Sample preparation techniques for quality evaluation and safety control of medicinal and edible plants: Overview, advances, applications, and future perspectives
Medicinal and edible plants (MEPs) have attracted increasing interest worldwide due to their natural origin, reliable efficacy, and minimal side effects in recent years. However, the complex and fluctuating levels of inherent chemical constituents and exogenous hazardous contaminants have triggered widespread concerns about their efficacy and safety. Developing analytical methods for both active components and exogenous contaminants concealed in these samples is central to the quality evaluation, in which sample preparation is crucial. This paper systematically reviewed the evolution of standard sample preparation methods, microextraction techniques based on novel solvents and nanomaterials, and innovative integrated techniques from 2019. Accordingly, their merits and weaknesses were discussed by showing fruitful applications in identifying and quantifying active components in these plants. Further, successful applications for analyzing exogenous contaminants were prominently showcased, highlighting the management of pesticides, heavy metals, mycotoxins, and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). Finally, forthcoming trends in sample preparation techniques were delineated to illuminate the development and implementation of more advanced sample preparation technologies.
Graphical abstract
Highlights
Outline of sample preparation techniques for quality evaluation and safety control of MEPs.
Emphasis on the enrichment and determination of endogenous bioactives and exogenous contaminants.
Profiling the merits and drawbacks of various sample preparation methods.
Sample preparation techniques are trending towards green analytical chemistry.

Introduction
Medicinal and edible plants (MEPs) have been extensively cultivated and consumed worldwide for millennia. MEPs possess both superior nutritional and medicinal values and are commonly utilized in traditional folk medicine systems to prevent and relieve diverse chronic diseases and address the challenges of malnutrition through daily intake. Since MEPs are readily available and remain safe and cost-effective for long-term ingestion, they are being exploited into dietary supplements, functional foods, nutraceuticals, etc. According to statistics from the World Health Organization (WHO), with the globalization of healthy living and dietary restructuring, nearly 80% of the global population prefers to rely on MEPs to meet their daily healthcare needs. Nevertheless, it cannot be overlooked that the rapid growth in market demand for MEPs has concurrently provoked global worries about their quality and safety. On the one hand, many chemical components with different physicochemical properties in MEPs contribute to their inherent complexity. The types and concentrations of the components are influenced by many factors, so variations in the contents of bioactives will directly impact their functional value and quality consistency. On the other hand, MEPs may be introduced into various exogenous hazardous residues owing to the unilateral pursuit of high crop yields, environmental pollution, improper handling or storage, and deliberate adulteration, all of which may cause accumulated toxicity and result in varied adverse reactions and health complications. Hence, quality control and contaminant monitoring are vital to ensuring the authenticity, legitimacy, and nutritional characteristics of MEPs.
At present, conventional analytical instruments such as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), capillary electrophoresis (CE), thin-layer chromatography (TLC), and mass spectrometry (MS) have been broadly applied to the development of quality control methods for MEPs. However, the complex matrix effects generated by the various compositions in MEPs shall lead to the inhibition or enhancement of the detection signals, possibly resulting in the subjective wrong judgment of pseudo-positive or false-negative results. As such, the sample preparation process is of particular significance. Statistically, approximately 30% of experimental errors (e.g., loss of analytes) and 60% of the working time during analysis are attributed to sample preparation. Through choosing an appropriate sample preparation procedure, it is feasible to (1) selectively extract target analytes from complex matrices (improving recoveries); (2) pre-concentrate analytes to increase the sensitivity of the analytical method (lowering the limit of detection (LOD)); (3) convert samples into instrument-compatible forms (elevating accuracy); and (4) clean the samples to remove matrix-interfering constituents (enhancing replicability). Standard extraction techniques mainly include ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE), accelerated solvent extraction (ASE), supercritical fluid extraction (SFE), solid phase extraction (SPE), and so forth. The recent advancement of green solvents like ionic liquids (ILs) and deep eutectic solvents (DESs), alongside the design and application of novel nanomaterials, is significantly driving the improvement of sample preparation techniques towards miniaturization, simplicity, cost-effectiveness, high extraction efficiency, and environmental friendliness. Notably, there also has been a marked escalation in the revolution of the green micro-sample pretreatment technologies, such as solid phase microextraction (SPME), liquid phase microextraction (LPME), dispersive solid phase extraction (DSPE), and so on.
Application of advanced sample preparation techniques for quality evaluation and safety control of medicinal and edible plants (MEPs). LLE: liquid–liquid extraction; UAE: ultrasound-assisted extraction; ASE: accelerated solvent extraction; MAE: microwave-assisted extraction; SFE: supercritical fluid extraction; EAE: enzyme-assisted extraction; ILE: ionic liquid-based extraction; DESE: deep eutectic solvent-based extraction; CPE: cloud point extraction; SPE: solid phase extraction; SPME: solid phase microextraction; SBSE: stir bar sorptive extraction; DSPE: dispersive solid phase extraction; MSPE: magnetic solid phase extraction; MSPD: matrix solid phase dispersion; LPME: liquid phase microextraction; DLLME: dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction; CMC: cell membrane chromatography; QuEChERS: quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe; LC: liquid chromatography; GC: gas chromatography; HRMS: high resolution mass spectrometry; TQMS: triple quadrupole mass spectrometry; PAHs: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; MOF: metal-organic framework; COF: covalent organic framework; MIP: molecularly imprinted polymer; GO: graphene oxide.
Scheme 1
To date, several exemplary studies have focused on applying sample preparation techniques to natural plant analysis. Two recent works specifically address the analysis of alkaloids and phytocannabinoids in plant samples, highlighting the significance of extraction and clean-up steps within the sample preparation process. Additionally, Prof. Li and co-workers provided a comprehensive summary of advancements in sample preparation techniques for analyzing herbal and biological materials, with a strong emphasis on microdialysis and microfluidic techniques. Regarding safety control methods, principal sample extraction and purification protocols employed for chromatographic analysis of pesticide residues in spices and herbs have been compiled. It is essential to recognize that advanced techniques within this field are continually evolving, and the scope of their applications is consistently expanding. So, in this work, we present a review of noteworthy and innovative research conducted from 2019 to the present, with the objective of (1) providing a comprehensive summary of screening and enrichment methodologies for bioactive compounds in MEPs, (2) offering an overview of various sample preparation techniques employed for the pre-treatment of MEPs aimed at the detection of exogenous hazardous residues, and (3) profiling the merits and drawbacks of diverse sample preparation techniques while also contemplating future directions in this field (Scheme 1). In conclusion, this review has presented state-of-the-art insights regarding the implementation of advanced sample preparation techniques in the quality assessment and safety control of MEPs. These insights may facilitate the selection of appropriate sample preparation methods, the establishment of quality control protocols, and the creation of more pioneering sample preparation strategies.

Sample preparation methods for the screening and determination of bioactives in MEPs
MEPs are abundant in bioactive phytochemicals, including flavonoids, phenolic acids, alkaloids, terpenes, polysaccharides, and volatile oils, which provide considerable health benefits. Although concepts such as fingerprinting have been proposed, the challenge of developing rapid, accurate, green, and highly selective sample preparation methods remains a fundamental issue in the quality evaluation of MEPs, primarily due to the presence of active ingredients at trace levels.

Macro-generic sample preparation methods
Overview of sample preparation techniques for quality evaluation of medicinal and edible plants (MEPs).
Table 1
Extraction Method	Extractant/adsorbent	Matrix	Analyte	Analytical method	Extraction yield/efficiency	LOD	LOQ	Recovery (%)	Refs.	 	Macro-generic extraction techniques	 	LLE	Ethyl acetate, water	Bambusoideae species	16 major compounds	HPLC-DAD	–	0.2–5.5 ng/mL	0.9–20.3 ng/mL	94.66–102.74		 	[C2mim]PF6, water	Scutellaria baicalensis	Baicalin and baicalein	HPLC-UV	14.3–43.3 mg/g	–	–	–		 	Methanol, 1-chlorobutane/dichloromethane (4:1)	Veratrum species	Five alkaloids	HPLC-MS/MS	–	0.16–0.42 μg/g	0.53–1.40 μg/g	94.40–101.50		 	UAE	Methanol	Mitragyna speciosa	Phenolic compounds	UPLC-DAD	143.51 mg/g	–	–	–		 	ChCl:1,4-butanediol(1:6, with 10% water)	Turmeric	Curcuminoids	HPLC-UV	10.63–46.70 mg/g	–	–	–		 	80% ethanol	Salvia miltiorrhiza	Tanshinone ⅡA and salvianolic acid B	HPLC-UV	2.82–27.48 mg/g	–	–	–		 	ASE	Ethanol	Morinda citrifolia	Scopoletin	HPLC-DAD	–	0.17 μg/g	0.58 μg/g	99.88		 	80% methanol	Rheum palmatum	Five flavonoids	HPLC-PDA	–	0.11–0.98 μg/mL	0.36–2.98 μg/mL	91.30–93.90		 	Ethanol	Angelica dahurica	Nine components	HPLC-UV	–	0.01–0.10 μg/mL	0.05–0.50 μg/mL	96.10–104.24		 	MAE	50% ethanol	Five Swertia species	Oleanolic acid, ursolic acid, betulinic acid, and lupeol	HPTLC	2.13%–3.48%	27–31 ng/g	81–92 ng/g	99.51–101.40		 	Ethanol:H2O:HCl (70:29:1)	Six Lamiaceae plants	Rosmarinic acid	HPLC-DAD	7.4–40.1 mg/g	–	0.4 mg/g	92.30–98.50		 	6 mol/L HCl	Mulberry leaf	17 amino acids	AAA-UV	0.17–12.75 mg/g	0.025–3.75 nmol/mL	0.1–10 nmol/mL	90.25–110.81		 	SFE	Supercritical-CO2: 97% ethanol (98:2)/Supercritical-CO2: 99% ethanol (56:44)	Seven plants	Volatiles and phenolic compounds	UHPSFC-MS/MS	–	–	–	–		 	Supercritical-CO2 (ethanol as the co-solvent)	Rhus coriaria	Gallic acid	UV–Vis	15.29 ± 0.76mg/g	–	–	–		 	Supercritical-CO2 (30%–50% ethanol as the modifier)	Rosemary	Carnosic acid, rosmarinic acid and pigments	UPLC-DAD-HRMS	380 mg/g	–	–	–		 	EAE	Agarase cocktail	Gracilariopsis lemaneiformis	Neoagarooligosaccharides and dietary fiber	TLC/GPC/MALDI-TOF-MS	1.142 mg/g	–	–	–		 	Cellulase:pectinase (2:1)	Dendrobium officinale	Polysaccharides	HPLC-Q-TOF/MS	–	0.70–45.45 ng/mL	2.33–151.51 ng/mL	81.46–114.92		 	Pectinase	Tagetes erecta	Polyphenol and lutein	HPLC-UV	5.59–83.56 mg/g	–	–	–		 	ILE	[HMIM][BF4], water	Chrysanthemums	Six hydrophilic and lipophilic compounds	UPLC-DAD-Q-TOF/MS	2.41–17.11 mg/g	9.7–29.3 μg/mL	28.3–85.5 μg/mL	95.50–101.10		 	[C8MIM]BF4	Licorice	Five prenylated flavonoids	HPLC-UV	–	0.008–0.192 μg/mL	0.028–0.763 μg/mL	95.71–101.24		 	VB3PILs	Rhizoma smilacis glabrae	Astilbin	HPLC-UV	16.2 mg/g	–	–	–		 	DESE	Levulinic acid:glycerol (1.5:1)	Evodia lepta	Alkaloids	HPLC-UV	757.71 μg/g	–	–	–		 	[N4444][Cl]:ethylene glycol (1:2)	Pueraria lobata	Seven isoflavones	UPLC-UV	–	4.8–24 ng/mL	12–48 ng/mL	97.79–105.83		 	Betaine:urea (1:2)	Aconiti Lateralis Radix Praeparata	Aconitum alkaloids	HPLC-UV	1.913 mg/g	–	–	–		 	CPE	Triton X-114 and Gemini 16-5-16	Radix Astragali	Four astragalosides	HPLC-ELSD	0.21–0.79 mg/g	70–110 ng/mL	145–270 ng/mL	100.50–102.60		 	[C4mim][PF6] and Triton X-114	Anoectochilus roxburghii	Rutin and narcissoside	HPLC-PDA	71.8%–75.6%	0.26–0.30 ng/mL	0.86–1.00 ng/mL	92.00–98.90		 	Triton X-114	Dandelion	Ferulic acid, chlorogenic acid, and caffeic acid	HPLC-UV	–	0.005–0.008 mg/L	–	81.00–96.00		 	SPE	DES-porous phenolic resin	Salvia miltiorrhiza	Four tanshinones	HPLC-UV	–	0.025–0.096 μg/mL	0.084–0.318 μg/mL	66.20–101.00		 	C18	Scutellaria baicalensis and Polygonum cuspidatum	Rutin	HPLC-UV	–	0.05 μg/mL	0.125 μg/mL	93.20–94.00		 	Mesoporous molecular sieve Santa Barbara Amorphous 15	Pulsatilla chinensis	Four triterpenoid saponins	UPLC-CAD	–	0.461–0.976 μg/mL	1.54–3.25 μg/mL	95.10–103.20		 	Green microextraction techniques	 	SPME	PVDF@PDA@PEI@XOD fiber	Plantago depressa	Nine bioactive components	UPLC-Q-TOF/MS	–	0.0003–0.005 mg/mL	0.001–0.016 mg/mL	95.06–104.55		 	Biocompatible C18 probe	Cannabis spp. varieties	Five phytocannabinoids	UPLC-Q-TOF/MS	–	–	10 ng/mL	95.00–105.00		 	P5W30/MIL-101(Cr)/silica aerogel fiber	Ferulago angulata	Volatile components	GC-FID	0.31–22.7 mg/g	–	–	–		 	SBSE	p-naphtholbenzein-NiAl-LDHs-PEEK	Psoralea corylifolia	Bavachin, isobavachalcone and bavachinin	HPLC-UV	93–190	0.01–0.02 ng/mL	0.03–0.05 ng/mL	92.80–96.31		 	PDMS	Cannabis sativa	Multiclass metabolites	GC × GC-MS	–	0.02–0.15 μg/mL	0.05–0.51 μg/mL	–		 	PDMS	Six spices	Terpenes and terpenoids	GC-MS/MS	–	–	0.03–8.7 μg/g	–		 	DSPE	CS-ZnO-NC	Four medical plants	Rosmarinic acid	HPLC-UV	93.72–110.47	0.060–0.089 ng/mL	0.201–0.297 ng/mL	96.66–105.42		 	MIPs	Tagetes erecta	Quercetagetin	HPLC-DAD	27.2 mg/g	25 ng/mL	50 ng/mL	96.31–114.04		 	MIP nanobead	Salvia Officinalis leaves	Rosmarinic acid	HPLC-DAD	33.3	0.031 mg/L	–	77.80 ± 4.14		 	MSPE	Fe3O4@SiO2@MIP	Acanthus plants	Benzoxazolinone-type alkaloids	UPLC-MS/MS	–	2.85–3.60 μg/L	9.00–12.60 μg/L	72.28–106.99		 	MMIP	Tea, orange, and grape	Quercetin	FLU/smartphone	–	1.1 ng/mL	3.7 ng/mL	92.20–104.70		 	High expression α1A-AR HEK 293 cell membrane-camouflaging magnetic CNTs	Radix Aconiti	Potential α1A-AR antagonists	HPLC-DAD-TOF-MS	–	0.8 mg/L	–	56.50–75.20		 	MSPD	Nano-SiO2	Corydalis Rhizoma	Isoquinoline alkaloids	HPLC-Q-TOF/MS	–	0.05–3.00 ng/mL	0.17–10.00 ng/mL	80.50–104.60		 	PDESs-MIP/GO	Solidago decurrens	Anti-adipogenesis markers	HPLC-DAD	3	2.0–6.1 ng/g	6.5–20.5 ng/g	94.40–115.90		 	Fe3O4@C@ACN MNP	Saposhnikoviae Radix	Four chromones and onecoumarin	HPLC-VWD	–	0.017–0.065 μg/mL	0.060–0.216 μg/mL	94.80–105.00		 	LPME	Diethanolamine-hexanoic acid (1:1)	Salvia Miltiorrhiza	Diterpenoid quinones	HPLC-UV	59–274	0.5–0.7 ng/mL	1.5–2.1 ng/mL	94.60–104.60		 	n-octanol	Rhubarb	Rhein and chrysophanol	HPLC-UV	127–247	0.6–1.1 ng/mL	3.1–5.6 ng/mL	97.60–98.10		 	Tetrabutylammonium chloride-hexanoic acid (1:3)	Chuanxiong Rhizoma	Four cinnamic acid derivatives	HPLC-UV	82.4–127.1	0.1–0.3 ng/mL	0.4–1.0 ng/mL	86.70–110.50		 	DLLME	Undecanol	Licorice, Puerariae flos, and Psoralea corylifolia	Seven chalcone and isoflavones	HPLC-UV	103.1–180.9	0.02–0.15 ng/mL	0.06–0.50 ng/mL	91.10–108.90		 	Ethanol	Guava fruit, coffee beans and black tea	Chlorogenic acid	HPLC-DAD	–	0.0281 μg/mL	0.0853 μg/mL	97.60–99.54		 	Hydroxyl-rich ferrofluid	Chuanxiong Rhizoma	Four cinnamic acid derivatives	HPLC-UV	107–114	0.2–0.9 ng/mL	0.7–3.0 ng/mL	96.00–104.70		 	CMC	MrgX2-Avi-tag/CMC model	Viticis Fructus	Anti-allergenic compounds	UPLC-MS/MS	–	–	–	–		 	MrgX2-HALO-tag/CMC model	Mori Cortex	Anti-pseudo-allergic components	HPLC-MS/MS	–	–	–	–		 	2D MPTS-modified BMMC/CMC model	Scutellariae Radix	Anti-osteoporosis components	HPLC-TOF-MS	–	–	–	–		 	Coupling extraction techniques	 	MAE-DSPE	Methanol:1% formic acid (75:25), PCX	Lotus leaf	Four alkaloids	UPLC-PDA	5–13	0.01–0.05 μg/mL	0.04–0.1 μg/mL	97.70–99.70		 	UAE-DSPE	PDES-GO	Broccoli	Indole-3-carbinol	HPLC-DAD	–	0.025 mg/g	0.084 mg/g	84.30–96.40		 	EAE-MAE	Cellulase:pectinase (1:1),[C4mim][Br]	Pinus koraiensis	Essential oil and procyanidins	GC-MS	7.76–32.19 mg/g	–	–	–		 	EAE-UAE-MAE-CPE	Triton X-114, cellulase and hemicellulose (10%)	Baeckea frutescens	Essential oil and flavonoids	GC-MS and HPLC-UV	0.53–18.58 mg/g	–	–	–		 	UAE-LLE	[C4MIM][BF4], water	Polygonum cuspidatum	Polyphenols and anthraquinones	HPLC-DAD	1.56–37.78 mg/g	2.8–29.5 ng/mL	9.4–98.3 ng/mL	92.16–105.41		 	MAE-ASE	70% acetonitrile	Sweet potato leaves	Flavonoids and polyphenols	UPLC-MS/MS	–	0.1–0.6 ng/mL	–	76.10–101.50		 	ASE-SPE	Water, PoraPakTM Rxn RP	Coffee	5-caffeoylquinic acid and caffeine	HPLC-PDA	7.064–9.951 mg/g	–	–	–		 	UAE-MAE-DLLME	90% ethanol, choline chloride:urea (1:1)	Parsley, thyme, mint, peanut, green onion and mint	Chlorophyll natural colorant	UV–Vis	16.7	0.007 μg/mL	0.023 μg/mL	93.00–104.00		 	UAE-MSPE	Fe3O4@SiO2–NH2-MMIP nanoparticles	Peganum harmala	Harmaline	HPLC-UV	45.31 mg/g	0.158 ng/mL	0.526 ng/mL	96.24–105.43		 	MAE-CPE-DSPE	[C10VIM]Br, FCNTs	Curcuma wenyujin	Three sesquiterpenes	HPLC-UV	–	0.092–6.72 μg/mL	0.285–19.2 μg/mL	95.30–102.53		 	EAE-UAE	Disodium hydrogen phosphate-citric acid buffer solution, cellulase: hemicellulose (4:7) Ethanol/(NH4)2SO4	Angelicae Sinensis Radix	Ligustilide and ferulic acid	HPLC-DAD	0.78–8.90 mg/g	–	–	99.00–101.41
LOD: limit of detection; LOQ: limit of quantification; LLE: liquid–liquid extraction; –: no data; HPLC: high performance liquid chromatography; DAD: diode array detector; [C2mim]PF6: 1-ethyl 3-methyl imidazolium hexafluorophosphate; UV: ultraviolet detector; MS: mass spectrometry; UAE: ultrasound-assisted extraction; ChCl: choline chloride; UPLC: ultra performance liquid chromatography; ASE: accelerated solvent extraction; PDA: photo-diode array; MAE: microwave-assisted extraction; HPTLC: high-performance thin-layer chromatography; AAA: amino acid analyzer; SFE: supercritical fluid extraction; UV–Vis: ultraviolet–visible detector; UHPSFC: ultra-high performance supercritical fluid chromatography; HRMS: high resolution mass spectrometry; EAE: enzyme-assisted extraction; TLC: thin layer chromatography; GPC: gel permeation chromatography; MALDI: matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization; Q-TOF: quadrupole-time of flight; ILE: ionic liquid-based extraction; [HMIM][BF4]: 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate; [C8MIM]BF4: 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate; VB3PILs: vitamin B3-based protic ionic liquids; DESE: deep eutectic solvent-based extraction; [N4444][Cl]: tetrabutylammonium chloride; CPE: cloud point extraction; Gemini 16-5-16: Gemini Cm-s-Cm·2Br with m being 16 and s being 5; ELSD: evaporative light-scattering detector; [C4mim][PF6]: 1-butyl-3-methyl-imidazolium hexafluorophosphate; SPE: solid phase extraction; DES: deep eutectic solvent; CAD: charged aerosol detection; SPME: solid phase microextraction; PVDF@PDA@PEI@XOD: polyvinylidene fluoride fibers@polydopamine@polyethylenimine@xanthine oxidase; P5W30: preyssler-type polyoxometalate; GC: gas chromatography; FID: flame ionization detector; SBSE: stir bar sorptive extraction; PDMS: poly(dimethylsiloxane); LDHs: layered double hydroxides; PEEK: polyether ether ketone; DSPE: dispersive solid phase extraction; MIP: molecularly imprinted polymer; CS-ZnO-NC: chitosan-zinc oxide nanocomposite; MSPE: magnetic solid phase extraction; MMIP: magnetic molecularly imprinted polymer; FLU: fluorescence; AR: adrenergic receptor; CNTs: carbon nanotubes; MSPD: matrix solid phase dispersion; PDES: poly(deep eutectic solvent); GO: graphene oxide; CAN: acetonitrile; MNP: magnetic nanoparticle; VWD: variable-wavelength-detector; LPME: liquid phase microextraction; DLLME: dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction; CMC: cell membrane chromatography; MrgX2: MAS-related G protein-coupled receptor X2; HALO-tag: haloalkane dehalogenase protein tag; 2D: two-dimensional; MPTS: 3-merraptopropyltrimethoxysilane; BMMC: bone marrow mononuclear cell; [C4mim][Br]: 1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide; [C4MIM][BF4]: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate; PCX: cation exchange polymer; [C10VIM]Br: 1-decyl-3-vinylimidazolium bromide; FCNTs: fluorinated carbon nanotubes.
Evolving and improving upon conventional extraction methods such as decoction, maceration, percolation, and reflux extraction, standard and universal sample preparation techniques like liquid–liquid extraction, microwave-assisted extraction (MAE), and SFE are increasingly maturing and being widely applied for the high-throughput extraction of phytochemicals in MEPs (Table 1). These macro-generic extraction methods share several common characteristics: (1) operational principles based on solubility differences, solvent polarity, phase equilibrium, or interfacial interactions; (2) enhancement of mass transfer efficiency through physical or chemical means such as ultrasound, microwave, pressure, heating, enzymes, or special solvents; (3) typically involving multiple handling steps including solvent addition, extraction, purification, separation, and concentration; (4) high consumption and strong overall dependency on samples and solvents; (5) potential reliance on specialized equipment such as ultrasonic device, microwave heating system, and supercritical extraction apparatus.

Liquid–liquid extraction (LLE)
LLE is the process of transferring dissolved analytes from one liquid phase to another liquid phase with which both are in full contact but are immiscible (or slightly miscible), and the difference in solubility of the compositions to be assayed in the two liquid phases affects the entire extraction proceeding. It is a simple means of handling mild conditions and has been commonly applied in many areas such as the environment, food, and drug analysis. Due to the presence of polysaccharides, volatile oils, pigments, and other interfering components in the plant matrix, using typical extraction solvents such as methanol and ethanol for solid–liquid extraction will lead to synergistic extraction of “invalid fractions”, which may limit or reduce the number of detectable fragments and the accuracy of the peaks separation during instrumental analysis. By effectively removing polysaccharides from Bambusoideae plants with a water/ethyl acetate-based LLE method, an analytical platform composed of HPLC-multiple reaction monitoring (MRM)/MS and HPLC-diode array detector (DAD) was established. Differences among the three Bambusoideae species were assessed through simultaneous quantification of 16 major compounds combined with multivariate statistical analysis, and nine constituents were recognized as marker compounds for species discrimination, which would help to prevent potential side-effects and unintended bioactivities due to species miscategorization.

UAE
Representative macro-generic extraction techniques for bioactives in medicinal and edible plants (MEPs). (A) Mechanisms of ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE) facilitating the release and extraction of bioactive components from plant cells. (B) Schematics of the extraction device for microwave-assisted extraction (MAE). (C) Assembly diagram of the individual elements of the supercritical carbon dioxide (CO2) extraction system. (D) Mechanism chart of enzyme-assisted extraction (EAE) functioning on plant cells to promote the extraction of active ingredients. BPR: back pressure regulator. Reprinted from Refs. with permission.
Fig. 1
UAE utilizes the interaction between mechanical waves with a frequency greater than 20 kHz, the sample matrix and solvent. With the “acoustic cavitation” effect as the principal driving force, it remarkably facilitated mass transfer from analytes to solvents and strengthened the release efficiency of bioactive compounds from plant matrices (Fig. 1A). Since UAE can be conducted over an extensive temperature range, retaining the mass of the extracted material with outstanding extraction rates, it is primarily fitted for the high-performance extraction of samples from diverse matrices. Zakaria et al. optimized the UAE parameters of phenolic compounds in Mitragyna speciosa leaves, including temperature, time, and solid–liquid ratio, using a Central Composite Rotatable Design of Response Surface Methodology (RSM) for optimal extraction rate with the highest total phenolic content. The developed quadratic polynomial model was verified for reliability by regression analysis and variance analysis, effectively reducing the total number of experimental trials, operating costs, and time. Multiple phenolic compounds found in the extracts after characterization by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS further confirmed the abundant bioactivities of Mitragyna speciosa.

ASE
ASE is an automated sample pre-treatment technique that utilizes high temperature and pressure to achieve highly efficient extraction in a short period. By flexibly changing the parameters of temperature, pressure, extraction time, and the number of cycles, the analyst can effectively increase the extraction rate of various compounds in plants. Compared with traditional extraction methods, ASE has the advantages of less solvent consumption and shorter extraction time due to the combination of extraction and cleanup into a single step. Recently, Tasfiyati et al. used the ASE method to extract the main quality control marker component, scopoletin, from Morinda citrifolia, and performed fast determination with HPLC-DAD technology. Under the best operating conditions based on RSM optimization (60 °C, 12 min, ethanol, solid–liquid ratio of 1:30), the LOD was as low as 0.17 μg/g, and the recovery could reach 99.88%, making it suitable for quality assessment and product certification of Morinda citrifolia.

MAE
MAE entails the transfer of energy into the matrix and solvent by non-ionizing radiation at a frequency of 300–300,000 MHz, which excites the dipole motion of the solvent and conduction migration of dissolved ions, resulting in rapid conversion of the microwave energy into thermal energy, thus causing an immediate heating of the sample extraction system (Fig. 1B). For MAE, the critical parameters that impact its performance include solvent, sample type, volume, power, exposure time, temperature, and humidity. In turn, based on the “green concept”, MAE technology helps reduce solvent usage, save time, and increase yield. Kaur et al. maximized the extraction yield of four pentacyclic triterpenoids from five Swertia species plants in a short time (2 min) using the MAE technique with 50% ethanol aqueous solution (15 mL). Subsequently, a rapid and parallel quantification method was developed in combination with high-performance thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC)-densitometric to screen a large number of samples in a short span, with a low limit of quantification (LOQ) between 81 and 92 ng, and the cost-effective analytical platform also facilitated the search for substitutes of endangered species and the selection of superior varieties.

SFE
Supercritical fluid (SF) refers to the substance that does not have a distinct gas–liquid interface at temperatures and pressures above the critical point and which can diffuse through a solid matrix like a gas or dissolve substances like a liquid. The SFE method developed based on SF is a process-economical, fast-efficient, and environmentally friendly technique for the separation of active ingredients (Fig. 1C). Bioactive compounds in plants often have varying physicochemical properties, the miscibility of supercritical carbon dioxide (CO2) as extraction medium with different organic solvents can modify its extraction selectivity. Pilařová et al. developed a two-step SFE method in which the volatile terpenes could be selectively extracted in 20 min by adding 2% co-solvent in CO2 in the first step, and flavonoids with phenolic acids could be extracted in 60 min by automatically switching to 44% co-solvent in the second step. Only CO2, ethanol, and water were utilized throughout the procedure, and they were successfully applied to seven different plants.

Enzyme-assisted extraction
The basic principle of enzyme-assisted extraction (EAE) is that enzymes with specific catalytic-hydrolytic properties bind to the cell matrix and degrade or destroy the cell walls and cell membranes of the plant, thus facilitating the rapid release of biologically active substances from the cytoplasm or their efficient extraction (Fig. 1D). The most frequently selected enzymes are pectinase, protease and cellulase. With EAE, the essential benefits are mild reaction conditions, substrate-specific catalysis, low solvent usage, less energy consumption, and no contamination. Therefore, EAE is widely used to improve the extraction efficiency of polysaccharides, pigments, oils, spices, or natural medicinal compounds. Additionally, using multiple enzymes or developing new types of enzymes for auxiliary or coordinated extraction can be considered an optimization approach for EAE. Song et al. converted homogenized Gracilariopsis lemaneiformis into neoagaroligosaccharides (NAOs) and dietary fibers employing a mixture of two agarases. 17.13 mg of crude NAOs was produced under the optimal hydrolysis process induced by the well-optimized solid–liquid ratio (15 g/150 mL), homogenization time (15 min), and enzyme loading amount (25 U), whose antioxidant activity was confirmed by free radical scavenging assays. Besides, the plant remnants after EAE were transformed into high-value-added dietary fiber concentrates. The entire EAE process avoids high temperature and acid/alkali treatment, making it environmentally friendly and avoiding high economic and time costs, with the potential for industrial-scale application.

Ionic liquid-based extraction (ILE)
ILs are salts made up of a large asymmetric organic cation and a smaller organic or inorganic anion, which can be maintained in the liquid state below 100 °C (some even below 0 °C). They are not easily volatilized during the extraction process, and possess high thermal stability, thus becoming sound substitutes for traditional toxic organic reagents as an environment-friendly solvent. Of paramount relevance, ILs are highly customizable. They can be tailored to the particular requirements of analyte extraction, thereby providing an enormous range of options for the extraction of small bioactive molecules in MEPs. Wang et al. utilized the temperature-responsive property of lipophilic IL-1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([HMIM][BF4]) (i.e., when the temperature was above its upper critical solution temperature (UCST, 65 °C), it formed a homogeneous solvent with water; as the temperature was lowered to room temperature, the system switched to a two-phase in situ) to achieve the simple and highly efficient extraction and separation of six major high- and low-polarity active ingredients in chrysanthemums within 30 min, and the recoveries of the target compounds were all over 90%, which offered a new perspective for the application of ILs in the extraction of natural components.

Deep eutectic solvent-based extraction (DESE)
DESs were invented and announced in 2001 as a new class of solvents formed by isothermal, reversible physical interactions between two or more elements in specific stoichiometric ratio (generating intramolecular hydrogen bonds devoid of any chemical reaction). They are generally comprised of hydrogen bond acceptors (HBA, quaternary ammonium, tetraalkyl ammonium, or ammonium phosphate salts) and hydrogen bond donors (HBD, acid, alcohol, amine, or carbohydrate), and with the melting point of the mixture being far lower than the that of any individual part. DESs are usually obtained by heating and stirring, evaporation, freeze-drying, or grinding, without any other purification steps or side reactions, and the efficiency of raw material utilization can attain 100%.
Deep eutectic solvent (DES)-based extraction, cloud point extraction (CPE), and nanomaterial-assisted solid phase extraction (SPE) for phytochemicals in medicinal and edible plants (MEPs). (A) Scheme of alkaloids extraction from Evodia lepta residue using the biphasic system of DES-ethyl acetate. (B) Mechanistic graph of CPE for target analyte extraction. (C) General procedures for SPE technology. (D) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of resin regulated with different DES. La/Gly: levulinic acid/glycerol. Reprinted from Refs. with permission.
Fig. 2
Extraction rates of bioactive compounds are mainly influenced by the composition of DES and the structure and configuration of the target molecules. Although the “green” characteristics of DES are beyond doubt, most DES have relatively high density and viscosity, which can greatly affect mass transfer and lead to suboptimal extraction efficiency. Therefore, the development of DES-based extraction methods should focus on the purification of target components and solvent recycling. A DES-based biphasic system (levulinic acid-glycerol-K2HPO4 aqueous solution as the hydrophilic phase, and ethyl acetate as the hydrophobic phase) was designed for the efficient and mild extraction of alkaloids from Evodia lepta residue (Fig. 2A). The total alkaloid yield of this method could reach 757.71 μg/g, which was 587.45% higher than the traditional methanol extraction method. In contrast, the DES phase was easy to separate and durable for recycling.

Cloud point extraction
Cloud point extraction (CPE) technique is founded on the feature that surfactants form micelles when heated above a specific temperature (cloud point) in an aqueous solution or when salts are added (salting-out effect, e.g., Na2SO4). It separates the extraction medium by centrifugation into two phases, i.e., the surfactant phase (small volume, enriched with analyte hydrophobic molecules) and the aqueous phase (ions insoluble in the micellar system) (Fig. 2B), which was initially proposed and has been widely developed in recent decades. CPE enjoys high enrichment capacity, low cost, basically no consumption of toxic reagents, rapidity and accuracy, and excellent selectivity, thereby receiving rapid promotion.
In the CPE process, selecting the appropriate type of surfactant is particularly important. Compared to a single surfactant, mixed micelles formed by nonionic and ionic surfactants offer greater flexibility in their physicochemical properties, which can remarkably alter ionic strength and broaden the extraction range, and then take advantage of their unique cloud point phenomenon to preconcentrate target compounds. Wang et al. developed a formulated surfactant system consisting of Triton X-114 (2%) and Gemini 16-5-16 (0.03%) for enriching four astragalosides from Radix Astragali. By adding (NH4)2SO4 (20%) to the system and centrifuging for a few minutes, a two-phase aqueous system could be created, and Gemini 16-5-16 as a co-surfactant could constitute ion-pairs with astragalosides, thus accelerating the transfer of substances into the micelles. The system was able to extract up to 0.21–0.79 mg/g of the four astragalosides, and the resulting HPLC-evaporative light-scattering detector (ELSD) platform exhibited LODs of 70–110 ng/mL.

New nanomaterials based-SPE
Arising in the mid-term of the 1870s, solid phase extraction (SPE) technology brings prominent strengths such as powerful enrichment and clean-up capability, low reagent depletion, automated operation, short processing time, and high repeatability (Fig. 2C). During the SPE process, the choice of adsorbent is a centerpiece in dictating the extraction behavior. Nowadays, many kinds of nanomaterials such as graphene (G), carbon nanotubes (CNTs), molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs), metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), and mesoporous materials are being utilized in SPE, which has motivated the development of SPE technology towards miniaturization, high recovery coefficient, and environmental friendliness.
In addition to participating in extraction as a green solvent, DES can also act as a structure-directing agent doped into the crystal structure to influence the synthesis process of various materials, and the tunability of its physicochemical properties creates numerous possibilities for material modification. Tang et al. introduced alcohol-based DES containing different HBAs into the synthesis process of phenolic resin, which aided in forming multi-hydroxyl structures, adjustable porosity, and high specific surface area, bringing more contact sites for recognition of small molecules (Fig. 2D), thereby facilitating the separation and purification of tanshinones from Salvia miltiorrhiza. After coupling with the HPLC-DAD technology, the LODs for the four tanshinones were as low as 0.025–0.096 μg/mL.

Green microextraction techniques
With the design of novel nanomaterials such as natural polymers, superporous materials, selectivity-enhanced materials, and carbon allotropes, along with the widespread adoption of green analytical chemistry principles, various microextraction techniques have emerged, including SPME, DSPE, and LPME (Table 1). This type of green microextraction technologies exhibit the following distinct features: (1) central to selective adsorption of adsorbent materials or distribution equilibrium of solvents within the sample matrix; (2) miniaturized platform with streamlined and integrated processing procedures; (3) minimal depletion of samples, sorbents, and solvents, along with short extraction time; (4) suitable for highly selective capture and rapid enrichment of specific trace target analytes; (5) superior extraction efficiency and analytical sensitivity.

SPME
Solid phase microextraction (SPME) and stir bar sorptive extraction for plant bioactives. (A) Graphic representation of the extraction and desorption process in SPME. (B) Layer-by-layer assembly of functionalized affinity SPME fiber for the extraction of xanthine oxidase (XOD) inhibitors from Plantago depressa. (C) Assembly schema of p-naphtholbenzein (PNB)-layered double hydroxides (LDHs)-polyether ether ketone (PEEK) dumbbell-shaped stir bar for the extraction of bioactives in Psoralea corylifolia. HS-SPME: headspace solid-phase microextraction; DI-SPME: direct immersion solid-phase microextraction; LC: liquid chromatography; GC: gas chromatography; CE: capillary electrophoresis; PEI: polyethylenimine; PDA: polydopamine; MS: mass spectrometry; SPR: surface plasmon resonance biosensor; APTES: 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane. Reprinted from Refs. with permission.
Fig. 3
SPME is a well-established microextraction technique that merges the steps of sampling, isolation, pre-concentration, purification, and inletting for analytes into one facile step (Fig. 3A). The whole SPME process is predicated on the equilibrium between analytes and adsorbents and can be classified into direct immersion (DI)-SPME, headspace (HS)-SPME, and membrane-protected (MP)-SPME. Remarkably, SPME-extracted analytes can be desorbed directly into the chromatography instrument for highly sensitive multi-component analysis. Since commercially available fibers are expensive, poorly selective, and dominated by hydrophobic coatings, exploiting coatings with high thermal stability and robust extraction power is the prevailing trend in SPME.
In recent years, an affinity SPME method has been applied to identify bioactive compounds in plants, addressing the drawbacks of traditional phytochemical methods. Tao et al. assembled polyvinylidene fluoride fibers (PVDF), polydopamine (PDA, strong adhesion), polyethylenimine (PEI, easily binds negatively charged receptors), and xanthine oxidase (XOD) layer-by-layer to construct a functionalized SPME fiber for extracting XOD inhibitors from Plantago depressa (Fig. 3B). Through optimizing factors including washing time (4 times), denaturing solvent (70% methanol), and incubation time (20 min), the extraction capacities of the nine active ingredients identified by ultra performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole-time of flight (UPLC-Q-TOF)-MS ranged from 14.61 to 49.24 mg/g, with average recoveries of 95.06%–104.55%, from which prepared SPME fibers remained reusable after ten consecutive cycles.

Stir bar sorptive extraction
Stir bar sorptive extraction (SBSE) technique is a solvent-free, fast, and green extraction method proposed in 1999. It utilizes an adsorbent coating to wrap a stir bar with a built-in magnetic core, and then extract the analytes during the stirring process. In the SBSE process, the adsorption rate and adsorption capacity are closely related to the surface area and modification amount of the stationary phase coating. Commercially available types of coatings are very limited and expensive, so the research and development (R&D) of innovative coatings is a significant direction for the future development of SBSE technology. To enhance the extraction rate and adsorption capacity of SBSE, it is generally advisable to prepare sorbents with a porous structure and large surface area. Otherwise, developing suitable high-surface-area support substrates for immobilizing various materials can indirectly increase the surface area of the stationary phase, expose more active sites, and promote mass transfer. A new modified flower-like NiAl-layered double hydroxide (LDH) with polydopamine was reported before. Synthesis and immobilization were achieved in a single step and then bonded the strongly hydrophobic p-naphtholbenzein (PNB) onto the NiAl-LDHs platform via 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane. Two lollipops-type ends were inserted into a polyether ether ketone (PEEK) jacket, forming a PNB-LDHs-PEEK dumbbell-shaped stir bar, which was used for the extraction of three active compounds in Psoralea corylifolia (Fig. 3C). This SBSE substrate balances the stability of the adsorbent with extraction efficiency, enabling enrichment factors up to 93-190-fold, with LODs of 0.01–0.02 ng/mL when coupled with HPLC-ultraviolet detector (UV).

DSPE
DSPE method entails the direct addition of the sorbents to the sample solution, followed by dispersion of the sorbents by vortexing, sonicating, stirring, or agitating. It will facilitate adequate sorbent-target component interactions, subsequent separation of the sorbents by mechanical processes (e.g., centrifugation, filtration), and thermal or solvent desorption of the concentrated analytes for assaying. Compared with conventional SPE methods, DSPE provides rapid and homogenous enrichment of analytes, high extraction capacity, low consumption of organic solvents, excellent recovery, and easy handling. Seeking natural and biocompatible polymeric materials from nature as efficient adsorbents for sample preparation is an important means of cost-saving and environmental protection. When applied to procedures like DSPE, Chitosan (CS) commonly requires additional modifications to resolve its low specific surface area and inaccessibility of active sites. Dil and others synthesized a CS-zinc oxide nanocomposite (CS-ZnO-NC) using a simple and rapid acoustic co-precipitation technique for extracting rosmarinic acid (RA) from four medical plants. Central composite design (CCD) was adopted to optimize the best working variables for DSPE (pH 7.0, 10 mg of material, contact time of 4 min, and 180 μL methanol for elution), which resulted in extraction recoveries of 98.22% ± 1.33% for RA and LODs of 0.060–0.089 ng/mL for the HPLC-UV method chosen for the determination.

Magnetic solid phase extraction
Representative magnetic and liquid-phase microextraction techniques applied to medicinal and edible plants (MEPs). (A) Universal procedures for magnetic solid phase extraction (MSPE) implementation. (B) Classical sample preparation procedures for matrix solid phase dispersion (MSPD). (C) Operational schematic of single drop microextraction (SDME). (D) Analytic graph of hollow-fiber (HF)-liquid phase microextraction (LPME) extraction system. (E) Hydrophilic switchable deep eutectic solvent (DES)-LPME for active phytochemicals extraction in Salvia Miltiorrhiza. SLM: supported liquid membrane. Reprinted from Refs. with permission.
Fig. 4
Magnetic solid phase extraction (MSPE) technique integrates the merits of magnetic separation with those of DSPE, accomplishing the enrichment and purification process based on an external magnetic field (Fig. 4A). For MSPE, magnetic nanoparticles are an important aid to simplify the analysis process as well, such as pure metals (Fe, Ni, Co), metallic oxides (Fe3O4 and γ-Fe2O3), ferrites (Cu/Mg/Mn/Ni–Fe2O4) and metal alloys (FePt, CoPt). In order to realize superior selective extraction efficiency, unilayered or multilayered inorganic or organic materials such as covalent organic frameworks (COFs), MIPs, MOFs, G, graphene oxide (GO), CNTs, and multi-walled CNTs have been fabricated for the functionalized modification of Fe3O4 to obtain innovative magnetic adsorbents.
Currently, the usage of multi-templates in an individual MIP synthesis enables selective anchoring of recognition sites for plural targets, while incorporating magnetic nanoparticles can shorten the analysis time and augment the cost-effectiveness. Utilizing Fe3O4@SiO2 as polymer scaffold, methacrylic acid as functional monomer, ethylene glycol dimethacrylate as cross-linking agent, 2,2-azodiisobutyric nitrile as initiator, and 2-benzoxazolinone & 2H-1,4-benzoxazin-3(4H)-one as bis-templates, a novel magnetic MIP (Fe3O4@SiO2@MIP) was synthesized and applied to enrich target Benzoxazolinone-type alkaloids in two acanthus plants. Due to the specific adsorption capacity of this MIP aggregation system for candidate molecules, the UPLC-MS/MS-based analytical platform demonstrated excellent sensitivity (LOQs of 9.00–12.60 μg/L) and accuracy (recoveries of 72.28%–106.99%).

Matrix solid phase dispersion
Nowadays, matrix solid phase dispersion (MSPD) technology has been widely applied for the pre-processing of liquid, viscous, semi-solid or solid samples. Compared to the SPE method, the substrates are thoroughly mixed with the sorbents in MSPD procedure and thus have a larger contact area with the elution solvents (Fig. 4B), which is more prone to strong physicochemical interactions. The development of new adsorbent materials and the miniaturization of MSPD loading devices are two dominant trends. On the one hand, conventional MSPD sorbents such as diatomite, Al2O3, C18, C8, and silica gel display slow mass transfer rates and poor adsorption capacities, which are attributed to structural limitations. On the other hand, the ever-increasing miniaturization of MSPD can reduce the consumption of samples, solid phases and solvents to minimize contamination and save costs. Yu et al. exploited a miniaturized MSPD technique using nano-SiO2 for the synchronous concentration of six isoquinoline alkaloids from Corydalis Rhizoma. Nano-SiO2 is characterized by small particle size, large specific surface area, and porosity, allowing it to come into full contact with samples. Abundant hydroxyl groups on its surface can form hydrogen bonds with target components to promote uniform dispersion, which is well-suited for extracting alkaloids as strong hydrophilic acidic oxides. Under the optimal extraction conditions optimized by Box-Behnken design (40 mg of sorbent, 60 s of grinding time, pH 4.8), the UPLC-Q-TOF/MS-mediated detection system showed low LOQs of 0.17–10.00 ng/mL and superior recoveries (80.50%–104.60%).

LPME
LPME technique is a miniaturized version of the LLE method, which utilizes a very minimal volume of extraction solvent (0.5–100 μL) versus the sample bulk to fulfill the high-performance extraction and clarification of the analytes. Exemplary LPME techniques notably comprise single drop microextraction (SDME) (Fig. 4C), hollow-fiber (HF)-LPME (Fig. 4D), etc. LPME technology based on switchable solvents has recently gained momentum due to its simplicity and speed. Switchable solvents such as amidines and guanidines are neutral and immiscible with aqueous solution. When a switching trigger condition is applied, they transform into ionic and hydrophilic states for extraction. If another switching trigger condition is initiated, switchable solvents enriched with target molecules revert to their original status (separating from the aqueous phase). As shown in Fig. 4E, a new hydrophilic switchable DES consisting of an alkanolamine (diethanolamine) and a fatty acid (hexanoic acid) (molar ratio 1:1, 180 μL) was explored and prepared, which was utilized for the pre-enrichment and HPLC-UV quantification of four liposoluble diterpenoid quinones in Salvia Miltiorrhiza. A homogeneous solution could be formed when DES was added to the sample phase as an extractant and subjected to vortex stirring. After that, adding HCl might disrupt the hydrogen bonds between HBA and HBD, converting DES into a hydrophobic condition. It then caused a turbid solution that could be easily centrifuged to recover the hydrophobic layer containing target substances. The established analytical method achieved enrichment factors up to 59–274 with acceptable LODs (0.5–0.7 ng/mL).

Dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction
Dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction (DLLME) and cell membrane chromatography (CMC) for screening bioactives in medicinal and edible plants (MEPs). (A) General steps for DLLME enforcement. (B) Manual pressing transient nebulization device-driven DLLME for the pre-concentration of bioactive compounds in three medicinal plants. (C) Schematic of CMC technology simulating the “drug-receptor” action in vivo. (D) Mas-related G protein-coupled receptor X2 (MrgprX2)-Avi-tag/CMC model coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) as a two-dimensional (2D) screening platform for the recognition of antiallergic compound in Viticis fructus. TCM: traditional Chinese medicine; GPCRs: G protein-coupled receptors; IB: 2-iminobiotin; CMSP: cell membrane stationary phase; HPLC: high-performance liquid chromatography. Reprinted from Refs. with permission.
Fig. 5
Dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction (DLLME), comprises the rapid injection of a binary solvent mixture (extraction and dispersive solvents) into an aqueous sample solution using a syringe, giving rise to a ternary solvent system in which the extractant is dispersed as very tiny droplets (Fig. 5A). Because of the direct influence of the type and volume of dispersant and extractant on the extraction efficiency, DLLME technology is progressing towards the invention of eco-friendly reagent substitutes, the prevention of dispersant and centrifugation operations, and the assistance of dispersion by external measures.
Replacing the dispersants with ultrasound, vortexing, stirring, or effervescence, as well as developing innovative auxiliary dispersing strategies, is one of the main trends in DLLME. A manual press transient nebulization device utilizing a was creatively made by sprinkling can from daily life, with a 10 mL syringe in the upper part (holding the sample phase), a nozzle in the middle part (pre-injecting 50 μL of the extractant undecanol), and a 10 mL centrifuge tube in the lower part (receiving the dispersed solution) (Fig. 5B). Concentration of seven chalcones and isoflavones from three medicinal plants was accomplished in just one press (2 s), with enrichment factors reaching 103.1–180.9 and LODs of 0.02–0.15 ng/mL (by HPLC-UV).

Cell membrane chromatography (CMC)
Proteins, ion channels, membrane lipids, and other potential receptors in the cell membrane account for roughly two-thirds of all known druggable targets within the cell. As such, to reveal drug-receptor interactions and to screen bioactive compounds from natural plants, the concept of cell membrane chromatography (CMC) was introduced and has been extensively developed since the 1990s. Specifically, integrated cell membranes were extracted from cell lines or tissues and then coated onto activated silica surfaces by self-fusion to prepare cell membrane stationary phases (CMSPs), which preserved the highly complex conformation and function of the original cells. By leveraging the specific targeting affinity between compounds and membrane receptors, when plant extracts passed through the CMC column, the active ingredients therein could be retained on the column, which was actually a form of biomimetic chromatography performing dual functions of recognition and separation (Fig. 5C). When CMC was combined with multidimensional chromatography or LC-MS/MS, it enabled rapid separation and identification of bioactive substances.
Although CMC holds a powerful screening throughput, it still faces numerous challenges. Nowadays, the development of CMC is trending towards the construction of genetically modified cell lines (with high-level receptor expression), functionalization of cell membrane surface, and mixing of diversified cell membranes to enhance the precision and efficiency of screening platforms. Lv et al. labeled HEK293T cell lines overexpressing Mas-related G protein-coupled receptor X2 (MrgprX2) using an Avi tag comprising a 15-amino acid fragment. In parallel, aminopropyl silica gel was chosen as the solid-phase carrier for 2-iminobiotin (IB) decoration; Taking BirA as the catalyst, the Avi tag could specifically bind to IB, allowing the directional attachment of cell membrane fragments to the silica gel surface. Then, it integrated the MrgprX2-Avi-tag/CMC model, building a 2D screening platform for antiallergic compounds by incorporating it with HPLC/MS, and successfully identifying vitexicarpin from Viticis fructus (Fig. 5D). This CMC model avoided the introduction of macromolecular reactants and effectively diminished nonspecific adsorption, while covalent bonding strengthened the stability of the stationary phase.

Coupling techniques
Because of the unique strengths and inevitable weaknesses of each sample preparation method, it is very common to observe the synergistic use of different sample preparation techniques to reinforce the accuracy, sensitivity, and reliability of analytical methods. As examples, coupling techniques such as EAE-MAE, UAE-LLE, and ASE-SPE are regularly incorporated for the extraction of phytochemicals from herbal plants (Table 1).
Typically, combining MAE and DSPE will further shorten the extraction time, increase the concentration of target analytes, and contribute to the environmental protection. Four alkaloids (nuciferine, O-nornuciferine, armepavine, and N-nornuciferine) from lotus leaves were extracted employing the MAE-DSPE technique, and the key parameters, including extraction solvent, material-to-solvent ratio, microwave power, extraction time, and the type and dosage of adsorbent, were univariately optimized. Upon enrichment and concentration, the UPLC-DAD assay disclosed that the concentrations of the four alkaloids elevated from 0.4 to 1.7 μg/mL to 2.6–19.9 μg/mL, with sensibility boosting by 5-13-fold. In contrast to single reflux extraction or microwave extraction, the MAE-DSPE technique exhibited faster extraction time (7 min), fewer sample amounts (0.25 g), lower solvent consumption (10 mL), and shorter detection time (10 min), with recoveries reaching 97.70%–99.70%, which was promising for further isolation of trace alkaloids and quality estimation of lotus leaves.
The UAE-aided DSPE process can facilitate the thorough dispersion and contact of the adsorbent within the sample solution, thereby promoting the extraction efficiency and mass transfer rate of the adsorbent. Yuan et al. enhanced the adsorption power and capacity of GO for target analytes by grafting a thin layer of poly-DES (PDES) onto its surface, which was then utilized for the prompt extraction of indole-3-carbinol, an anticancer compound, from broccoli. Besides, the mass transfer speed was accelerated with UAE, and the quick separation, adsorption, and desorption of the sorbent from the sample solution was realized by adopting a syringe with a filter (0.45 μm). In comparison with the singular SPE or DSPE method, the PDES-GO-based UAE-DSPE-HPLC-DAD system demonstrated cheap cost loss (3 mg of sorbent), favorable accuracy (recoveries of 84.30%–96.40%), desirable sensitivity (LOQ of 0.084 μg/g) and precision (relative standard deviation (RSD) ≤ 5.6%).

Sample preparation techniques for safety control of MEPs
Individual parts of MEPs (flowers, fruits, roots, leaves, and seeds) have now been fully exploited into dietary supplements, functional foods, herbal teas, etc. Typical regulatory standards established by Chinese Pharmacopoeia and the European Pharmacopoeia have been promulgated to monitor harmful substances such as pesticides, heavy metals, mycotoxins, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and so on. Nonetheless, the complex composition of pigments, polysaccharides, and other compounds within these plants seriously affects the stability and accuracy of analysis, thus underscoring the necessity for sample preparation techniques.

Pesticide residues
Pesticides are natural or synthetic chemical substances that prevent, destroy, and control insects or regulate the different phases of growth and development. Although the adequate allocation of pesticides can enhance the yield and economic benefits of medicinal herbs, their constant and reckless use and abuse pose a potential risk of contamination and cumulative toxicity to both the environment and human health. Pesticide residues are trace quantities of pesticides and their metabolites, as well as degradants that remain in the plants after pesticide application during growth, harvesting, storage, processing, and transportation. Reportedly, sustained exposure to diverse pesticides may cause damage to the cardiovascular system, reproductive system, central nervous system, endocrine system, and respiratory system. Consequently, the determination of pesticide residues in MEPs is an integral aspect of the safety monitoring of MEPs.
Representative applications of sample preparation techniques for safety control of medicinal and edible plants (MEPs).
Table 2
Extraction method	Extractant/adsorbent	Matrix	Analyte	Analytical method	Linear range	LOD	LOQ	Recovery (%)	Refs.	 	Extraction techniques for pesticide residues	 	QuEChERS	GCB, C18, MgSO4	Five edible herbs	Ten neonicotinoids and their ten metabolites	UPLC-MS/MS	0.1–200 μg/kg	–	0.1–5.0 μg/kg	65.00–120.00		 	MSPE	Fe3O4@MIL-68(Al)@ TAPB-PDA-COF	Three herbs	Carbendazim and thiabendazole	HPLC-UV	13–8000 μg/L	0.65–1.34 μg/L	2.02–4.52 μg/L	86.05–99.78		 	LLE	Methanol, water, K2HPO4⋅3H2O	Garlic	Iron Chlorin e6	HPLC-UV	0.01–5.00 mg/kg	0.19–0.26 μg/kg	0.58–0.77 μg/kg	83.15–107.86		 	UAE	Acetonitrile containing 1% formic acid	34 species of medicinal plants	24 PGRs and 11 pesticides	UPLC-MS/MS	0.5–500 ng/mL	0.2–8 μg/kg	0.5–20 μg/kg	63.18–127.23		 	SPE	SR/GO	Fruits and vegetables	Five pesticides	HPLC-DAD	0.005–10 μg/g	1.4–2.9 ng/g	4.7–9.6 ng/g	75.30–113.00		 	SPME	Biomimetic water-swelling fiber	Lactuca sativa and Glycine max	Seven neonicotinoids	UPLC-MS/MS	1–1000 ng/mL	0.03–0.11 ng/mL	0.11–0.34 ng/mL	–		 	DSPE	IL-WFOMS	Panax ginseng	Four PGRs	HPLC-FLD	0.05–22.5 ng/g	0.003–0.008 ng/g	0.010–0.027 ng/g	77.60–98.30		 	MSPD	Florisil	Dalmatian pyrethrum	Six pyrethrin components	HPLC-DAD	–	3.2–11.7 μg/g	9.6–35.5 μg/g	70.13–107.51		 	DLLME	Tetrachloromanganate-based MIL	Seven edible plants	Metribuzin	UV–Vis	35–800 μg/L	10.6 μg/L	35 μg/L	91.00–102.00		 	UAE-DSPE	PIL-GO	Vegetables and fruits	Phenylurea pesticides	HPLC-DAD	0.01–2.50 μg/g	1.00–1.25 ng/g	3.35–4.17 ng/g	86.60–116.90		 	UAE-LPME	Choline chloride:phenol (1:4)	Five herbs	Five pesticides	HPLC-DAD	0.054–107 μg/mL	0.02–0.2 g/mL	0.05–0.5 g/mL	81.00–92.10		 	Extraction techniques for mycotoxins	 	QuEChERS	MgSO4, PSA	Atractylodis rhizoma	Seven mycotoxins	UPLC-MS/MS	0.0625–500 ng/mL	0.025–0.25 μg/kg	0.1–0.5 μg/kg	75.60–108.80		 	IAC	11+Myco MS-PREP®	Five medicinal herbs	Nine mycotoxins	UPLC-MS/MS	0.05–50 μg/L	–	0.5–20 μg/kg	71.00–110.00		 	SPE	Degreasing cotton	Corn, Coix seed and Gualoupi	ZEN	UPLC-MS/MS	0.1–100 ng/g	0.025 ng/g	0.083 ng/g	95.60–110.40		 	DSPE	MAX	15 kinds of herbal samples	AFB1, AFB2, AFG1, AFG2	HPLC-FLD	0.05–100 ng/mL	0.01 ng/mL	0.03 ng/mL	72.70–114.50		 	MSPE	Fe3O4@PDA/MIL-101(Cr)	Licorice	Five mycotoxins	UPLC-MS/MS	0.5–50 μg/L	0.01–0.09 μg/kg	0.02–0.30 μg/kg	78.53–116.28		 	DLLME	Ethyl acetate	Eight herbal teas	16 mycotoxins	HPLC-MS/MS	–	0.05–10 μg/L	0.2–33 μg/L	65.00–127.00		 	IAC-QuEChERS	Myco6in1+, C18	20 medicinal herbs	11 mycotoxins	UPLC-MS/MS	0.25–2500 ng/g	–	0.25–2.5 ng/g	51.00–106.20		 	UAE-SPE	Acetonitrile-water-formic acid (84:15:1), PriboFast®MFC 100	Astragali Radix	21 mycotoxins	UPLC-MS/MS	0.025–100 ng/mL	0.01–0.1 ng/mL	0.025–0.25 ng/mL	54.60–110.70		 	QuEChERS-DLLME	MgSO4, C18, ethyl acetate, CHCl3	56 different species of herbs	Ten mycotoxins	HPLC-MS/MS	0.2–1000 μg/L	0.1–5.0 μg/kg	0.3–16.7 μg/kg	58.00–110.00		 	Extraction techniques for heavy metals	 	EAE-UAE	Cellulase, tris–HCl buffer solution	Four rhizomatous herbs	Four arsenic species	LC-HGAFS	1.0–80.0 μg/L	0.7–2.5 μg/kg	2.2–7.7 μg/kg	91.70–115.00		 	UAE-DLLME	1-dodecanol	Carrot, lettuce, bell pepper, parsley, mint, and thyme	Ni and Co	FAAS	10.0–400.0 μg/L	1.7–2.4 μg/L	5.6–7.9 μg/L	94.00–101.00		 	UAE	HNO3 (0.10 M), dodecanoic acid	Ginkgo biloba leaf	Cd	TS-FF-AAS	0.36–7.50 μg/L	0.11 μg/L	0.36 μg/L	–		 	MAE	Natural DESs	Peach leaves, and Brachiaria brizantha	As, Cd, Hg, Pb, Se, and V	ICP-MS	–	0.0017–2.66 μg/kg	0.0057–7.98 μg/kg	–		 	CPE	Triton X-114, L-menthol: nonanoic acid (2:1)	Paris polyphylla andSalvia yunnanensis	Co	UV–Vis	0.27–100 μg/L	0.08 μg/L	0.27 μg/L	92.40–105.00		 	SPE	Eichhornia crassipes leaves as solid phase	Leaves of three edible plants	Pb	FAAS	2.35–100 μg/L	2.35 μg/L	–	–		 	DSPE	GO-TSC	Spinach, celery, and scallion	Hg	TXRF	–	1.8 ng/g	–	103.00–108.00		 	MSPE	MCOF-DES	Phyllanthus emblica	Cu	ICP-OES	0.4–700 μg/L	0.16 μg/L	0.54 μg/L	90.60–106.00		 	DLLME	Choline chloride:phenol (1:2)	Rose tea	Cu	FAAS	5.07–246.61 μg/kg	2.50 μg/kg	8.32 μg/kg	95.90–118.40		 	UAE-MSPD	β-alanine:citric acid:water (1:2:17)	Fennel, yerba mate, lemongrass, and chamomile	As	ICP-MS	0.10–15.0 μg/L	0.039 mg/kg	0.130 mg/kg	95.00–101.00		 	UAE-LPME	Dipropylamine	Gentiana rigescens	Ni	UV–Vis	0.067–100 μg/L	0.02 μg/L	0.067 μg/L	91.60–110.00		 	Extraction techniques for PAHs	 	DSPE	NF@COF	Five herbs	16 PAHs	GC-MS/MS	20–2000 ng/mL	0.3–2.7 ng/mL	1.0–9.0 ng/mL	78.00–124.00		 		NF@SiO2@G	Five herbs	16 PAHs	GC-MS/MS	20–2000 ng/mL	0.98–13.34 ng/mL	3.25–44.47 ng/mL	75.50–118.40		 	MSPE	Fe3O4@SiO2@C60	Nine herbs	16 PAHs	GC-MS/MS	5–1000 μg/L	0.02–0.11 μg/kg	0.07–0.36 μg/kg	84.70–107.20		 		Fe3O4/Cu:CuO/GO-NC	Vegetables and fruits	Four PAHs	HPLC-UV	3–3800 ng/mL	0.015–0.061 ng/mL	0.485–2.034 ng/mL	95.12–106.80		 	SPE	PU-PP	Lotus roots	Four PAHs	HPLC-FLD	1–200 ng/g	0.09–0.28 ng/g	0.29–0.93 ng/g	84.60–114.30		 		PS-DVB	Primulae flos and tea	Four PAHs	HPLC-FLD	–	10.66–12.46 mg/L	37.88–44.13 mg/L	90.00–103.00		 	LPME	ChCl:HFIP (1:2)	Teas and medicinal herbs	Six PAHs	HPLC-FLD	0.3–1400 ng/g	0.05–0.35 ng/g	0.15–1.05 ng/g	86.20–114.90		 	DLLME	[MOEDEA][FAP]: acetonitrile (1:2)	Twenty-five teas	Six PAHs	HPLC-FLD	1–500 μg/L	2.02–30.8 ng/L	6.73–95.2 ng/L	56.00–94.00		 	UAE-SPE	Dichloromethane, silica gel and alumina	Pine needles and oak leaves	16 PAHs	GC-MS/MS	–	0.01–0.08 ng/g	–	74.98–90.53
LOD: limit of detection; LOQ: limit of quantification; LLE: liquid–liquid extraction; HPLC: high performance liquid chromatography; UV: ultraviolet detector; UAE: ultrasound-assisted extraction; PGRs: plant growth regulators; UPLC: ultra performance liquid chromatography; MS: mass spectrometry; SPE: solid phase extraction; SR: superhydrophilic resin; GO: graphene oxide; DAD: diode array detector; QuEChERS: quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe; –: no data; GCB: graphitized carbon black; SPME: solid phase microextraction; DSPE: dispersive solid phase extraction; IL: ionic liquid; WFOMS: wool cluster functionalized ordered mesoporous silica; FLD: fluorescence detector; MSPE: magnetic solid phase extraction; TAPB: 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl) benzene; PDA: terephthaldehyde; COF: covalent organic framework; MSPD: matrix solid phase dispersion; LPME: liquid phase microextraction; DLLME: dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction; MIL: magnetic ionic liquid; UV-Vis: ultraviolet-visible detector; PIL: poly(ionic liquid); MAX: mixed-mode anion exchange; AF: aflatoxin; PSA: primary secondary amine; IAC: immunoaffinity column; ZEN: zearalenone; Cd: cadmium; TS-FF-AAS: thermospray flame furnace atomic absorption spectrometry; MAE: microwave-assisted extraction; DES: deep eutectic solvent; As: arsenic; Hg: hydrargyrum; Pb: lead; Se: selenium; V: vanadium; ICP: inductively coupled plasma; CPE: cloud point extraction; Co: cobalt; FAAS: flame atomic absorption spectrometry; TSC: thiosemicarbazide; TXRF: total-reflection X-ray fluorescence spectrometry; Cu: copper; OES: optical emission spectrometry; EAE: enzyme-assisted extraction; HGAFS: hydride generation atomic fluorescence spectroscopy; Ni: nickel; PAHs: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons; PU-PP: phloroglucinol-urotropine porous polymer; PS-DVB: polystyrene-divinyl benzene; NF: nickel foam; G: graphene; GC: gas chromatography; NC: nanocomposite; ChCl: choline chloride; HFIP: hexafluoroisopropanol; [MOEDEA][FAP]: ethyl-dimethyl-(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium tris(pentafluoroethyl)trifluorophosphate.
Typical sample preparation workflows for pesticide and mycotoxin analysis in medicinal and edible plants (MEPs). (A) Classic flowchart of quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe (QuEChERS) technology implementation. (B) Preparation of Fe3O4@MIL-68(Al)@1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl) benzene (TAPB)-terephthaldehyde (PDA)-covalent organic framework (COF) and its application in the enrichment and determination of carbendazim (CBZ) and thiabendazole (TBZ) from herbal plants. (C) Immunoaffinity column (IAC) sample preparation procedures for plant materials. PSA: primary secondary amine; LC: liquid chromatography; GC: gas chromatography; AFs: aflatoxins; HPLC: high-performance liquid chromatography; PCD: photochemical derivatization; FLD: fluorescence detection. Reprinted from Refs. with permission.
Fig. 6
To date, the primary sample pretreatment techniques for pesticide residues in herbal medicine include DLLME, SPE, MSPE, LPME, and quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe (QuEChERS) methods (Table 2). Of these, the QuEChERS technique, which is the most commonly applied pretreatment tool for the determination of pesticide residues, was first presented at the 4th European Pesticide Residue Workshop (EPRW) in 2002 (Fig. 6A). Compared to traditional sample pre-treatment methods, QuEChERS technology can reduce solvent and cost consumption by approximately 95%.
Neonicotinoid insecticides (NEOs) represent vast alternatives to other conventional ones because of their great broad-spectrum, robust water-solubility, and high selectivity. Wang et al. established a method for the assay of 20 NEOs and their poisonous metabolites (m-NEOs) in different medicinal and edible homologous herbs based on QuEChERS-UPLC-MS/MS technique. The established method was validated with the lowest LODs of 0.1–5 μg/kg for 20 NEOs and m-NEOs, with average recoveries between 65% and 120% and precision RSD values below 19.85%. Final assay results of the actual samples revealed that 90 out of 109 herbal samples were found positive, with total residue levels of 0.26–86.95 μg/kg.
Incorporating MOF and COF into hybrid material and adapting them to MSPE can enhance the specific surface area and adsorption capacity of the porous frameworks. 1,3,5-tris(4-aminophenyl) benzene (TAPB) and terephthaldehyde (PDA) were covalently integrated onto Fe3O4@MIL-68(Al) to produce a magnetic MOF-doped TAPB-PDA-COF of Fe3O4@MIL-68(Al)@TAPB-PDA-COF, which effectively altered the hydrophilicity (turned into hydrophobicity) of MIL-68(Al) and was successfully deployed for the adsorption of carbendazim (CBZ) and thiabendazole (TBZ) in herbal medicines (Fig. 6B), with the maximum adsorption capacity of 54.24 and 67.87 mg/g, respectively. The established MSPE-HPLC-UV method with low LODs (0.65–1.34 μg/L) and fine accuracy (86.05%–99.78%) was profitably adopted for the parallel quantification of CBZ and TBZ residues in L. japonicae flos, C. grandis exocarium and C. arcodylis fructus.

Mycotoxins
Mycotoxins are secondary metabolites manufactured naturally by fungi, the majority of which are labeled with high toxicity and high pollution rates. Any improper control is susceptible to fungal infections and contamination by mycotoxins. Numerous publications have illustrated that mycotoxins present carcinogenic, teratogenic and mutagenic properties, as well as being closely correlated with renal damage, hepatotoxicity, reproductive disorders, immunosuppression, and diseases of the central nervous system. So, the surveillance of mycotoxin pollution in MEPs is also necessary to ensure the plant's safety. At present, the foremost visible mycotoxins in MEPs belong to aflatoxin (AF), ochratoxin (OT), zearalenone (ZEN), fumonisin (FB), trichothecene, and patulin (PAT). Most representative ones, such as AFB1 and OTA, are recognized by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) as ⅠA and ⅡB carcinogens, posing an imminent threat globally. QuEChERS, SPE, DSPE, and MSPE were all cited as pre-treatments for the evaluation of mycotoxins in MEPs (Table 2).
Atractylodis rhizoma is a well-known Chinese medicine that enjoys extensive usage, but because of its rich starch content and mild growth conditions, it is very vulnerable to fungal contamination. A revised QuEChERS method was implemented by Liu et al. for the pretreatment of Atractylodis rhizoma. The cleaned-up specimens acquired were subjected to parallel trace detection of seven multiclass mycotoxins (AFB1, AFB2, AFG1, AFG2, OTA, FB1, and FB2) using the UPLC-triple quadrupole/linear-ion trap (QqQLIT)-MS/MS technique, which enabled the simultaneous identification and quantification of the compounds in the MRM-information dependent acquisition-enhanced product ion (IDA-EPI) mode. Elaborated method with outstanding sensitivity (LOQs of 0.1–0.5 μg/kg) and accuracy (mean recoveries of 75.6%–108.8%) was glibly exploited for the test of candidate mycotoxins in 22 batches of Atractylodis rhizoma samples (18.2% of samples were positive).
Immunoaffinity columns (IAC) specifically adsorb mycotoxins from samples by antibodies contained inside the in-column gel suspension, which are capable of removing co-extracted impurities and reducing matrix-derived signals in the instrument (Fig. 6C). A method founded on 80% methanol extraction-IAC clarification was taken for the extraction and enrichment of nine mycotoxins (AFB1, AFB2, AFG1, AFG2, OTA, ZEN, deoxynivalenol, T-2, and HT-2 toxins) from five Indian medicinal plants, namely, giloy, ashwagandha, safed musli, satavari, and tulsi. LC-fluorescence detector (FLD) and LC-MS/MS methods were developed separately for subsequent inspection and cross-corroboration, and it was proved that, except for AFs, the LOQs (0.5–20 μg/kg) of LC-MS/MS were much lower with higher applicability and selectivity. Superior analytical capabilities of the method (71%–110% spiked recoveries, RSD <10%) fulfilled the demands of the maximum level (ML) assay.

Heavy metals
Heavy metals are metals with a density greater than 4.5 g/cm3, including biologically essential elements (e.g., cobalt (Co), iron (Fe), copper (Cu), chromium (Cr), etc.) and non-essential elements (e.g., gold (Au), silver (Ag), thallium (TI), arsenic (As), etc.). Reports indicate that heavy metals are highly vulnerable to accumulation in the human body, given their difficult biodegradability, producing chronic toxicity by formulating complexes or chelates and disturbing the physiological functions of internal organs. With regard to MEPs, heavy metal contamination is never a problem to be overlooked. In particular, Cu, Cd, Pb, Cr, Hg, and As are the pollutants of critical concern in MEPs. As such, the detection of heavy metals in MEPs is a pivotal aspect in assessing their quality. CPE, UAE, MSPE, MAE, MSPD, and DLLME have been applied to the pre-treatment for the analysis of heavy metals in MEPs (Table 2).
Enzymes can foster the hydrolysis of biological macromolecules and disrupt the binding of metal polymers to efficiently extract metal elements from biological samples, while ultrasound can accelerate this enzymatic hydrolysis process. A dual-frequency ultrasound (40 kHz ultrasonic bath coupled with a 20 kHz ultrasonic probe) assisted cellulose enzymatic digestion (DUED) technique was practiced by Cheng et al. for the extraction of four forms of arsenic (As(Ⅲ), As(Ⅴ), monomethylarsinic acid and dimethylarsinic acid) from Salvia miltiorrhiza, Codonopsis pilosula, Paeoniae Raxix rubra, and Angelica Sinensis. The cavitation bubbles under dual-frequency ultrasound were more evenly distributed, accelerating the destruction of cell membranes and allowing the enzyme to act on the cytoplasmic inclusions earlier (relative extraction efficiencies of 105.6%–112.5%). The built DUED-LC-hydride generation atomic fluorescence spectroscopy (HGAFS) method exhibited sound accuracy (recoveries of 91.7%–115%) and sensitivity (0.7–2.5 μg/kg of LODs).
The DLLME technology based on solidified floating organic drops (SFOD) can overcome the drawbacks of extracting solvents that are denser than water and toxic, and further integrating with ionic surfactants and UAE technology is more favorable to the mass transfer of ionic compounds into the hydrophobic organic phase. Congo red (CR) and didecyldimethyl ammonium chloride were employed as complexing and ion-pairing agents. Arpa et al. developed an ion-pair surfactant-enhanced (IPSE) UAE-DLLME-SFOD technique for the pre-enrichment of Ni and Co ions in six MEPs, with enrichment factors of 65 and 48 using 1-dodecanol as the extractant. The optimum FAAS assay presented satisfactory sensitivity (1.7–2.4 μg/L for LODs and 5.6–7.9 μg/L for LOQs).

PAHS
PAHs are a class of aromatic compounds made up of comprising two or more benzene rings, primarily composed of carbon and hydrogen atoms. Considerable studies have shown that PAHs have potential genotoxicity, immunotoxicity, carcinogenicity and mutagenicity. After being ingested into the body, they can easily covalently bind with proteins and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) to perturb gene expression and intensely stimulate the respiratory, endocrine, and digestive systems, triggering all sorts of chronic illnesses. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) listed 16 PAHs as priority contaminants for control, while IRAC rated them as Class Ⅰ–Ⅲ carcinogens. The European Commission subsequently limited the maximum allowable levels of four PAHs in dried herbs to a collective total of less than 50 μg/kg (benzo(a)pyrene (BaP), benz(a)anthracene (BaA), benzo(b)fluoranthene (BbF) and chrysene (CHR)). Therefore, the supervision of PAHs is indispensable to ensure the clinical quality and safety of MEPs. Technologies such as SPE, DSPE, MSPE, and LPME are the primary sample preparation methods for the analysis of PAHs in MEPs (Table 2).
Advanced sorbent materials for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) enrichment from medicinal and edible plants (MEPs). (A) Synthesis of nickel foam (NF)@covalent organic framework (COF) and its utilization for efficient extraction of PAHs from herbal plants. (B) Preparation of magnetic C60 nanospheres for enrichment and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) measurement of PAHs in MEPs. THF: tetrahydrofuran; TEOS: tetraethoxysilane; APTES: 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane. Reprinted from Refs. with permission.
Fig. 7
Modification of COFs with a novel porous material named nickel foam (NF), which features great heat resistance and a unique three-dimensional structure, can enhance their stability, while the abundant aromatic rings within the structure enable selective capture of PAHs (π-π stacking and strong hydrophobic interactions). A facile NF@COF adsorbent was prepared for the affluent concentration of 16 PAHs. The optimal DSPE method was as follows: 114 mg of sorbent extracted 10 mL of sample in 5 min followed by desorption with 1 mL of dichloromethane for 1 min (Fig. 7A). The adsorption capacity could reach 101.03–327.45 ng/mg, while NF@COF stayed stable after 9 cycles of recycling. With gas chromatography (GC)-MS technology chosen for the determination, the proposed method demonstrated promising analytical performance (linear range of 20–2000 ng/mL, LOQs of 1.0–9.0 ng/mL, and spiked recoveries of 78%–124%). It was smoothly deployed for the simultaneous quantification of 16 PAHs in five MEPs.
Magnetic nanospheres available for the MSPE procedure offer a large contact area with the analytes and are easily and quickly separated from the solution. Silicon dioxide with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (linker) was ascribed for the modification of Fe3O4 nanorods, which reacted with C60 to create a new type of magnetic nanorods, Fe3O4@SiO2@C60. Then, it was utilized for the MSPE preconcentration of 16 PAHs in nine Chinese herbs (Fig. 7B). The resulting optimally enriched PAHs mixture was analyzed by isotope dilution GC-MS. The validated method possessed excellent applicability for the assay of different PAHs in complex matrices, with high accuracy (spiked recoveries of 84.7%–107.2%), favorable sensitivity (0.02–0.11 μg/kg of LODs), and fine precision (RSDs of 1.7%–8.4%).

Conclusions and future perspectives
Developing and utilizing safer and greener solvents and reagents to replace those detrimental to the environment and human health, with solvent-free or virtually solvent-free methods being particularly popular. Such as kinds of SFs, ILs, DESs, and surfactants, which possess low-toxicity, low-volatility and non-flammability, affordable price and excellent solubility, making them wonderful choices to substitute hazardous organic reagents. Moreover, technologies like SPME and SBSE have already enabled high-performance analyte extraction under near-solventless circumstances (directly coupled with thermal desorption devices).
Minimizing the usage of samples, chemicals and materials as much as possible by means of miniaturized sample preparation systems, or reducing the number of experimental explorations that need to be carried out, so as to fully leverage resources and lessen the waste generated. Microextraction techniques such as SPME, LPME, DLLME, DSPE, MSPE, QuEChERS, or modified micro-preparation devices can cut down on solvent use and lower chemical exposure for analysts. Whereas chemometrics tools such as RSM, CCD, Box-Behnken design, uniform design, artificial neural network, and data fitting modeling analysis can optimize the experimental protocols and reduce the number of experiments.
Exquisite nanomaterials with large specific surface area, high selectivity, strong adsorption capacity, and sustainable reusability will take sample preparation techniques involving the uptake of adsorbents to the next level. Such as G, GO, MOFs, COFs, MIPs, restricted access media, natural polymers, and carbon allotropes, offering improved absorptive capacity, reproducibility, enhanced mechanical and thermal stability, which significantly strengthen the detection performance of the analytical methods when applied to SPE, DSPE, SPME, SBSE, MSPD. Furthermore, commonly available materials tend to be integrated together to form hybrid adsorbents with synergistic effects.
Magnetic nanoparticle-based “self-separating” systems can decrease energy consumption and are a mainstream trend in the development of sorbents. Functionalized magnetic nanoparticles (e.g., the MSPE method) are compatible with the speed and efficiency of dispersive extraction, but avoid the centrifugation and filtration phases, facilitating easy separation with an external magnetic field application. With favorable magnetic conductivity, biocompatibility, and biodegradability, magnetic nanoparticles render the sample preparation process cost-effective, portable, and less time-consuming.
Immobilization of target molecules (e.g., enzymes, proteins, cell membranes) on the surface of nanocarriers (e.g., magnetic nanoparticles, porous nanoparticles) and the utilization of combined chemical and affinity-linking strategies to maintain the optimal degree of bioactivity (enhancement of environmental tolerance), are a potential method for screening bioactive components (high-affinity ligands) from complex matrices of herbal plants. For example, MSPE and CMC technologies, by coating innovative nanoparticles with cooperative magnetic effects and massive binding sites, can not only introduce different kinds of functional groups to improve selectivity, but also increase the screening range of the corresponding active ingredients.
Applying ancillary means to maximize sample throughput or incorporating multiple sample preparation techniques to assemble a composite extraction procedure to maximize extraction yield. Decreasing sample turnaround time with auxiliary fields such as ultrasound, microwave, enzyme, vortex, and high pressure to accelerate extraction or microextraction processes (e.g., UAE, MAE, EAE, ASE) or additives, membranes, etc., for adsorption or partitioning-based phase transfer (e.g., CPE, LPME, DLLME, membrane separation). Since individual sample preparation technology has its special advantages, the usage of applicable devices or means to consolidate different extraction methods can disguise their strengths into an integral whole (e.g., UAE-EAE, MAE-DSPE, ASE-SPE), thus accomplishing the purpose of high-efficient enrichment and segregation.
Employing “green” analytical instruments is also an invaluable means to cut down on energy consumption and waste generation, guaranteeing that repeatability, selectivity, sensitivity and matrix effects are not drastically compromised. In comparison with UPLC and UPLC-MS/MS techniques, methods such as HPLC and supercritical fluid chromatography are undoubtedly alternative analytical tools with lower energy expenditure, high popularity, and affordable costs, whereas CE also provides the benefits of high flexibility, strong separation capacity, and low solvent depletion with a short analysis time.
Simplifying or even completely automating sample preparation procedures by incorporating multiple steps in a sample preparation method will be an especially promising direction for future developments in the field of sample pre-treatment. Streamlining extraction, derivatization, cleaning, and concentration into a single step (as is possible with SPME technology) will substantially boost sample throughput, reduce solvent wastage, and permit a noticeable lessening of human intervention, resulting in the evacuation of probable operational errors and elimination of the safety risk regarding chemical exposure. Development of fully automated sample preparation systems and high-performance extraction devices will prompt the miniaturization and portability of sample preparation regimes, or may realize genuinely in-situ and in-place sample preparation.
Evolution of various sample preparation techniques and dissection of their strengths and weaknesses. LLE: liquid–liquid extraction; UAE: ultrasound-assisted extraction; ASE: accelerated solvent extraction; MAE: microwave-assisted extraction; SFE: supercritical fluid extraction; EAE: enzyme-assisted extraction; ILE: ionic liquid-based extraction; DESE: deep eutectic solvent-based extraction; CPE: cloud point extraction; SPE: solid phase extraction; SPME: solid phase microextraction; SBSE: stir bar sorptive extraction; DSPE: dispersive solid phase extraction; MSPE: magnetic solid phase extraction; MSPD: matrix solid phase dispersion; LPME: liquid phase microextraction; DLLME: dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction; CMC: cell membrane chromatography; QuEChERS: quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe.
Fig. 8
Comparison of different sample preparation techniques for quality evaluation and safety control of medicinal and edible plants (MEPs).
Table 3
Extraction method	Advantages	Disadvantages	 	LLE	Simple and easy to implementSuitable for most samples and compoundsInexpensive devices	Cumbersome and time-consuming stepsLarge consumption of organic solventsLow extraction selectivityPossible formation of emulsionSample loss during solvent evaporation	 	UAE	High extraction efficiency in short timeEasy to operate at room temperatureApplicable to various herbs and ingredientsRetainable mass of extracted materialHigh automation level	Noisy during operationNot easily expandable equipmentRigorous requirements for extraction containersToxic vapors generated when using organic solventsUneven ultrasonic action	 	ASE	Airtight operating system reduces reagent evaporationAutomated devicesSmall amount of organic solvents usageRapid extraction at high temperature and pressure	Expensive equipmentComponents with poor thermal stability are prone to decompositionHigh-voltage safety hazards	 	MAE	Less extraction solventMinor contaminationEven heating and high thermal efficiencyReduced pre-treatment timeEasily controllable extraction system	Restricted to thermally stable substancesGood water absorption of herbs is requiredLow extraction selectivityPossible leakage of microwave radiation	 	SFE	Avoids high temperatureNo toxic solvent residuesNo pollution to the environmentHigh extraction yieldRapid extraction cycleAdjustable temperature and pressure for selective extraction	High operational expensesComplex phase equilibrium processExtensive solvent circulationExtraction limitations for certain polar compoundsEnergy and operational challenges	 	EAE	Moderate reaction conditionsSpecialized extraction of target componentsShortened extraction timeDecreased use of organic reagents	Limited selectivityHigh enzyme costsEnzymes are easily inactivatedMay damage certain structures in plants	 	ILE	Non-toxic, non-volatile and heat-stable green solventDesigning solvent structures for selective extractionHigh recycling rate and high-efficiency extraction capabilityWidespread coupling with other extraction techniques	Complex synthesis and purification of solventsEnvironmental safety issues in solvent generationDifficulty in recovering solvents	 	DESE	Non-flammable, non-volatile and biodegradable green solventInexpensive solvent preparationHighly tunable physical and chemical properties of solventsHigh extraction efficiency and recyclableCommonly co-operated with other extraction methods	High viscosity of solventsLimited solubilityRecycling costs may be highToxicity and safety remain for further study	 	CPE	High enrichment factorRecyclable low-toxicity surfactantsSimple operation and mild conditionsEnvironmental friendlinessRapid phase separationIntegration with different analytical instruments	Surfactant interference with assay resultsHard to remove surfactants from chromatographic systemSensitive to temperature changePotential risks of surfactant residues	 	SPE	High recovery and enrichment factorReduced volume of organic solventsEasy automation and connection to analytical instrumentsBatch handle samples and conserve timeSimultaneous enrichment and purificationAvoiding emulsification and phase separation	High-cost commercially available cartridgesSuspended matter or solid particles in the sample may clog the adsorbent bedPoor reproducibility due to subtle differences in packing materialsAdditional parameter optimization workload	 	SPME	No organic solvents requiredEasy automation and on-line coupling with instrumentsNon-invasive to samplesOnly very tiny amounts of sample are neededAll-in-one sampling, extraction, concentration, and injectionHigh sensitivity	Fibers are fragile and easily breakableInstability and short lifespan of fiber coatingsPoor repeatability from different fibersExpensive resulting from high production precision of fibers	 	SBSE	Solvent-freeLarge extraction phase volumeHigh extraction efficiencyHigh sensitivityHigh recoveryReusable stirring bar	Difficulties in real-time monitoringLimited selectivity of coatings for complex substratesTedious desorption processComplex and costly coating preparation process	 	DSPE	Considerable increase in contact area between sample and sorbentReduced reagent usageHigh extraction efficiencyHigh selectivityEasy to operateSolid-phase adsorbents can be reused multiple times	Mechanical means (centrifugation or filtration) are needed to separate the sorbentsSample must be liquidAdsorbent materials may be expensive	 	MSPE	Phase separation without centrifugation or filtrationEasily automatedHigh extraction efficiencyHigh selectivityGood biocompatibilityLess equilibrium timeLow solvent consumptionReusable magnetic material	Complicated preparation of magnetic materialsInadequate devices for practical applicationLow variety of magnetic nanoparticlesHigh cost of functionalized magnetic nanomaterials	 	MSPD	Condensing sample homogenization, tissue lysis, extraction, and purification processesPrevents sample loss due to laborious proceduresHigh recoveryLow detection limits	High degree of sample pulverization requiredSize of dispersant affects elutionTightness of cartridge loading affects reproducibilityRisk of dust inhalation during sorbent grinding	 	LPME	Very low organic solvent consumptionHigh enrichment factorLow costSimple operationFast extraction at room temperature	Instability of extraction dropletsLong extraction time for less soluble substancesPoor reproducibilityHigh operational precision required	 	DLLME	Rapidly achieves extraction equilibriumHigh enrichment factorFavorable recoveryLow costEasy operationRequires only a small amount of sample and organic solvents	Ternary solvent system requiredDispersant directly affects extraction efficiencyCentrifugation is needed to collect the extraction phaseFrequent use of halogenated hydrocarbons raises environmental risks	 	CMC	Integrating chromatographic separation and receptor affinityAccurate screening of active components from the complex system in herbal plantsBiologically active biomimetic chromatography systemHigh selectivityNo derivatization requiredReusable stationary phaseSimultaneous completion of drug activity screening and component separationIn vitro simulation of the authentic cell membrane environment	Short lifetime of cell membrane columnMultiple centrifugation steps are time- and labor-intensiveInability to realistically simulate the intricate environment in vivoLow sensitivityOperational conditions must be strictly controlledBiological waste generation	 	QuEChERS	Simultaneously detects hundreds of compoundsGood recoverySimple and quick operationLess solvent usageEconomical equipment and cost consumptionWide scope of application	Serious matrix effectMoisture and fat content of the sample affects the extraction effectLow enrichment factorPoor selectivityAdditional centrifugation procedures
LLE: liquid–liquid extraction; UAE: ultrasound-assisted extraction; ASE: accelerated solvent extraction; MAE: microwave-assisted extraction; SFE: supercritical fluid extraction; EAE: enzyme-assisted extraction; ILE: ionic liquid-based extraction; DESE: deep eutectic solvent-based extraction; CPE: cloud point extraction; SPE: solid phase extraction; SPME: solid phase microextraction; SBSE: stir bar sorptive extraction; DSPE: dispersive solid phase extraction; MSPE: magnetic solid phase extraction; MSPD: matrix solid phase dispersion; LPME: liquid phase microextraction; DLLME: dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction; CMC: cell membrane chromatography; QuEChERS: quick, easy, cheap, effective, rugged, and safe.
In this review, we thoroughly discussed the current practice scenario of available advanced sample preparation techniques in the quality assessment (screening and enrichment of bioactive compounds) and safety control (monitoring of exogenous pollutants) of MEPs, and specifically profiled the strengths and weaknesses of the different extraction methods (Fig. 8 and Table 3). The extraction methods and sample preparation strategies involved in the quality evaluation and safety monitoring of MEPs have been continuously developing in accordance with the characteristics of plant materials and the peculiarities of Green Sample Preparation:

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Lingxuan Ma: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software, Methodology, Investigation. Lele Yang: Methodology, Investigation, Data curation. Lijun Tang: Formal analysis. Yudi Wang: Formal analysis. Hua Luo: Validation. Zhangfeng Zhong: Validation. Wensheng Zhang: Validation. Di Chen: Supervision, Conceptualization. Jinchao Wei: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization. Peng Li: Supervision. Yitao Wang: Supervision, Funding acquisition.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

References
The ethnomedicinal and functional uses, phytochemical and pharmacology of compounds from Ardisia species: An updated review
Recent advances in polysaccharides from edible and medicinal Polygonati rhizoma: From bench to market
Alternanthera sessilis: Uncovering the nutritional and medicinal values of an edible weed
Recent trends of machine learning applied to multi-source data of medicinal plants
Classification and rapid non-destructive quality evaluation of different processed products of Cyperus rotundus based on near-infrared spectroscopy combined with deep learning
The safety of Chinese medicine: A systematic review of endogenous substances and exogenous residues
Analytical insights for ensuring authenticity of Greek agriculture products: Unveiling chemical marker applications
Evolution of green sample preparation: Fostering a sustainable tomorrow in analytical sciences
A comprehensive review on recent developments and future perspectives of switchable solvents and their applications in sample preparation techniques
Green chemistry methods for food analysis: Overview of sample preparation and determination
Advanced materials in sorbent-based analytical sample preparation
Green analytical chemistry metrics for evaluation of microextraction methods: Fascinating or essential tools in real-world applications?
Enlarging the bottleneck in the analysis of alkaloids: A review on sample preparation in herbal matrices
SPME as a green sample-preparation technique for the monitoring of phytocannabinoids and endocannabinoids in complex matrices
Recent advances of modern sample preparation techniques for traditional Chinese medicines
Pesticide residues in spices and herbs: Sample preparation methods and determination by chromatographic techniques
Characterization and classification of three common Bambusoideae species in Korea by an HPLC-based analytical platform coupled with multivariate statistical analysis
Selective separation of the homologues of baicalin and baicalein from Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi using a recyclable ionic liquid-based liquid-liquid extraction system
Determination of Veratrum alkaloid contents in three Veratrum species by HPLC-MS/MS
Ultrasound-assisted extraction conditions optimisation using response surface methodology from Mitragyna speciosa (Korth.) Havil leaves
Impact of conventional and sustainable solvents on the yield, selectivity, and recovery of curcuminoids from turmeric
Simultaneous optimization of ultrasonic-assisted extraction of Danshen for maximal tanshinone IIA and salvianolic acid B yields and antioxidant activity: A comparative study of the response surface methodology and artificial neural network
An experimental design approach for the optimization of scopoletin extraction from Morinda citrifolia L. using accelerated solvent extraction
Simultaneous identification and quantification of five flavonoids in the seeds of Rheum palmatum L. by using accelerated solvent extraction and HPLC–PDA–ESI/MSn
“Q-markers targeted screening” strategy for comprehensive qualitative and quantitative analysis in fingerprints of Angelica dahurica with chemometric methods
Simultaneous quantification of oleanolic acid, ursolic acid, betulinic acid and lupeol in different populations of five Swertia species by using HPTLC-densitometry: Comparison of different extraction methods and solvent selection
Conventional and nonconventional extraction techniques for optimal extraction processes of rosmarinic acid from six Lamiaceae plants as determined by HPLC-DAD measurement
A rapid and efficient method of microwave-assisted extraction and hydrolysis and automatic amino acid analyzer determination of 17 amino acids from mulberry leaves
Comprehensive two-step supercritical fluid extraction for green isolation of volatiles and phenolic compounds from plant material
Experimental extraction of gallic acid from brown sumac seed (Rhus coriaria) using supercritical carbon dioxide and ethanol as co-solvent: Modeling and optimization
Sequential extraction of carnosic acid, rosmarinic acid and pigments (carotenoids and chlorophylls) from Rosemary by online supercritical fluid extraction-supercritical fluid chromatography
Antioxidant neoagarooligosaccharides (NAOs) and dietary fiber production from red algae Gracilariopsis lemaneiformis using enzyme assisted one-step process
An efficient mixed enzymes-assisted mechanical bio-extraction of polysaccharides from Dendrobium officinale and determination of monosaccharides by HPLC-Q-TOF/MS
Simultaneous extraction and enrichment of polyphenol and lutein from marigold (Tagetes erecta L.) flower by an enzyme-assisted ethanol/ammonium sulfate system
Temperature-responsive ionic liquids to set up a method for the simultaneous extraction and in situ preconcentration of hydrophilic and lipophilic compounds from medicinal plant matrices
Highly efficient and selective extraction of minor bioactive natural products using pure ionic liquids: Application to prenylated flavonoids in licorice
Vitamin B3-based protic ionic liquids as green solvents for the isolation of astilbin from rhizoma smilacis glabrae
A deep eutectic solvent binary-phase system for alkaloid extraction from Chinese herb Evodia lepta residue and its mechanism
pH-controlled reversible deep-eutectic solvent based enzyme system for simultaneous extraction and in-situ separation of isoflavones from Pueraria lobata
Deep eutectic solvents in the efficient detoxification and extraction of alkaloids of aconiti lateralis Radix praeparata
An integrated strategy for extraction and pre-concentration of four astragalosides from Radix Astragali by a formulated surfactant aqueous system
Synergic cloud-point extraction using C4mim PF6 and Triton X-114 as extractant combined with HPLC for the determination of rutin and narcissoside in Anoectochilus roxburghii (Wall.) Lindl. and its compound oral liquid
Facile cloud point extraction for the separation and determination of phenolic acids from dandelion
Porous phenolic resin regulated by alcohol-based deep eutectic solvent for selective extraction and separation of tanshinones from Salvia miltiorrhiza
Online coupling of the Ussing chamber, solid-phase extraction and high-performance liquid chromatography for screening and analysis of active constituents of traditional Chinese medicines
Miniaturized solid-phase extraction using a mesoporous molecular sieve SBA-15 as sorbent for the determination of triterpenoid saponins from Pulsatilla chinensis by ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography-charged aerosol detection
Research progress in the use of liquid-liquid extraction for food flavour analysis
A review of ultrasound-assisted extraction for plant bioactive compounds: Phenolics, flavonoids, thymols, saponins and proteins
Combining extraction and purification steps in sample preparation for environmental matrices: A review of matrix solid phase dispersion (MSPD) and pressurized liquid extraction (PLE) applications
Antioxidant, antiradical, and antimicrobial activities of polysaccharides obtained by microwave-assisted extraction method: A review
Supercritical fluid extraction of seed oils–A short review of current trends
Enzyme-assisted extractions of polyphenols–A comprehensive review
Uses of ionic liquids to obtain bioactive compounds: Insights from the main international regulations for technological applications
A green and designable natural deep eutectic solvent-based supramolecular solvents system: Efficient extraction and enrichment for phytochemicals
Recent innovations in cloud point extraction towards a more efficient and environmentally friendly procedure
Miniaturized Solid Phase Extraction techniques for different kind of pollutants analysis: State of the art and future perspectives–PART 2
Layer-by-layer assembly strategy for fabrication of polydopamine-polyethyleneimine hybrid modified fibers and their application to solid-phase microextraction of bioactive molecules from medicinal plant samples followed by surface plasmon resonance biosensor validation
In vivo profiling of phytocannabinoids in Cannabis spp. varieties via SPME-LC-MS analysis
Magnetic fiber headspace solid-phase microextraction of Ferulago angulata volatile components using Preyssler-type polyoxometalate/metal-organic framework/silica aerogel sorbent
Surface area expansion by flower-like nanoscale layered double hydroxides for high efficient stir bar sorptive extraction
In-depth Cannabis multiclass metabolite profiling using sorptive extraction and multidimensional gas chromatography with low- and high-resolution mass spectrometry
Optimization by experimental design of headspace sorptive extraction and solid-phase microextraction for the determination of terpenes in spices
Biocompatible chitosan-zinc oxide nanocomposite based dispersive micro-solid phase extraction coupled with HPLC-UV for the determination of rosmarinic acid in the extracts of medical plants and water sample
Effective extraction methods based on hydrophobic deep eutectic solvent coupled with functional molecularly imprinted polymers: Application on quercetagetin extraction from natural medicine and blood
Synthesis, characterization and application of spherical and uniform molecularly imprinted polymeric nanobeads as efficient sorbent for selective extraction of rosmarinic acid from plant matrix
Development of magnetic molecularly imprinted polymers for selective extraction of Benzoxazolinone-type alkaloids from Acanthus plants
A novel magnetic molecularly imprinted polymer for selective extraction and determination of quercetin in plant samples
Magnetic carbon nanotubes camouflaged with cell membrane as a drug discovery platform for selective extraction of bioactive compounds from natural products
Synchronous microextraction of active and toxic compounds from medicinal plant using nano-SiO2 assisted miniaturized matrix solid-phase dispersion
Miniaturized centrifugation accelerated pipette-tip matrix solid-phase dispersion based on poly(deep eutectic solvents) surface imprinted graphene oxide composite adsorbent for rapid extraction of anti-adipogenesis markers from Solidago decurrens Lour
A sustainable vortex-assisted matrix solid phase dispersion for the simultaneous extraction of five active components from Saposhnikoviae Radix
Preconcentration of liposoluble constituents in Salvia Miltiorrhiza using acid-assisted liquid phase microextraction based on a switchable deep eutectic solvent
Ballpoint connector-protected salt-oil-salt liquid phase microextraction for concentration and enrichment of trace anthraquinone compounds in rhubarb
Deep eutectic solvent-based hollow fiber liquid-phase microextraction for quantification of Q-markers of cinnamic acid derivatives in traditional Chinese medicines and research of their plasma protein binding rates
Application of instantaneous nebulization dispersive liquid-phase microextraction combined with HPLC for the determination of chalcone and isoflavone in traditional Chinese medicines
A dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction followed by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography for QuEChERS determination of chlorogenic acid
Hydroxyl-rich ferrofluid for efficient liquid phase microextraction of cinnamic acid derivatives in traditional Chinese medicine
Construction of cell membrane chromatography screening materials based on avi-tag fused G protein-coupled receptors
A new MAS-related G protein-coupled receptor X2 cell membrane chromatography analysis model based on HALO-tag technology and its applications
Development of 3-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTS)-modified bone marrow mononuclear cell membrane chromatography for screening anti-osteoporosis components from Scutellariae Radix
Trends in nanomaterial-based solid-phase microextraction with a focus on environmental applications - a review
Fundamentals and applications of stir bar sorptive dispersive microextraction: A tutorial review
Metal–organic framework-based sorbents in analytical sample preparation
Application of derivatized magnetic materials to the separation and the preconcentration of pollutants in water samples
Cellulose supported promising magnetic sorbents for magnetic solid-phase extraction: A review
Emerging extraction strategies in analytical chemistry
Liquid phase microextraction strategies and their application in the determination of endocrine disruptive compounds in food samples
Advances in cell membrane chromatography
Microwave assisted solid phase microextraction for extraction and selective enrichment of four alkaloids in lotus leaf
Analysis of anticancer compound, indole-3-carbinol, in broccoli using a new ultrasound-assisted dispersive-filter extraction method based on poly(deep eutectic solvent)-graphene oxide nanocomposite
Aqueous enzymatic pretreatment ionic liquid–lithium salt based microwave–assisted extraction of essential oil and procyanidins from pinecones of Pinus koraiensis
Enzyme pretreatment combined with ultrasonic-microwave-assisted surfactant for simultaneous extraction of essential oil and flavonoids from Baeckea frutescens
Ionic liquid-based salt-induced liquid-liquid extraction of polyphenols and anthraquinones in Polygonum cuspidatum
Improved sample treatment for the determination of flavonoids and polyphenols in sweet potato leaves by ultra performance convergence chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
Simultaneous extraction, separation, and analysis of 5-caffeoylquinic acid and caffeine from coffee co-product by PLE-SPE × HPLC-PDA two-dimensional system
Deep eutectic solvent dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction methods for the analysis of chlorophyll natural colorant (E140) via microwave assisted sample preparation
Ultrasound-assisted solid phase microextraction-HPLC method based on Fe3O4@SiO2-NH2-molecularly imprinted polymer magnetic nano-sorbent for rapid and efficient extraction of harmaline from Peganum harmala extract
Microwave-assisted ionic liquid-based micelle extraction combined with trace-fluorinated carbon nanotubes in dispersive micro-solid-phase extraction to determine three sesquiterpenes in roots of Curcuma wenyujin
Sustainable extraction of ligustilide and ferulic acid from Angelicae Sinensis Radix, for antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities
On-site rapid detection of multiple pesticide residues in tea leaves by lateral flow immunoassay
Photo-induced toxicity of pesticides in aqueous environment: A review
Residue detection and correlation analysis of multiple neonicotinoid insecticides and their metabolites in edible herbs
Synthesis of composite materials combining magnetic metal-organic frameworks and conjugated organic frameworks for selective extraction of carbendazim and thiabendazole residues from Chinese herbal medicine samples
Evaluation of Iron Chlorin e6 disappearance and hydrolysis in soil and garlic using salting-out assisted liquid-liquid extraction coupled with high-performance liquid chromatography and ultraviolet-visible detection
Multi-residue analysis of plant growth regulators and pesticides in traditional Chinese medicines by high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry
Green synthesis of superhydrophilic resin/graphene oxide for efficient analysis of multiple pesticide residues in fruits and vegetables
A novel water-swelling sampling probe for in vivo detection of neonicotinoids in plants
Ionic liquid-organic-functionalized ordered mesoporous silica-integrated dispersive solid-phase extraction for determination of plant growth regulators in fresh Panax ginseng
Matrix solid-phase dispersion optimization for determination of pyrethrin content in Dalmatian Pyrethrum (Tanacetum cinerariifolium/Trevir./Sch. Bip.) by liquid chromatography
Vortex assisted magnetic ionic liquid based dispersive liquid–liquid microextraction approach for determination of metribuzin in some plant samples with UV–Vis spectrophotometer
Ultrasound-assisted dispersive-filter extraction coupled with high-performance liquid chromatography: A rapid miniaturized method for the determination of phenylurea pesticides in vegetables and fruits
Ultrasound-assisted emulsification liquid phase microextraction method based on deep eutectic solvent as extraction solvent for determination of five pesticides in traditional Chinese medicine
The application of the QuEChERS methodology in the determination of antibiotics in food: A review
Recent advances on toxicity and determination methods of mycotoxins in foodstuffs
Homogeneous fluorescence immunoassay based on AuNPs quenching dendritic silica assembled with multicolor QDs for the simultaneous determination of four mycotoxins in cereals
Sensitive assessment of multi-class mycotoxins residue in Atractylodis rhizoma
Multi-mycotoxin analysis method using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry and fluorescence detection in Indian medicinal herbs: Development and validation
In-syringe cotton fiber solid-phase extraction coupled with stable-isotope-dilution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for the determination of Zearalenone
Aqueous extraction followed by dispersive solid phase extraction with in situ derivatization for the determination of aflatoxins in traditional Chinese medicines
Fe3O4@PDA/MIL-101(Cr) as magnetic solid-phase extraction sorbent for mycotoxins in licorice prior to ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis
Occurrence of mycotoxins in botanical dietary supplement infusion beverages
Comprehensive analysis of multi-class mycotoxins in twenty different species of functional and medicinal herbs using liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry
A comprehensive strategy for screening and exploring multi-class mycotoxins contamination status in Astragali Radix
Risk assessment and mitigation of the mycotoxin content in medicinal plants by the infusion process
Reuse of regenerated immunoaffinity column for excellent clean-up and low-cost detection of trace aflatoxins in malt
FRET-based innovative assays for precise detection of the residual heavy metals in food and agriculture-related matrices
Chemical speciation, plant uptake, and toxicity of heavy metals in agricultural soils
Rapid extraction of arsenic species from traditional Chinese herbal by dual-frequency ultrasound-assisted enzymatic digestion prior to spectral analysis
Ultrasound assisted ion pair based surfactant-enhanced liquid–liquid microextraction with solidification of floating organic drop combined with flame atomic absorption spectrometry for preconcentration and determination of nickel and cobalt ions in vegetable and herb samples
Assessment of ultrasound-assisted extraction combined with supramolecular solvent-based microextraction for highly sensitive cadmium determination in medicinal plant sample by TS-FF-AAS
Synthesis of natural deep eutectic solvents using a mixture design for extraction of animal and plant samples prior to ICP-MS analysis
Determination of cobalt in P. polyphylla var. yunnanensis and S. yunnanensis by micro UV–vis spectrophotometry after deep eutectic solvent-based rapidly synergistic cloud point extraction
Conversion of an invasive plant into a new solid phase for lead preconcentration for analytical purpose
Ultrasensitive and selective determination of mercury in water, beverages and food samples by EDXRF and TXRF using graphene oxide modified with thiosemicarbazide
A novel deep eutectic solvent modified magnetic covalent organic framework for the selective separation and determination of trace copper ion in medicinal plants and environmental samples
Determination of copper in rose tea samples using flame atomic absorption spectrometry after emulsification liquid-liquid microextraction
Green approaches with amino acids-based deep eutectic solvents (AADES) for determining As in medicinal herbs by ICP-MS
Micro-spectrophotometric determination of nickel in Gentiana rigescens after switchable hydrophilicity solvent-based ultrasound-assisted liquid phase microextraction
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs): Updated aspects of their determination, kinetics in the human body, and toxicity
Association of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons exposure with child neurodevelopment and adult emotional disorders: A meta-analysis study
The occurrence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in dried herbs and spices
Preparation of COF-coated nickel foam adsorbents for dispersive solid-phase extraction of 16 polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from Chinese herbal medicines
Determination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in Chinese herbal medicines by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry with graphene-functionalized nickel foam
Magnetic C60 nanospheres based solid-phase extraction coupled with isotope dilution gas chromatography-mass spectrometry method for the determination of sixteen polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in Chinese herbal medicines
Magnetic Cu: CuO-GO nanocomposite for efficient dispersive micro-solid phase extraction of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from vegetable, fruit, and environmental water samples by liquid chromatographic determination
Green synthesis of phloroglucinol-urotropine porous polymer: Ingenious miniaturized solid phase extraction for efficient purification and determination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in lotus roots
An automated preloaded pipet tip SPE method for the accurate quantification of carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons from tea
A density-tunable liquid-phase microextraction system based on deep eutectic solvents for the determination of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in tea, medicinal herbs and liquid foods
Ionic liquids-based dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction for determination of carcinogenic polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in tea beverages: Evaluation of infusion preparation on pollutants release
A traceless clean-up method coupled with gas chromatography and mass spectrometry for analyzing polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in complex plant leaf matrices
Peer review under responsibility of Xi'an Jiaotong University.