Active versus restrictive approach to isolated hypotension in preterm neonates: A Systematic Review, Meta-analysis and GRADE based Clinical Practice Guideline
Objective
Isolated hypotension (IH) without any clinical or biochemical features of poor perfusion is a common occurrence in very preterm infants (VPTI). There exists no recommendations guiding its management.The objective of this review was to compare the effect of active vs. restrictive approach to treat IH in VPTI.
Methodology
Medline, Embase and Web of Science were searched until 1st April 2024. RCTs and non-RCTs were included. Mortality, major brain injury (MBI) (intraventricular hemorrhage >  grade 2 or cystic periventricular leukomalacia), mortality or neurodevelopmental impairment (NDI) at 18–24 months’ corrected age were the critical outcomes evaluated.
Results
44 studies were included: 9 were synthesized in a meta-analysis and 35 studies in the narrative review. Clinical benefit or harm could not be ruled out for the outcomes from the meta-analyses of RCTs. Meta-analysis of 3 non-RCTs suggested that active treatment of IH in VPTI of <  24 hours of life possibly increased the odds of MBI (aOR: 95% CI 1.85 (1.45; 2.36), very low certainty). Meta-analysis of 2 non-RCTs that had included VPTI <  72 hours indicated a possibly decreased risk of MBI (aOR: 95% CI 0.44 (0.24; 0.82), very low certainty) and NEC ≥  stage 2 (aOR: 95% CI 0.61 (0.41; 0.92), very low certainty) with active treatment of IH. Active treatment of IH in the first 24 hours possibly increased the risk of mortality or long-term NDI (aOR: 95% CI 1.84 (1.10; 3.09), very low certainty) and the risk of hearing loss at 2 years (aOR: 95% CI 3.60 (1.30; 9.70), very low certainty). Clinical benefit or harm could not be ruled out for other outcomes. There was insufficient evidence with respect to preterm neonates of ≥  32 weeks.
Conclusions
IH may not be treated in VPTI in the first 24 hours. However, IH occurring between 24 hours - 72 hours of life may be treated. The evidence certainty was very low.

Introduction
Isolated hypotension (IH) without any clinical or biochemical features of poor perfusion is a common occurrence in very preterm infants (VPTI) and extremely low gestational age neonates (ELGANs) in the initial days of life. The definition of hypotension based on blood pressure (BP) values is a controversial topic. The systematic review by Dempsey et al. concluded that that there was paucity of data as to whether any intervention for hypotensive neonates translated to improved outcomes. Two randomised controlled trials (RCTs) published subsequently compared active treatment (IH without any clinical or biochemical signs of poor perfusion) vs. restrictive treatment (no treatment or treatment only when clinical signs of poor perfusion was present) in VPTI and ELGANs. Both the trials were underpowered, and one of them was stopped prematurely. Further, a pilot trial by Batton et al. pointed out the various bottlenecks associated with conducting such trials, namely the low consent rates and lack of physician equipoise. A scoping review of literature indicated that many observational studies have been published on this topic since the last systematic review by Dempsey et al. The results of these studies were contentious with widely differing conclusions. The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluations (GRADE) working group had indicated that in such scenarios though not making any recommendations may be an option, it emphasized that such an approach is not advisable. The argument for the same was that clinicians would rarely search for evidence systematically as thoroughly as a guideline panel, neither would they have the time or resources to evaluate the possible underlying values and preferences of the parents. Till date, there exists no clinical practice guideline (CPG) that had addressed this topic of management of IH in preterm neonates. Thus, it is imperative that the published literature on this contentious topic be evaluated through a validated process to guide safe clinical practice, with an aim to improve neonatal outcomes. Henceforth, this systematic review and meta-analysis was performed. A CPG was formulated following the stringent GRADE working group guidelines.

Methods
The protocol was registered with PROSPERO (https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?ID=CRD42023446821) and the reporting of this systematic review adheres to the PRISMA guidance.

Inclusion criteria

Population(P).
Preterm neonates of less than 37 weeks’ gestational age within the first week of life with IH. IH was defined as low mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) as ascertained by the investigator which could be based on different definitions such as MAP less than gestational age, MAP value below a particular centile for the gestational age, MAP less than 30 mm Hg, and without any clinical or biochemical evidence of hypoperfusion.

Intervention(I) (active treatment group).
Treatment with inotropes for IH. Volume expansion with crystalloids or colloids could have been used prior to inotrope or vasopressor initiation.

Comparator(C) (restrictive treatment group).
a. Treatment with volume expansion and/ or inotropes in preterm neonates with hypotension only when clinical and/ or biochemical features of poor perfusion were present. The clinical and/ or biochemical signs of hypoperfusion were defined as presence of either of these: Unexplained tachycardia (>160–170 beats/min), prolonged capillary refilling time ( > 3–4 seconds), low peripheral pulses, decreased urine output ( < 1 ml/kg/ hour for 4 -6 hours, physiological oliguria or anuria should also be considered), increasing lactate levels ( > 3–4 mmol/L) and base deficit ( > 8 meq/L).
b. No treatment of IH.

Outcomes(O).
a. Critical outcomes: Mortality, major brain injury (MBI) (defined as intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH)>  stage 2 and/ cystic periventricular leukomalacia (PVL)), composite outcome of mortality or neurodevelopmental impairment (NDI) at 18–24 months’ corrected age (CA).
b. Important outcomes: Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) (respiratory support requirement at 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age (PMA)), necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) ≥  stage 2, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) requiring treatment and retinopathy of Prematurity (ROP) requiring treatment.
Study designs: RCTs and observational studies were eligible for inclusion. Case reports, descriptive reviews and case series were excluded.
Time frame: From inception of the databases until 1st April 2024

Literature search strategy.
Medline, Embase and Web of Science were searched from inception until 1st April 2024. (S1a Table, S1b Table in S1 File) After the removal of duplicates, titles and abstracts were screened for potentially eligible studies. Full texts of the respective studies were assessed for possible inclusion. Two authors blinded to each other performed the literature search. Disagreements were resolved by consensus. Reference lists of included studies and other similar systematic reviews were hand searched for studies that satisfied the inclusion criteria. There were no language restrictions. Only published literature was included.

Data extraction and synthesis.
Two authors extracted data independently. Data synthesis was performed using the R-software (version 2023.06.0 + 421) (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria). A random-effects model with weighted average (Mantel-Haenszel method) for pooling raw data from RCTs and inverse variance method for pooling of adjusted odds ratio (aOR) with 95% confidence interval (CI) was utilized. Raw unadjusted data from observational studies were included in the narrative review. Statistical heterogeneity was assessed based on I² test, Tau2 (using the DerSimonian-Laird estimator) and Cochran Q. For any outcome, if ten or more studies were available for meta-analysis, publication bias was planned to be assessed. In cases of missing data for a particular outcome, we decided to adopt the strategy of last observation carry forward (LOCF).

Risk of bias.
Risk of bias was performed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool version 2.0 for RCTs and Risk Of Bias in Non-randomized Studies-of Intervention (ROBINS-I) for non-RCTs by two authors blinded to each other. Disagreements were resolved by consensus.

Certainty of evidence and recommendations.
Certainty of evidence (CoE) for the effect estimates of outcomes was assessed according to GRADE. The reporting of the results of the systematic review was done as per the modified GRADE recommendations. (S2 Table in S1 File) Evidence to decision framework (EtD) was used to arrive at the recommendations.

Results
After the removal of duplicates, 2166 titles and abstracts were screened. Of these, a total of 44 studies were included in the systematic review: 35 studies were included in the narrative review (RCT:1, observational studies: 34) and 9 in meta-analysis (RCTs: 2, observational studies: 7). The PRISMA flow is depicted in Fig 1.
PRISMA flow.
Amongst the 35 studies in included in the narrative review, 12 studies had included ELGANs, 16 studies VPTI, and 7 studies had evaluated preterm neonates of >  32 weeks’ gestation. Of the 9 studies included in the meta-analysis, 5 studies had enrolled ELGANs and 4 VPTI. The definition used for hypotension varied between the studies. The commonly used definitions were mean arterial pressure (MAP) < gestational age in weeks, MAP <  30 mm Hg, MAP <  25 mm Hg and MAP less than 3rd –10th centile for gestational age, birth weight and postnatal age, and MAP < median MAP based on centiles according to the gestational age and the postnatal age. Some studies had defined hypotension based on clinical or biochemical signs of poor perfusion with or without a MAP cut-off. The characteristics of the included studies is provided in S1 Table and S2 Table in S2 File.

Risk of bias
Of the three included RCTs, 2 had a high risk of bias and one had a low risk of bias. The RCTs with a high risk of overall bias had issues with the domain of deviation from the intended interventions. Amongst the observational studies, most of the studies had a moderate to serious risk of bias due to issues with the domains of confounding and classification of interventions. (S3 Table in S1 File)

Outcomes

Mortality.
Clinical benefit or harm could not be ruled out for the outcome of mortality from meta-analysis of RCTs [Risk ratio (RR): 1.08, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.48–2.43; 2 RCTs; n = 118] or non RCTs [Adjusted odds ratio (aOR): 0.71, 95% CI: 0.40–1.03; 3 non-RCTs; n = 5816] due to statistically non-significant results and the CoE being very low to low. (Fig 2, Table 1)
Active treatment (isolated hypotension without any clinical or biochemical signs of poor perfusion) compared to restrictive treatment (no treatment of isolated hypotension or treatment of hypotension with clinical or biochemical signs of poor perfusion) in preterm neonates born at less than 37 weeks' gestation in the first week of postnatal life.
Certainty assessment	Summary of findings	 	Participants (studies) Follow-up	Risk of bias	Inconsistency	Indirectness	Imprecision*	Publication bias	Overall certainty of evidence	Study event rates (%)	Relative effect (95% CI)	Anticipated absolute effects	 	With restrictive treatment (no treatment of isolated hypotension or treatment of hypotension with clinical or biochemical signs of poor perfusion) 	With active treatment (isolated hypotension without any clinical or biochemical signs of poor perfusion)	Risk with restrictive treatment (no treatment of isolated hypotension or treatment of hypotension with clinical or biochemical signs of poor perfusion) 	Risk difference with active treatment (isolated hypotension without any clinical or biochemical signs of poor perfusion)	 	Neonatal mortality (RCTs)	 	118 (2 RCTs)	seriousa	not serious	seriousb	very seriousc	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	9/50 (18%)	13/68 (19.1%)	RR 1.08 (0.48 to 2.43)	180 per 1,000	14 more per 1,000 (from 94 fewer to 257 more) 	 	Neonatal mortality (non-RCTs)	 	5816 (3 observational studies)	seriousd	seriouse	seriousb	very seriousf	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	220/2815 (7.8%)	207/3001 (6.9%)	OR 0.71 (0.49 to 1.03)	78 per 1,000	21 fewer per 1,000 (from 38 fewer to 2 more)	 	Severe brain injury (defined as IVH > grade 2 or cystic PVL) (RCTs)	 	118(2 RCTs)	seriousa	not serious	seriousb	extremely seriousg	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	5/50 (10.0%) 	5/68 (7.4%)	RR 1.00 (0.32 to 3.09) 	100 per 1,000	0 fewer per 1,000 (from 68 fewer to 209 more) 	 	Severe brain injury (defined as IVH > grade 2 or cystic PVL) (non-RCTs)	 	5993 (5 observational studies)	serioush	very seriousi	seriousb	very seriousj	none	⨁◯◯◯ Very low	544/2909 (18.7%)	459/3084 (14.9%)	OR 1.52 (1.21 to 1.91)	187 per 1,000	72 more per 1,000(from 31 more to 118 more)	 	NEC ≥ stage 2 (RCTs)	 	118 (2 RCTs)	not serious	not serious	seriousb	extremely seriousg	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	10/50 (20.0%) 	10/68 (14.7%)	RR 0.67 (0.28 to 1.59) 	200 per 1,000	66 fewer per 1,000 (from 144 fewer to 118 more) 	 	NEC ≥ stage 2 (non-RCTs)	 	908 (2 observational studies)	seriousk	not serious	seriousb	very seriousj	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	91/526 (17.3%)	41/382 (10.7%)	OR 0.61 (0.41 to 0.92)	173 per 1,000	60 fewer per 1,000 (from 94 fewer to 12 fewer)	 	PDA requiring treatment (RCTs)	 	118 (2 RCTs)	not serious	not serious	seriousb	extremely seriousg	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	8/50 (16.0%) 	17/68 (25.0%) 	RR 1.12 (0.59 to 2.15) 	160 per 1,000	19 more per 1,000 (from 66 fewer to 184 more) 	 	PDA requiring treatment (non-RCT)	 	671 (1 observational study)	very seriousl	not serious	seriousb	very seriousj	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	64/408 (15.7%)	63/263 (24.0%)	OR 1.64(1.12 to 2.44)	157 per 1,000	77 more per 1,000 (from 16 more to 155 more)	 	Moderate to severe BPD (O2 or respiratory support requirement at 36 weeks' PMA) (RCTs)	 	118 (2 RCTs)	not serious	not serious	seriousb	very seriousc	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	26/50 (52.0%) 	43/68 (63.2%)	RR 1.19 (0.86 to 1.64) 	520 per 1,000	99 more per 1,000 (from 73 fewer to 333 more) 	 	Moderate to severe BPD (O2 or respiratory support requirement at 36 weeks' PMA (non-RCTs)	 	5805 (4 observational studies)	seriousk	very serioush	seriousb	very seriousc	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	601/2715 (22.1%)	562/3090 (18.2%)	OR 1.29(0.98 to 1.71)	221 per 1,000	47 more per 1,000 (from 3 fewer to 106 more)	 	Severe ROP (non-RCT)	 	191 (1 observational study)	seriousl	not serious	Seriousb	very seriousm	none	⨁◯◯◯ Very low	2/92 (2.2%)	1/99 (1.0%)	RR 0.46(0.04 to 5.15)	22 per 1,000	12 fewer per 1,000 (from 21 fewer to 90 more)	 	Mortality or neurodevelopmental impairment at 18–22 months' corrected age (non-RCT)	 	137 (1 observational study)	seriousl	not serious	Seriousb	seriousj	none	⨁◯◯◯very low	19/67 (28.4%)	33/70 (47.1%)	OR 1.84(1.10 to 3.09)	284 per 1,000	138 more per 1,000 (from 20 more to 267 more)	 	Sensineural hearing loss at 12–24 months’ corrected age (non-RCT)	 	25 cases 710 controls(1 observational study)	very seriousj	not serious	seriousb	seriousj	none	⨁◯◯◯Very low	25 cases 710 controls	OR 3.60\(1.30 to 9.70)	-
Explanations
a One study which had the highest weightage had a high risk of bias.
b Indirectness related to patient population (definition of the outcome hypotension) and additional interventions in either of the arms.
c The minimally important difference (MID) indicates probable important harm, but the boundary of CI suggests possible important benefit as well.
d While 2 studies had a serious risk of overall bias, one had a moderate risk of overall bias.
e I2 > 50%
f The MID indicates probable important benefit, but the boundary of CI suggests possible harm as well.
g The CI boundary is very wide and is uncertain.
h Of the 5 studies, 2 had moderate risk of overall bias and 3 had serious risk of overall bias.
i I2 > 75%.
j The ratio of OR 95%CI boundary is >1.5
k While one study had a serious risk of overall bias, the other had a moderate risk of overall bias.
l The single study had a serious risk of overall bias.
m Trivial effect, but boundaries of CI indicate both probable important harm and possible important benefit.
*MID set for critical outcomes: 1%, important outcomes: 5%
Forest plot depicting the effect estimates from randomized controlled trials and non-randomized controlled trials for the various outcomes.

Major brain injury.
Clinical benefit or harm could not be ruled out for the outcome of MBI from meta-analysis of RCTs (RR: 1.00, 95% CI: 0.32–3.09; 2 RCTs; n = 118). When aORs with 95% CI from non-RCTs were pooled for the outcome of MBI, significant heterogeneity was detected (I2: 88%). Sub-group analysis based on the postnatal age of the neonates possibly explained the between studies heterogeneity. While active treatment of IH in the first 24 hours possibly increased the odds of MBI (aOR: 1.85, 95% CI: 1.45 - 2.36; 3 non-RCTs; n = 5495) (8,54,55), meta-analysis of observational studies which had included neonates of <  72 hours of life indicated that active treatment of IH possibly decreased the odds of MBI (aOR:0.44, 95% CI: 0.24 - 0.82, 2 non-RCTs, n = 909). (Fig 2)

NEC ≥  stage 2..
Clinical benefit of harm could not be ruled out for this outcome from the meta-analysis of RCTs (RR: 0.67, 95% CI: 0.28–1.59; 2 RCTs; n = 118). Meta-analysis of the observational studies which had enrolled neonates of <  72 hours indicated that active treatment of IH possibly decreased the risk of NEC ≥  stage 2 (aOR: 0.61; 95% CI: 0.41 - 0.92, 2 non-RCTs, n = 909). (Fig 2, Table 1)

BPD.
There was a trend towards a possibly increased risk of BPD with active approach to management of IH from the meta-analysis of RCTs (RR:1.19, 95% CI: 0.86 - 1.64; 2 RCTs; n = 118) and that of non-RCTs (aOR: 1.29, 95% CI: 0.98 - 1.71; 4 non-RCTs; n = 5805). (Fig 2, Table 1)

ROP requiring treatment.
Clinical benefit or harm could not be ruled out from the only non-RCT that had reported on this outcome (aOR: 0.46, 95% CI: 0.04–5.15; n = 191)

PDA requiring treatment (medical or surgical).
Clinical benefit or harm could not be ruled out for this outcome from meta-analysis of RCTs (RR:1.12, 95% CI: 0.59–2.15; 2 RCTs; n = 118). A single non-RCT enrolling 671 neonates indicated that the active management of IH possibly increased the odds of PDA requiring treatment (aOR: 1.64, 95% CI: 1.12 - 2.44). (Fig 2, Table 1)

Mortality or neurodevelopmental impairment at 18–22 months’ CA.
Very low evidence certainty from one non-RCT enrolling 137 neonates suggested that active treatment of IH in the first 24 hours might possibly increase the risk of mortality or NDI (aOR: 1.84, 95% CI: 1.10 - 3.09). One non-RCT with a case control design enrolling 25 cases and 710 controls indicated that an active approach to management of IH in the first 24 hours of life was associated with an increased risk of sensineural hearing loss at 2 years (aOR: 3.60, 95% CI: 1.30 - 9.70, very low certainty) (Table 1)
The narrative review of the studies included in the systematic review is provided in S1_file Appendix in S1 File. A table of all data extracted from the primary studies included in this systematic review and meta-analyses is provided in S5 Table in S1 File.

Evidence to decision
The EtD framework using the GRADE guidelines was used to arrive at recommendations. The parameters of desirable effects, undesirable effects, evidence certainty, values of the outcomes studied, balance of effects, resources required, cost-effectiveness, equity, acceptability, and feasibility were taken into consideration. These are detailed in S4 Table in S1 File.

Discussion
In this systematic review and meta-analysis, we evaluated 44 studies, predominantly including ELGANs and VPTI in the first 72 hours of life with hypotension. Two interventions, namely active treatment vs. restrictive treatment of IH were compared. The results of this systematic review and meta-analysis were evaluated through the GRADE framework to make recommendations and formulate a CPG. To the best of our knowledge, there exists no CPG for this specific PICO.
It should be noted that there was some clinical heterogeneity with regards to the patient population, the intervention and the comparator in the included studies in the meta-analyses for the various outcomes. The question of whether pooling of data in a meta-analysis arises in such scenarios. The GRADE working group provides clarity with respect to that. While GRADE visualizes the variability between studies as a source of potential opportunity. GRADE group points out that in some scenarios such variability might even turn out to be one of the strengths of a systematic review. In our systematic review, the meta-analyses of RCTs did not show any between studies heterogeneity though there were some differences in the patient population, intervention and the comparator. This implies that the results of the meta-analysis of the RCTs could be generalizable to different clinical settings where isolated hypotension is defined based various definitions, the intervention and the comparator could deviate slightly still yielding similar clinical outcomes. Further, the meta-analyses of non-RCTs indicated significant heterogeneity for the critical outcome of mortality and the important outcome of severe grade IVH. This provided us an opportunity to explore the various potential reasons for the same. We found postnatal age to be an important effect modifier and hence we could bring out recommendations based on postnatal age of the neonate (≤24 h vs. >  24 h). Such pragmatic systematic reviews form the basis for formulation of clinical practice guidelines for difficult questions that often addressed through expert consensus. Further, these systematic reviews could be generalizable across different settings and also provide clinicians, parents and other stakeholders to choose between different treatment choices.
Based on the aforementioned parameters, the guideline development group suggests that clinicians may not treat IH (hypotension without any clinical and/ or biochemical signs of poor perfusion) in VPTI in the first 24 hours of life, the evidence certainty being very low and the recommendation being weak.
Further, our consensus was that the MAP cut-off to define hypotension may be centile-based. The gestational age-based centiles derived from the largest cohort of VPTI from the German Neonatal Network may be used in the first 24 hours of life. To provide a safety net, we suggest that severe IH with a MAP value of less than 5 mm Hg (median MAP – 5 mm Hg) for the corresponding gestational age may be treated in VPTI in the first 24 hours of life.
Further, we suggest that in VPTI, IH beyond the first 24 hours of life and within the first 72 hours may be treated. The MAP cut-off for treatment of IH beyond 24 hours of life may be a MAP of less than the neonates’ gestational age in weeks. The evidence certainty was very low, and the strength of the recommendation was weak. There was insufficient evidence to recommend for or against the treatment of IH in preterm neonates of ≥  32 weeks’ gestation.
The justification for these recommendations were based on careful consideration of all aspects of the EtD framework. Active treatment of IH in VPTI in the first 24 hours of life was shown to be associated with an increased risk of MBI, mortality or NDI at 18–22 months’ CA and hearing loss at 2 years’ CA. Studies included in the narrative review had also reported similar findings. Further, studies have shown that in VPTI, the MAP shows a slow physiological rise over the first day. Actively intervening with an aim to increase the MAP might result increased MAP variability which has also been shown to be associated with poorer short- and long-term outcomes in many of the included studies. To substantiate this argument, some of the included studies on cerebral blood flow (CBF) measurement in VPTI of <  24 hours of life have shown that CBF is affected only at a significantly lower MAP, and also that a higher MAP during this transitional period may be counterproductive as some studies have shown compromised cerebral perfusion at relatively higher MAP. Since sub-group analyses indicated that active treatment of IH in VPTI between 24 hours to 72 hours of age was associated with a decreased risk of NEC ≥  stage 2 and MBI, separate recommendations were made based on the postnatal age.
The largest cohort study (German Neonatal Network) has published nomograms of median mean arterial blood pressures for VPTI in the first 24 hours of life. In this study, there was a strong association between not treating severe IH (when the cut-off MAP used was median MAP for the corresponding GA minus 5 mm Hg) and poor short-term outcomes. This cut-off was also used by the HIP trial in the placebo group as rescue therapy. Hence, this MAP cut-off was chosen for rescue therapy for neonates with severe IH in the first 24 hours of life.
The implementation of these recommendations needs the following good practice statements to be considered. The studies included in the meta-analysis have used both invasive and non-invasive methods for BP monitoring. If feasible invasive BP monitoring may be preferred. Further, preterm neonates with IH who are treated by a restrictive approach should be closely monitored for clinical and/ or biochemical signs of hypoperfusion such as unexplained persistent tachycardia, prolonged capillary refilling time, low peripheral pulses, decreased urine output, increasing lactate levels and base deficit. If feasible, functional echocardiography may be utilized as an adjunct to the clinical and biochemical criteria. Warm shock may mimic isolated hypotension, and hence those neonates at risk of early onset sepsis should be closely monitored. If the decision to treat IH is made based on clinicians’ discretion, the target MAP should be just more than or equal to the neonates’ gestational age in weeks as higher MAP and increased variability in blood pressures have been shown to be associated with poor CBF potentially resulting in MBI. There were several limitations to this meta-analysis. The definition of IH and clinical hypotension with signs of hypoperfusion varied between studies. Further, some of the neonates in the restrictive approach group received volume expansion which could have altered the effect estimates of the meta-analyses. We tried to address these by downrating the evidence by one level for the domain of indirectness related to patient population and the intervention/ comparator.

Conclusions
In conclusion, the recommendations of the guideline development group were based on very low evidence certainty. Large multi-center RCTs comparing active versus restrictive treatment of IH in neonates of different gestational age cohorts at varying post-natal ages are needed. Low consent rates and lack of physician equipoise are the major barriers for conducting such trials. Though it has been suggested that such a trial may satisfy all the criteria for waiver of consent, this aspect should be thoroughly evaluated by the Ethical Committee of the respective centers.

Supporting information

References
Hypotension in Preterm Infants (HIP) randomised trial
Blood pressure intervention levels in preterm infants: pilot randomised trial
Use of antihypotensive therapies in extremely preterm infants
Treating hypotension in the preterm infant: when and with what: a critical and systematic review
Feasibility study of early blood pressure management in extremely preterm infants
Permissive hypotension in extremely low birth weight infants (≤1000 gm)
Comparison of clinical outcomes between active and permissive blood pressure management in extremely preterm infants
Neocirculation project and the German Neonatal Network (GNN). Short-term outcome of very-low-birthweight infants with arterial hypotension in the first 24 h of life
Hemodynamic EPIPAGE 2 Study Group. Abstention or intervention for isolated hypotension in the first 3 days of life in extremely preterm infants: association with short-term outcomes in the EPIPAGE 2 cohort study
Treatment for hypotension in the first 24 postnatal hours and the risk of hearing loss among extremely low birth weight infants
GRADE guidelines: 14. Going from evidence to recommendations: the significance and presentation of recommendations
Update on the methods of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: insufficient evidence
GRADE guidelines: a new series of articles in the Journal of Clinical Epidemiology
American college of critical care medicine clinical practice parameters for hemodynamic support of pediatric and neonatal septic shock
Quantitation of severity of critical illness with special reference to blood lactate
Clinical detection of low upper body blood flow in very premature infants using blood pressure, capillary refill time, and central-peripheral temperature difference
Developing a neonatal acute kidney injury research definition: a report from the NIDDK neonatal AKI workshop
RoB 2: a revised tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials
ROBINS-I: a tool for assessing risk of bias in non-randomised studies of interventions
GRADE guidelines 26: informative statements to communicate the findings of systematic reviews of interventions
Mean arterial blood pressure changes in premature infants and those at risk for intraventricular hemorrhage
Blood pressure during the first 7 days in premature infants born at postmenstrual age 23 to 25 weeks
Early blood pressure, antihypotensive therapy and outcomes at 18-22 months’ corrected age in extremely preterm infants
Blood pressure, anti-hypotensive therapy, and neurodevelopment in extremely preterm infants
Hypotension in small preterms: what does it mean?
Intra-arterial blood pressure reference ranges, death and morbidity in very low birthweight infants during the first seven days of life
Blood pressure, heart rate, and skin temperature in preterm infants: associations with periventricular haemorrhage
Permissive hypotension in the extremely low birthweight infant with signs of good perfusion
Treated hypotension is associated with neonatal morbidity and hearing loss in extremely low birth weight infants
Definitions of cardiovascular insufficiency and relation to outcomes in critically ill newborn infants
Elevated arterial blood pressure is associated with peri-intraventricular haemorrhage
Hypotension within 1 week of life associated with poor short- and long-term outcomes in very low birth weight infants
Current definitions of hypotension do not predict abnormal cranial ultrasound findings in preterm infants
Influence of hypotension on the short-term prognosis of preterm infants with a gestational age of <32 weeks
Early postnatal hypotension is not associated with indicators of white matter damage or cerebral palsy in extremely low gestational age newborns
Is hypotension a major risk factor for neurological morbidity at term age in very preterm infants?
Low cerebral blood flow is a risk factor for severe intraventricular haemorrhage
Mean arterial blood pressure and neonatal cerebral lesions
Neonatal risk factors for cerebral palsy in very preterm babies: case-control study
hypotension and adverse outcomes in prematurity: comparing definitions
Clinical risk factors and periventricular leucomalacia
Relationship between blood pressure, cerebral electrical activity, cerebral fractional oxygen extraction, and peripheral blood flow in very low birth weight newborn infants
Blood pressure and cerebral haemorrhage and ischaemia in very low birthweight infants
Perinatal events which precede periventricular haemorrhage and leukomalacia in the newborn
Borderline hypotension: how does it influence cerebral regional tissue oxygenation in preterm infants?
Relationship between cerebral oxygenation, cardiac output, and blood pressure during transitional period in extremely low gestational age neonates
Blood pressure standards for very low birthweight infants during the first day of life
Determinants of blood pressure in very low birth weight neonates: lack of effect of antenatal steroids
Oscillometric arterial blood pressure in haemodynamically stable neonates in the first 2 weeks of life
Early systemic hypotension and vasopressor support in low birth weight infants: impact on neurodevelopment
Risk factors and prognosis of hypotension within 72 hours after birth in extremely preterm infants
Evolving blood pressure dynamics for extremely preterm infants
Systemic hypotension and white-matter damage in preterm infants
Early treated hypotension and outcome in very low birth weight infants
Permissive approach and relationship to outcomes of infants < 27 weeks gestation
GRADE guidance 36: updates to GRADE’s approach to addressing inconsistency
International neonatal consortium. Method of blood pressure measurement in Neonates and Infants: a systematic review and analysis
European Special Interest Group ‘Neonatologist Performed Echocardiography’ (NPE). The role of neonatologist performed echocardiography in the assessment and management of neonatal shock
Clinical practice parameters for hemodynamic support of pediatric and neonatal septic shock: 2007 update from the American College of Critical Care Medicine
10.1371/journal.pone.0309520.r001

Author response to Decision Letter 0
29 Dec 2023
10.1371/journal.pone.0309520.r002

Decision Letter 0
Dey
Sanjoy Kumer
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
1 Apr 2024
PONE-D-23-44090Active Versus Restrictive Approach To Isolated Hypotension In Preterm Neonates: A Systematic Review And Meta-analysisPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. More,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by May 16 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sanjoy Kumer Dey, M.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
2. Please amend either the title on the online submission form (via Edit Submission) or the title in the manuscript so that they are identical.
3. Please amend the manuscript submission data (via Edit Submission) to include author Abdul Kareem Pullattayil S.
4. One of the noted authors is a group [National Neonatal Forum (NNF), Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) Group, India]. In addition to naming the author group, please list the individual authors and affiliations within this group in the acknowledgments section of your manuscript. Please also indicate clearly a lead author for this group along with a contact email address.
5. Please include your tables as part of your main manuscript and remove the individual files. Please note that supplementary tables (should remain/ be uploaded) as separate ""supporting information"" files".
6. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: THis is good review on the topic Active versus Restrictive managment of Isolated Hypotension in preterm infants. Although the evidence evalauted did not result in strong recommendations, the authors suggest the need for well conducted RCT on this important topic.
I feel the paragraphs on the narrative review may be deleted altogether to improve the readablilty of the study. However some sections of the narrative review may be used by the authors in the discussion to understand how some the weak or expert recommendations were arrived at.
Reviewer #2: Active Versus Restrictive Approach to Isolated Hypotension In Preterm Neonates: A Systematic Review And Meta-analysis
The authors tried to address an important yet les studied and controversial topic. They have systematically approached the topic and must be congratulated for their efforts.
Here are certain observations which might be of help in revising the manuscript:
1. The authors must define what does active and restrictive approach mean. Throughout the manuscript there is no mention of these two strategies.
2. The authors must describe the active and control group strategies in table 1 and table 2. Without clear description one will not know whether they are comparable.
3. Inclusion criteria: Population is not well defined. The population definition should contain preterm infants with isolated hypotension. This isolated hypotension must be elaborated well like by what definition the diagnosis should be made. As there will be huge variation in the way the condition is defined, and it will have direct impact on the results.
4. Comparator also needs clarity. Which gain takes us back to defining the isolated hypotension.
5. Literature search: The search was limited to only 2 databases. As the authors said that this topic is very controversial with limited literature, it becomes more pertinent to include at least 3 databases. Also, it will be better if the search is updated till end of the year.
6. The authors stated that the definition of IH varied. The variation is so much that it might not be wise to pool them. Particularly if some of the studies did not use BP as a measure to define IH.
7. Outcomes: The authors should provide the risk estimates in text also particularly for important outcomes rather than just referring to Tables and figures.
8. At all places , the number of studies with number of participants must be mentioned along with effect estimates. This provides a wholesome view to the reader. Many of the outcomes are from a handful of participants.
9. Dempsey 2021 compared fluid+ inotrope vs fluid only. How come the first is active approach and second is restrictive
10. Pereira 2019 USA 3-armed pilot RCT: In this study all received fluid bolus and inotropes though at different cut-offs. So technically it should not be combined with Dempsey 2021.
11. The active group of Batton 2016 has significant overlap with Dempsey 2021.
12. How did the authors assess inconsistency? I hope it was limited to statistical heterogeneity.
13. The GRADE profile does not seem to be consistent with recent GRADE recommendations. At many places , especially for imprecision the down gradation should be by 2-3 points. Particularly for RCTs where the cumulative sample size is < 400 and CI are extremely wide.
14. Was Pereira 2019 really at low risk of bias in all domains. It was retrospectively registered with no protocol available at website. Intervention is open label, and many outcomes are subject to observer bias.
15. Many observational studies do not actually meet the criteria for inclusion. They are hugely different from each other with significant overlap between two groups among themselves and with other studies.
Based on above observations the authors should rethink whether the meta-analysis should be done.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: Yes:  Srinivas Murki
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0309520.r003

Author response to Decision Letter 1
13 Apr 2024
Response to Editorial Board and Reviewer comments:
1. When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf.
Response:
We have formatted the manuscript as per PLOS ONE’s requirements.
2. Please amend either the title on the online submission form (via Edit Submission) or the title in the manuscript so that they are identical.
Response:
We have addressed this aspect.
3. Please amend the manuscript submission data (via Edit Submission) to include author Abdul Kareem Pullattayil S.
Response:
We have amended the manuscript submission data.
4. One of the noted authors is a group [National Neonatal Forum (NNF), Clinical Practice Guidelines (CPG) Group, India]. In addition to naming the author group, please list the individual authors and affiliations within this group in the acknowledgments section of your manuscript. Please also indicate clearly a lead author for this group along with a contact email address.
Response:
We made the suggested changes. (Page 13 -14, Line 285 – 308)
5. Please include your tables as part of your main manuscript and remove the individual files. Please note that supplementary tables (should remain/ be uploaded) as separate ""supporting information"" files".
Response:
We have embedded the three tables within the manuscript. The supplementary file has been uploaded as ‘supporting information file’.
6. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
Response:
We have made the suggested changes (Page 20).
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author:
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Response to the Reviewers:
We thank the Reviewers for their critical appraisal of our manuscript. We have modified the manuscript in accordance with their comments and suggestions.
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: This is good review on the topic Active versus Restrictive management of Isolated Hypotension in preterm infants. Although the evidence evaluated did not result in strong recommendations, the authors suggest the need for well conducted RCT on this important topic.
Response to the Reviewer #1:
We thank the Reviewer for the comments.
I feel the paragraphs on the narrative review may be deleted altogether to improve the readability of the study. However some sections of the narrative review may be used by the authors in the discussion to understand how some the weak or expert recommendations were arrived at.
Response to the Reviewer:
We thank the Reviewer for these suggestions.
Accordingly, we have moved the ‘Narrative review’ section to ‘S1_File’ and labelled the section as ‘Appendix’.
We would also like to bring to the esteemed Reviewers’ attention that we have provided the complete evidence to decision (EtD) framework as per the GRADE working group guidelines in ‘S4 Table’ in ‘S1_File’. Since these recommendations were based on both quantitative meta-analyses and descriptive review of studies that could not be included in the data synthesis, we decided to provide whole EtD framework along with the justifications for providing weak recommendations. We have also indicated this in the manuscript in the discussion section as suggested by the Reviewer. The readership could go in detail the process that was involved in the framing of these recommendations in the EtD framework as indicated in the manuscript. (Page 10, Lines 209-214)
Response to the Reviewer #2:
Reviewer #2: Active Versus Restrictive Approach to Isolated Hypotension In Preterm Neonates: A Systematic Review And Meta-analysis
The authors tried to address an important yet les studied and controversial topic. They have systematically approached the topic and must be congratulated for their efforts.
Response to the Reviewer:
We thank the Reviewer for the encouraging comments.
Here are certain observations which might be of help in revising the manuscript:
1. The authors must define what does active and restrictive approach mean. Throughout the manuscript there is no mention of these two strategies.
Response to the Reviewer:
We thank the Reviewer for this suggestion. We had defined both the approaches in the ‘inclusion criteria’ sub-section (Page 4, Lines 83-100). As you are well aware hypotension was defined varyingly by the authors of the included studies. The following definitions have been commonly used for hypotension in VPT infants: Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) less than the gestational age, MAP based on centiles, MAP < 30 mm Hg etc. Hence, for such a less studied and debatable topic, we decided to define hypotension based on the primary authors’ / investigators’ definition. We have amended the inclusion criteria by defining isolated hypotension (response to the Reviewer query 3) and the clinical and / or biochemical features of hypoperfusion (the clinical / biochemical criteria for defining hypoperfusion was already mentioned in S4 Table under the sub-section ‘implementation considerations’). We amended the definitions to bring in more clarity in the modified manuscript:
Intervention(I) (active treatment group): Treatment with inotropes for IH. Volume expansion with crystalloids or colloids could have been used prior to inotrope or vasopressor initiation. (Page 4, Lines 89-91)
Comparator(C) (restrictive treatment group):
a. Treatment with volume expansion and / or inotropes in preterm neonates with hypotension only when clinical and / or biochemical features of poor perfusion were present. The clinical and / or biochemical signs of hypoperfusion were defined as presence of either of these: Unexplained tachycardia (>160-170 beats/min), prolonged capillary refilling time (> 3-4 seconds), low peripheral pulses, decreased urine output (< 1 ml/kg/ hour for 4 -6 hours, physiological oliguria or anuria should also be considered), increasing lactate levels (> 3-4 mmol/L) and base deficit (> 8 meq/L).
b. No treatment of IH. (Page 4, Lines 92 – 100)
2. The authors must describe the active and control group strategies in table 1 and table 2. Without clear description one will not know whether they are comparable.
Response to the Reviewer:
We thank the Reviewer for the valuable suggestions. We have included the two approaches (as modified according to the previous suggestion by the Reviewer) in the footnotes in Table 1 and Table 2. (Pages 26 and 38)
3. Inclusion criteria: Population is not well defined. The population definition should contain preterm infants with isolated hypotension. This isolated hypotension must be elaborated well like by what definition the diagnosis should be made. As there will be huge variation in the way the condition is defined, and it will have direct impact on the results.
Response to the Reviewer:
We thank the Reviewer for the suggestions. We have added ‘isolated hypotension’ in the population. The definition of isolated hypotension has also been mentioned. We had a priori defined in our protocol that the MAP cut-off for IH would be ‘as defined by the authors’. The following changes have been made:
“Population(P): Preterm neonates of less than 37 weeks’ gestational age within the first week of life with IH. IH was defined as low mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) as ascertained by the investigator which could be based on definitions such as MAP less than gestational age, MAP value below the 5th centile for the particular gestational age, MAP less than 30 mm Hg without any clinical or biochemical evidence of hypoperfusion.”(Page 4, Lines 84 - 88)
4. Comparator also needs clarity. Which gain takes us back to defining the isolated hypotension.
Response to the Reviewer:
We thank the Reviewer for the comment. This section has been revised as per Reviewer comment 1. (Page 4, Lines 92 – 100)
5. Literature search: The search was limited to only 2 databases. As the authors said that this topic is very controversial with limited literature, it becomes more pertinent to include at least 3 databases. Also, it will be better if the search is updated till end of the year.
Response to the Reviewer:
We thank the Reviewer for the suggestions. We have updated the literature search of the data bases Medline and Embase until 1st April 2024. We have also included another database Web of Science and done a systematic literature search of WOS until 1st April 2024 as well. Accordingly, changes have been made to the PRISMA flow (Figure 1), abstract section (Page 2), literature search strategy section (page 5, line 114), results section (Page 6, Lines 140-146), S1_File: S1b Table and the narrative review of the studies (S1 File: Narrative review). We could include 7 recently published additional studies (References: 46 – 52).
6. The authors stated that the definition of IH varied. The variation is so much that it might not be wise to pool them. Particularly if some of the studies did not use BP as a measure to define IH.
Response to the Reviewer:
We thank the Reviewer for the suggestion. Most studies have used BP as a measure of isolated hypotension. The two RCTs had taken almost similar (if not exactly the same definitions). The results of our meta-analyses also did not reveal any statistical heterogeneity. Hence, we feel that meta-analyses of these two small sized RCTs may possibly be justified.
Coming to observational studies, Faust et al., Aladangady et al., Durrmeyer et al., Kuint et al., Gogcu et al. have all used quite similar definitions to define hypotension which was MAP < GA. Only Dammann et al. had used a different definition (quartile based). We included Dammann et al. study as we presumed the definition used would be quite similar to that of Faust et al. as the BP centiles in Dammann et al. were equivalent to MAP < GA. Batton et al. had used a divergent definition for IH and we did not include the study in the meta-analysis. We were quite conscious of this important aspect pointed out by the Reviewer before proceeding ahead with the meta-analyses. Also, we had addressed this issue by downrating the evidence for indirectness related to definition of IH (population) wherever appropriate (Table 3, explanation ‘b’)(page 42)
7. Outcomes: The authors should provide the risk estimates in text also particularly for important outcomes rather than just referring to Tables and figures.
8. At all places , the number of studies with number of participants must be mentioned along with effect estimates. This provides a wholesome view to the reader. Many of the outcomes are from a handful of participants.
Response to the Reviewer query 7 and 8:
We thank the Reviewer for these suggestions. We have given the effect estimates with 95% CI for all the outcomes along with the number of studies and the sample size. (Pages 8 – 10)
9. Dempsey 2021 compared fluid+ inotrope vs fluid only. How come the first is active approach and second is restrictive
10. Pereira 2019 USA 3-armed pilot RCT: In this study all received fluid bolus and inotropes though at different cut-offs. So technically it should not be combined with Dempsey 2021.
Response to the Reviewer query 9 and 10:
We thank the Reviewer for the query. We would like to state that boluses have been given in many studies including the ones pointed out by the author. As stated in response to Reviewer comment 6, our initial scoping review did bring out these aspects and we decided to do a pragmatic meta-analyses of studies that had quite similar but not exactly the same PICO. As stated before we did not find any significant heterogeneity when pooling the data from these studies. Likewise for the patient population (definition of IH), we had downgraded the evidence for indirectness related to intervention / comparator. As you are well aware, as a Clinical practice Guideline Group we had to make recommendations with the best available evidence that could be generalizable to different settings. Henceforth, we presumed that a pragmatic rather than an explanatory meta-analyses would possibly be the appropriate way forward. The evidence certainty from the meta-analyses of these two RCTs is ‘very low’ now. We have updated them in the manuscript as well. We have included these in the limitations section:
“There were several limitations to this meta-analysis. The definition of isolated hypotension and clinical hypotension with signs of hypoperfusion varied between studies. Further, some of the neonates in the restrictive approach group received volume expansion which could have altered the effect estimates of the meta-analyses. We tried to address these by downrating the evidence by one level for the domain of indirectness related to patient population and the intervention / comparator.” (Page 12, Lines 269 - 275)
We took the decision to do a meta-analysis with a pragmatic approach based on the suggestion by the GRADE group:
“First, if results prove similar from study to study, the variability in study PICOs enhances the generalizability of those results. If patient populations differ widely and results are nevertheless similar across studies, it tells us that patients with different characteristics respond similarly to the intervention, allowing application of the results to a wide range of patients. If studies use different doses but results are nevertheless similar across studies, this tells us intervention effects are independent of dose. Clinicians can then choose freely from among the doses used in the studies (e.g., use lower doses that are less likely to cause adverse effects). Similar interpretations would apply to differences in the comparator and outcomes.”
Reference: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36898507/
In our study, there were differences in “PIC” between the studies, the meta-analyses of most of the outcomes revealed almost similar results. Wherever, significant heterogeneity was dete
10.1371/journal.pone.0309520.r004

Decision Letter 1
Dey
Sanjoy Kumer
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
30 May 2024
<div>PONE-D-23-44090R1Active Versus Restrictive Approach To Isolated Hypotension In Preterm Neonates: A Systematic Review, Meta-analysis And GRADE based Clinical Practice GuidelinePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. More,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 14 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sanjoy Kumer Dey, M.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: the authors have made all the changes as suggested. The narartive review included in the appendix. Readability improed. No further changes are recommended
Reviewer #2: Thank you considering my comments and revising the manuscript. However i still believe that the studies are not similar to combine them statistically.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: Yes:  SRINIVAS MURKI
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0309520.r005

Author response to Decision Letter 2
1 Jun 2024
Dear Dr. More,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 14 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
• A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
• A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
• An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sanjoy Kumer Dey, M.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Response to the Editor:
Dear Sanjoy K Dey, M.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
We would like to thank you for giving us the opportunity to address the Reviewer’s comments and suggestions. We also would like to thank the PLOS ONE team for ensuring a timely re-review of our manuscript.
Sincerely Yours
Viraraghavan V Ramaswamy
On behalf of the Author Team and National Neonatology Forum, India CPG 2023 group
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
Response to Reviewer #1: We thank the Reviewer for the comment.
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
Response to Reviewer #1 and Reviewer #2: We thank the Reviewers for accepting most of the suggested changes that we had made in the modified manuscript and for the point by point response given to the Reviewer comments.
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: No
Response to Reviewer #1 and Reviewer #2: We thank the Reviewers for their comments We would like to elaborate with regards to this question to Reviewer #2 comment 6 in the forthcoming section.
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Response to Reviewer #1 and Reviewer #2: We thank the Reviewers for the comments.
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
Response to Reviewer #1 and Reviewer #2: We thank the Reviewers for the comments.
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: the authors have made all the changes as suggested. The narartive review included in the appendix. Readability improed. No further changes are recommended
Response to Reviewer #1: We thank Reviewer #1 for the suggestions which had greatly improved the quality of the manuscript.
Reviewer #2: Thank you considering my comments and revising the manuscript. However i still believe that the studies are not similar to combine them statistically.
Response to Reviewer #2: We thank Reviewer #2 for all the suggestions and critical appraisal of our initial manuscript. We had extensively revised our manuscript based on the critical inputs given by the Reviewer which made our literature search more comprehensive, the GRADE assessment rigorous, the definition of PICO clearer and finally, we could bring it out with more clarity to the readership that this was a pragmatic systematic review and not an explanatory one. We have detailed these aspects including why we synthesized the data with references from the GRADE working group and what are the implications of that in the revised manuscript.
Page 10-11, Lines 219- 238: “It should be noted that there was some clinical heterogeneity with regards to the patient population, the intervention and the comparator in the included studies in the meta-analyses for the various outcomes. The question of whether pooling of data in a meta-analysis arises in such scenarios. The GRADE working group provides clarity with respect to that. While GRADE visualizes the variability between studies as a source of potential opportunity. GRADE group points out that in some scenarios such variability might even turn out to be one of the strengths of a systematic review.(57) In our systematic review, the meta-analyses of RCTs did not show any between studies heterogeneity though there were some differences in the patient population, intervention and the comparator. This implies that the results of the meta-analysis of the RCTs could be generalizable to different clinical settings where isolated hypotension is defined based various definitions, the intervention and the comparator could deviate slightly still yielding similar clinical outcomes. Further, the meta-analyses of non-RCTs indicated significant heterogeneity for the critical outcome of mortality and the important outcome of severe grade IVH. This provided us an opportunity to explore the various potential reasons for the same. We found postnatal age to be an important effect modifier and hence we could bring out recommendations based on postnatal age of the neonate (≤24 h vs. > 24 h). Such pragmatic systematic reviews form the basis for formulation of clinical practice guidelines for difficult questions that often addressed through expert consensus. Further, these systematic reviews could be generalizable across different settings and also provide clinicians, parents and other stakeholders to choose between different treatment choices.”
10.1371/journal.pone.0309520.r006

Decision Letter 2
Dey
Sanjoy Kumer
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
31 Jul 2024
PONE-D-23-44090R2Active Versus Restrictive Approach To Isolated Hypotension In Preterm Neonates: A Systematic Review, Meta-analysis And GRADE based Clinical Practice GuidelinePLOS ONE
Dear Dr. More,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Sep 14 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Sanjoy Kumer Dey, M.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #2: No
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: Thank you for providing opportunity to review this manuscript. I have few observations
1. The definitions for intervention and control are hugely different across studies, hence might not be appropriate to combine them.
The following definitions have been commonly used for hypotension in VPT infants: Mean arterial
blood pressure (MAP) less than the gestational age, MAP based on centiles, MAP < 30mm Hg etc. Hence, for such a less studied and debatable topic, we decided to define hypotension based on the primary authors’ / investigators’ definition. We have amended the inclusion criteria by defining isolated hypotension and the clinical and / or biochemical features of hypoperfusion (the clinical / biochemical criteria for defining hypoperfusion was already mentioned in S4
Table under the sub-section ‘implementation considerations’).
Intervention(I) (active treatment group): Treatment with inotropes for IH. Volume
expansion with crystalloids or colloids could have been used prior to inotrope or
vasopressor initiation.
Comparator(C) (restrictive treatment group):
Treatment with volume expansion and/or inotropes in preterm neonates with
hypotension only when clinical and / or biochemical features of poor perfusion were
present. The clinical and / or biochemical signs of hypoperfusion were defined as
presence of either of these: Unexplained tachycardia (>160-170 beats/min), prolonged
capillary refilling time (> 3-4 seconds), low peripheral pulses, decreased urine output (<
1 ml/kg/ hour for 4 -6 hours, physiological oliguria or anuria should also be considered),
increasing lactate levels (> 3-4 mmol/L) and base deficit (> 8 meq/L).
b. No treatment of IH. (Page 4, Lines 92 – 100)
As you can see that the infant who are getting fluid bolus might be considered in intervention by some whereas control in another study.
Two arms of study by Pereiera have been combined together as intervention ( active and moderate) when the two are very different. Also by this way they have done "double counting” of the control group which is not appropriate. That total sample size of two RCts is 118 whereas the authors mentioned it as 139 (Table 3 GRADE). It happened at multiple places because of double counting error.
2. Many observational studies do not actually meet the criteria for inclusion. They are
hugely different from each other with significant overlap between two groups among
themselves and with other studies.
3. I think the manuscript definitely have merits but needs a different way of presentation. The statistical analysis seems incorrect to me. It is like combining apples and oranges and then justifying by looking at statistical heterogeneity (while ignoring clinical heterogeneity)
I am getting a feeling that a narrative review without combing the clinically different studies might be more useful. We agree that there are are extremely limited studies on this aspect and but e they are not alike to be combined together
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0309520.r007

Author response to Decision Letter 3
4 Aug 2024
Dear Sanjoy K Dey, M.D 5th August 2024
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
I thank you for giving us the opportunity to address the Reviewer’s comments and suggestions for the third revision of the manuscript. We have extensively addressed the queries raised by the previous Reviewers backed by published scientific literature on systematic reviews and clinical practice guidelines. Our group have would tried our best to address them in this third revision as well.
Sincerely Yours
Viraraghavan Vadakkencherry Ramaswamy
MD, DM (Neonatology), DNB (Neonatology) (LHMC, Delhi University, Delhi)
Neonatal trainee (OUH, Oslo, Norway)
Clinical Fellow (Oxford University Hospitals, U.K.)
Consultant Neonatologist and Head (Ankura Hospital for Women and Children, KPHB, Hyderabad, India) (2020- )
Associate Task Force Member, Neonatal Life Support, ILCOR (2021-)
Member, Cochrane Neonatal (2021-)
Guest faculty, KDIGO (2023)
Editorial Board Member, BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth (2023-)
Editorial Coordinator, National Neonatal Forum, India Clinical Practice Guidelines Group (2020-)
Editorial Board Member, Journal of Neonatology (2024-)
Member, Global Neonatal Resuscitation Alliance (2024-)
On behalf of the National Neonatology Forum, India Clinical Practice Guidelines Group 2023
Response to the Reviewer
Reviewer #2: Thank you for providing opportunity to review this manuscript. I have few observations
1. The definitions for intervention and control are hugely different across studies, hence might not be appropriate to combine them.
The following definitions have been commonly used for hypotension in VPT infants: Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) less than the gestational age, MAP based on centiles, MAP < 30mm Hg etc. Hence, for such a less studied and debatable topic, we decided to define hypotension based on the primary authors’ / investigators’ definition. We have amended the inclusion criteria by defining isolated hypotension and the clinical and / or biochemical features of hypoperfusion (the clinical / biochemical criteria for defining hypoperfusion was already mentioned in S4Table under the sub-section ‘implementation considerations’).
Intervention(I) (active treatment group): Treatment with inotropes for IH. Volume
expansion with crystalloids or colloids could have been used prior to inotrope or
vasopressor initiation.
Comparator(C) (restrictive treatment group): Treatment with volume expansion and/or inotropes in preterm neonates with hypotension only when clinical and / or biochemical features of poor perfusion were present. The clinical and / or biochemical signs of hypoperfusion were defined as presence of either of these: Unexplained tachycardia (>160-170 beats/min), prolonged capillary refilling time (> 3-4 seconds), low peripheral pulses, decreased urine output (< 1 ml/kg/ hour for 4 -6 hours, physiological oliguria or anuria should also be considered), increasing lactate levels (> 3-4 mmol/L) and base deficit (> 8 meq/L).
b. No treatment of IH. (Page 4, Lines 92 – 100)
As you can see that the infant who are getting fluid bolus might be considered in intervention by some whereas control in another study.
Two arms of study by Pereiera have been combined together as intervention ( active and moderate) when the two are very different. Also by this way they have done "double counting” of the control group which is not appropriate. That total sample size of two RCts is 118 whereas the authors mentioned it as 139 (Table 3 GRADE). It happened at multiple places because of double counting error.
Response:
1. We would like to thank the Reviewer for the query. It is to be noted that volume expansion in hypotension is a standard of care in the setting of hypotension in most of NICUs across the globe.
A. The HIP trial protocol states “Infants received an infusion of 10mL/kg of 0.9% saline administered over 20 min before commencing their allocated study drug contained in 50 mL syringes identical in appearance.”
B. Pereira et al. trial states “ A written protocol tailored for each gestation and study arm was at the cot side to guide staff, with BP intervention levels. Apart from this target, the guideline (Appendix A) was similar to standard NICU policy. Key elements included triggers for evaluation (BP, tachycardia, impaired perfusion), basic stabilisation, and a maximum of 10-20 mls/kg intravascular volume.” Henceforth, these two trials had used volume expansion in the intervention and control arms prior to randomisation. Coming to observational studies that were included in the meta-analyses most have not stated whether a bolus had been given or not. So, we are unable to comment on this aspect.
2. We would like to thank the Reviewer for pointing out the aspect of ‘double counting’ related to the Pereira et al. RCT in the meta-analyses of the various outcomes. Of the various approaches to avoid the ‘unit-of-analysis’ error that could happen due to this, we decided to adopt the ‘combining groups’ approach suggested by the Cochrane group ( https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/cesm.12033). All the meta-analyses for the various outcomes have been re-done. Figure 2 has been modified. The effect estimates and sample sizes of the various outcomes have been changed in the manuscript. Table 3, the summary of findings table has been changed in accordance with the results of the meta-analyses. All these changes have been marked in the marked copy of the revised manuscript.
3. Many observational studies do not actually meet the criteria for inclusion. They are
hugely different from each other with significant overlap between two groups among
themselves and with other studies.
Response:
We thank the Reviewer for the comments. We would like to indicate that this was a systematic review based on which a clinical practice guideline was formulated. Likewise for any clinical practice guideline, we had to adopt a broader inclusion criteria. The specific purpose for the same are two reasons. Firstly, many of these studies would be included in the additional evidence section of the evidence to decision table of the GRADE. I would like to refer to two ILCOR Neonatal Life Support Systematic Reviews
( 1. Ramaswamy VV, Dawson JA, de Almeida MF, Trevisanuto D, Nakwa FL, Kamlin COF, Trang J, Wyckoff MH, Weiner GM, Liley HG; International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation Neonatal Life Support Task Force. Maintaining normothermia immediately after birth in preterm infants <34 weeks' gestation: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Resuscitation. 2023 Oct;191:109934. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2023.109934. Epub 2023 Aug 18. PMID: 37597649.;
2. Ramaswamy VV, de Almeida MF, Dawson JA, Trevisanuto D, Nakwa FL, Kamlin CO, Hosono S, Wyckoff MH, Liley HG; International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation Neonatal Life Support Task Force. Maintaining normal temperature immediately after birth in late preterm and term infants: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Resuscitation. 2022 Nov;180:81-98. doi: 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2022.09.014. Epub 2022 Sep 27. PMID: 36174764.) where various papers which had not reported on the pre-specified outcomes where included. For example, one paper had evaluated the comfort of doctors and nurses in the OT at different OT temperatures. This was included as an additional evidence in EtD framework. Many QI studies were included where interventions not specified a priori such as education, training etc were components of the QI. To summarise, systematic reviews done for the purpose of formulating CPGs would usually be pragmatic (as it is in this manuscript) while isolated systematic reviews would be more of an explanatory in nature.
3. I think the manuscript definitely have merits but needs a different way of presentation. The statistical analysis seems incorrect to me. It is like combining apples and oranges and then justifying by looking at statistical heterogeneity (while ignoring clinical heterogeneity)
I am getting a feeling that a narrative review without combing the clinically different studies might be more useful. We agree that there are are extremely limited studies on this aspect and but e they are not alike to be combined together.
Response:
We thank the Reviewer for the comments. We would like to emphasize on the following points apart from the response provided to Reviewer query 4 (regarding adopting a pragmatic broader inclusion criteria for the systematic review)
(reference https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S089543562300046X):
A. The GRADE working group emphasizes on statistical heterogeneity more than clinical heterogeneity which is a norm in pragmatic systematic reviews.
B. The GRADE working group also states the following: “First, if results prove similar from study to study, the variability in study PICOs enhances the generalizability of those results. If patient populations differ widely and results are nevertheless similar across studies, it tells us that patients with different characteristics respond similarly to the intervention, allowing application of the results to a wide range of patients. If studies use different doses but results are nevertheless similar across studies, this tells us intervention effects are independent of dose. Clinicians can then choose freely from among the doses used in the studies (e.g., use lower doses that are less likely to cause adverse effects). Similar interpretations would apply to differences in the comparator and outcomes.” From the perspective of our review, the aforementioned statement may be construed as follows:
- Irrespective of the definition of IH used, the restrictive approach might possibly result in better outcomes.
- These results are generalizable to NICUs where volume expansion alone is used (and not inotropes or vasopressors) for treating IH (restrictive approach).
C. We had already stated this aspect in the limitations section for the sake of transparency as follows:
“There were several limitations to this meta-analysis. The definition of isolated hypotension and clinical hypotension with signs of hypoperfusion varied between studies. Further, some of the neonates in the restrictive approach group received volume expansion which could have altered the effect estimates of the meta-analyses. We tried to address these by downrating the evidence by one level for the domain of indirectness related to patient population and the intervention / comparator.”
D. In the previous review, the Reviewer 1 had specifically asked to delete the narrative review section all together which we moved to Appendix in the supplement. Reviewer 1: “I feel the paragraphs on the narrative review may be deleted altogether to improve the readability of the study. However some sections of the narrative review may be used by the authors in the discussion to understand how some the weak or expert recommendations were arrived at.”
Reviewer 1’s response to our edits: “The authors have made all the changes as suggested. The narrative review is included in the appendix. Readability improved. No further changes are recommended”
E. Since we had addressed this issue of this systematic review being predominantly reported based on the results from meta-analyses of various outcomes, we are of the opinion that it would be unfair to make it a narrative review at this stage as the CPG has been widely adopted in our country as well others.
F. Finally, the definition of isolated hypotension did not vary significantly between the studies included in the meta-analyses. The two RCTs had taken almost similar (if not exactly the same definitions). The results of our meta-analyses also did not reveal any statistical heterogeneity as stated before. Hence, we feel that meta-analyses of these two small sized RCTs may possibly be justified. Coming to the observational studies, Faust et al., Aladangady et al., Durrmeyer et al., Kuint et al., and Gogcu et al. have all used quite similar definitions to define hypotension which was MAP < GA. Only Dammann et al. had used a different definition (quartile based). We included Dammann et al. study as we presumed the definition used was quite similar to that of Faust et al.’s as the BP centiles in Dammann et al.’s study were almost similar to MAP < GA. Batton et al. had used a divergent definition for IH and we did not include the study in the meta-analysis. Also, we had addressed this issue by downrating the evidence for indirectness related to definition of IH (population) wherever we deemed appropriate.
10.1371/journal.pone.0309520.r008

Decision Letter 3
Dey
Sanjoy Kumer
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
15 Aug 2024
<p>Active Versus Restrictive Approach To Isolated Hypotension In Preterm Neonates: A Systematic Review, Meta-analysis And GRADE based Clinical Practice Guideline
PONE-D-23-44090R3
Dear Dr.Kiran More,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Sanjoy Kumer Dey, M.D
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0309520.r009

Acceptance letter
Dey
Sanjoy
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
PONE-D-23-44090R3
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. More,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Sanjoy Kumer Dey
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE