Mechanisms of Myocardial Ischemia in Cancer Patients: A State-of-the-Art Review of Obstructive Versus Non-Obstructive Causes
In patients with cancer, myocardial infarction (MI) has distinct features and  mechanisms compared to the non-oncology population. Triggers of myocardial  ischemia specific to the oncology population have been increasingly identified.  Coronary plaque disruption, coronary vasospasm, coronary microvascular  dysfunction, spontaneous coronary artery dissection, and coronary oxygen  supply-demand mismatch are all causes of MI that have been shown to have specific  triggers related to either the treatments or complications of cancer. MI can  occur in the presence or absence of atherosclerotic coronary artery disease  (CAD). MI with nonobstructive CAD (MINOCA) is a heterogeneous syndrome that has  distinct pathophysiology and different epidemiology from MI with significant CAD  (MI-CAD). Recognition and differentiation of MI-CAD and MINOCA is essential in  the oncology population, due to unique etiology and impact on diagnosis,  management, and overall outcomes. There are currently no reports in the  literature concerning MINOCA as a unified syndrome in oncology patients. The  purpose of this review is to analyze the literature for studies related to known  triggers of myocardial ischemia in cancer patients, with a focus on MINOCA. We  propose that certain cancer treatments can induce MINOCA-like states, and further  research is warranted to investigate mechanisms that may be unique to certain  cancer states and types of treatment.

1. Introduction
Myocardial infarction (MI) in cancer patients has distinct features and  mechanisms compared to the general, non-oncology population. MI can broadly be  categorized into MI due to coronary artery disease (MI-CAD) and MI in the absence  of coronary obstructive disease (MINOCA). MI-CAD is the most common cause of MI  in both cancer and non-cancer patients. Although traditional cardiovascular risk  factors apply to both patients with and without cancer, the overall risk for MI  in oncology patients is higher due to both cancer-related processes and  anti-cancer therapies. Even in the absence of cardiotoxic anti-cancer  treatments, cancer patients can be found with high levels of cardiac biomarkers,  suggesting subclinical myocardial damage of unclear etiology and associated with  worse outcomes. MINOCA is a newly recognized heterogeneous syndrome that  has distinct pathophysiology and epidemiology when compared to MI-CAD. The  prevalence of MINOCA among patients presenting with suspicion of acute MI was  reported as high as 14%. Recent data suggest that patients presenting with  ST-elevation MI (STEMI) who have a history of cancer are more likely to have  MINOCA rather than MI-CAD compared to patients with STEMI without an oncologic  history (17% vs. 8%, respectively). Recognition of this condition and  distinction from MI-CAD are essential, as MINOCA may be mis-diagnosed as  non-cardiac, with significant cardiovascular management and outcome implications.
With the recent rapid rise of cardio-oncology, triggers of myocardial ischemia  specific to the oncology population have been increasingly identified.  Coronary plaque disruption, coronary vasospasm, coronary microvascular  dysfunction, oxygen supply-demand mismatch, and spontaneous coronary artery  dissection (SCAD), are all causes of MI that have been shown to have specific  triggers related to either the treatments or complications of cancer. The  multiple etiologies of MINOCA each portend different prognoses and require  individualized management strategies. Currently there is a paucity of data  in the literature concerning MINOCA as a unified syndrome in oncology patients.  The purpose of this review is to analyze the literature for studies related to  known triggers of myocardial ischemia and infarction in cancer patients with a  focus on MINOCA and propose that certain cancer states, and/or their treatments  can induce MINOCA-like states.

2. Definitions
The Fourth Universal Definition of MI, issued by the Joint European Society of  Cardiology (ESC), American College of Cardiology (ACC), American Heart  Association (AHA), and World Heart Federation (WHF) Task Force, is widely  accepted and used in clinical practice. This most recent iteration of the  universal definition of MI classifies troponin elevation as being due to acute  ischemia (leading to myocardial infarction) and not acute ischemia driven (e.g.,  myocardial injury due to acute myocarditis).
MINOCA is a recently described entity that can broadly be defined by these  criteria: (1) acute MI according to the Fourth Universal Definition of MI; (2)  exclusion of missed obstructive coronary disease (e.g., coronary emboli/thrombi,  coronary dissection); (3) no coronary lesions 50% in a major epicardial  vessel; (4) no coronary lesions with FFR 0.8; (5) no other identifiable cause  for the presentation. MINOCA can be considered as a working diagnosis,  when known causes of elevated troponin are excluded and our current diagnostic  capacity has been reached. Initial studies of MINOCA considered the complete  absence of coronary disease as a diagnostic necessity. It is currently  generally accepted that the diagnosis can be established even in the presence of  moderate coronary disease (i.e., obstructing 50% of the lumen).  Echocardiography, ventriculography, and cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging  should be part of the work-up when assessing for MINOCA to comprehensively search  for etiologies that may mimic the syndrome (Fig. 1). CMR is an essential  diagnostic tool in these patients since it can evaluate the non-ischemic and  ischemic etiology once the working diagnosis of MINOCA is established. Data on  the functional assessment of coronary lesions in MINOCA are sparse. It was noted  that a significant number of lesions in the 30%–50% range by angiography are  functionally hemodynamically significant on fractional flow reserve (FFR) or  cardiac positron emission tomography (PET) and responsible for MI-CAD.  There are no data on instantaneous free-wave ratio in MINOCA. A special category  of cancer patients undergoing therapy with immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) and  possible myocarditis can have indeterminate CMR findings and in some cases  require endomyocardial biopsy (EMB), which can be challenging in the acute  coronary setting where the addition of antiplatelet and anticoagulation increases  the bleeding risk and the subsequent risk of perforation and tamponade.  Intracoronary imaging and functional assessment should also be used to identify  specific causes of MINOCA once an ischemic etiology is established via CMR.
Patients with cancer and ischemia may require extensive workup 
to differentiate between the various causes of obstructive and non-obstructive 
coronary artery disease and to exclude alternative diagnoses. Abbreviations: 
CAD, coronary artery disease; MI-CAD, myocardial infarction with obstructive 
coronary artery disease; MINOCA, myocardial infarction with non-obstructive 
coronary artery disease; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, positron emission 
tomography scan; SCAD, spontaneous coronary artery dissection.
Despite MINOCA having an overall 1-year mortality rate of 4.7%, data on the  impact of distinct management strategies based on the specific diagnosis is  lacking in the literature. This may be due to MINOCA being a relatively  heterogeneous entity, with various etiologies included in the disease spectrum,  with an evolving definition. The diagnosis of MINOCA can be difficult, given that  many chemotherapies and targeted therapies can cause non-specific cardiac  biomarker elevations and/or EKG or echocardiographic abnormalities, which can  also be compounded by other concomitates states associated with complications of  cancer and its therapies (e.g., sepsis, hypovolemia). The overlap of these states  with MINOCA is unclear. Scientific statements from the AHA and ESC proposed  algorithms for diagnosing MINOCA, which specifically exclude from the MINOCA  spectrum non-ischemic causes of troponin elevation, such as cardiac contusion,  coronary emboli/thrombi, Takotsubo syndrome (TTS) and other cardiomyopathies, and  myocarditis requires a comprehensive work-up which is infrequently  performed.

3. Etiology and Mechanisms of Myocardial Infarction in Cancer Patients
Based on the above definitions, we considered the following specific causes of  MI-CAD and MINOCA: coronary plaque disruption, epicardial coronary vasospasm,  coronary microvascular dysfunction, coronary oxygen supply-demand mismatch (type  2 MI), and SCAD. The epidemiology of these specific causes of MI is  different in cardio-oncology patients compared to the general cardiovascular  population, given the unique risk profile of cancer patients and various  cardiotoxic anti-cancer therapies. As such, we performed a literature search for  studies addressing each of these situations in cancer patients. A special note is  made regarding TTS and myocarditis, two entities that were initially considered  triggers of MINOCA given their very similar presentation to non-ST elevation MI  (NSTEMI), but which have been excluded from the MINOCA spectrum in the most  recent societal statements. TTS has a proposed ischemic mechanism that includes  coronary vasospasm and microvascular dysfunction (in addition to  catecholamine-induced toxicity). Furthermore, TTS is more prevalent in  cancer patients presenting with apparent NSTEMI compared to the general  population, with approximately 10% of patients with cancer who exhibited  clinical characteristics of NSTEMI being ultimately found with TTS.  Cancer patients are also exposed to various agents that may induce both acute  coronary syndromes and myocarditis, which have similar initial presentations  . We also considered extrinsic coronary compression as a mechanism of  myocardial ischemia in cancer patients. Given these special considerations in  cardio-oncology, coronary compression, TTS, and myocarditis will also be  addressed in this review as syndromes that specifically need to be considered in  cancer patients presenting with apparent NSTEMI or MINOCA.

3.1 Coronary Plaque Disruption
Cancer and coronary artery disease (CAD) frequently coexist due to shared risk  factors, an increasing pool of cancer survivors that age, and increased  recognition of the cardiovascular toxicity of anti-cancer therapies during active  cancer treatment and in cancer survivors. Furthermore, the  pro-inflammatory and pro-thrombotic nature of malignancies increases the risk for  endothelial damage and progression of atherosclerotic disease in an oncology  population, in addition to the endothelial dysfunction/injury from chemo-,  immune- or radiation therapy. Up to 15% of patients presenting with  acute coronary syndromes have either active or a history of cancer. Cancer  can be considered a risk factor for CAD, with increasing data suggesting the  direct cause-and-effect relationship between cancer and CAD. Supply-demand  mismatch in stable CAD is common in cancer patients due to a high risk of anemia,  sepsis, tachycardia, and hypovolemia, in this population, although this  represents a different mechanism and will be discussed separately.
Similar to MI-CAD, the fundamental atherosclerotic mechanism of MINOCA is  coronary plaque disruption. Plaques prone to disruption (“vulnerable”)  are generally angiographically mild. More commonly in MINOCA than MI-CAD,  plaque disruption occurs in positively-remodeled lesions, i.e., lesions expanding  outward from the coronary wall instead of obstructing the lumen, thus not evident  on regular coronary angiography. These lesions require definitive assessment  with intracoronary imaging, either intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) or, preferred  if available, optical coherence tomography (OCT). Cancer patients appear to  have accelerated vascular aging as reflected by increased calcium scores when  compared to non-cancer patients, which, in turn, also places them at a higher  risk for acute MI, be it MINOCA or MI-CAD.
Plaque disruption includes the following 3 mechanisms: plaque rupture, plaque  erosion, and calcified nodules all with a common pathophysiologic endpoint  of acute MI via thrombosis. The risk of venous thrombosis in cancer patients has  been extensively studied and is well-established, however, recent evidence  suggests that the risk of arterial thrombosis is currently underestimated  . Cancer patients have been shown to have elevated levels of platelet  activation markers, such as platelet factor 4, P-selectin, and soluble CD40  ligand. Cancerous cells have also been shown in vitro to directly  induce platelet activation and aggregation. The mechanism, generally termed  tumor cell-induced platelet aggregation, involves several molecular pathways,  including ADP, thrombin, tissue factor, metalloproteinases, thromboxane ,  and VEGF. There is increasing evidence supporting the involvement of  neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) in cancer-induced thrombosis, which may  clinically present with elevated serum troponins in ischemic stroke patients  . In a small 2016 case series on 31 patients assessing causes of troponin  elevation in patients with ischemic stroke, the only significant difference  between patients with and without elevated serum troponin was the presence of  active cancer. Three of the patients with troponin elevation in this study  were diagnosed with active cancer post-mortem. On autopsy, these patients were  all found with only mild coronary atherosclerosis, no thrombotic occlusions, but  with widespread coronary microvascular thrombosis, disseminated focal areas of  myocardial damage, and presence of NETs. Although the main focus of the study was  ischemic stroke, the authors reported NET-associated myocardial arterial  microthrombosis in the coronary vasculature due to cancer as a cause of troponin  elevation in the context of no epicardial coronary disease. Interestingly,  the risk of arterial thrombosis persists even in the setting of chronic  thrombocytopenia (a frequent comorbidity in the course of malignancies).
In addition to direct cancer-induced mechanisms of thrombosis, there is also a  strong association between anti-cancer therapies and a risk of arterial  thrombosis (Table 1). This includes numerous classes of  chemotherapeutic agents, immunotherapies, and radiation therapy. For example,  Animal and human studies showed that radiation-therapy leads to accelerated  atherosclerosis and vulnerable plaque development.
Mechanisms of cancer treatment-induced myocardial ischemia 
(MI-CAD + MINOCA).
Plaque disruption and prothrombotic effects	Vasospasm	Microvascular dysfunction	 	Alkylating agents (cisplatin, cyclophosphamide)	+	+	+	 	Antimetabolites (5-fluorouracil, capecitabine)	-	+	+	 	Anthracyclines (doxorubicin)	-	+	+	 	Microtubule-binding agents (paclitaxel)	-	+	+	 	Antitumor antibiotics (bleomycin)	+	+		 	Plant alkaloids (vincristine, etoposide)	+	+	+	 	Proteasome inhibitors (bortezomib, carfilzomib)		+		 	Anti-VEGF (bevacizumab)	+	+	+	 	TKI inhibitors (e.g., ponatinib, sorafenib, sunitinib, axitinib, pazopanib)	+	+	+	 	Immune checkpoint inhibitors (e.g., pembrolizumab, nivolumab, atezolizumab, ipilimumab)	+	-	-	 	CAR T-cell therapy	+	-	-	 	Radiotherapy	+	+	+
Abbreviations: CAR, chimeric antigen receptor; TKI, tyrosine kinase 
inhibitor; VEGF, vascular endothelial growth factor.
Adapted from Herrmann J, Yang EH, Iliescu CA, Cilingiroglu M, Charitakis K, 
Hakeem A, et al. Vascular Toxicities of Cancer Therapies: The Old and the New–An 
Evolving Avenue. Circulation. 2016;133(13):1272-89.
Although there are no studies currently in the literature specifically assessing  MINOCA in cancer patients, evidence regarding this syndrome and arterial  thrombosis in cardio-oncology may be inferred from several works. A case report  of a patient who developed sudden cardiac death while on cisplatin, bleomycin,  and etoposide for testicular cancer suggested demonstrated an acute fibrin  thrombus on autopsy overlying mild atherosclerotic disease. Cisplatin in  particular may be related to this effect, as it has been described on forearm  venous occlusion plethysmography to induce acute and transient endothelial  toxicity. A recent study from Israel analyzed consecutive patients who  underwent coronary angiography for clinically defined acute MI and who were found  without obstructive CAD. The study included 174 such patients who were  matched with a control group of 348 adults with MI-CAD. The authors identified  MINOCA presenting as NSTEMI to be a significant independent risk factor for  occult malignancies (odds ratio 4.6) and attributed this effect mainly to  arterial thromboembolism, although they couldn’t definitively rule out other of  the known triggers of MINOCA. Another recent case-control analysis of  coronary angiography findings in 240 cancer patients and 240 non-cancer patients  identified a lower burden of angiographically-detectable coronary disease in the  cancer group. A significant limitation of that analysis was the inclusion of  all patients undergoing coronary angiography without adjusting for indications  for cardiac catheterization. Although the authors concluded that this “cancer  paradox” may be due to cancer patients being referred for coronary angiography  for indications other than CAD suspicion, and there’s no analysis of the  prevalence of patients who had acute MI criteria. These findings also raise the  hypothesis of a higher prevalence of MINOCA in the cancer group. A landmark study  by Navi et al. assessing 280,000 cancer patients in the  Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database matched each patient  to patients from the Medicare database. The authors identified MI via ICD codes,  including numerous possible forms such as plaque rupture, embolism, vasospasm,  and other forms of thrombosis. A diagnosis of cancer carried a significant hazard  ratio (HR) of 2.2 for arterial thrombotic events and of 2.9 for MI. Of note, the  authors excluded patients with a diagnosis of CAD one year prior to the cancer  diagnosis. However, the SEER study did not include angiographic data, nor did it  analyze specific triggers of MI, so it is unknown how many of the included  patients with myocardial ischemia had MINOCA versus other forms of MI.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) are increasingly and successfully used in the  treatment of numerous cancers. These agents are associated with a range of  immune-related adverse events (iRAEs), of which cardiotoxicity is among the most  severe. Although the main focus in the literature with regards to cardiotoxicity  has been on ICI-induced myocarditis, recently, multiple reports have been  published suggesting a direct causal effect of ICI on coronary plaque disruption  . In a recent study of 1215 patients with cancer who received ICI,  approximately 1% of patients developed either myocardial infarction or an  ischemic stroke within 6 months of ICI treatment. The same incidence of  arterial thrombotic events after ICI therapy was described in a systematic review  of 10,106 subjects. The underlying mechanism appears to be a change in  atherosclerotic inflammatory cell composition triggered by ICI. Given these  observations and the ubiquitous use of ICI, these agents should be recognized as  potentially linked to MI and/or MINOCA, although further study is warranted.
Clonal hematopoiesis of indeterminate potential (CHIP) has recently emerged as  an independent risk factor for CAD. Mutations seen in CHIP are also seen in  certain hematologic cancers, such as myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid  leukemia. Patients with CHIP have a 10-time higher risk of developing a  hematologic malignancy compared to those without CHIP. The precise mechanism  through which CHIP induces atherosclerotic disease is unclear. Although there are  no reports currently of CHIP-associated acute MI, clinicians should be aware of  CHIP as a causative agent for atherosclerotic disease.
Data regarding MINOCA secondary to non-hemodynamically significant coronary  atherosclerosis in cancer patients is extremely limited. What is clear is that  cancer patients are at increased risk for plaque disruption and arterial  thrombosis, which increases risk of both MI-CAD and MINOCA. Further studies to  advance the understanding of arterial thrombosis leading to MINOCA in cancer  patients is essential to optimize management and develop preventive strategies,  particularly in patients receiving thrombogenic anti-cancer therapies.

3.2 Epicardial Coronary Vasospasm
Coronary artery spasm (CAS) is an important cause of MINOCA, described in up to  46% of MINOCA patients. Intense CAS may be significant enough to impede  blood flow and cause myocardial ischemia. The diagnosis may be missed on coronary  angiography, as the spasm may resolve before the procedure. Vasospasm can occur  both in the absence or the presence of CAD, as atherosclerosis may precipitate  vasospasm. Definitive diagnosis requires provocative testing, the current  standard being high-dose intracoronary acetylcholine boluses followed by coronary  angiography. Although CAS may occur without apparent triggers, several  anti-cancer therapies have been well documented to induce infarction by  vasospasm.
The classic chemotherapies extensively described as inducing CAS are the  fluoropyrimidines 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and its oral prodrug, capecitabine. The  pathophysiology of 5-FU cardiotoxicity is multifactorial. Histology studies found  changes such as pan-cardiac inflammatory changes, coronary arterial spasm,  hemorrhagic infarction of ventricular walls, myocardial interstitial fibrosis,  disseminated myocardial necrosis, and coronary microthrombosis. These  changes were found to be dependent on treatment dose and schedule. Between  1–19% of patients receiving 5-FU develop chest pain attributed to CAS,  irrespective of pre-existing cardiovascular disease. This effect is  amplified in the setting of simultaneous administration of other chemotherapeutic  agents, especially leucovorin or cisplatin. The significant range may be  attributed to differences between administration methods, underlying CAD, or use  of other anti-cancer treatments. A prospective study on 102 unselected patients  treated with 5-FU were followed with ECG, echocardiography, and radionuclide  ventriculography at baseline and 3 months from starting 5-FU. Nineteen of the 102  patients developed severe chest pain, with EKG changes suggestive of myocardial  infarction. Six of them underwent coronary angiography. None of them were  found with significant CAD. The authors of these study report that cardiac  enzymes were measured initially negative in these patients. However, multiple  reports of troponin elevation with normal coronary angiography in patients  receiving 5-FU undergoing extensive cardiac assessment have been published  . A 2009 systematic review of fluoropyrimidine-associated cardiotoxicity  describes a 12% prevalence of increased cardiac enzymes. These findings are  consistent with MINOCA. Further angiographic data in patients with suspected 5-FU  or capecitabine cardiotoxicity are limited to individual case reports. These  reports consistently show the lack of significant coronary artery disease  . The mechanism best supported by both preclinical and clinical data  for these findings is CAS related to endothelial dysfunction. Although  inconsistently reported, CAS and brachial artery vasoconstriction have been  directly demonstrated during angiography. The risk of recurrence of such  ischemic events with 5-FU rechallenge is as high as 90%. This effect is  “cross-reactive” with cisplatin, although there have been reports of successful  capecitabine use following 5-FU cardiotoxicity. Therefore, special  considerations are needed when considering 5-FU rechallenge in patients with  5-FU-induced MINOCA via CAS. If no other anti-cancer regimen is reasonable,  several strategies may be attempted, such as bolus instead of 5-FU infusion  , or giving low-dose aspirin and a calcium-channel blocker and long-acting  nitrate at least 72 hours prior to 5-FU administration (although this approach is  mainly based on consensus rather than evidence-backed).
A number of different chemotherapies are also associated with CAS. Cisplatin has  been associated with numerous vascular toxicities. There are few reports of MI  with troponin measurements and documented coronary angiography following  cisplatin administration. These reports attributed the ischemic event to CAS  . Troponin elevation was inconsistently present, but coronary angiography  recurrently showed no significant CAD, consistent with MINOCA. Notably, one  report documented that acetylcholine provocation induced severe coronary  vasospasm associated with chest pain and significant ST elevation.  Cisplatin-induced MINOCA via CAS may occur early during the treatment regimen or  delayed for years after completing cisplatin treatment. Since cisplatin has  been associated with type 1 MI due to coronary thrombosis, angiographic  assessment (optimally invasive) is advised in patients treated with this agent  presenting with apparent ACS.
Vasospasm has been proposed as the underlying mechanism of taxane-induced ACS.  Paclitaxel is an antimicrotubule agent which has been linked with ACS, acute  heart failure, bradycardia, and cardiovascular mortality. Paclitaxel-induced  MI is a rare adverse event, estimated to occur in ~0.26% of  cases. There are several case reports of paclitaxel-induced MI, with  inconsistent troponin elevation, transient ST-elevation, demonstrated coronary  vasospasm, and both obstructive and non-obstructive CAD. The proposed  mechanism of taxane-induced vasospasm is reduced calcium release in the  sarcoplasmic reticulum.
Angiogenesis inhibition is currently expanding as a cancer treatment strategy.  Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors are increasingly being used  as part of this strategy. Physiologically, VEGF is essential to normal  endothelial function and maintaining hemostasis and thrombosis. Low levels  of VEGF have been associated with increased cardiovascular mortality in patients  with known or suspected CAD. VEGF inhibitors include the monoclonal  antibodies bevacizumab and regorafenib and the small molecule tyrosine kinase  inhibitors (TKIs) such as ponatinib, sorafenib, sunitinib, axitinib, and  pazopanib. Both bevacizumab and small molecule TKIs have been strongly associated  with arterial thrombotic events, however, only small molecule TKIs have been  found to also induce vasospasm. Data related to TKI-induced CAS is limited to  case reports. Troponin elevations in cases of non-obstructive CAD were  not consistently reported, making MINOCA an unclear entity related to TKIs  . In patients with known CAD, performing a stress test and treatment with  aspirin and a statin prior to and during TKI therapy is reasonable, as well as  treating with calcium channel blockers should vasospasm be identified.
More recently, proteasome inhibitors have been linked to CAS. Bortezomib  and carfilzomib are proteasome inhibitors used in the treatment of multiple  myeloma. Although these agents are strongly associated with acute heart failure  thus leading to MINOCA indirectly via type 2 MI, they have also been linked to  CAS. Murine studies on carfilzomib suggest that this agent impairs vasodilation  through an endothelium-dependent mechanism and increases the spasmogenic effect  of other agents. Bortezomib is another frequently used proteasome inhibitor  which has been shown to induce CAS in humans. Vasospasm was mainly  described in the left coronary system, most frequently in the left anterior  descending artery. Calcium channel blockade inconsistently improved symptoms and  recovery of cardiac function. In vitro, nifedipine was less effective  than nitroglycerin at inhibiting proteasome-inhibitor-induced vasospasm, which  suggest using nitrates in this setting as opposed to calcium channel blockers  .
Symptomatic CAS has also been reported in patients undergoing radiation therapy  (RT). Several mechanisms have been hypothesized for RT-induced CAS,  such as radiation-induced pericarditis and radiation-induced vasculitis or  arteritis. More recently, a direct effect of RT on vascular reactivity has  been described. RT impairs endothelium-dependent vasorelaxation by decreasing  nitric oxide availability, an effect which may persist for years.  RT-induced CAS appears to be refractory to vasodilators and may improve with  glucocorticoids.
CAS is one of the most common mechanisms of MINOCA in cancer patients. Although  most frequently precipitated by chemotherapy, chronic inflammation and oxidative  stress intrinsic to the cancer status predispose patients to this adverse event.  Troponin elevation may or may not occur in cases of chemotherapy-induced CAS and  vasospasm may not be directly identified on coronary angiography. However, MINOCA  in this setting should be recognized and prophylactic measures should be  implemented when agents known to cause CAS are being considered as part of cancer  therapy. Calcium channel blockers are first-line therapies, although not always  resolving symptoms or preventing recurrences. Further studies into the mechanisms  and effective prophylactic and therapeutic measures of CAS-induced MINOCA in  cancer patients are required.

3.3 Coronary Microvascular Dysfunction
The coronary microcirculation is not readily visualized on routine clinical  imaging modalities, despite accounting for 70% of coronary resistance in the  setting of no obstructive CAD. Coronary microvascular dysfunction (CMD) has  been described in 30–50% of cases presenting with chest discomfort and  non-obstructive CAD on coronary angiography. The criteria for microvascular  angina were standardized by the Coronary Vasomotion Disorders International Study  Group and they include: (1) symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischemia; (2)  objective evidence of myocardial ischemia; (3) absence of obstructive CAD by  angiography or FFR; (4) confirmation of reduced coronary blood flow reserve  and/or inducible microvascular spasm. Although microvascular angina is not  equivalent to MI, it may progress to MINOCA if undiagnosed and untreated. Only a  minority of patients with CMD will have regional wall motion abnormalities on  echocardiography, highlighting the need for multimodality imaging, with  cardiac PET playing a role in identifying these patients. CMD is a predictive  factor for other CVD, in particular heart failure with preserved ejection  fraction. CMD has also recently been associated with a two-fold increased risk of  developing solid-tumor cancer, suggesting the need for increased awareness of CMD  in cardio-oncology.
The mechanisms through which anti-cancer therapies cause CMD are similar to  those responsible for epicardial coronary disease with endothelial dysfunction  playing a central role, resulting from decreased nitric oxide production,  oxidative stress with release of reactive oxygen species, and increased  endothelin-1 and angiotensin II release and production. Other mechanisms that  also lead to CMD in cancer patients are atherosclerosis, thrombosis,  microvascular CAS, hormonal effects, and autonomic dysfunction. Anti-cancer  treatments have been shown to induce CMD via the above mechanisms.
VEGF inhibitors have been associated with arterial thrombotic events and CAS, as  mentioned above. The abnormal vasoreactivity triggered by these agents may be  even more significant on the coronary microcirculation than the epicardial  coronaries. Bevacizumab is a VEGF inhibitor used in multiple cancers. All  patients with known heart failure should undergo coronary angiography prior to  initiating bevacizumab to exclude CAD. The mechanism of CMD induced by VEGF  inhibitors is decreased nitric oxide production impairing endothelium-mediated  vasodilation and increased endothelin-1 and angiotensin II production  . Although bevacizumab cardiotoxicity is well-recognized and arterial  thrombotic events are a major concern, data on bevacizumab-induced MI are  scarce. Murine models showed a twofold increase in serum troponin levels in mice  following a 3-week treatment with bevacizumab, as well as evidence of myocardial  necrosis as early as 2 weeks of treatment. Human data on  bevacizumab-induced MINOCA is limited to case reports which also include coronary  angiography data. Although no mechanism has been clearly identified,  given the toxicity profile of bevacizumab, coronary microthrombosis is a  reasonable hypothesis as the underlying mechanism of these events, although  further studies are needed. Nicorandil, a vasodilator agent, was successfully  used to treat microvascular angina associated with bevacizumab.  Third-generation TKIs have been notoriously associated with rapidly-progressive  vasculopathy. Unique to sunitinib is the observation that in mice, it induced  rarefication of microvascular pericytes without changing capillary density, with  subsequent development of microvascular dysfunction and impaired coronary flow  reserve. Ponatinib has been shown to cause microvascular coronary  angiopathy by inducing von Willebrand factor-mediated platelet-endothelial  adhesion. Myocardial contrast echocardiography was used as a rapid bedside  diagnosis of coronary microvascular disease in cases of suspected  ponatinib-induced acute MI with elevated troponin.
Radiation-induced CAD (RI-CAD) is an important cause of morbidity in patients  who undergo RT with mediastinal involvement. The risk of CAD in such patients is  increased as much as 2.5 times compared to patients without radiation therapy  exposure. RT with incidental cardiac exposure can disrupt the capillary  endothelial structure and cause direct myocyte injury, leading to episodes of  ischemia, collagen deposition, and fibrosis. Biochemically, the result  is an increase in transforming growth factor-beta, which leads to a  pro-thrombotic and pro-inflammatory state which predisposes to accelerated  atherosclerosis. This effect may present even in the absence of prior CAD or  traditional cardiovascular risk factors, although the presence of these elements  shortens the time to the development of atherosclerosis. The dose of  radiation is linearly associated with the risk of RI-CAD. In  vitro, this effect was not augmented by trastuzumab, which may translate to the  use of trastuzumab without concern for microvascular dysfunction. The  evaluation of patients with RI-CAD is similar to ACS, however, in patients found  with non-obstructive CAD, further work-up with functional testing or cardiac MRI  is advised. If CMD is diagnosed, aggressive cardiovascular risk factor management  should be immediately started with close follow-up.
In addition to the VEGF inhibitors and RT, recently, doxorubicin has been shown  ex vivo to induce significant impairment of coronary arteriolar function in  vessel samples collected from adults undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass surgery  . Interestingly, this effect was insignificant in pediatric coronary  microcirculation.
Although there are few angiographic and serologic data regarding CMD as a cause  of MINOCA in cancer patients, by definition CMD is part of the MINOCA spectrum.  Doxorubicin, VEGF inhibitors, and RT are all associated with significant  morbidity related to CMD that may progress to overt MINOCA. Chest pain or anginal  equivalents should not be dismissed as non-cardiac in patients receiving these  therapies with unremarkable coronary angiography and microvascular angina should  be considered as a leading diagnosis.

3.4 Coronary Oxygen Supply-Demand Mismatch
According to the Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction, type 2 MI  (T2MI) is the result of myocardial oxygen supply-demand mismatch. In  patients diagnosed with MI, T2MI is up to 48% prevalent. In patients with  T2MI, MINOCA can be diagnosed when a plausible trigger for MI exists in the  absence of angiographic or imaging evidence that would suggest another diagnosis  . One of the most common causes of T2MI is tachyarrhythmia-associated acute  MI, with other potential causes being anemia, hypotension, or thyrotoxicosis  . Given the nature of malignant disease, these conditions are prevalent in  the cancer population, placing them at high risk for T2MI. However, there are few  data on cancer patients with T2MI, as invasive assessment is generally deferred  in comorbid patients with sufficient clinical evidence of a T2MI with low  suspicion of obstructive coronary disease. Cancer patients with T2MI have been  shown to have worse overall survival than those with type 1 MI, potentially  related to a higher burden of non-cardiac comorbidities, although etiologic  mortality data has not been reported. A retrospective cohort study from  the Mayo Clinic of patients with active hematologic malignancies diagnosed with  ACS found that 67% of studied patients who underwent coronary angiography had  T2MI, consistent with MINOCA. Only 17.5% of patients with NSTEMI in this study  underwent coronary angiography, with T2MI suspected in the majority of cases with  invasive work-up deferred. Differentiating clinically between T2MI, other  forms of cardiotoxicity, and the pure definition of MINOCA in cancer patients,  can be difficult and further research is needed regarding the optimal management  of these cases.

3.5 Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) is a nontraumatic,  nonatherosclerotic cause of ACS and sudden cardiac death. SCAD was thought  to be very rare, including in cancer patients, but recent efforts found a higher  prevalence than previously believed and provide a better understanding of this  clinical entity. SCAD has typically been described in middle aged women  (87–95% of SCAD), but it can occur anytime from late teens to the ninth decade  of life. The mechanism for acute MI in SCAD is the development of a  hematoma within the intima or between the intima and media, compressing the  coronary true lumen. The hematoma is thought to arise in two ways: an  endothelial-intimal disruption creates a “flap” through which blood can enter  the sub-intimal space—the “inside-out” hypothesis; and possible de novo  disruption of vasa vasorum in the media, causing a hematoma without any  communication with the true lumen—the “outside-in” hypothesis. SCAD  can lead to MINOCA in cases where the false lumen is nonobstructive or in acute  intracoronary thrombosis in the absence of prior significant atherosclerotic  disease. SCAD may require intracoronary imaging techniques for definitive  diagnosis. The mechanism of SCAD is unclear, but thought to be due to an  intrinsic vascular vulnerability superimposed with an acute catecholamine surge  (i.e., emotional stress, physical activity, medications). SCAD seems to  occur independently of atherosclerosis, not being associated with conventional  cardiac risk factors. SCAD has been reported to have various triggers, some  of which are not usually associated with acute MI, such as emotional or physical  stress.
There are few case reports of SCAD occurring in cancer patients undergoing  chemotherapy with 5-FU and/or cisplatin, bone marrow transplant for  chronic lymphocytic leukemia, and in patients without active cancer  treatment. None of these patients had significant atherosclerotic disease  on coronary angiography. Because of the overwhelming majority of SCAD cases  presenting in women, sex hormones have been studied to assess any pathogenic  mechanism. It is unclear what this mechanism is or if sex hormones are involved,  as SCAD can occur in pregnant, postpartum, nulliparous, multiparous, and  post-menopausal women, and contraceptive and postmenopausal hormone use  are similar to general population. There have been no studies regarding  the relationship between hormone-altering cancer therapies (e.g., in breast,  endometrial, testicular, or prostate cancers) and SCAD. There are no reports of  intracoronary imaging used in cancer patients with SCAD, so it is reasonable to  hypothesize that there are a number of MINOCA cases caused by SCAD that remain  undiagnosed. Thorough intracoronary imaging should be considered in suspected  cases of MINOCA.

3.6 Special Considerations: Extrinsic Coronary Compression,  Takotsubo Syndrome, Myocarditis
In addition to the above specific causes of myocardial ischemia, in cancer  patients, several special considerations should be noted.
Patients with intrathoracic masses are at risk for acute MI from extrinsic  coronary compression. Although this etiology hasn’t been proposed as a cause of  MINOCA in societal guidelines, it may conform to the definition of MINOCA. Both  primary and metastatic tumors and both cardiac and extracardiac masses may  compress on any coronary artery. Small epicardial branches have been more  frequently involved, although there have also been reports of left main and  proximal left anterior descending artery involvement. Patients may  present with both STEMI and non-STEMI and may be found with both angiographically  significant and non-significant stenoses. Coronary angiography may show  completely normal coronaries in young patients, leading to suspicion of CAS as  the etiology of MINOCA. However, further testing with intracoronary imaging,  cardiac CT, or CMR may be warranted, particularly in young patients with clear  MINOCA and otherwise no cardiovascular history or risk factors, which may reveal  intramyocardial metastases of mediastinal tumors. Cardiac primary tumors or  extracardiac malignancies with secondary cardiac determination with or without  coronary compression have abnormal cardiac biomarkers, ECG, and should be  differentiated from other causes of ACS and MINOCA.
Special situations worth noting in cardio-oncology patients are TTS and  myocarditis. Although these syndromes are no longer considered MINOCA per the  most recent societal documents, TTS and myocarditis have a high prevalence and  unique triggers in cardio-oncology patients, making them worth noting as causes  of ischemia-like presentations with no obstructive coronary disease. In fact, as  much as 20% of cancer patients presenting with suspicion of non-STEMI are  ultimately diagnosed with TTS and up to 30% of patients initially diagnosed with  MINOCA based on coronary angiography are ultimately found with myocarditis  following advanced non-invasive imaging. The exact pathogenic mechanism  of TTS is still unknown and may in fact be related to other causes of MINOCA,  such as CAS and CMD. Emotional stress related to the cancer diagnosis and  treatment, the pro-inflammatory state of malignancy, and chemoradiation may all  precipitate TTS. Numerous classes of chemotherapeutic agents have been  recognized as triggering TTS and myocarditis, including novel immunotherapies  such as lenalidomide and immune checkpoint inhibitors. Patients  treated with these agents may be misdiagnosed as having MINOCA while they have an  unrecognized myocarditis. There are no prospective clinical trial data to guide  management of cancer-related TTS or myocarditis. TTS is generally treated with  guideline-directed medical therapy for heart failure with reduced ejection  fraction regardless of apparent trigger, although outcome data does not show a  clear benefit of any regimen. Distinguishing between MINOCA and  cardiomyopathies or inflammatory syndromes such as myocarditis can be difficult  and more investigation is required to determine optimal management.

4. Conclusions
Ischemic assessment in cancer should involve troponin assessment in combination  with other cardiac biomarkers and novel imaging modalities given the complex and  heterogeneous pathophysiology of cancer. MI-CAD and MINOCA in cardio-oncology  patients have unique triggers, each portending different management strategies  and prognoses. Multiple chemotherapeutic regimens may trigger MI, with the main  mechanisms being coronary thrombosis, CAS, and CMD. Although further studies are  needed in investigating the mechanisms of MI for individual cancer treatments,  integrating the term MINOCA in classifying forms of cardiotoxicity may be useful  throughout the diagnostic process. Historically the original “type I/type II”  cardiotoxicity paradigm was used to define major types of cardiotoxicity  but was oversimplified and primarily focused on the mechanisms of cardiotoxicity  of anthracyclines and anti-HER2 treatments. However, as previously outlined in  this review, there are both historical and novel cancer treatments that may  induce MINOCA-like states which raises the potential applicability of this term  as a form of cardiotoxicity. Further study of mechanisms and noninvasive and  invasive diagnostic strategies are needed to further understand the unique  mechanistic aspects of MINOCA syndromes in specific cancer treatments and/or  biology. The diagnosis of MINOCA implies the presence of true myocardial ischemia  and causes of non-ischemic myocardial injury should be excluded. The dynamics of  cardiac biomarkers, intracoronary imaging, and multimodality imaging should be  considered as part of comprehensive cardiovascular work-up in cancer patients  presenting with ACS and non-obstructive CAD on coronary angiography.
Publisher’s Note: IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, DVB and IH. Methodology, DVB, RB, TD, EHY, PP, CI, JH, and  IH. Resources, DVB, RB, TD, and IH. Writing-original draft preparation, DVB, RB,  and TD. Writing-review and editing, DVB, RB, TD, EHY, PP, CI, JH, and IH.  Figures, DVB and TD. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of  the manuscript.

Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Funding
This research received no external funding.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
Percutaneous coronary intervention in cancer patients: a report of the prevalence and outcomes in the United States
Cardiovascular biomarkers in patients with cancer and their association with all-cause mortality
Coronary artery disease, left ventricular function and cardiac biomarkers determine all-cause mortality in cancer patients-a large monocenter cohort study
Presentation, Clinical Profile, and Prognosis of Young Patients with Myocardial Infarction with Nonobstructive Coronary Arteries (MINOCA): Results from the VIRGO Study
Characteristics of patients with myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA) from the ARIAM-SEMICYUC registry: development of a score for predicting MINOCA
Previously diagnosed cancer and mortality after ST-segment elevation acute myocardial infarction treated with primary angioplasty
Cardiac Interventional Procedures in Cardio-Oncology Patients
Stress-Induced Cardiomyopathy in Cancer Patients
Ischemic Heart Disease: Special Considerations in Cardio-Oncology
Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection: Current State of the Science: a Scientific Statement from the American Heart Association
Vascular Toxicities of Cancer Therapies: The Old and the New–An Evolving Avenue
Contemporary Diagnosis and Management of Patients with Myocardial Infarction in the Absence of Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease: a Scientific Statement from the American Heart Association
Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction (2018)
2020 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation: The Task Force for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)
Myocardial infarction with angiographically normal coronary arteries
Does Routine Pressure Wire Assessment Influence Management Strategy at Coronary Angiography for Diagnosis of Chest Pain?: the RIPCORD study
Does Physiology Trump Anatomy as the “Best Course” to Guide PCI Decision Making and Outcomes
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in immune checkpoint inhibitor-associated myocarditis
Systematic Review of Patients Presenting with Suspected Myocardial Infarction and Nonobstructive Coronary Arteries
Acute stress-induced (takotsubo) cardiomyopathy
Interventional Cardio-Oncology: Adding a New Dimension to the Cardio-Oncology Field
Takotsubo Stress Cardiomyopathy: ”Good News” in Cancer Patients
Myocarditis in the Setting of Cancer Therapeutics: Proposed Case Definitions for Emerging Clinical Syndromes in Cardio-Oncology
Cancer and Its Association With the Development of Coronary Artery Calcification: An Assessment From the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis
Cardiovascular Health of Patients with Cancer and Cancer Survivors: A Roadmap to the Next Level
Risk of cardiovascular disease among Nordic childhood cancer survivors with diabetes mellitus: a report from adult life after childhood cancer in Scandinavia
Arterial events in cancer patients—the case of acute coronary thrombosis
Cancer as a Risk Factor for Cardiovascular Disease
Optimal management of cancer patients with acute coronary syndrome
Acute myocardial infarction with no obstructive coronary atherosclerosis: mechanisms and management
Mechanisms of Myocardial Infarction in Patients with Nonobstructive Coronary Artery Disease: Results From the Optical Coherence Tomography Study
Reassessing the Mechanisms of Acute Coronary Syndromes
Cancer-Associated Thrombosis: An Overview of Mechanisms, Risk Factors, and Treatment
Risk of Arterial Thromboembolism in Patients with Cancer
Platelets and Cancer-Associated Thrombosis
Effects of Cancer on Platelets
Role of platelets in cancer and cancer-associated thrombosis: Experimental and clinical evidences
NETosis: a new factor in tumor progression and cancer-associated thrombosis
NETosis promotes cancer-associated arterial microthrombosis presenting as ischemic stroke with troponin elevation
Safety of Diagnostic and Therapeutic Cardiac Catheterization in Cancer Patients With Acute Coronary Syndrome and Chronic Thrombocytopenia
Arterial thrombosis and cancer
Cardiovascular diseases related to ionizing radiation: the risk of low-dose exposure (Review)
Cardiac Sudden Death as a Result of Acute Coronary Artery Thrombosis during Chemotherapy for Testicular Carcinoma
Comprehensive Characterization of the Vascular Effects of Cisplatin-Based Chemotherapy in Patients with Testicular Cancer
Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction with Non-significant Coronary Artery Disease as a Symptom of Occult or New Malignancy
A Cancer Paradox: Machine-Learning Backed Propensity-Score Analysis of Coronary Angiography Findings in Cardio-Oncology
Acute Coronary Syndrome with Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors: a Proof-of-Concept Case and Pharmacovigilance Analysis of a Life-Threatening Adverse Event
Acute coronary syndrome as a possible immune-related adverse event in a lung cancer patient achieving a complete response to anti-PD-1 immune checkpoint antibody
Possible Precipitation of Acute Coronary Syndrome with Immune Checkpoint Blockade: A Case Report
Acute vascular events as a possibly related adverse event of immunotherapy: a single-institute retrospective study
Venous and arterial thromboembolic events with immune checkpoint inhibitors: a systematic review
Immune checkpoint inhibition alters the inflammatory cell composition of human coronary artery atherosclerosis
Clonal Hematopoiesis and Risk of Atherosclerotic Cardiovascular Disease
The genetics of myelodysplastic syndrome: from clonal haematopoiesis to secondary leukaemia
Patients with acute myocardial infarction and non-obstructive coronary arteries: safety and prognostic relevance of invasive coronary provocative tests
Spasm of the Coronary Arteries: Causes and Consequences (the Scientist’s Viewpoint)
Cardiac lesions induced by 5-fluorouracil in the rabbit
5-fluorouracil induced cardiotoxicity in albino rats
Symptomatic cardiotoxicity associated with 5-fluorouracil
5-Fluorouracil induces arterial vasocontractions
Fluorouracil Induces Myocardial Ischemia with Increases of Plasma Brain Natriuretic Peptide and Lactic Acid but without Dysfunction of Left Ventricle
Fluoropyrimidine-associated cardiotoxicity: revisited
Cardiotoxicity of de Gramont’s regimen: incidence, clinical characteristics and long-term follow-up
Cardiotoxicity in cancer patients treated with 5-fluorouracil or capecitabine: a systematic review of incidence, manifestations and predisposing factors
High Incidence of Angina pectoris in Patients Treated with 5-Fluorouracil. A planned surveillance study with 102 patients
5-Fluorouracil-Induced Coronary Vasospasm
5-FU induced cardiotoxicity: case series and review of the literature
A Case of Severe Coronary Spasm Associated with 5-Fluorouracil Chemotherapy
Capecitabine may induce coronary artery vasospasm
Angina Induced by 5-Fluorouracil Infusion in a Patient with Normal Coronaries
Cardiotoxicity of 5-Fluorouracil
Acute chest pain in a patient treated with capecitabine
5-fluorouracil and cardiotoxicity: a review
The spectrum of 5-fluorouracil cardiotoxicity
Coronary artery spasm induced by 5-fluorouracil
Pericardial Disease in Cancer Patients
Cardiotoxicity of high-dose continuous infusion fluorouracil: a prospective clinical study
Paradoxical effect of capecitabine in 5-fluorouracil-induced cardiotoxicity: a case vignette and literature review
Fluoropyrimidine-induced cardiac toxicity: challenging the current paradigm
Cardiotoxicity of fluoropyrimidines in different schedules of administration: a prospective study
Failure of oral nitrate and calcium channel blocker therapy to prevent 5-fluorouracil-related myocardial ischemia: a case report
Coronary vasospasm induced by cisplatin for seminoma
Cisplatin Induced Acute Myocardial Infarction and Dyslipidemia
A rare case of cisplatin-induced acute myocardial infarction in a patient receiving chemoradiation for lung cancer
Vasospastic Angina Likely Related to Cisplatin-containing Chemotherapy and Thoracic Irradiation for Lung Cancer
Acute vascular toxicity after combination chemotherapy with cisplatin, vinblastine, and bleomycin for testicular cancer
Chemotherapeutic Agents and the Risk of Ischemia and Arterial Thrombosis
Acute non-ST elevation myocardial infarction following paclitaxel administration for ovarian carcinoma: a case report and review of literature
Paclitaxel-induced ST-Segment Elevations
Paclitaxel Induced Acute ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction: A Rare Case Report
Taxol: a Unique Antineoplastic Agent with Significant Activity in Advanced Ovarian Epithelial Neoplasms
VEGF-C and Mortality in Patients With Suspected or Known Coronary Artery Disease
Serum VEGF: Diagnostic Value of Acute Coronary Syndrome from Stable Angina Pectoris and Prognostic Value of Coronary Artery Disease
Fulminant Vascular and Cardiac Toxicity Associated with Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor Sorafenib
Coronary artery spasms due to tyrosine kinase inhibitors used in chronic myeloid leukemia
Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitor-Associated Cardiovascular Toxicity in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
Cardiotoxicity with vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor therapy
Spasmogenic Effects of the Proteasome Inhibitor Carfilzomib on Coronary Resistance, Vascular Tone and Reactivity
Ischemic heart disease associated with bortezomib treatment combined with dexamethasone in a patient with multiple myeloma
Coronary spastic angina in a multiple myeloma patient treated with bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone
Symptomatic Coronary Artery Spasm Following Radiotherapy for Hodgkin’s Disease
Acute myocardial infarction with normal coronary arteriogram after mantle field radiation therapy for Hodgkin’s disease
Vascular toxic effects of cancer therapies
Mechanisms of endothelial dysfunction after ionized radiation: selective impairment of the nitric oxide component of endothelium-dependent vasodilation
Preferential Impairment of Nitric Oxide-Mediated Endothelium-Dependent Relaxation in Human Cervical Arteries after Irradiation
Effects of Radiation Therapy on Vascular Responsiveness
Advances in Coronary Microvascular Dysfunction
International standardization of diagnostic criteria for microvascular angina
Assessment of peripheral endothelial function predicts future risk of solid-tumor cancer
Coronary microvascular dysfunction in the clinical setting: from mystery to reality
Cancer therapy and cardiovascular risk: focus on bevacizumab
Angiogenic growth factors and hypertension
Mechanisms of adverse effects of anti-VEGF therapy for cancer
Cardiovascular Adverse Events in Patients with Cancer Treated with Bevacizumab: a Meta-Analysis of more than 20 000 Patients
Dual Targeting of Tumor Angiogenesis and Chemotherapy by Endostatin-Cytosine Deaminase-Uracil Phosphoribosyltransferase
The utility of cardiac biomarkers and echocardiography for the early detection of bevacizumab- and sunitinib-mediated cardiotoxicity
Bevacizumab: a Rare Cause of Nonischemic Cardiomyopathy
Bevacizumab-Related Microvascular Angina and its Management with Nicorandil
Coronary Microvascular Pericytes are the Cellular Target of Sunitinib Malate–Induced Cardiotoxicity
Thrombotic microangiopathy as a cause of cardiovascular toxicity from the BCR-ABL1 tyrosine kinase inhibitor ponatinib
Ponatinib coronary microangiopathy: novel bedside diagnostic approach and management with N-acetylcysteine
Relation of coronary artery calcium score to premature coronary artery disease in survivors >15 years of Hodgkin’s lymphoma
The unique physiology of endothelial cells and its implications in radiobiology
Heart irradiation reduces microvascular density and accumulation of HSPA1 in mice
The synergism of x-irradiation and cholesterol-fat feeding on the development of coronary artery lesions
Risk of ischemic heart disease in women after radiotherapy for breast cancer
Radiation- and anthracycline-induced cardiac toxicity and the influence of ErbB2 blocking agents
Detrimental effects of chemotherapy on human coronary microvascular function
Supply/Demand Type 2 Myocardial Infarction: should we be paying more attention
Effect of Definition on Incidence and Prognosis of Type 2 Myocardial Infarction
Acute myocardial infarction in a high-risk cancer population: Outcomes following conservative versus invasive management
Differences in Short- and Long-Term Outcomes among Older Patients with ST-Elevation Versus Non-ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction with Angiographically Proven Coronary Artery Disease
Acute coronary syndromes in patients with active hematologic malignancies - Incidence, management, and outcomes
Contemporary Review on Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection
Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection: JACC State-of-the-Art Review
Early Natural History of Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection
Non-atherosclerotic causes of acute coronary syndromes
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection diagnosed by intravascular ultrasound and followed up by cardiac computed tomography
Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection: association with predisposing arteriopathies and precipitating stressors and cardiovascular outcomes
Conditions and Factors Associated with Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection (from a National Population-Based Cohort Study)
Clinical Features, Management, and Prognosis of Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection
Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection in a Woman Receiving 5-Fluorouracil–a case report
Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection Associated with Anal Cancer Management with Fluorouracil and Radiotherapy
An unusual case of chronic coronary artery dissection: did cisplatin play a role
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection during hematopoietic stem cell infusion
Multiple spontaneous coronary artery dissection associated with Trousseau’s syndrome
Prevalence and Clinical Factors of Migraine in Patients with Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection
Canadian spontaneous coronary artery dissection cohort study: in-hospital and 30-day outcomes
Current contraceptive status among women aged 15–49: United States, 2015–2017
A Sustained Decline in Postmenopausal Hormone Use: results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1999–2010
External compression by metastatic squamous cell carcinoma: a rare cause of left main coronary artery narrowing
An Unusual Cause of Acute Myocardial Infarction Caused by a Large Pulmonary Artery Intimal Sarcoma
A rare cause of myocardial infarction with non-obstructive coronary arteries-case report of ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction caused by a mediastinal mass
Cardiac compression causing fatal acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
Myocarditis or “true” infarction by cardiac magnetic resonance in patients with a clinical diagnosis of myocardial infarction without obstructive coronary disease: a meta-analysis of individual patient data
Takotsubo cardiomyopathy in cancer patients
What is/are the trigger(s) of takotsubo syndrome in cancer patients receiving chemotherapy
Takotsubo syndrome in patients with cancer treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors: a new adverse cardiac complication
Lenalidomide-induced focal myocarditis mimicking acute ST segment elevation myocardial infarction
Lenalidomide-Induced Myocarditis, Rare But Possibly Fatal Toxicity of a Commonly Used Immunotherapy
Chronic pharmacological treatment in takotsubo cardiomyopathy
Type II chemotherapy-related cardiac dysfunction: time to recognize a new entity