Protein and polysaccharide edible coatings: A promising approach for fruits preservation - recent advances
Biodegradable packaging, especially edible coatings (EC) for fruit preservation, is a sustainable and eco-friendly approach. ECs, such as polysaccharides and proteins, are widely used in fruit preservation, with a preference for polysaccharides in coating studies. Fundamental EC properties include barrier properties, tensile strength, elongation at break, and UV blocking. Extra materials such as antimicrobial agents, antioxidants, anti-browning agents, and antagonistic microorganisms enhance EC benefits. ECs impact fruit metabolism by reducing malondialdehyde production and enhancing the activities of key enzymes. However, extra materials at high concentrations affect the bonding network of the EC and weaken its structure. Therefore, selecting an appropriate concentration of extra materials is crucial to ensure adequate preservation and safety without affecting sensory properties. Combining coating materials and extra materials to reduce fruit metabolism, maintain fruit quality, inhibit damage pathogens, prevent browning, and provide antioxidants would be an excellent way to promote the green potential of fruit preservation approaches.
Graphical abstract
Highlights
Edible coatings (EC) made from protein and polysaccharides are a sustainable approach.
EC has properties that slow down the metabolism of fruits during storage.
Extra materials (essential oils, nanoparticles, etc.) are necessary for EC.
EC extends the shelf life of fruit without affecting sensory quality.
Appropriate EC materials based on the fruit type and preservation goal.

Introduction
Global fruit production has been increasing due to rising demand, improved living standards, and increased health awareness regarding fruit consumption. According to the reports, global fruit production grew by 55 % between 2000 and 2020, reaching 910 million tonnes in 2021. However, postharvest losses lead to reduced quantity and quality of fruits after harvest, posing a severe challenge. Post-harvest fruit losses can occur due to various factors, such as mishandling, lack of pre-cooling, improper storage temperature control, and microbial pathogens. Therefore, reducing post-harvest losses becomes an urgent concern that needs attention. The approach to preserving fruit by slowing down the internal metabolism and limiting the penetration of external agents through the use of packaging demonstrates a practical approach. Materials for fruit packing are diverse and divided into two main groups, including biodegradable and non-biodegradable. Non-biodegradable packaging, made of plastics and chemicals, is commonly used today. On the other hand, biodegradable packaging materials offer advantages over synthetic plastics, including biodegradability, compostability, and renewable resources. Besides, non-biodegradable packaging can cause significant environmental damage, threatening the environment and living beings. Therefore, biodegradable packaging, especially edible coatings (EC) in fruit preservation, is considered a sustainable green approach receiving much attention. Based on the total effect (substitution effect and income effect) of the shift from synthetic packaged food to edible packaged food, indicated consumer preference for edible packaged food over synthetic packaged food. The edible coating would slow down ethylene production and the ripening process, reduce spoilage and weight loss, lower respiration, and delay a reduction in hardness, ultimately leading to an extension of fruit shelf life. It has also been demonstrated that using an edible coating does not affect the sensory quality of the fruit and has no toxic effects. Besides, edible coatings can be applied to a wider variety of fruits than plastic films, especially for ready-to-eat or fresh-cut fruits, increasing preservation efficiency and allowing for direct consumption without affecting the sensory characteristics.
The components of an edible coating are diverse, including polysaccharides, proteins, etc. Extra materials, such as antagonistic microorganisms, essential oils, nanoparticles, plant extract, etc., could also inhibit or compete with microbial pathogens or maintain the fruit quality to enhance preservation efficiency. In fruit preservation, the storage efficiency depends on the interaction of the main components, extra materials, type of fruits, and their ability to adhere to the fruit surface. Besides, the combination of edible coating components affects mechanical properties, barrier function, optical properties, UV blocking ability, antimicrobial properties, antioxidant properties, etc. Therefore, selecting coating and supplement components is crucial in determining fruit preservation's effectiveness. This review focuses on the use of edible coatings for fruit preservation. It covers EC components, EC properties, the mechanism of EC on fruit preservation efficiency, and the potential fruit preservation approach.

Edible Coating Components

Main materials of edible coating
Component of edible coatings for fruit preservation.
Fig. 1
After treatment, the EC becomes a part of the fruit and could be eaten. Therefore, the coating material must be non-toxic, safe for health, extend the fruit's shelf life, and not affect its sensory properties. ECs, including polysaccharides, proteins, etc. (Fig. 1), are extensively used for fruit preservation, with polysaccharides particularly favored for coating applications. Polysaccharides, including alginate, aloe vera, carrageenan, dextrin, guar gum, gum Arabic, pectin, chitosan, starch (; ), carboxymethyl cellulose, soybean polysaccharide, etc., were used as the main compounds of EC for fruit preservation.
Edible coating application for fruit preservation.
Table. 1
Main componentsApproach	Extra materials	Type of fruitStorage condition	Outcome	References	 	Whole fruit	 	Alginate (1 % w/v)Immersion approach	Rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum L.) (5 % v/v)	Peach fruitsRoom temperature	Limits the rate of spoilage caused by Penicillium expansumMaintains firmness and soluble solids contentReduce respirationReduce weight lossSlows down polyphenol oxidase activity		 	Alginate (2 % w/v)Spray	Lemongrass oil (1.25 % w/w)	‘Rocha’ pear0 °C and 90–95 % RH	Reduce decay and color changeMaintains firmness		 	AlginateImmersion approach	Titanium dioxideMousami peel extract	Peach fruit7 days at room temperature	Reduced weight loss and firmness loss.Inhibit yeast and moldThe coatings also positively affected several quality tributes, such as color index, pH, TSS, and titratable acidity.		 	Alginate/chitosanlayer-by-layer approach	NS	StrawberriesRoom temperature for 5 days	Decreased consumption of total soluble solids.Delayed accumulation of malondialdehydeReduced weight loss.Preservation of antioxidant capacity.		 	Aloe vera gelChitosanImmersion approach	Mentha piperita L.Satureja montana L.Thymus vulgaris L.	Sweet cherries2 ± 1 °C and 95 % relative humidity	Delaying ripening index.Improving antioxidant activity.Reducing weight loss and firmness loss.		 	Carboxymethyl cellulose (1.5 % w/v)Hand brushing	Morus alba root extracts 1.5 % (w/v)	Banana13 ± 2 °C40 % RH	Delayed changes in colors, polyphenol oxidase activity, browning index, and visual quality levels.		 	Carboxymethyl cellulose and cellulose nanofibersImmersion approach	Mandarin oil	Strawberries5 °C and 85 ± 5 % RH	Controlling weight loss and antifungal activity.Reducing the degradation of fruit quality.Mandarin oil significantly affected the properties of coating solutions and the film characteristics.		 	Carboxymethyl cellulose (1.5 % w/v)Immersion approach	thyme, clove, and cardamom	Kiwi fruit10 ± 2 °Cfor 30 days	Reduction of 58.23 % in bacterial count compared to the control group. After 30 days of kiwifruit storage at 10 °C		 	Carboxymethyl cellulose (2 % w/v) and chitosan (1.5 % w/v)Immersion approach	Oxalic acidMalic acid	Pomegranate fruit2 °C, and 80–90 % RH for 120 days	Decreased chilling injuryReduced electrolyte leakage, malondialdehyde, and hydrogen peroxide.Total phenolic content, antioxidant activity, and catalase activity were higher in treated than control fruit during storage.		 	Carboxymethyl chitosan-gelatinImmersion approach	Calcium chloride and/or ascorbic acid	Sweet cherries0 °C for 30 days	Decreased fruit decay ratio, weight loss, respiration rate, and pedicel browning incidence;Delayed the increase of soluble solids content/ titratable acidity.Maintained high fruit firmness, pedicel moisture content, and antioxidant activity.		 	Chitosan 1 % (w/v)Immersion approach	Ascorbic acid 1 %	Strawberry4 °C and 85 % RH 15 days.	Reducing cell wall degrading enzymes.Maintained fruit quality by conserving higher total soluble solids, titratable acidity, ascorbic acid content, total phenolic,s and antioxidant activityDelayed fruit softening.		 	Chitosan	1-Methylcyclopropene	Passion fruit4 °C for 25 days	Inhibited the peroxidase and ascorbate peroxidase activity.Reduced the weight loss rate, shrinkage index, and respiratory rate.		 	Chitosan nanoemulsionImmersion approach	Angelica archangelica essential oil	Table grape25 ± 2 °C for 30 days	Prevented contamination of B. cinerea and maintained the quality attributes of table grape fruit, including weight, titrable acidity, total soluble solids, phenolic content, and pH during storage.		 	Chitosan 1 % w/vImmersion approach	Ascorbic acid 1 % w/v	Custard apple (Annona squamosa)15 ± 1 °C for 12 days	Delay the decrease of firmness, appearance deterioration, weight loss, and accumulation of malondialdehyde content.Regulating the activities of cell wall degrading enzymes and their gene expression levels.		 	ChitosanImmersion approach	Iturin	Mangoes12 °C for 20 days	Improved disease control, respiratory rate, weight loss, total soluble solids, titratable acidity, and fruit firmness maintenance during storage.		 	ChitosanSpray approach	Lignocellulosic nanofibers, and raspberry leafextract	Strawberry5 ± 1 °C for 16 days	Reducing size loss during storage.Controlling fungal development.		 	Chitosan 1.5 %Functionalized cellulose nanofiber 1.5 %Immersion approach	NS	Kiwi fruit10 °C for 10 days	Reduced mass loss, firmness loss, respiration rate, and microbial count.		 	Chitosan Dialdehyde celluloseImmersion approach	NS	Mandarin fruits23 °C for 18 days	Maintained the firmness of fruits.Reduced the respiration rate, weight loss speed, and accumulative decay rate.		 	GelatinImmersion approach	Argentine propolis ethanolic extract	Raspberries5 °C for 11 days	Exhibited antifungal properties.Reduced disease incidence during storage.		 	Gelatin 5 % (w/v)Immersion approach	Lactobacillus rhamnosus(11 LogCFU/g)	Strawberries4 °C for 16 days	Better Strawberries appearance.Reduced fungal growth and aerobic mesophilic counts during storage.Reduced spoilage.		 	Gum ArabicBrushing approach	Cinnamic acid	Mango12 ± 1 °C for 28 days (RH of 85–90 %)	Maintained higher firmness, total flavonoid content, and total carotenoid content.Retained the higher sensory quality of mango fruit.Suppressed activities of polygalacturonase, cellulase, and pectin methyl esterase (PME) in stored fruits.		 	Hydroxypropyl methylcelluloseChitosanLayer – by – layer approach	NS	Tangerine fruit20 ± 2 °C and 50 % RH for 15 days	Maintained the firmness and nutrient content of the fruits.Slowed down the decay of tangerine fruits during storage.		 	Lima bean starchDipping, spraying, and brushing approaches		Sapota fruits28 ± 2 °C or3 ± 1 °C	Dipping approach exhibited better physicochemical analysis.Reduced the weight loss rate.		 	Pectin (3 % w/v)Immersion approach	Lemon oil (2 % v/v)Reuterin (10 mM)	Strawberriesat 4 °C for 31 days	Exhibited a redder color fruit.Higher moisture content.Reduced viable Penicillium spp.		 	PectinImmersion approach	Nisin	‘Guiqi’ mango fruit25 ± 2 °C, 85 ± 2 % RH for 8 days	Inhibit the activity of polygalacturonase, β-galactosidase, and cellulase.Delaying down the microbial-induced rotting process.		 	Quaternized chitosanSpray approach	Konjac glucomannan	Banana25 °C and 50 % RH for 10 days	Delay fruit hardness.Reduce weight loss.Reduce the oxygen permeability.		 	ShellacImmersion approach	Tannic acid	Mangoes Room temperature for 10 days	Improvement of physical properties and chemical qualities.Improved overall quality of mangoes.Maintaining of tissue firmness.Reduced lipid peroxidation.Slowing down of respiration rate.Suppression of browning.		 	Soluble soybean polysaccharide: carboxymethyl chitosan (1:1)Immersion approach	Lavender oil 1.0 (wt%)	Banana25 ± 2 °C 56 ± 2 % RH for 9 days	Delayed banana peel browning process.Increased antioxidant and antibacterial properties.Improved water vapor barrier and UV barrier.		 	Fresh-cut fruit	 	AlginateImmersion approach	Clove essential oil nanoemulsion	Freshly cut apple4 °C for 14 days90 % RH	Extended the shelf life of fruits.Inhibiting microbial growth.Protecting against physical damage.Reducing moisture loss.		 	AlginateDipping approach	Oregano essential oil	fresh-cut papaya4 ± 1 °C for 20 days	Retain the sensory scores till day 16 of analysis.Retarding the degradation rate of physicochemical properties.		 	Carboxymethyl celluloseImmersion approach	Seabuckthorn leaf extract	fresh cut “Maharaji” apple4 °C for 10 days	Inhibiting the polyphenol enzyme activityReducing the microbial spoilageExtended the shelf life of fresh cut fruit	Rather et al., 2023	 	Carboxymethyl cellulose and sodium alginateLayer-by-layer approach	Oxalic and citric acid	Pear fruit2 ± 0.5 °C and 90 % RH for 10 days	Enhance the activities of key enzymes, including superoxide dismutase and catalase.Inhibit physiological decay.		 	Chitosan, pullulan, linseed, nopal cactus and aloemucilageLayer-by-layer approach	NS	fresh-cut pineapple4 °C for 18 days	Improve the firmness.Reduced weight loss.Inhibited microbial growth.Without affecting sensory characteristics.		 	ChitosanImmersion	AgNPs	Fresh-cut melon5 °C (90–95 % RH)	Not affect fresh-cut melon's quality, including sugars, organic acids, and vitamin C.		 	Chitosan–citric acidImmersion approach	NS	Fresh-cut guava24 °C and 4 °C for 7 and 14 days	Antifungal activity against Colletotrichum gloeosporioides.Maintaining quality parameters (pH, soluble solids, total sugar, etc.) during storage.Preserving their sensorial characteristics.		 	Citrus pectinImmersion approach	Oregano essential oil	Fresh-cut applesat room temperature for 5 days	Exhibited significant antioxidant, antibacterial, and antifungal properties.Retention of freshness and color.		 	Gum ArabicDipping approach	Aqueous extracts of Syzygium aqueum, Diploglottis bracteata, and Tasmannia lanceolata	Fresh-cut red capsicum4 °C for 16 days	Inhibited microbial growth.Maintained a low bacterial load led to positive liking scores for appearance, aroma, and flavor.Enhanced the overall sensory experience of the capsicum.		 	PectinNS	Quercetin	Fresh-cut apples4 °C for 15 days	Enhanced antimicrobial activity against S. aureus and L. monocytogenes.Extended the shelf life of fresh-cut apples while maintaining good commercial quality.
NS: not showed; RH: relative humidity; AgNPs: silver nanoparticles.
Chitosan is among the most extensively researched materials for edible coatings derived from polysaccharides. The EC made from chitosan has been shown to preserve numerous types of fruit such as strawberries effectively, mangoes, passion, table grape, custard apple, banana, fresh-cut melon, fresh-cut guava, mandarin fruit, etc., (Table 1). Besides, ECs derived from starch have gained significant attention due to their various sources. These sources include lima bean seeds and pods, corn starch, cassava starch, rice starch, chayotextle starch, and soybean starch, banana pseudostem starch, jackfruit seed starch. These starches have been proven to enhance the shelf life and preserve the quality of fruits such as sapota, cashew apples, blackberry, strawberry and fresh-cut apples, plum, guavas, sapota, apples and mangoes, white grapes, etc., In addition, the use of protein sources as ECs for preserving fruit is also quite diverse. These sources include gelatin, soybean protein isolate, and whey protein.
The preservation efficiency of EC has significantly enhanced the shelf life of fruits. However, each film has its own drawbacks that require improvement. Therefore, the combination of edible coating components is being considered as a potential approach to overcome the shortcomings of coatings. Studies on the combination of edible coating components are diverse (Table 1), such as chitosan-pullulan, chitosan-linseed, chitosan-nopal cactus, and chitosan-aloe mucilage, rice starch-ι-carrageenan-sucrose fatty acid esters and glycerol, chitosan-whey protein isolate, cellulose nanofibers reinforced chitosan, chitosan-dialdehyde cellulose, chitosan-alginate, chitosan-hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, chitosan-locust bean gum, pregelatinized corn starch-cellulose nanofibers, chitosan-guar gum, chitosan-aloe vera gel, chitosan-hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, banana pseudostem starch and fish-scale chitosan, sodium alginate and whey protein isolate, etc.

Extra materials
The EC serves as a physical barrier to prevent fruit exchange with the environment. To enhance fruit preservation efficiency and improve the properties of the EC structure, extra materials should be added. Extra materials are components that cannot form the film themselves but are added to enhance the beneficial properties of EC (Fig. 1). The components of extra materials are diverse depending on the preservation goals, including antimicrobial agents (e.g., essential oils, nanoparticles, plant extract, etc.), antioxidants (e.g., essential oils, plant extract, etc.), anti-browning agents (e.g., ascorbic acid, citric acid, essential oil, oxalic acid, plant extract, etc.), ethylene signaling inhibitors (e.g., 1-Methylcyclopropene), and antagonistic microorganisms (e.g., bacteriophage, lactic bacteria, etc.). Different materials are selected for optimal preservation results depending on the type of fruit and its intended preservation. However, these extra materials could impact the coating structure, necessitating research on suitable extra materials for the EC is necessary.

Properties of edible coating

General characteristics
SEM images of uncoated strawberries (a) and coated strawberries by yam bean starch, agarwood bouya oil, and calcium propionate (b). Stomata on strawberry surface (indicated with yellow arrows). Coated plum fruit by starch 3 %, carrageenan 1.5 %, and fatty acid esters 2 %, control fruit day 1 (c), coated fruit day 1 (d), control fruit day 21 (e), coated fruit (f) were stored for three weeks at 20 °C. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 2
The EC acts as a physical film that covers the surface of the fruit, blocking the fruit surface with the ambient environment. Barrier properties are essential properties that prevent the exchange activity between fruit and the ambient environment. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) analysis revealed that uncoated strawberries displayed visible lines and stomata on their surface, while the coated fruits appeared smoother with a uniformly distributed coating solution and no visible stomata (Fig. 2a-b). Similarly, the morphological observations revealed that the combination of rice starch, ι-carrageenan, sucrose fatty acid esters, and glycerol effectively formed a solid semi-permeable membrane on the coated plum fruit, while the uncoated fruit exhibited visible cracks on its surface (Fig. 2c-f). These properties reduce respiration, metabolism, and transpiration, leading to a slow-down ripening process.
The ability of EC to decelerate fruit metabolism during storage has been documented in numerous previous studies. In plum fruit, a significant increase (p < 0.05) in ethylene production in uncoated fruit was recorded at 9.76 μL C2H2/Kg/h, which was 8.08 μL C2H2/Kg/h higher than coated fruit by rice starch-ι-carrageenan-sucrose fatty acid esters and glycerol at 21 days of storage. The EC made of chitosan could create a steady-state atmosphere in packages with 12.6–16.2 kPa of CO2 and 2.3–3.7 kPa of O2 after 9–10 days of fresh-cut melon storage. Similarly, chitosan nanoparticles with konjac glucomannan as a dispersant were shown to reduce the oxygen permeability of film with 1.93 × 10−13 (cm3.cm)/(cm2.s.Pa) which is much lower than the oxygen permeability of chitosan, gelatin, gelatin/chitosan, gelatin/chitosan/montmorillonite and starch films. Similarly, the oxygen barrier property of the chitosan/dialdehyde cellulose film was enhanced eightfold compared to chitosan alone. Besides, UV light-induced free radicals in food materials cause color degradation, nutrient loss, and lipid damage, making UV protection crucial for preserving fresh fruits. The EC improves the UV absorption capacity, which prevents UV rays from reaching the fruit peel, affecting fruit quality during storage. The transmittance at 600 nm of EC based on starch was higher than 60 %, and adding ferulic acid to cassava starch coating positively impacts fruit preservation, minimally affects the appearance of coated fruit, and provides protection against UV damage. These results indicate that using EC provides many benefits in fruit preservation. However, to improve preservation efficiency, adding extra materials to EC is necessary.

Improving the properties of edible coatings using extra materials
ECs are biodegradation materials, and various fungi in the soil could break down a significant amount of natural polymers. Therefore, supplementing extra materials could prevent and inhibit the spoilage caused by fungi. Moreover, this approach could enhance the favorable properties for fruit preservation, such as antioxidants, anti-browning, etc. Furthermore, the extra materials also increased EC's thickness and UV-blocking ability.

Anti-microorganism properties
Previous studies have shown that incorporating antimicrobial agents into EC significantly improves its ability to combat fruit pathogens. Extra materials containing antimicrobial properties are diverse, including essential oils, plant extracts, nanoparticles, antagonistic microorganisms, fermentation products, etc.
The essential oils possess broad-spectrum antimicrobial properties, enhancing the coating's antimicrobial efficiency when combined with EC. There are many sources of essential oils such as cinnamon, basil, clove, lemongrass, oregano, Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis L.) and thyme (Thymus vulgaris), lemon, etc. The ECs based on a 1:1 mixture of soluble soybean polysaccharide and carboxymethyl chitosan, containing 1 % lavender essential oil, exhibited excellent antibacterial effects against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Similarly, chitosan/aloe vera gel coatings with a 4:1 ratio, including orange peel essential oils, demonstrated antimicrobial activity against Klebsiella pneumoniae, Escherichia coli, and Staphylococcus aureus, in contrast to coatings without essential oils, which did not show antimicrobial effects. Lemongrass oil at a concentration of 2.5 % (w/w), incorporated into sodium alginate coating 2 % (w/w), resulted in more significant decay and weight loss in ‘Rocha’ pears compared to 1.25 % w/w. Besides, the antibacterial effectiveness of the nanocomposite coating against E. coli and S. aureus was significantly increased by 57.13 % and 62.18 %, respectively, due to the addition of carvacrol into chitosan-cellulose nanocrystals coating. In addition, essential oils not only exhibit antimicrobial activity but also contain a high total phenol and antioxidant content due to their bioactive compounds. However, at high concentrations, essential oils could have a negative impact on the peel or pulp fruit. Furthermore, using EC combined with antimicrobial agents, especially essential oils, which have a strong odor for fresh-cut fruit preservation, would mask the original flavor. Therefore, the appropriate essential oil concentration is necessary to ensure antifungal efficiency but not negatively impact the fruit.
Besides essential oils, plant extracts such as raspberry leaf extract, turmeric extracts or green tea extracts, pomegranate peel extract, Fagonia indica, quercetin (a natural plant flavonoid) also received much attention. A study by showed that date palm fruit waste extract with antibacterial, yeast, and mold resistance when added to a chitosan/polyethylene glycol coating, significantly improved the storage efficiency of strawberries. According to, the addition of ethanolic extract of propolis to gelatin film exhibited significant antifungal properties against major fungal pathogens that affect fruits and vegetables, including Penicillium digitatum, Penicillium expansum, Penicillium italicum, Botrytis cinerea, Alternaria alternata, and Aspergillus carbonarius.
Another strategy for providing extra sources of antimicrobials to EC that is receiving much attention is the use of antagonistic microorganisms. suggested that incorporating Lactiplantibacillus plantarum into the EC helped extend the shelf life of cherry tomatoes by protecting them from fungal decay. Lactic acid bacteria added to EC suppressed coliform, mold, and yeast, with no colonies detected during cherry tomato storage. Incorporating bacteriophages into ECs has significantly enhanced their antimicrobial properties. Similarly, the antimicrobial activity against Salmonella of bacteriophage in different ECs such as whey protein concentrate, carboxymethyl cellulose, chitosan, and sodium alginate in which whey protein showed the most efficiency. In this approach, antagonistic microorganisms must be present inside the EC at high concentrations. Additionally, the integrity of the fruit peel is crucial. If the fruit peel is damaged during transportation or/and storage, causing juice leakage, antagonistic microorganisms would firstly be the primary cause of fruit damage. Besides, using fermented products combined with EC is another potential approach receiving attention. In a study by, chitosan demonstrated superior antifungal ability, peptide release, and degradability when incorporated with probiotic-fermented palm kernel cake compared to other polysaccharides such as starch potato, pectin, carrageenan powder, microcrystalline cellulose, sodium alginate, and carboxymethyl-cellulose. Similarly, flaxseed mucilage coating supplemented with postbiotics obtained from Lactobacillus acidophilus LA-5 showed a significantly reduced fungal count during strawberry storage. Iturin, the lipopeptides generated through the fermentation process of Bacillus ssp. showed high antifungal activity against C. gloeosporioides, enhancing the antifungal activity of edible coating-based chitosan to preserve mangoes.
Another promising approach is using additional silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) in EC for fruit and vegetable preservation, which has been proven to be a potential and sustainable approach. AgNPs synthesized from plants not only have a high spectrum board anti-microorganism activity but also have been proven to be non-toxic and have been applied in whole fruit and fresh-cut fruit preservation. Furthermore, incorporating AgNPs into EC resulted in a UV-blocking capacity.

Antioxidant properties
The antioxidant properties of fruit could be enhanced by incorporating a supplementary composition into EC such as essential oil, turmeric or green tea extracts, date palm fruit waste extract, organic acids such asascorbic acid. suggested that carvacrol incorporated into chitosan-cellulose nanocrystal EC gives an antioxidant effect attributed to its phenolic hydroxyl group, which exhibits a superior antioxidant capacity. Increasing the amount of essential oil would enhance the antioxidant activity of the EC. A study by found that incorporating lavender oil into soluble soybean polysaccharide-based coatings with carboxymethyl chitosan improved the antioxidant and antibacterial properties. Additionally, this incorporation enhanced the EC's water vapor barrier, UV barrier, and mechanical properties. Similarly, the polyphenols, alkaloids, flavonoids, tannins, and steroids present in the date palm fruit waste extract have been found to exhibit antibacterial and antioxidant properties, effectively inhibiting the growth of microbial cells.

Anti-browning properties
One of the main challenges in preserving fruit, especially fresh-cut fruit, is the development of flesh browning due to polyphenol oxidase activity, influencing customers' purchasing decisions. The factors causing the browning of fruit peel resulting in the polyphenol oxidase activity include water loss, chilling injury, disease, and mechanical damage. The polyphenol oxidase activity values increased gradually throughout the storage period (. The EC was improved by adding ingredients such as ascorbic acid, citric acid, essential oil, oxalic acid, plant extract, sodium chlorite, oleuropein, olive oil, etc., to enhance anti-browning.
Effect of edible coatings on the browning of banana (i) and fresh-cut apple slices (ii). (i). PE: polyethylene; SA: sodium alginate; S12W8: sodium alginate + whey protein isolate. (ii). CMC: carboxymethylcellulose; ST: Seabuckthorn leaves.
Fig. 3
Changes in polyphenol oxidase activity of the exocarp of zucchini fruit were significantly reduced in fruit coated by dextrin plus olive oil (0.2 %), as reported. The ECs with soluble soybean polysaccharide and carboxymethyl chitosan (ratio 1;1) containing lavender oil (1 wt%) could slow down banana peel browning during nine days of storage at 25 °C and 56 ± 2 % RH. Similarly, combining sodium alginate and whey protein isolate significantly inhibited the browning of bananas after 8 days of storage at 25 °C compared to control and commercial polyethylene samples (Fig. 3i). The anti-browning agent ascorbic acid 0.1 % (w/v) proved to be very efficient when combined with the EC eugenol 2 % (w/w) combined with eugenol 0.1 % (w/v) that maintained ‘Bravo de Esmolfe’ fresh-cut apple quality. Plant extract in which Morus alba root extracts (1.5 % w/v) were incorporated into carboxymethyl cellulose (1.5 % w/v) showed anti-browning in bananas with a peel color difference (ΔE) had more than twice the difference in color difference values compared to uncoated samples. indicated that the reduction in browning of peach surface can be obtained by applying coatings that protect the structure and integrity of the cell membrane. Seabuckthorn leaves (1.5 % w/v) have been proven to have an anti-browning property incorporating into carboxymethylcellulose (1 % w/v) inhibited the polyphenol enzyme activity in fresh-cut “Maharaji” apple for eight days at 4 °C (Fig. 3 ii). These results indicated that adding extra materials significantly improved the fruit preservation efficiency of EC. However, the effect of extra materials on film structure should be evaluated to ensure the preservation efficiency.

Effect of extra materials on film structure
Effect of extra materials on the film. (ii). The SEM images of the films' surface (a-c) and cross-section (d-f). SC: soluble soybean polysaccharide (1.5 %) + carboxymethyl chitosan (1.5 %); L: lavender oil. (ii). The SEM images of the films' surface. CS: Chitosan; TE: turmeric extract; GT: green tea extract. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 4
Extra materials significantly improve fruit preservation efficiency. However, the presence of these materials could also change EC's properties. To evaluate the properties of EC, a substantial amount of EC materials is utilized to pour into the mold to create thick films for testing characteristics such as elongation at break, optical properties, tensile strength, water vapor permeability, etc. Previous studies have shown that combining coating materials enhances the film structure. found that the covalent grafting of epigallocatechin gallate significantly enhanced the wetting and adhesion properties of pectin coatings on the surface of grape skin. Similarly, suggested that the carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) coating, combined with essential oil (Lippia sidoides), positively impacted the physicochemical characteristics of the fruit for eighteen days under refrigerated storage while enhancing strawberries' color. According to, Argentine propolis ethanolic extract (PEE) incorporated into gelatin showed some stretch marks and no phase separation. The authors also indicated that interactions between proteins and polyphenols such as chalcones, phenolic acids, and flavonoids could occur and might favor the integration of the PEE in the biopolymer matrix. The coating with low water vapor permeability is preferred because it helps maintain the moisture content of food and fruit products. A study conducted by demonstrated that including palm fruit waste extract in chitosan/polyethylene glycol coatings increased water solubility and decreased water vapor permeability. However, incorporating supplement materials into ECs could potentially impact the overall film structure. indicated that the tensile strength and elongation at break were significantly enhanced when whey protein isolate, and gluconolactone were added to sodium alginate film. The authors also showed that the high whey protein isolate affected the gel structure, decreasing the film's tensile strength. incorporating pomegranate peel extract 0.1 % (g/ml) into jackfruit seed starch 5 % (w/v) enhanced the total phenolic content and antioxidant activity, but also had negative impacts on the water vapor permeability, oxygen permeability, and tensile strength. Similarly, the addition of propolis ethanolic extract did not significantly impact gelatin films' microstructural and water barrier properties but significantly affected the mechanical behavior, making the films more elastic and stretchable than the control film. A study by found that the control pectin film had a relatively homogeneous structure, while the structures of oregano oil -oil-containing films were porous, and larger micro-pores were formed at higher oil concentrations (0.5 % and 1 %). Similarly, indicated that Incorporating lavender essential oil into the film made from soluble soybean polysaccharide and carboxymethyl chitosan resulted in the surface of the blended film exhibiting numerous crater-like pits (Fig. 4i). found that high concentrations of 5 % (v/v) of turmeric or green tea extracts caused film agglomeration, reduced elongation at break, increased tensile strength, and caused discontinuities in the matrix polymer (Fig. 4 ii).
In another report by, mandarin oil added to coatings (made by carboxymethyl cellulose and cellulose nanofibers) significantly affected the properties of coating solutions and the film characteristics, as shown in b*, and roughness values increased strongly. Besides, adding essential oil would impact the coating properties, resulting in a darker color of EC and a decrease in the water vapor barrier. These results suggest that combining supplements with extra materials at high concentrations affects the bonding network of the EC and weakens its structure. Therefore, choosing a suitable concentration of supplement components is essential to ensure preservation efficiency. Furthermore, since the coated fruit may be eaten directly, the coating materials must be safe at all levels.

Sensory properties
In preserving agricultural products, particularly fruits, sensory properties play a vital role in influencing consumers' purchasing decisions. One significant advantage of using coatings for fruit preservation is that these coatings not only do not affect the sensory appearance but also maintain the quality of the fruit throughout the preservation process. Additionally, ECs can be applied to fruits eaten directly (without peeling) or to fresh-cut fruits without compromising their sensory quality.
A study conducted by found that mango fruit treated with a composite coating comprising gum Arabic 20 % (w/v) and cinnamic acid 0.2 % (w/v) did not show a significant difference in sensory quality on the first day. However, after 28 days of storage at 12 °C, these treated mangoes registered a higher sensory score. Coated sapota fruits treated with soybean starch showed improved visual and sensory characteristics compared to uncoated samples stored under ambient conditions, according to. Additionally, the use of sodium alginate (1 % w/v) coating for peach fruit preservation maintained sensory scores of appearance, aroma, sweetness, juiciness, texture, and flavor were 6.3, 6.1, 6.7, 6.4, 5.1, 4.8 compared to 3.5, 3.6, 3.1, 3.4, 3.3, 3.2, respectively in control samples stored at room temperature for 7 days. These benefits are due to EC serving as a barrier, slowing the ripening process, and improving sensory quality compared to uncoated fruit.
Previous studies have also demonstrated the benefits of ECs in preserving fruits that can be eaten directly (without peeling) or as fresh-cut products. indicated that chitosan-based coating containing turmeric and green tea extracts did not significantly affect the flavor and taste of strawberries. Similarly, fresh-cut guava coated with chitosan-citric acid (5 mg/mL) showed no sensory differences such as appearance, color, and flavor compared to control samples (coated with glycerol 0.5 %). Moreover, the EC significantly better preserves the quality value of fruit during storage compared to the control sample. indicated that strawberries coated by chitosan 1 % (w/v) and ascorbic acid 1 % (w/v) demonstrated significant improvements after 15 days of storage at 4 °C, achieving 1.72-fold higher taste scores, 2.67-fold higher color scores, 2.00-fold higher glossiness scores, and 1.95-fold higher overall acceptability scores compared to uncoated samples. Another study by suggested that coated strawberries by carboxymethylcellulose exhibited a more pronounced brightness than the control ones and maintained a characteristic strawberry color intensity until the sixth day of storage at 4 °C. EC based on carboxymethylcellulose incorporated with seabuckthorn leaf extract maintaining the fresh-cut apple quality including appearance, color, aroma, texture, taste, overall acceptability after 10 days storage at 4 °C, as reported by. Research results indicate that edible coatings do not negatively impact the sensory appearance of fruits, particularly fresh-cut and directly consumed varieties, and they help maintain fruit quality during storage.

Application of edible coating for fruit preservation

Causes of fruit damage during storage
The spoilage of fruits is caused by two main factors (Fig. 1S). Firstly, internal factors such as metabolism and respiration inside the fruit. Secondly, external factors such as the attack of microorganisms cause damage to the peel, especially through wounds on the fruit and improper preservation. Internal factors during fruit preservation are primarily caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS). Besides, the total suspended solids increase due to the hydrolysis of polysaccharides into simple sugars and other soluble compounds. These factors lead to processes such as membrane lipid peroxidation and the activity of enzymes like polygalacturonase, cellulase, and pectin methyl esterase. Along with internal ones, external factors contribute to post-harvest losses. These include improper handling, inadequate control of storage temperature, and attacks by microorganisms. These factors significantly affect the quality of fruit, especially microbial attacks that can cause rapid damage and spread on the fruit. These effects impact the quality of the fruit by reducing firmness, hastening spoilage, and causing weight loss. Additionally, they can affect key quality indicators such as Brix, pH, titratable acidity, and total soluble solids.
Schematic representation of the coating preparation process and its application. (a): Immersion approach; (b): Spray approach; (c): Brushed approach; (d): Layer-by-layer approach.
Fig. 5
Previous studies have demonstrated that EC significantly extends the shelf life of fruit by accelerating the activity of ROS-scavenging enzymes and inhibiting microorganisms. One of the significant advantages of applying EC in fruit preservation is the simple process, ease of carrying out, etc. There are various approaches to apply EC in fruit preservation (Fig. 5), the most popular of which are immersion/ dipping (;), spray, brushing, and layer-by-layer. indicated that sapota fruits were coated with extracted soybean starch by different coating approaches, including dipping, spraying, and brushing, in which the dipping approach exhibited better physiochemical analysis results than other approaches. Still, the effectiveness of fruit preservation also depends on the type of fruit, the EC components, and the adhesion of these components to the fruit skin, and from there, the appropriate approach is chosen. ECs have been proven to maintain fruit quality by reducing weight loss, respiration rates, and ethylene production, maintaining firmness, inhibiting pathogens, slowing ripening, decreasing chilling injury, and reducing electrolyte leakage, malondialdehyde, and hydrogen peroxide during storage.

Mechanism of edible coating on fruit preservation efficiency
Mechanism of edible coating on fruit preservation efficiency.
Fig. 6
During storage, the EC significantly affects fruit metabolism (Fig. 6). Malondialdehyde is a secondary end-product of membrane lipid peroxidation and serves as an indicator of oxidative stress. This process damages cell membranes, reduces the membrane integrity of the fruit cell, and reduces the quality and nutritional value of the fruit. Chitosan EC with ascorbic acid delays malondialdehyde accumulation from lipid peroxidation, maintaining custard apple quality during storage. Similarly, applying a sodium alginate/chitosan coating to strawberries resulted in a significantly delayed accumulation of malondialdehyde compared to the uncoated group. Konjac glucomannan/low-acyl gellan gum coating significantly reduced malondialdehyde production during the lipid peroxidation process during blueberry storage with 27.25 μ mol/g compared to 41.06 μ mol/g in uncoated samples. The coating material type also affects the lipid peroxidation activity level over the fruit storage time. Lipid peroxidation activity during storage of zucchini fruit covered with dextrin (1 %), starch (1 %), chitosan (1 %), and carboxymethylcellulose (1 %) after 14 days of storage at 4 °C were 408; 403; 434; and 437 μg MDA/kg fresh weight, respectively that compared to 578 μg MDA/kg fresh weight in control samples.
found that adding iturin (a product by Bacillus ssp. fermentation) to chitosan coatings on mangoes boosts stress defense enzymes such as glutathione reductase, catalase, ascorbate peroxidase, and peroxidase, significantly improving resistance to pathogen infection and enhancing preservation. Incorporating ascorbic acid (1 % w/v) into the EC based on chitosan (1 % w/v) reduced cell wall degrading enzyme activities such as polygalacturonase, cellulase, and pectin methyl esterase during strawberry preservation, as reported by. Similarly, a study conducted by found that incorporating ascorbic acid (1 % w/v) into chitosan coating (1 % w/v) inhibited the expression of cell wall degrading enzymes during custard apple storage. also indicated that ascorbic acid incorporation catalyzed ROS scavenging enzymes (ascorbate peroxidase, catalase, peroxidase, and superoxide dismutase) activities that maintained fruit quality under cold storage. demonstrated the ability of EC based on carboxymethyl cellulose and sodium alginate containing oxalic and citric acid to enhance the activities of key enzymes, including superoxide dismutase, catalase, and the entire AA-GSH cycle, while simultaneously reducing the activities of guaiacol peroxidase and polyphenol oxidase. Previous studies also demonstrated that applying an EC to the fruit's surface can seal the stomata on the fruit surface, preventing quantity loss and maintaining the fruit's shelf-life. Besides, the application of a sodium alginate/chitosan coating on strawberries resulted in significant reductions in weight loss, preservation of antioxidant capacity, decreased consumption of total soluble solids, and titratable acidity compared to the uncoated group. Moreover, the EC could improve control of the respiration rates and enzymatic and oxidative reactions of the fruit, which would conserve the color of the fruit. The processes primarily relate to the barrier property of the EC, which prevents the exchange of metabolites between the fruit and the environment. The EC can be applied to both whole and fresh-cut fruits for preservation. Depending on the type of fruit and the preservation purpose, choose the appropriate coating materials and extra materials.

EC for whole fruit preservation
Effect of edible coating on whole fruit and fresh-cut fruit appearance during storage. (a). strawberries during 10 days of storage at 20 °C; (b) strawberries during 16 days of storage at 4 °C; (c). Mangoes (infected by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides) during 20 days of storage at 12 °C; (d). Fresh-cut apples coated by Quercetin/pectin 0.5 mM/L; (e). Fresh-cut apples coated by pectin 1.8 % and Oregano oil (0.05 %) (Kostic et al., 2023).
Fig. 7
The application of EC provides many benefits in whole fruit preservation (Fig. 7). The indexes to consider in whole fruit preservation include weight loss, firmness, damage level, and other quality indexes such as pH, acidity, and Brix. The specific requirements for these indexes vary depending on the type of fruit.

Main benefits of EC
The weight loss of fruit is an essential factor closely linked to water loss. Additionally, limiting enzyme activity and minimizing water loss is essential for maintaining fruit firmness, a critical characteristic for fruit preservation. Previous studies have demonstrated that applying an EC could decrease the amount of weight loss in fruit during storage. Coated sapota fruits by lima bean starch showed a weight loss percentage of 15.28 % compared to 28.79 % in control samples. found that incorporating of pomegranate peel extract 0.1 % (g/ml) into jackfruit seed starch 5 % (w/v) reduced weight loss and maintained firmness in white grapes. A study by indicated that the weight loss rate of bananas in the control group was as high as 14.42 ± 0.69 % after seven days, while that in the chitosan nanoparticles with konjac glucomannan as a dispersant group was only 7.59 ± 0.56 %. Similarly, banana coating by carboxymethyl cellulose 1.5 % (w/v) showed 24.25 % weight loss compared to 32.26 % in control samples after 15 days of storage at 13 °C ± 2 °C. The weight loss of strawberries coated by flaxseed mucilage extraction of 5 % (w/v) after 12 days of storage at 4 °C significantly reduced by 1.7 % compared to 8.06 in uncoated samples. Also, carboxymethyl cellulose and cellulose nanofibers EC containing mandarin oil have proven to reduce weight loss and the degradation of strawberry quality during storage at 5 °C. found that chitosan supplements lignocellulosic nanofibers and raspberry leaf extract significantly reduced fruit size loss and managed fungal development compared to uncoated strawberries after 16 days of storage at 5 °C. Similarly, chitosan-based EC 1 % (w/v) also showed to reduce the weight loss of custard apple (Annona squamosa) after 12 days of storage at 15 °C with 9.10 % compared to 14.66 % in the uncoated sample.
Some reports, however, indicated that EC did not reduce fruit weight loss. A study by showed that using edible corn starch-based coating 4 % (v/v) was ineffective in reducing weight loss in cashew apples during storage. Pectin EC (3 % w/v) did not reduce weight loss in strawberries during 31 days of storage at 4 °C compared to uncoated samples, as reported. indicated that gum Arabic coating for fresh-cut red capsicum preservation did not reduce the weight loss compared to control during 16 days of storage at 4 °C.
Besides the weight loss index, the firmness of fruit is one of the primary physical factors that significantly affect consumer acceptability. The fruit's cell wall serves as a protective function, and its degradation leads to fruit softening. Fruit firmness is related to the activity of the enzyme β-galactosidase during storage. Previous studies have demonstrated that EC significantly reduces fruit softness during storage. A study by showed that ECs delayed the production of β-Galactosidase during fruit storage, which maintained fruit firmness better than the control. indicated that ECs may reduce the activity of cell wall degrading enzymes such as polygalacturonase, β-galactosidase, and pectin lyase, thus delaying the softening process and maintaining firmness. found that starch coatings effectively delayed the increase in pH and maintained the firmness and anthocyanin content of the blackberry fruits. The firmness of peach fruit coated with alginate 1 % (w/v) was better maintained than that of the control after seven days of storage. Similarly, the firmness of the control and tomato coated with carboxymethyl cellulose-based cardamom essential oil nanoemulsion decreased by 2.3 and 1.3 times after 15 days of storage at 25 ± 2 °C, respectively. Uncoated guavas experienced the highest firmness loss (219 N, 12 days), while all guavas covered with chayotextle starch exhibited increased firmness values (270 N, 12 days) during storage. Coating ‘Rocha’ pears with alginate enriched with lemongrass oil 1.25 % (w/w) reduced decay and color change while maintaining firmness better than the control samples, as reported. suggested that the firmness maintained in the samples coated by the rhubarb supplementing alginate was attributed to its higher antibacterial activity, which slowed down intracellular matrix decomposition and reduction of the central vacuole.
Besides, the storage temperature has a significant impact on fruit firmness. Low-temperature storage helps maintain fruit firmness better than high-temperature storage. The decay rate of fruits is impacted by the storage temperature for the same type of coatings, in which a cool temperature of 4 °C was more effective in reducing the decay rate compared to room temperature. This is due to the low temperatures that can inhibit metabolic enzyme activity, leading to fruit firmness maintenance. indicated that low temperatures slow down metabolic enzymes during mandarin fruit storage, and the efficiency was significantly improved when combined with the EC approach. The low temperature also reduces the weight loss during storage. According to a study by, sapota fruit experienced weight losses of 29.89 % and 17.26 % at ambient temperature (28 ± 2 °C) and cool temperature (3 ± 1 °C), respectively, on the 15th day of storage. However, the preservation effect also depends on different ripening states, and applying this method would cause varying degrees of cold injury. This occurrence is linked to alterations in cell membrane integrity due to oxidative stress resulting from the high production of reactive oxygen species. Therefore, it is necessary to evaluate the appropriate storage temperature for each type of fruit. Another approach to maintaining fruit firmness during storage is using calcium in film formation. The EC of corn starch 4 % (v/v) enriched with calcium 2 % (w/v) improved cashew apple preservation, resulting in firmer fruit, reduced pectin methylesterase and polyphenol oxidase activity, and increased soluble solids content. Similarly, all the CaCl2 and coating treatments based on carboxymethyl chitosan-gelatin limited fruit weight loss and maintained freshness and firmness during storage compared with untreated sweet cherry fruit during 30 days of storage at 0 ± 0.5 °C.
However, some research has reported that using EC for fruit preservation did not maintain the firmness of the fruit during storage. A study by showed that chitosan-based EC 1 % (w/v) did not enhance the firmness of custard apples compared to uncoated samples. Similarly, the firmness of mandarin fruits did not show any significant difference between coated fruits (chitosan, alginate/chitosan, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose/chitosan, and locust bean gum/chitosan) and uncoated fruits at room temperature or cool temperature during storage, as indicated by. According to, the firmness of fresh-cut red capsicum coated with gum Arabic did not improve compared to uncoated samples during 16 days of storage at 4 °C. These results suggested that the fruit firmness during storage depends on the type of fruit, coating materials, and storage condition.
The rate of fruit damage is a crucial factor in assessing the effectiveness of preservation. EC has been shown to reduce fruit spoilage during storage. A study by indicated that EC based on hydroxypropyl methylcellulose 1 % (w/v) and chitosan 1.5 % (w/v) not only reduced the decay rate of tangerine fruit by 45 % compared to the uncoated samples but also maintained a high content of ascorbic acid. Similarly, the decay rate of strawberries was significantly reduced to 23.51 % with the sodium alginate/chitosan coating, compared to 41.31 % in uncoated groups. One of the main causes of fruit spoilage is due to microorganisms. Therefore, extra materials with anti-microorganism properties are often added to extend the shelf life of fruits. Using extra materials to supplement ECs has been proven to enhance anti-microorganism effectiveness. Various extra materials have been applied in fruit preservation, such as essential oils, plant extracts, antagonistic microorganisms, fermentation broth, nanoparticles, etc.,
Strawberries (inoculated with Penicillium sp.) coated by pectin coating containing lemon oil and reuterin decreased up to 2 Log of fungal spores, and there is no mycelial growth was observed during storage compared to the control sample, which was fully covered by fungal growth after 17 days of storage at 4 °C. A study by indicated that nano-emulsions formulated with Carboxymethyl cellulose 1.5 % (w/v) and a blend of essential oils (thyme, clove, and cardamom in a 1:1:1 ratio) exhibited a 58.23 % reduction in bacterial count compared to the control group after 30 days of kiwifruit storage at 10 °C. Also, the decay incidence of blueberries was significantly decreased when thymol was incorporated into Konjac glucomannan/low-acyl gellan gum coating with 6.35 % compared to 18.84 % in uncoated samples.
Using plant extracts incorporated into EC has also proven to enhance anti-microorganism effectiveness in preserving fruit. found that adding date palm fruit waste extract to chitosan/polyethylene glycol coating effectively inhibited fungal growth on strawberries after ten days of storage at 25 °C. In another study by, adding turmeric extracts to chitosan, EC improved antifungal activity against Botrytis cinerea during ten days of strawberries storage at 20 °C, while 100 % of uncoated samples exhibited symptoms of gray mold disease (Fig. 7a). indicated that raspberries treated with gelatin coatings containing ethanolic extract of Propolis presented a disease incidence of 20 % compared to 90 % in control samples after seven days of storage at 5 °C.
Another approach using antagonistic microorganisms added to EC has also been shown to reduce the rate of microbial spoilage during fruit storage. Adding Lactobacillus rhamnosus into gelatin coatings reduced fungal growth and aerobic mesophilic counts in strawberries during storage, resulting in a better appearance than control samples and reduced spoilage (Fig. 7b). Research by demonstrated that strawberries coated with bacteriophage-infused materials substantially reduced Salmonella counts during storage, highlighting the effectiveness of this approach in enhancing the safety and longevity of ECs.
Besides, the use of fermented products also showed significant improvement in fruit preservation efficiency. Chitosan coating containing palm kernel cake (PKC) fermented by probiotic bacterium for mango (injected by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and Botryodiplodia theobromae) preservation showed disease-free status compared to pure chitosan which had disease lesions 6.5 and 4 mm, respectively after nine days of storage at 25 °C. During storage at 4 °C and 85 % relative humidity for 12 days, strawberries coated with flaxseed mucilage supplemented with postbiotics (P) from Lactobacillus acidophilus LA-5 showed a significant increase in total phenolic content, total flavonoid content, antioxidant capacity, and total anthocyanin content compared to uncoated strawberries. Similarly, incorporating 0.12 g/L of iturin (lipopeptides generated through the fermentation process of Bacillus ssp.) into chitosan at a concentration of 15 g/L had a synergistic effect in preventing the expansion of lesions infected by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides in mangoes after 20 days of storage at 12 °C (Fig. 7c). Adding fermented product by the bacterium to chitosan coatings resulted in improved disease control, reduced respiratory rate, lower weight loss, higher total soluble solids, increased titratable acidity, and better fruit firmness maintenance during storage. Incorporating ε-polylysine into soy protein isolate coating also showed a decrease in disease incidence of citrus fruit by 16.67 % compared to 78.67 % in control samples, as reported. Studies have shown that extra materials offer numerous benefits, including diverse sources, high anti-microorganism activity, and safety. Depending on the type of coating, type of fruit, and storage conditions, appropriate extra materials should be selected.

Improve fruit quality with extra materials
During fruit storage, changes in fruit components such as pH, titrable acidity, total soluble solids, phenolic content, etc., also significantly affect the quality of the fruit and influence the consumer's purchasing decision. In general, over time, the values  such as total phenol content, total antioxidant content, etc., tend to decrease, while values  such as pH, total soluble solids content, etc., show an increase recorded in some fruits such as custard apple, guava, peach, strawberries. In the case of grapes fruit, the pH, total soluble solids content, and reducing sugar values  remained unchanged, while titratable acidity tended to increase during storage at 12 °C for 24 days. This suggests that these parameters will vary depending on the fruit type and storage conditions. Additionally, the use of extra materials has been shown to enhance effectiveness against spoilage microorganisms and positively affect fruit quality during storage.
Adding cinnamon (2 %) into EC based on Arabic gum (5 %) and sodium caseinate (1 %) led to lower activity of polyphenol oxidase and peroxidase, higher DPPH radical scavenging activity, improved retention of ascorbic acid, phenol, and flavonoid content, and extended the shelf-life of guava to 40 days compared to the uncoated samples, which only lasted for seven days. indicated that the quality of mangoes was improved by EC based on gum Arabic (20 %) and cinnamic acid (2 %), which suppressed the activities of polygalacturonase, cellulase, and pectin methyl esterase during storage. Correspondingly, EC based on chitosan nanoemulsion and Angelica archangelica oil prevented contamination of Botrytis cinerea and maintained the quality attributes of table grape fruit, including weight, titrable acidity, total soluble solids, phenolic content, and pH during 30 days of storage at 25 ± 2 °C. Furthermore, demonstrated that uncoated bananas and mangoes showed random spots, enzymatic browning, and decay, which were significantly reduced in fruits coated with a chitosan-cellulose nanocrystals-carvacrol blend.
Plant extracts have also been shown to maintain fruit quality effectively. The addition of rhubarb (Rheum rhaponticum L.) 5 % (v/v) to alginate coating 1 % (w/v) reduced weight loss, maintained firmness and soluble solids content, reduced respiration, and slowed polyphenol oxidase activity on peach fruits compared to samples without rhubarb. Similarly, sapodilla fruit coated by Aloe vera 100 % and Fagonia indica 1 % significantly reduced weight loss, decay incidence, and soluble solids concentration, and preserved firmness and acidity compared to uncoated fruit over 12 days of storage at 20 °C. Moreover, in zucchini fruit coating based on dextrin 1 % (w/v) plus oleuropein 0.3 % (w/v), superoxide dismutase activity was about 20 % higher than the control after 14 days of storage at 4 °C.
The presence of lactic acid bacteria in EC affected ethylene products and enzymes involved in fruit ripening. found that an exopolysaccharide-based EC supplemented with lactic bacteria significantly reduced ethylene production by 45 % compared to control samples during the storage of cherry tomatoes. indicated that EC made by pectin containing nisin may inhibit the activity of enzymes responsible for fruit decay, such as polygalacturonase, β-galactosidase, and cellulase, slowing down the microbial-induced rotting process.
Besides, adding nanoparticles to EC also effectively maintained fruit quality during storage. indicated that the bananas' appearance was maintained when treated with AgNPs incorporated in sodium alginate coating, compared to uncoated samples, which had more black senescent spots after nine days of storage at 25 °C. Edible chitosan nanoparticle coatings on grapes effectively delayed ripening, minimized weight loss and sugar content, enhanced moisture retention, and preserved acidity levels and taste characteristics. The coatings made by sodium alginate supplemented with green synthesized titanium dioxide nanoparticles and mousami peel extract positively affected several quality tributes, such as color index, pH, TSS, and titratable acidity.
On the same fruit, the quality of fruit during storage also varies depending on the type of coating materials. found that coating materials such as chitosan, alginate/chitosan, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose/chitosan, and locust bean gum/chitosan have varying effects on the bioactive compounds and organic acids of mandarin fruits during storage at room temperature and in cold storage. Similarly, different polysaccharide-based coatings, including carboxymethylcellulose, chitosan, dextrin, and starch, showed significant differences in firmness index, the percentage of weight loss, and chilling-injury index of zucchini fruit at 4 °C in which dextrin showed to be the most effective.

EC for Fresh-cut fruit preservation
One of the outstanding advantages of EC compared to other fruit packaging approaches is that EC can be directly consumed with the fruit. To achieve this, the materials must be safe, not affect the sensory properties, and ensure preservation efficiency. EC materials are widely used to preserve fresh-cut fruits, such as alginate, carboxymethyl cellulose, chitosan, gum Arabic, pectin, etc. (Table 1) Besides, extra materials are also diverse, such as AgNPs, essential oils, and plant extract. Previous studies have shown that EC efficiently extends the shelf life and maintains fresh-cut quality during storage. The fresh-cut pineapple was coated with ECs such as chitosan-pullulan, chitosan-linseed, chitosan-nopal cactus, and chitosan-aloe mucilage by layer-by-layer technique showed to improve the firmness, reduced weight loss, inhibited microbial growth, and did not affect sensory characteristics compared to uncoated samples. Similar to whole fruit, low temperatures also have a positive effect on the weight loss of fresh-cut fruit. A study by found that fresh-cut guava coated with chitosan–citric acid experienced a weight loss of 8.37 % and 3.58 % after 7 days of storage at 24 °C and 4 °C, respectively.
Combining extra materials into EC has also been proven to enhance preservation efficiency. found that incorporating seabuckthorn leaves 1.5 % (w/v) into carboxymethylcellulose 1 % (w/v) effectively inhibits polyphenol enzyme activity in freshly cut “Maharaji” apples for ten days at 4 °C, compared to control or carboxymethylcellulose alone, without compromising the apples' firmness, soluble solids, titratable acidity, and sensory qualities. A study by showed that fresh-cut apples coated with pectin solution that includes quercetin significantly enhanced their resistance to bacterial infections and extend their shelf life to 10 days while preserving desirable attributes such as color, 100 % hardness, and 80 % of their sugar content during storage at 4 °C (Fig. 7d). indicated that fresh-cut papaya samples coated with nanoemulsion coating made by sodium alginate 2 % (v/v) containing oregano oil were not only able to retain the sensory scores till day 16 of analysis but also proved more efficient in retarding the degradation rate of physicochemical properties. Moreover, bacterial count in the fresh-cut papaya coated by sodium alginate 2 % (v/v) containing oregano oil 1 % (v/v) showed not exceed 3 log CFU/g till day 16 of storage compared to that of exceeding 12 log CFU/g in uncoated samples. discovered that fresh-cut apples coated with pectin-oregano oil not only demonstrated significant antioxidant, antibacterial, and antifungal properties but also maintained their freshness better than the uncoated ones during storage (Fig. 7e). Similarly, adding clove essential oil to alginate coating reduced weight loss and increased fresh-cut apple pieces' total phenolic and antioxidant content stored at 4 °C for 14 days.
Extra organic acid materials also played a vital role in enhancing fresh-cut fruit quality. A study by indicated that the EC, which is based on carboxymethyl cellulose and sodium alginate and contains oxalic and citric acid, showed a significant inhibitory effect on the physiological decay of fresh-cut pear. The EC also minimized the total soluble solid and pH increase, prevented titratable acidity decrease, hindered decay, and significantly extended the storage period of Williams' pear fruit in cold storage at 2 ± 0.5 °C for 10 days. Fresh-cut guava coated with chitosan–citric acid maintained quality parameters (pH, soluble solids, total sugar, etc.) during storage at 24 °C and 4 °C for 7 and 14 days and preserved their sensory characteristics. Also, the sensory quality of fresh-cut melons coated by chitosan with Ag-chitosan (extracted) nanocomposites was better, with lower translucency and texture/firmness degradation after 13 days at 5 °C. The use of EC with barrier properties and UV-blocking capabilities, combined with extra materials possessing antimicrobial, antioxidant, and anti-browning properties, has greatly enhanced the effectiveness of fruit preservation. It is essential to select the appropriate EC based on the type of fruit and storage conditions for optimal preservation results.

Conclusion and Future Trends
Edible coating shows many outstanding advantages, including extended fruit shelf life, no toxic effects, and no effect on the sensory quality. ECs, such as polysaccharides and proteins, come in various forms and are widely used to preserve fruits. Polysaccharides are especially popular for this purpose due to their many benefits, including barrier properties and UV blocking. Besides, extra materials can be added to ECs to enhance their beneficial properties, such as improving film structure, antimicrobial and antioxidant properties, and preventing browning. ECs have been proven to maintain fruit quality by reducing weight loss, respiration rates, and ethylene production, maintaining firmness, inhibiting pathogens, slowing ripening, decreasing chilling injury, and reducing electrolyte leakage, malondialdehyde, and hydrogen peroxide during storage. EC has significant effects on fruit metabolism membrane lipid peroxidation boosts stress defense enzymes such as glutathione reductase, catalase, ascorbate peroxidase, peroxidase, and superoxide dismutase reduced enzyme activities such as polygalacturonase, cellulase, and pectin methyl esterase. The EC can be applied to both whole and fresh-cut fruits for preservation. Choosing the appropriate coating and extra materials depends on the type of fruit and the preservation purpose. Combining coating materials and extra materials to reduce fruit metabolism, maintain fruit quality, inhibit damage pathogens, anti-browning, and antioxidants would be tended for the green potential of fruit preservation approaches.
The following are the supplementary data related to this article.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Dong My Lieu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Software, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Thuy Thi Kim Dang: Writing – review & editing. Huong Thuy Nguyen: Writing – review & editing, Supervision.

Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from public, commercial, or not-for-profit funding agencies.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Study on the preparation and use of edible coating of fish scale chitosan and glycerol blended banana pseudostem starch for the preservation of apples, mangoes, and strawberries
Innovative edible coatings for postharvest storage of sweet cherries
Role of gum Arabic combined with cinnamic acid coating on quality and cell wall degradation enzymes of mango fruits at low temperature
Valorizing pomegranate wastes by producing functional silver nanoparticles with antioxidant, anticancer, antiviral, and antimicrobial activities and its potential in food preservation
Use of an exopolysaccharide-based edible coating and lactic acid bacteria with antifungal activity to preserve the postharvest quality of cherry tomato
Chitosan hydrochloride-gum Arabic-passion fruit seed oil nanoparticle edible coating to control fungal infection and maintain quality parameters of strawberries
Assessment of a new edible film biodegradable based on starch-nystose to increase quality and the shelf life of blackberries
Development and characterization of pomegranate peel extract-functionalized jackfruit seed starch-based edible films and coatings for prolonging the shelf life of white grapes
Application of polysaccharide-based edible coatings to improve the quality of zucchini fruit during postharvest cold storage
Properties of an active film based on chitosan/silk fibroin loaded with an essential oil microemulsion and its application in preservation of strawberries
Utilization of lima bean starch as an edible coating base material for sapota fruit shelf-life enhancement
Formulation of extracted soyabean starch based edible coatings by different methods and their impact on shelf life of sapota fruit
Angelica archangelica essential oil loaded chitosan nanoemulsion as edible coating for preservation of table grape fruit against Botrytis cinerea contamination and storage quality deterioration
Carboxymethyl cellulose and cardamom oil in a nanoemulsion edible coating inhibit the growth of foodborne pathogens and extend the shelf life of tomatoes
Konjac glucomannan-based nanocomposite spray coating with antimicrobial, gas barrier, UV blocking, and antioxidation for bananas preservation
Multifunctional sodium alginate-based self-healing edible cross-linked coating for banana preservation
Effect of edible coating and antifungal emulsion system on Colletotrichum acutatum and shelf life of strawberries
Phytochemicals-based edible coating for photodynamic preservation of fresh-cut apples
Fabrication of novel self-healing edible coating for fruits preservation and its performance maintenance mechanism
Enhanced chilling tolerance of pomegranate fruit by edible coatings combined with malic and oxalic acid treatments
On the use of carrageenan matrices for the development of antiviral edible coatings of interest in berries
Agricultural production statistics 2000–2020
Chitosan/aloe vera gel coatings infused with orange peel essential oils for fruits preservation
1-Methylcyclopropene and lemongrass essential oil nanocoatings effect on the preservation of cold stored ‘Rocha’pear
Curcumin doped functionalized cellulose nanofibers based edible chitosan coating on kiwifruits
Effect of Aloe vera gel coating enriched with Fagonia indica plant extract on physicochemical and antioxidant activity of sapodilla fruit during postharvest storage
Effect of guar gum-chitosan composites edible coating functionalized with essential oils on the postharvest shelf life of Khasi mandarin at ambient condition
The effect of edible coatings on the nutritional quality of ‘bravo de Esmolfe’fresh-cut apple through shelf-life
Evaluation of the effectivity of reuterin in pectin edible coatings to extend the shelf-life of strawberries during cold storage
ε-Polylysine and soybean protein isolate form nanoscale to microscale electrostatic complexes in solution: Properties, interactions and as antimicrobial edible coatings on citrus
Konjac glucomannan/low-acyl gellan gum edible coating containing thymol microcapsule regulates cell wall polysaccharides disassembly and delays postharvest softening of blueberries
Bioadhesive and antibacterial edible coating of EGCG-grafted pectin for improving the quality of grapes during storage
Application of carboxymethylcellulose in combination with essential oils nano-emulsions edible coating for the preservation of kiwifruit
Chitosan-based layer-by-layer edible coatings application for the preservation of mandarin fruit bioactive compounds and organic acids
Enhanced shelf-life of peach fruit in alginate based edible coating loaded with TiO2 nanoparticles
Effect of edible coating with Morus alba root extract and carboxymethyl cellulose for enhancing the quality and preventing the browning of banana (Musa acuminata Cavendish) during storage
Edible coatings based on plant components for active packaging of fresh/fresh-cut fruits
Development and characterization of corn starch based nanocomposite film with AgNPs and plant extract
Green and facile fabrication of multifunctional cellulose nanocrystal and carvacrol together reinforced chitosan bio-nanocomposite coatings for fruit preservation
Rhubarb extract incorporated into an alginate-based edible coating for peach preservation
Improvement in the optical properties of starch coatings via chemical-physical combination strategy for fruits preservation
Enhancing mango anthracnose control and quality maintenance through chitosan and iturin A coating
Green synthesized silver nanoparticles, a sustainable approach for fruit and vegetable preservation: An overview
Improvement of shelf-life of mangoes by chitosan coating enriched with cinnamon oil dissolved in tween 80 combined with ethanol
The efficacy of combined application of edible coatings and essential oil in mango preservation
A review of preservation approaches for extending avocado fruit shelf-life
Soluble soybean polysaccharide/carboxymethyl chitosan coatings incorporated with lavender essential oil: Structure, properties and application in fruit preservation
Application of nisin-embedded pectin microcapsules for ‘Guiqi’mango fruit postharvest preservation
Novel edible coating based on shellac and tannic acid for prolonging postharvest shelf life and improving overall quality of mango
Effect of active layer-by-layer edible coating on quality, biochemicals, and the antioxidant system in ready-to-eat ‘Williams’ pear fruit during cold storage
Effect of using microencapsulated ascorbic acid in coatings based on resistant starch chayotextle on the quality of guava fruit
Effects of fungal chitosan nanoparticles as eco-friendly edible coatings on the quality of postharvest table grapes
Antifungal edible coatings containing Argentinian propolis extract and their application in raspberries
Extension of postharvest shelf life of strawberries (Fragaria ananassa) using a coating of chitosan-whey protein isolate conjugate
The effect of edible coating based on Arabic gum, sodium caseinate and essential oil of cinnamon and lemon grass on guava
Chitosan–citric acid edible coating to control Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and maintain quality parameters of fresh-cut guava
Effect of carboxymethylcellulose-based edible coatings incorporating essential oil on Botrytis cinerea and strawberry attributes
Ag-chitosan nanocomposites in edible coatings affect the quality of fresh-cut melon
Effects of clove essential oil (Caryophyllus aromaticus L.) nanoemulsion incorporated edible coating on shelf-life of fresh cut apple pieces
Comparison between essential oils and supercritical extracts into chitosan-based edible coatings on strawberry quality during cold storage
Evaluation of the effect of nanocellulose edible coating on strawberries inoculated with aspergillus flavus through image analysis
Peptide-based edible coatings to control postharvest fungal spoilage of mango (Mangifera indica L.) fruit
Effect of carboxymethyl cellulose enriched with seabuckthorn (Hippophaerhamnoides L.) leaf extract edible coatings on the quality of fresh cut “Maharaji” apple
A review on antimicrobial nano-based edible packaging: Sustainable applications and emerging trends in food industry
Preparation of water-soluble dialdehyde cellulose enhanced chitosan coating and its application on the preservation of mandarin fruit
Incorporation of ascorbic acid in chitosan-based edible coating improves postharvest quality and storability of strawberry fruits
Gum Arabic edible coating embedded aqueous plant extracts: Interactive effects of partaking components and its effectiveness on cold storage of fresh-cut capsicum
Calcium application via hydrocooling and edible coating for the conservation and quality of cashew apples
The use of bacteriophage-based edible coatings for the biocontrol of Salmonella in strawberries
Postbiotics-enriched flaxseed mucilage coating: A solution to improving postharvest quality and shelf life of strawberry
Postbiotics-enriched flaxseed mucilage coating: A solution to improving postharvest quality and shelf life of strawberry
Application of nanoemulsion based edible coating on fresh-cut papaya
Microbiological and physicochemical quality of strawberries (Fragaria× ananassa) coated with lactobacillus rhamnosus and inulin enriched gelatin films
Development and application of rice starch based edible coating to improve the postharvest storage potential and quality of plum fruit (Prunus salicina)
Layer-by-layer edible coatings based on mucilages, pullulan and chitosan and its effect on quality and preservation of fresh-cut pineapple (Ananas comosus)
Oxidative stress associated with chilling injury in immature fruit: Postharvest technological and biotechnological solutions
Effect of edible coating incorporating sodium carboxymethyl cellulose/cellulose nanofibers and self-produced mandarin oil on strawberries
Effect of chitosan-ascorbic acid composite coating on postharvest quality of custard apple (Annona squamosa)
Strawberry preservation using combination of yam bean starch, agarwood Aetoxylon bouya essential oil, and calcium propionate edible coating during cold storage evaluated by TOPSIS-Shannon entropy
Application of pregelatinized corn starch and basil essential oil edible coating with cellulose nanofiber as Pickering emulsion agent to prevent quality-quantity loss of mandarin orange
Evaluation of chitosan coatings enriched with turmeric and green tea extracts on postharvest preservation of strawberries
Effect of 1-Methylcyclopropene combined with chitosan-coated film on storage quality of passion fruit
Advances in bio food packaging–an overview
Development and analysis of silver nitroprusside nanoparticle-incorporated sodium alginate films for Banana Browning prevention
Advances in control technologies and mechanisms to treat peel browning in postharvest fruit
Effect of carboxymethyl chitosan-gelatin-based edible coatings on the quality and antioxidant properties of sweet cherry during postharvest storage
Chitosan coatings with different degrees of deacetylation regulate the postharvest quality of sweet cherry through internal metabolism
Development of mussel-inspired chitosan-derived edible coating for fruit preservation
Application of hydroxypropyl methylcellulose to improve the wettability of chitosan coating and its preservation performance on tangerine fruits
Modification of edible chitosan/polyethylene glycol films fortified with date palm fruit waste extract as promising antimicrobial food packaging materials for fresh strawberry conservation

Data availability
The data that has been used is confidential.