Health-Related Physical Fitness Evaluation in HIV-Diagnosed Children and Adolescents: A Scoping Review
Background: Health-related physical fitness has been widely used to investigate the adverse effects of HIV infection/ART in children and adolescents. However, methods/protocols and cut-points applied for investigating health-related physical fitness are not clear. The aim of this scoping review was to map the literature to identify gaps in knowledge regarding the methods/protocols and cut-points. Methods: A scoping review, following the Joana Briggs Institute (JBI) guidelines, was conducted through ten major databases. Search followed the PCC strategy to construct block of terms related to population (children and adolescents), concept (health-related physical fitness components) and context (HIV infection). Results: The search resulted in 7545 studies. After duplicate removal, titles and abstracts reading and full text assessment, 246 studies were included in the scoping review. Body composition was the most investigated component (n = 244), followed by muscular strength/endurance (n = 23), cardiorespiratory fitness (n = 15) and flexibility (n = 4). The World Health Organization growth curves, and nationals’ surveys were the most reference values applied to classify body composition (n = 149), followed by internal cut-points (n = 30) and cut-points developed through small populations (n = 16). Cardiorespiratory fitness was classified through cut-points from three different assessment batteries, as well as cut-points developed through studies with small populations, muscular strength/endurance and flexibility were classified through the same cut-points from five different assessment batteries. Conclusions: The research on muscular strength/endurance, cardiorespiratory fitness and flexibility has been scarcely explored. The lack of studies that investigated method usability as well as reference values was evidenced.

1. Introduction
In the 1980s, period when the first cases were recorded, the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection with was highly lethal. However, in the 1990s, with the introduction of combined antiretroviral therapy (ART), the characterization of the HIV infection was changed from highly lethal to a controllable chronic disease. Thus, substantially increasing the life expectancy and quality of life of HIV-infected children and adolescents. ART’s main objectives are to suppress HIV replication, rebuild immune function and reduce drug resistance, as well as toxicity, allowing for adequate growth and development. Despite being the main way in the treatment of HIV infection, continuous use of ART can lead to adverse effects such as complications of the cardiovascular and nervous systems, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance and changes in body composition, in addition to mitochondrial and renal toxicity. Furthermore, in 2021, around 160,000 new cases of HIV infection in children and adolescents and 97,500 deaths of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents under the age of 15 were recorded, and this high mortality rate over the number of new cases may be related to the adverse effects of prolonged use of ART. These facts highlight the relevance of continued investigation of the HIV infection mechanism and ART’s possible adverse effects.
The investigation of health-related physical fitness in children and adolescents has been widely used to identify and understand those possible adverse effects of HIV infection/ART use such as changes in body composition (alterations in body fat distribution, reduction in bone mineral content and fat-free mass); reduced cardiorespiratory fitness; reduced muscular strength/endurance; and reduced flexibility. However, studies that investigated HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents ended up developing their own methods/protocols for evaluating the health-related physical fitness and also used empirical cut-points for physical fitness tests to classify the participants. This lack of standardization limits the comparison between studies and the direction of future studies.
Furthermore, the investigation of possible effects of HIV infection/ART use in relation to the different health-related physical fitness components has been carried out in isolation, that is, with studies focusing mainly on one of the components such as body composition without observing other components such as cardiorespiratory fitness. This approach makes sense when the aim of the study is to investigate possible effects of HIV infection/ART use in a specific component. However, previous studies have showed that: (I) muscular strength/endurance is directly associated with the number of muscle fibers, where the greater the number of muscle fibers, the greater the muscular strength/endurance values; (II) cardiorespiratory fitness is directly associated with the amount of type I (oxidative) muscle fibers, where the greater the number of type I muscle fibers, the greater the cardiorespiratory fitness. Thus, focusing mainly on only one specific component limits the understanding of whether the changes observed in the investigated component were explained by changes in another component, or furthermore, whether these changes result in changes in other components as a ripple effect.
In addition to the relationship between the components, it is known that improvements in health-related physical fitness components (body composition, cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength/endurance and flexibility) can be the result of improvements in physical activity. Thus, physical activity can moderate the relationship between HIV infection/ART use and the health-related physical fitness components, as well the differences between HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents and their peers without HIV infection diagnosis. Consequently, the results of studies that investigated health-related physical fitness to understand the relationship with HIV infection/ART use, or to compare HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents with their peers without HIV infection diagnosis, may be misinterpreted due to do not considering physical activity.
Thus, the aim of this scoping review was to map the available literature that investigated the health-related physical fitness in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents, and through that to identify gaps in knowledge regarding the methods/protocols and cut-points applied. In addition to that, studies that simultaneously researched the health-related physical fitness components and physical activity were identified.

2. Materials and Methods

2.1. Preliminary Search
The preliminary search was conducted in January 2024, through the search tools of the Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online (MEDLINE) (via PubMed), Cochrane Library, Joana Briggs Institute (JBI) Evidence Synthesis and Open Science Framework (OSF) to identify scoping reviews or systematic reviews that mapped the health-related physical fitness of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents. Two systematic reviews with meta-analysis were found, which aimed to investigate muscle function and aerobic capacity in HIV-diagnosed patients, and to investigate the aerobic capacity, muscle strength and body composition of HIV-diagnosed adolescents. However, those reviews included only studies that compared results of HIV-diagnosed participants with comparison groups of participants without HIV diagnoses, thus excluding studies that investigated only HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents.

2.2. Review Questions
This review aimed to map, compile and disseminate the knowledge regarding the health-related physical fitness of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents, based on the following questions: which health-related physical fitness components have been investigated in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents? Which methods/protocols and cut-points were applied to investigate the health-related physical fitness of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents?
Considering the assumption that the physical activity level is directly related to the health-related physical fitness, in which higher level of physical activity is related to improvements in the health-related physical fitness. Studies that researched health-related physical fitness and physical activity were investigated to identify the approach that has been given to physical activity and whether the physical activity level has influenced the results found regarding the health-related physical fitness.

2.3. Protocol and Checklist
This scoping review (design, conduction and report) was developed following the JBI guidelines and the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) checklist and explanation. The final protocol of this scoping review was previously registered in the Open Science Framework (OSF) (, accessed on 14 April 2024).

2.4. Inclusion Criteria

2.4.1. Participants
Studies that included children and adolescents aged 2 to 19 years and/or with mean age of up to 19 years, diagnosed with HIV infection (with or without comparison groups).

2.4.2. Concept
Studies that investigated the health-related physical fitness components (body composition, cardiorespiratory fitness, muscle strength/endurance and flexibility) through laboratory and/or field tests were included in the review.

2.4.3. Context
There was no context restriction regarding sex, geographic location, ethnicity, viral load and ART use, or physical activity level. However, studies that did not investigate participants with HIV infection diagnosis or did not present the method/protocol to assess the health-related physical fitness component investigated were excluded. Moreover, there was no restriction regarding the time of study publication.

2.5. Types of Evidence Sources
Original cross-sectional studies, longitudinal studies, cohort studies, case–control designs and controlled trials studies that were published in peer-review journals, with primary data and explicit description of the methods were included. Dissertations, theses, book chapters, conference abstracts and presentations, point of view or opinion articles, methodological and review articles were excluded.

2.6. Text Access
Studies that presented unavailability of access to the full text, even after attempts to contact authors and journals, were excluded.

2.7. Search Strategy
Descriptors and their respective entry terms were searched through the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) and the Health Sciences Descriptors (DECS). The descriptors definition was made in English, Portuguese and Spanish. Boolean operators (“AND” and “OR”) were used to construct blocks of terms and to combine them. The PCC (population, concept, and context) strategy was applied to block of terms construction in which terms related to the population (children and adolescents), concept (health-related physical fitness components) and context (HIV infection) were combined. The option to apply only terms related to the health-related physical fitness components (as concept) was made to avoid studies that only investigated the physical activity level.
The ten following databases were used, independently by two researchers, to identify the articles to the scoping review: Cochrane Library, MEDLINE (via PubMed), Excerpta Medica dataBASE EMBASE (via Ovid), Web of Science, SPORTDiscus (via EBSCOhost), Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature (LILACS) (via BVS), Scopus, Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO) and Science Direct and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL) (via EBSCOhost). Additional information regarding the search strategy can be found in the Supplementary Materials.

2.8. Evidence Screening and Selection
The search results from each database were imported into the EndNoteTM 21 reference manager, version 21.2 (ClarivateTM, Philadelphia, PA, USA) where duplicate references identified by the software were excluded. The screening process involved two levels conducted independently by two researchers. At the first level (screening), the titles and abstracts were read to identify possible eligible studies according to the inclusion criteria. In the second level (eligibility), the entire texts were read to identify the studies to be included in the scoping review. The discrepancies between the two researchers, regarding the eligibility and inclusion of the articles, were resolved by a third researcher when necessary.

2.9. Data Extraction
The data of the articles were extracted into an Excel® (Microsoft©, Redmond, WA, USA) spreadsheet, by two independent reviewers, within a standardized model specific to the study and the following data were extracted: (1) year of publication, first author and country; (2) study design and purpose; (3) groups (HIV infection, and comparison groups if investigated), sample size, sex and mean age; (4) health-related physical fitness component(s) investigated, method/protocol and cut-points for classification; (5) approach applied to physical activity (e.g., moderator to group differences or to association with health-related physical fitness components).

2.10. Data Analysis
The data from the Excel® (Microsoft©, Redmond, WA, USA) spreadsheet was extracted to the R© 4.2.1 (The R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) software and coded to tabulate the results and to perform the data analysis. Data was organized first to describe the group of studies through the identification of the year, first author and country were the division proposed by the United Nations Children’s Foundation (UNICEF) was applied to identify the investigated populations. Then, the study design and purpose were identified and the information regarding the sample characteristics such as groups investigated, sample size, sex and age group were analyzed. After that, the health-related physical fitness components, method/protocol, and cut-point applied were investigated. Then, studies that researched health-related physical fitness and physical activity were surveyed to identify the approach that has been given to physical activity and to verify the influence of the level of physical activity on the results found in relation to health-related physical fitness.

2.11. Presentation of Results
The process of identification and inclusion of the studies was presented in a flowchart following the JBI and PRISMA-ScR recommendations. The results were organized to describe which health-related physical fitness components were investigated along the timeline of investigation, as well as the methods/protocols and cut-points applied, and to identify if the physical activity level has influenced the results found regarding the health-related physical fitness.

3. Results

3.1. Search
The initial database search resulted in 7545 studies. Following the removal of duplicate studies (1794), the titles and abstracts of 5751 studies were read. Among these, 5226 studies were excluded due to not meeting the inclusion criteria. Therefore, the full text of 525 studies were assessed. Among these, 163 studies were excluded for investigating a sample with mean age greater than 19 years, while 83 studies were excluded due to the study design (reviews, conference abstracts, theses and dissertations). Additionally, nine studies were excluded as they did not involve samples with a diagnosis of HIV infection, and 12 were excluded because they did not investigate health-related physical fitness components. Furthermore, 12 studies were excluded due to unavailability of access to the full text. As a result, a total of 246 studies were included in the scoping review (Figure 1).

3.2. Characteristic of Studies (Period of Publication, Regions, Design, Studies Purpose, and Samples)
Regarding the publication period of the studies, the first study that investigated the topic of interest in the scoping review was published in 1995. The number of publications over the years showed increasing behavior with the publication of eight studies between 1995 and 1999 (less than two studies per year), 80 studies between the years 2000 and 2009 (eight studies per year), 104 studies between 2010 and 2019 (average of 10.4 studies per year) and 54 studies from 2020 to 2023 (average of 13.5 studies per year) (Table 1).
Populations from North America and Western and Central Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, Sub-Saharan Africa, Asia and the Pacific were represented among the 246 studies. The North America and Central and Western Europe were the most represented populations among the studies, represented in 132 studies (50.0%), of which 71 studies represented the United States population and 34 represented the Italian population. Populations from Latin America and the Caribbean were represented in 65 studies (24.6%), with the Brazilian population being represented in 48 studies. Sub-Saharan African populations were represented by 50 studies (18.9%), of which 30 studies represented the South African population. Asian and Pacific populations were represented in 17 studies (6.4%), with the Thai population represented in 11 of these studies (Table 1).
Regarding the study design, 154 analytic studies and 92 descriptive studies (62.6% and 37.4%, respectively) were identified. Of those, 56.5% (n = 139 studies) aimed to investigate associations related to at least one of the health-related physical fitness components, 17.91% (n = 44 studies) investigated differences between HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents and their peers without a diagnosis of HIV infection, 15.0% (n = 37 studies) investigated the effects of medications ART-related or therapies complementary to ART, 5.3% (n = 13 studies) investigated the validation of methods to investigate the health-related physical fitness components, 3.7% (n = 9 studies) investigated prevalences related to at least one of the health-related physical fitness components and 1.6% (n = 4 studies) investigated the effects of interventions on health-related physical fitness components and/or on the physical activity level of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents (Table 1).
Regarding the sample size of participants diagnosed with HIV infection, the study with the smallest sample investigated six participants and the study with the largest sample investigated 826 participants. Most of the studies investigated children and adolescents aged two to nineteen of both sexes (male and female), with only one study investigating only females. However, twelve studies did not report the sex of the participants (Supplementary Table S1, Supplementary Materials).

3.3. Health-Related Physical Fitness Components
Body composition was the health-related physical fitness component most investigated, being present in 99.2% of the studies (n = 244) and was mostly investigated through anthropometry (weight, height and body mass index) (n = 235). However, studies that used laboratory methods such as dual emission X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) (n = 127), computed tomography (n = 7), ultrasonography (n = 5), deuterium dilution (n = 4) and air displacement plethysmography (n = 3) were also identified. Muscular strength/endurance, the second most investigated component, was assessed in 9.3% of the studies (n = 23) through isokinetic isometry, vertical or horizontal jump tests and maximum repetition tests (e.g., abdominal resistance test and elbow flexion and extension test). Cardiorespiratory fitness was investigated in 6.1% of the studies (n = 15), through laboratory tests of maximal and submaximal effort (on treadmill or cycle ergometer tests) with breath-to-breath gas exchange analysis, as well as field tests (running or walking tests) for subsequent estimation of cardiorespiratory fitness. Flexibility was investigated in 2.4% of the studies (n = 4), through the sit-to-reach test and in two studies through the modified sit-to-reach test (Table 2).
Regarding the cut-points applied to classify the body composition, the use of international reference values, such as the World Health Organization (WHO) growth curves and national surveys, was observed in 149 studies. However, the use of internal cut-points (e.g., standard deviations) was observed in 30 studies. Moreover, 16 studies used cut-points developed through studies with small populations without HIV infection diagnosis. Additionally, one study developed a new cut-point for identifying lipodystrophy in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents through anthropometry and four studies did not describe the applied cut-point (Table 3 and Table S2).
Regarding the cardiorespiratory fitness, the use of cut-points from three different assessment batteries for large populations was observed, as well as cut-points developed through two studies with small populations without HIV infection diagnosis (Table 3).
Concerning muscular strength/endurance and flexibility, the use of the same cut-points from five different assessment batteries for large populations was observed. However, one of the studies used the cut-points of three batteries without identifying which cut-point of each battery was applied to each component (Table 3).

3.4. Investigation of Physical Activity
Physical activity was also investigated in 20.3% of all studies (n = 50), in which the first study was published in 2002, through structured questionnaires (n = 33), accelerometers (n = 10) and pedometers (n = 2). However, five studies did not report the method. Regarding physical activity level, the WHO physical activity recommendations were applied as reference value in ten studies for classify the physical activity level. Internals cut-points, such as the use of standard deviations, were applied in 12 studies. Furthermore, six studies did not report the applied cut-point and 20 studies did not classify the physical activity level. Physical activity was investigated through different purposes such as group comparisons (n = 21), associations with health-related physical fitness components (n = 12) and models adjustments (n = 8). Where six studies observe no association between physical activity level and body fat and bone mass parameters. However, four studies observe negative association between physical activity level and fat mass parameters, two studies observe positive association between physical activity level and bone mass parameters, one study observes positive association between physical activity level and fat-free mass and one study observes positive association between physical activity level and muscle strength/endurance. In addition to that, the results of eight studies that adjusted models’ analysis through physical activity level did not change (Supplementary Materials Table S3).

4. Discussion
The relationship between body composition and the HIV infection/ART use has been the studies main focus, since the beginning of the health-related physical fitness components investigation in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents, primarily to understand alterations in growth pattern and nutritional status and most recently to investigate modifications in body composition such as changes in fat mass distribution, alterations in bone mass and reduction in muscle mass. In the early 2000s, research began on the cardiorespiratory fitness, followed by the beginning of the research into muscular strength/endurance in the mid-2000s and the beginning of the research into flexibility in 2010, with the aim to investigate the relationship between the HIV infection/ART use and reduce cardiorespiratory fitness, low muscular strength/endurance and flexibility. In addition to the investigation of different health-related physical fitness components over time, the number of publications over the years has shown increasing behavior for the four health-related physical fitness components. These facts demonstrate changes in the investigation of the health-related physical fitness components with new perspectives over the years, and increased interest in investigating the different health-related physical fitness components in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents. However, when observed the proportions of studies that investigate muscular strength/endurance, cardiorespiratory fitness, and flexibility in comparison with proportion of studies that investigate body composition, it shows that the investigation of those health-related physical fitness components has been scarcely explored in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents.
Regarding the methods/protocols and cut-points applied to investigate the health-related physical fitness components in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents, the use of reference methods to investigate the different health-related physical fitness components was highlighted, as well as alternatives field tests that are more accessible for use in epidemiological studies. However, only 13 studies that aimed to validate methods for investigating the health-related physical fitness components were identified, of which 12 studies investigated the validation of methods for assessing body composition. Furthermore, studies that proposed reference values for evaluating health-related physical fitness were not identified. Considering that the method validation process aims to identify their usability to evaluate the investigated variables ensuring the accuracy of the collected measurements, as well as suitability for the investigated population and that the process of proposing reference values aims to elucidate parameters related to factors such as health indicators. Despite the use of different pre-established reference values, such as the WHO growth curves, and the use of reference values from protocols which were developed aiming at global health parameters. Studies that aimed to investigate the relationship between reference values and specific health indicators for the population of HIV-infected children and adolescents, such as viral load, CD4 and CD8 lymphocyte counts and immunosuppression status were not identified. Furthermore, the use of reference values still in the consolidation phase was observed. Thus, the lack of validation studies that aim to identify the usability of methods/protocols, as well as studies that aim to propose reference values and/or to verify the suitability of pre-established reference values for the investigation of the health-related physical fitness components of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents was evidenced.
Observing the aim of the studies, the results of the present scoping review reflect a broad descriptive investigation of differences between HIV-diagnosed populations and HIV non diagnosed peers, prevalences related to health-related physical fitness components and different associations between health-related physical fitness components and variables such as the HIV infection status (viral load, CD4 and CD8 lymphocyte count and immunosuppression status) and use of different ART regimens. Moreover, the proportions of studies demonstrated a lack of studies to possibly under-stand the cause of changes in the health-related physical fitness components in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents where it is observed that only 15.0% of the studies aimed to investigate possible changes in the health-related physical fitness components related to the ART use, or ART related therapies and 1.7% of the studies aimed to investigate effects related to interventions that aimed to improve health-related physical fitness components and/or the physical activity level in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents.
In addition to that, studies that aimed to investigate the relationship between HIV infection/ART use and the health-related physical fitness components showed changes in the body fat distribution, reduction in the bone mass and fat-free mass. However, only 12.2% (n = 30) of the studies investigated more than one the health-related physical fitness component and no study that investigated the relationship between the health-related physical fitness components was found. Muscular strength/endurance is directly associated with the amount of muscle fibers—that is, related to the amount of fat-free mass, specifically muscle tissue, as well as cardiorespiratory fitness—is directly associated with the amount of type I (oxidative) muscle fibers. Investigating a certain health-related physical fitness component without investigating other related component may be neglecting relevant moderating factors of the relationships investigated, such as the interdependent relationships between the different components. A lack of knowledge was shown in terms of the relationship between the health-related physical components, such as an example how much changes in body composition represent in reduction in muscular strength/endurance, cardiorespiratory fitness and flexibility.
Regarding the regions in which the studies where developed, the estimate of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents in 2022 was approximately 2.6 million, of which 84.6% (2.2 million) were from the Sub-Saharan Africa, 3.8% (99,000) from Asia and the Pacific and 3.3% (85,000) from the Latin America and the Caribbean. Although all the regions across the globe were represented, the proportion of populations investigated in the studies does not reflect the most representative populations of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents across the globe when its observed that the regions that presented the highest proportion of studies (North America and Western and Central Europe, with 50.0% of the studies) and the regions that presented the lowest proportion of studies (Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia and the Pacific, with 18.9% and 6.4%, respectively).
Physical activity was investigated through different aims such as to investigate differences between HIV-diagnosed group compared to non-diagnosed groups, to investigate the association between health-related physical fitness and physical activity level and to adjust models through physical activity. In addition to the assumption that improvements in physical activity level can result in improvements in health-related physical fitness components, it follows that physical activity can moderate the relationship between HIV infection/ART use and the health-related physical fitness components, as well the differences between HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents and their peers without IV infection diagnosis. The twelve studies that investigated the association between health-related physical fitness and physical activity presented divergent results, either indicating association, or showing the absence of association. Moreover, studies that used the physical activity level to adjust models observe that if physical activity was moderating the investigated relationships, no difference was shown in the results after the adjustments through physical activity. Those inconclusive results regarding the relationship between health-related physical fitness components and physical activity can be related to the use of different methods to investigate physical activity. Where the use of direct methods, considered reference methods to investigate the physical activity level, as well as indirect methods, considered as alternatives methods that are more accessible for epidemiological studies, was observed. Moreover, physical activity was classified using different reference values and cut-points. Where the WHO Guidelines on Physical Activity and Sedentary Behavior was applied in 20% (n = 10) of the studies, however, 24% (n = 12) applied internal cut-points, 12% (n = 6) did not report the cut-point applied. In addition to that, the physical activity level investigation through structured questionaries that did not report usability was observe in most of the studies, and only one study investigated the usability of structed questionaries and proposed cut-points to estimate the physical activity level in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents. In addition to the lack of validation studies that aim to identify the usability of methods/protocols, the lack of standardization between studies in terms of investigating the level of physical activity was also observed. Thus, it is difficult to make a comparison between these studies and interpret their findings in the literature. Another fact that can be related to the inconclusive results regarding the relationship between health-related physical fitness components and physical activity is the participants physical activity level itself. It can be observed that although almost half of the studies showed no difference between HIV-diagnosed participant and HIV-non diagnosed participants and the other half showed lower physical activity level form HIV-diagnosed participants, one fact in common to the studies is the participants low physical activity level. Thus, the physical activity level can be insufficient for in improvements in health-related physical fitness components, and will not work as a moderator of the relationship between health-related physical fitness components and the investigated variables.
Concerning the studies that aimed to investigate differences between HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents and their peers without diagnosis, part of these studies adopted matching strategies such as matching by sex and age to ensure data quality. The importance of adopting matching strategies lies in the fact that the differences between HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents when compared to their peers without HIV infection diagnosis, as well as the relationships between the health-related physical fitness components with the investigated variables, could be explained by variables that can moderate these differences and relationships such as sex and the physical activity level. The relevance of adopting these matching strategies was evidenced in this scoping review considering that females presented higher values of fat mass percentage, body mass component and in the flexibility test when compared to males, and that males presented higher values of cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength/endurance and physical activity level when compared to females. However, the results from these scoping reviews show the lack of knowledge in terms of understanding the importance of the physical activity level as a moderating factor in the relationship between HIV infection/ART use and the health-related physical fitness components in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents in terms of the physical activity level investigation. Another limitation of the interpretation of these studies is the difference between HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents when compared whit their peers without a diagnosis of HIV infection.
Despite this, this scoping review has limitations, such as the fact that the literature search did not include the gray literature, such as theses and dissertations, as it was not part of the search and inclusion process. The adoption of this strategy was due to the fact that, although gray literature can highlight the findings of emerging research and reflect the updated panorama of the topic investigated, it can, in terms of quality, present methodological flaws which can interfere in the reliability and interpretation of the results found.

5. Conclusions
Through the results of this scoping review, it is concluded that the relationship between body composition and the HIV infection and use of ART has been the primarily focus of most studies. However, research on muscular strength/endurance, cardiorespiratory fitness and flexibility has been scarcely explored. Regarding the methods/protocols and cut-points applied to investigate the health-related physical fitness components in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents, the lack of studies that investigated methods usability as well as reference values was evidenced. Moreover, a lack of studies to possibly understand the causal relationship of alterations on the health-related physical fitness components in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents was observed. Additionally, the regions with the highest prevalence of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents were the least investigated. Therefore, the results found may not be reflecting the population across the globe in a generalized way, but rather reflecting small populations. Regarding the studies that investigated the health-related physical fitness components and the physical activity level, it is not clear if the physical activity level should be investigated as a moderator factor to the investigated relationships between health-related physical fitness and the research variables. It was also evident that the investigation of differences between HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents and their peers must be associated with matching strategies that aim to mitigate the influence of variables that moderate the prevalence and relationships investigated. Thus, thought the scoping review finds the following need for future research directions is presented: (I) to develop studies to investigate cardiorespiratory fitness, muscular strength/endurance and flexibility; (II) to develop studies to investigate methods usability as well as reference values for this population; (III) to develop studies to possibly understand the causal relationship of alterations on the health-related physical fitness components in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents; (IV) to develop studies in the regions with the highest prevalence of HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents; (V) to develop studies to possibly understand if physical activity level can be investigated as a moderator factor to the relationships between health-related physical fitness and the research variables.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: , Supplementary Table S1: Publication year, first author, country, design, purpose, and participants of the studies included in the scoping review; Supplementary Table S2: Health-related physical fitness components investigated and physical activity level (protocols/tests and cut-points applied); Supplementary Table S3: Physical activity investigation: methods/protocols, reference values and cut-points, aims and outcomes. Supplementary Table S4: References included in the scoping review.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, J.A.C.d.C., T.R.d.L. and D.A.S.S.; Methodology, J.A.C.d.C., T.R.d.L. and D.A.S.S.; Formal Analysis, J.A.C.d.C., T.R.d.L. and D.A.S.S.; Writing—Original Draft Preparation, J.A.C.d.C., T.R.d.L. and D.A.S.S.; Writing—Review & Editing, J.A.C.d.C., T.R.d.L. and D.A.S.S.; Visualization, J.A.C.d.C., T.R.d.L. and D.A.S.S.; Supervision, D.A.S.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Data Availability Statement
No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is not applicable to this article.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
Effect of combination therapy including protease inhibitors on mortality among children and adolescents infected with HIV-1
Growing up with HIV: Children, adolescents, and young adults with perinatally acquired HIV infection
Metabolic and Renal Adverse Effects of Antiretroviral Therapy in HIV-Infected Children and Adolescents
Metabolic complications of HIV therapy in children
Gastrostomy tube supplementation for HIV-infected children
Growth velocity, fat-free mass energy intake are inversely related to viral load in HIV-infected children
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and an optimized background regimen of antiretroviral agents as salvage therapy: Impact on bone mineral density in HIV-infected children
Detection of lipoatrophy in human immunodeficiency virus-1-infected children treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy
Longitudinal changes in regional fat content in HIV-infected children and adolescents
Prevalencia de factores de riesgo de enfermedad cardiovascular en niños y adolescentes con infección por HIV
Impact of adherence and anthropometric characteristics on nevirapine pharmacokinetics and exposure among HIV-infected Kenyan children
Long-Term Changes of Subcutaneous Fat Mass in HIV-Infected Children on Antiretroviral Therapy: A Retrospective Analysis of Longitudinal Data from Two Pediatric HIV-Cohorts
Low Bone Mineral Density in Vertically HIV-infected Children and Adolescents: Risk Factors and the Role of T-cell Activation and Senescence
Can We Improve Stavudine’s Safety Profile in Children? Pharmacokinetics of Intracellular Stavudine Triphosphate with Reduced Dosing
Impact of Vitamin D and Calcium Supplementation on Bone Mineral Density and Bone Metabolism Among Thai Adolescents with Perinatally Acquired Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Infection: A Randomized Clinical Trial
Gut Dysfunction Markers Are Associated with Body Composition in Youth Living with Perinatally Acquired Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Impaired Bone Architecture in Peripubertal Children With HIV, Despite Treatment with Antiretroviral Therapy: A Cross-Sectional Study from Zimbabwe
Bone mineral density among children living with HIV failing first-line anti-retroviral therapy in Uganda: A sub-study of the CHAPAS-4 trial
Perinatal HIV infection is associated with deficits in muscle function in children and adolescents: A cross-sectional study in Zimbabwe
Functional aerobic impairment in adolescents seropositive for HIV: A quasiexperimental analysis
Aerobic capacity in late adolescents infected with HIV and controls
Physical fitness in children infected with the human immunodeficiency virus: Associations with highly active antiretroviral therapy
Aerobic Fitness and Moderate to Vigorous Physical Activity in Children and Adolescents Living with HIV
Muscle strength, flexibility and cardiorespiratory endurance in children with human immunodeficiency virus on antiretroviral therapy: A case control study
Avaliação das variáveis de força muscular, agilidade e composição corporal em crianças vivendo com HIV/AIDS
The effect of a structured exercise program on nutrition and fitness outcomes in human immunodeficiency virus-infected children
Muscle power in children, youth and young adults who acquired HIV perinatally
Muscle strength in young children perinatally infected with HIV who were initiated on antiretroviral therapy early
Body composition, physical fitness and physical activity in Mozambican children and adolescents living with HIV
Accuracy of octa-polar bioelectrical impedance analysis for the assessment of total and appendicular body composition in children and adolescents with HIV: Comparison with dual energy X-ray absorptiometry and air displacement plethysmography
Aerobic fitness and physical activity are inversely associated with body fat, dyslipidemia and inflammatory mediators in children and adolescents living with HIV
Prediction of peak VO2 in Children and Adolescents With HIV From an Incremental Cycle Ergometer Test
Body composition in prepubertal, HIV-infected children: A comparison of bioelectrical impedance analysis and dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry
Anthropometric measures associated with fat mass estimation in children and adolescents with HIV
Markers of Bone Mineral Metabolism and Cardiac Structure and Function in Perinatally HIV-Infected and HIV-Exposed but Uninfected Children and Adolescents
Deficits in Bone Architecture and Strength in Children Living With HIV on Antiretroviral Therapy
Height adjustment reduces occurrence of low bone mineral density in children and adolescents with HIV
Effect of HIV infection on growth and bone density in peripubertal children in the era of antiretroviral therapy: A cross-sectional study in Zimbabwe
Motor function, muscle strength and health-related quality of life of children perinatally infected with HIV
Association between lipid and glycemic profile and total body and trunk fat in children and adolescents diagnosed with HIV+
Bone health in HIV-infected children on antiretroviral therapy: An Indian study
Body Fat Distribution and Metabolic Changes in a Cohort of Adolescents Living With HIV Switched to an Antiretroviral Regimen Containing Dolutegravir
Immune Markers and Their Association with Bone Density in Children, Adolescents, and Young Adults with Perinatally Acquired HIV
Safety and Efficacy of 48 and 96 Weeks of Alendronate in Children and Adolescents With Perinatal Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection and Low Bone Mineral Density for Age
Does antiretroviral therapy change the relationship between body composition and muscle strength in children and adolescents diagnosed with HIV?
Exercise Improves Cardiovascular Risk Factors, Fitness, and Quality Of Life in Hiv+ Children and Adolescents: Pilot Study
Examining psychosocial correlates of physical activity and sedentary behavior in youth with and without HIV
The effects of a home exercise programme on the exercise endurance of children infected with HIV
Systematic review of the relationships between objectively measured physical activity and health indicators in school-aged children and youth
Muscle Strength and Aerobic Capacity in HIV-Infected Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Comparison of Muscle Strength, Aerobic Capacity and Body Composition between Healthy Adolescents and Those Living with HIV: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Updated methodological guidance for the conduct of scoping reviews
PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and Explanation
HIV Statistics-Global and Regional Trends-UNICEF DATA
Measurement and Interpretation of Maximal Aerobic Power in Children
Current body composition measurement techniques
Body composition in children
Subjective versus Objective Measure of Physical Activity: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Convergent Validity of the Physical Activity Questionnaire for Children (PAQ-C)
Field-Based Health-Related Physical Fitness Tests in Children and Adolescents: A Systematic Review
Application of bioimpedance analysis for estimating body composition in prepubertal children infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1
Development of an instrument to assess nutritional risk factors for children infected with human immunodeficiency virus
Z score prediction model for assessment of bone mineral content in pediatric diseases
Bioelectrical impedance analysis models for prediction of total body water and fat-free mass in healthy and HIV-infected children and adolescents
Applicability of quantitative ultrasonography of the radius and tibia in HIV-infected children and adolescents
Biceps skin-fold thickness may detect and predict early lipoatrophy in HIV-infected children
Prediction of Areal Bone Mineral Density and Bone Mineral Content in Children and Adolescents Living With HIV Based on Anthropometric Variables
Are traditional body fat equations and anthropometry valid to estimate body fat in children and adolescents living with HIV?
Bone Mineral Content Prediction by Bioelectrical Impedance Analysis in Children and Adolescents Diagnosed with HIV Infection: Comparison with Dual Energy X-ray Absorptiometry: A Cross-Sectional Study
Comparison of quantitative ultrasonography and dual X-ray absorptiometry for bone status assessment in South African children living with HIV
Top 10 International Priorities for Physical Fitness Research and Surveillance Among Children and Adolescents: A Twin-Panel Delphi Study
Predictive validity of health-related fitness in youth: A systematic review
Cut points and contexts
Physical Activity Assessment in Children and Adolescents
Development of a WHO growth reference for school-aged children and adolescents
Revised surveillance case definition for HIV infection—United States, 2014
Alpha-fit test battery norms for children and adolescents from 5 to 18 years of age obtained by a linear interpolation of existing European physical fitness references
Longitudinal changes of bone mineral density and metabolism in antiretroviral-treated human immunodeficiency virus-infected children
Predictors of bone mineral density in human immunodeficiency virus-1 infected children
Endocrine abnormalities and impaired growth in human immunodeficiency virus-infected children
Morphologic and metabolic abnormalities in vertically HIV-infected children and youth
Total body and spinal bone mineral density across Tanner stage in perinatally HIV-infected and uninfected children and youth in PACTG 1045
Biomarkers of vascular dysfunction in children infected with human immunodeficiency virus-1
Body fat distribution in perinatally HIV-infected and HIV-exposed but uninfected children in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy: Outcomes from the Pediatric HIV/AIDS Cohort Study
Abnormalities in body composition and nutritional status in HIV-infected children and adolescents on antiretroviral therapy
Nutritional assessment and lipid profile in HIV-infected children and adolescents treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy
Using cluster heat maps to investigate relationships between body composition and laboratory measurements in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected children and young adults
Metabolic abnormalities and viral replication are associated with biomarkers of vascular dysfunction in HIV-infected children
Bone mineral density in children and adolescents with perinatal HIV infection
Anthropometric measurements and lipid profiles to detect early lipodystrophy in antiretroviral therapy experienced HIV-infected children in the CHAPAS-3 trial
Sclerostin and DKK-1: Two important regulators of bone metabolism in HIV-infected youths
Efavirenz is associated with higher bone mass in South African children with HIV
Decreased Vigorous Physical Activity in School-Aged Children with Human Immunodeficiency Virus in Johannesburg, South Africa
Physical activity and body fat in adolescents living with HIV: A comparative study
Dyslipidemia, chronic inflammation, and subclinical atherosclerosis in children and adolescents infected with HIV: The PositHIVe Health Study
The Association of Fat and Lean Tissue with Whole Body and Spine Bone Mineral Density Is Modified by HIV Status and Sex in Children and Youth
Patterns of Growth, Body Composition, and Lipid Profiles in a South African Cohort of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Infected and Uninfected Children: A Cross-Sectional Study
Longitudinal Changes in Body Composition by Dual-energy Radiograph Absorptiometry Among Perinatally HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected Youth: Increased Risk of Adiposity Among HIV-infected Female Youth
Decreased bone turnover in HIV-infected children on antiretroviral therapy
Predicting cognitive performance from physical activity and fitness in adolescents and young adults in Botswana relative to HIV status
Left Ventricular Function, Epicardial Adipose Tissue, and Carotid Intima-Media Thickness in Children and Adolescents With Vertical HIV Infection
Persistently lower bone mass and bone turnover among South African children living with well controlled HIV
Switch to Efavirenz Attenuates Lipoatrophy in Girls With Perinatal HIV
Physical functioning in adolescents with perinatal HIV
Longitudinal comparison of insulin resistance and dyslipidemia in children with and without perinatal HIV infection in South Africa
High resting energy expenditure, less fat-free mass, and less muscle strength in HIV-infected children: A matched, cross-sectional study
Serum vitamin E levels in children with human immunodeficiency virus infection in Lagos Nigeria
Growth Profiles of Children and Adolescents Living with and without Perinatal HIV Infection in Southern Africa: A Secondary Analysis of Cohort Data
Fracture prevalence and its association with bone density among children living with HIV in Zimbabwe
Evaluation of submaximal endurance in young children living with HIV
Lipodystrophy syndrome in human immunodeficiency virus-infected children
Decreased bone mineral density in HIV-infected children receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy
Dislipemia y lipodistrofia en niños uruguayos VIH positivos en tratamiento antirretroviral
Prevalence of lipodystrophy in HIV-infected children: A cross-sectional study
Factors Associated with Insulin Resistance among Children and Adolescents Perinatally Infected with HIV-1 in the Pediatric HIV/AIDS Cohort Study
Prevalence of vitamin d deficiency among perinatally HIV-infected thai adolescents receiving antiretroviral therapy
Dyslipidemia, Diet and Physical Exercise in Children on Treatment With Antiretroviral Medication in El Salvador: A Cross-sectional Study
Impact of HIV-1 Infection and Antiretroviral Therapy on Bone Homeostasis and Mineral Density in Vertically Infected Patients
Longitudinal Assessment of Growth in Children Born to Mothers with Human-Immunodeficiency-Virus Infection
Nutritional status and cardiac mass and function in children infected with the human immunodeficiency virus
Body composition in prepubertal children with human immunodeficiency virus type I infection
Resting energy expenditure and body composition in children with HIV infection
Body composition in HIV-infected children: Relations with disease progression and survival
Nutritional status changes in HIV-infected children receiving combined antiretroviral therapy including protease inhibitors
Avaliação da composição corporal por antropometria: Crianças com síndrome da imunodeficiência humana
Clinical and metabolic presentation of the lipodystrophic syndrome in HIV-infected children
Predictors of change in the functional status of children with human immunodeficiency virus infection
Lipodystrophy in HIV-infected children is associated with high viral load and low CD4+ -lymphocyte count and CD4+-lymphocyte percentage at baseline and use of protease inhibitors and stavudine
Highly active antiretroviral-treated HIV-infected children show fat distribution changes even in absence of lipodystrophy
Metabolic abnormalities in HIV type 1-infected children treated and not treated with protease inhibitors
Bone mineral loss through increased bone turnover in HIV-infected children treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy
Bone mineral content in girls perinatally infected with HIV
Bone metabolism in children with human immunodeficiency virus infection receiving highly active anti-retroviral therapy including a protease inhibitor
Bone mineral content is lower in prepubertal HIV-infected children
Mitochondrial functionality and mitochondrial DNA content in lymphocytes of vertically infected human immunodeficiency virus-positive children with highly active antiretroviral therapy-related lipodystrophy
Growth in human immunodeficiency virus-infected children receiving ritonavir-containing antiretroviral therapy
Insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and IGF-binding protein 3 response to growth hormone is impaired in HIV-infected children
Severe insulin resistance contrasting with mild anthropometric changes in the adipose tissue of HIV-infected children with lipohypertrophy
Serum lipids, glucose homeostasis and abdominal adipose tissue distribution in protease inhibitor-treated and naive HIV-infected children
Evidence of human immunodeficiency virus-associated lipodystrophy syndrome in children treated with protease inhibitors
Impaired growth hormone secretion correlates with visceral adiposity in highly active antiretroviral treated HIV-infected adolescents
Increased lipodystrophy is associated with increased exposure to highly active antiretroviral therapy in HIV-infected children
Altered bone metabolism in children infected with human immunodeficiency virus
Two-year clinical and immune outcomes in human immunodeficiency virus-infected children who reconstitute CD4 T cells without control of viral replication after combination antiretroviral therapy
Endocrine function in Thai children infected with human immunodeficiency virus
Changed bone status in human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) perinatally infected children is related to low serum free IGF-1
Natural history of lipid abnormalities and fat redistribution among human immunodeficiency virus-infected children receiving long-term, protease inhibitor-containing, highly active antiretroviral therapy regimens
Abnormalities in plasma fatty acid composition in human immunodeficiency virus-infected children treated with protease inhibitors
Insulin sensitivity and β-cell function in protease inhibitor-treated and -naive human immunodeficiency virus-infected children
Analysis of bone mineral content in horizontally HIV-infected children naïve to antiretroviral treatment
Bone measures in HIV-1 infected children and adolescents: Disparity between quantitative computed tomography and dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry measurements
Bone quality in perinatally HIV-infected children: Role of age, sex, growth, HIV infection, and antiretroviral therapy
Effects of protease inhibitors on glucose tolerance, lipid metabolism, and body composition in children and adolescents infected with human immunodeficiency virus
Assessment of obesity status in outpatients from three disease states
Associations among body composition, androgen levels, and human immunodeficiency virus status in adolescents
Serum adiponectin and leptin concentrations in HIV-infected children with fat redistribution syndrome
A simplified weight-based method for pediatric drug dosing for zidovudine and didanosine in resource-limited settings
Serum leptin concentrations and fat redistribution in HIV-1-infected children on highly active antiretroviral therapy
Hypoadiponectinemia, dyslipidemia, and impaired growth in children with HIV-associated facial lipoatrophy
Increased carotid intima media thickness and cardiac biomarkers in HIV infected children
Alterations in circulating osteoimmune factors may be responsible for high bone resorption rate in HIV-infected children and adolescents
Changes in leptin serum levels in HIV-infected children receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy
Niacin nutritional status in HIV type 1-positive children: Preliminary data
Risk Factors for Cardiovascular Disease in Children Infected with Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1
Changes in macronutrient intake among HIV-infected children between 1995 and 2004
Is resistin a link between highly active antiretroviral therapy and fat redistribution in HIV-infected children?
Alteraciones metabólicas con terapia antirretroviral altamente efectiva en niños positivos para VIH, Cali, Colombia
Lipodistrofia em crianças e adolescentes com síndrome da imunodeficiência adquirida e sua relação com a terapia antirretroviral empregada
Long-Term Evaluation of Glucose Homeostasis in a Cohort of HAART-Treated HIV-Infected Children: A Longitudinal, Observational Cohort Study
Associations of Proinflammatory Cytokine Levels With Lipid Profiles, Growth, and Body Composition in HIV-infected Children Initiating or Changing Antiretroviral Therapy
Predictors of growth and body composition in HIV-infected children beginning or changing antiretroviral therapy
Final Height in Patients Perinatally Infected with the Human Immunodeficiency Virus
Síndrome da lipodistrofia e fatores de risco cardiovasculares em crianças e adolescentes infectados pelo HIV/AIDS em uso de terapia antirretroviral de alta potência
Antiretroviral therapy and bone mineral measurements in HIV-infected youths
Nutritional status and lipid profile of HIV-positive children and adolescents using antiretroviral therapy
Body satisfaction and lipodystrophy characteristics in HIV/AIDS children and teenagers undergoing highly active antiretroviral therapy
Longitudinal assessment of metabolic abnormalities in adolescents and young adults with HIV-infection acquired perinatally or in early childhood
Nutritional status of children living with HIV and receiving antiretroviral (ARV) medication in the Klang Valley, Malaysia
Mitochondrial impact of human immunodeficiency virus and antiretrovirals on infected pediatric patients with or without lipodystrophy
Monitoring of lipodystrophic and metabolic abnormalities in HIV-1 infected children on antiretroviral therapy
Lipodystrophy, insulin resistance, and adiponectin concentration in HIV-infected children and adolescents
Body Fat Abnormality in HIV-Infected Children and Adolescents Living in Europe: Prevalence and Risk Factors
Evidence for extended age dependent maternal immunity in infected children: Mother to child transmission of HIV infection and potential interventions including sulfatides of the human fetal adnexa and complementary or alternative medicines
High prevalence of lipoatrophy in pre-pubertal South African children on antiretroviral therapy: A cross-sectional study
Prevalence and risk factors of low bone mineral density among perinatally HIV-infected Thai adolescents receiving antiretroviral therapy
Anaerobic power and muscle strength in human immunodeficiency virus-positive preadolescents
Factors associated with low bone mineral density in a Brazilian cohort of vertically HIV-infected adolescents
Metabolic abnormalities and body composition of HIV-infected children on Lopinavir or Nevirapinebased antiretroviral therapy
Bone mineral density increases in HIV-infected children treated with long-term combination antiretroviral therapy
Immunological and virological characteristics and performance in the variables flexibility and abdominal resistence strength of HIV/AIDS adolescents under highly active antirretroviral therapy
Bone mass in children and adolescents infected with human immunodeficiency virus
Bone geometry and strength are adapted to muscle force in children and adolescents perinatally infected with HIV
Body composition and lipodystrophy in prepubertal HIV-infected children
Short Communication: The Relationship Between Mitochondrial Dysfunction and Insulin Resistance in HIV-Infected Children Receiving Antiretroviral Therapy
Insulin resistance and lipid profiles in HIV-infected Thai children receiving lopinavir/ritonavir-based highly active antiretroviral therapy
Determination of optimal vitamin D3 dosing regimens in HIV-infected paediatric patients using a population pharmacokinetic approach
Dietary intake and nutritional status of HIV-1-infected children and adolescents in Florianópolis, Brazil
A pilot study to investigate the muscle strength of children infected with HIV
Non-traditional adipokines in pediatric HIV-related lipodystrophy: A-FABP as a biomarker of central fat accumulation
Anthropometry and body composition of vertically HIV-infected children and adolescents under therapy with and without protease inhibitors
Impaired bone mineral accrual in prepubertal HIV-infected children: A cohort study
Health & nutritional status of HIV infected children in Hyderabad, India
Hypovitaminosis D and hyperparathyroidism: Effects on bone turnover and bone mineral density among perinatally HIV-infected adolescents
Bone mineral density and vitamin D concentration: The challenges in taking care of children and adolescents infected with HIV
Associations of Low Vitamin D and Elevated Parathyroid Hormone Concentrations With Bone Mineral Density in Perinatally HIV-Infected Children
Level vitamin D, calcium serum and mandibular bone density in HIV/AIDS children
Adverse bone health and abnormal bone turnover among perinatally HIV-infected Asian adolescents with virological suppression
Impact of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate on bone metabolism and bone mass among perinatally HIV-infected Asian adolescents
Amino Acid Concentrations in HIV-Infected Youth Compared to Healthy Controls and Associations with CD4 Counts and Inflammation
Low prevalence of lipodystrophy in HIV-infected Senegalese children on long-term antiretroviral treatment: The ANRS 12279 MAGGSEN Pediatric Cohort Study
Body image and anthropometric indicators in adolescents living with HIV
Lipodystrophy syndrome in HIV-1 infected pediatric patients, under highly effective antiretroviral therapy (HAART), attending at a high specialty hospital
Evaluation of bone mineral density in children with vertical infection by HIV
Bone Quality Measured Using Calcaneal Quantitative Ultrasonography Is Reduced Among Children with HIV in Johannesburg, South Africa
Older age at initiation of antiretroviral therapy predicts low bone mineral density in children with perinatally-infected HIV in Zimbabwe
Phase angle is associated with the physical fitness of HIV-infected children and adolescents
Influence of body composition on the respiratory muscle strength of children exposed to antiretroviral therapy forhuman immunodeficiency virus
Fractures in children and adolescents living with perinatally acquired HIV
Prevalence and predictors of bone health among perinatally HIV-infected adolescents
Chronic lung disease in children and adolescents with HIV: A case–control study
Association Between Body Fat Distribution Assessed by Different Techniques and Body Image Perception in HIV-Infected Children and Adolescents
Earlier antiretroviral initiation is independently associated with better arterial stiffness in children living with perinatally acquired hiv with sustained viral suppression in mozambique
Nutritional status, physical activity and quality of life in children and adolescents with human immunodeficiency virus infection
Association between handgrip strength and bone mass parameters in HIV-infected children and adolescents. A cross-sectional study
What anthropometric indicators are associated with insulin resistance? Cross-sectional study on children and adolescents with diagnosed human immunodeficiency virus
The association between mental health and metabolic outcomes in youth living with perinatally acquired HIV in the Cape Town Adolescent Antiretroviral Cohort
Muscle mass indicators as fat-free mass and lean soft tissue mass are associated with handgrip strength in HIV-diagnosed children and adolescents
Arterial Stiffness in a Cohort of Young People Living With Perinatal HIV and HIV Negative Young People in England
Prevalence and Risk Factors for Hepatic Steatosis in Children With Perinatal HIV on Early Antiretroviral Therapy Compared to HIV-Exposed Uninfected and HIV-Unexposed Children
Massa óssea em crianças e adolescentes com infecção vertical pelo HIV: Uma série de casos
Factors Correlated with Body Image Dissatisfaction in Children and Adolescents Diagnosed with HIV: A Cross-Sectional Study
Association between bone mineral density and content and physical growth parameters among children and adolescents diagnosed with HIV: A cross-sectional study
Anthropometric indicators as discriminators of high body fat in children and adolescents with HIV: Comparison with reference methods
Longitudinal changes in body fat and metabolic complications in young people with perinatally acquired HIV
Health-related quality of life and nutritional status of people living with HIV/AIDS in South-East Nigeria; a facility-based study
The effects of height-for-age and HIV on cognitive development of school-aged children in Nairobi, Kenya: A structural equation modelling analysis
Association between Phase Angle and Body Composition of Children and Adolescents Diagnosed with HIV Infection
Effect of protease inhibitors combined with standard antiretroviral therapy on linear growth and weight gain in human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected children
Antiretroviral therapy, fat redistribution and hyperlipidaemia in HIV-infected children in Europe
Evaluation of the effects of oxandrolone on malnourished HIV-positive pediatric patients
The effect of protease inhibitor therapy on growth and body composition in human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected children
Treatment with highly active antiretroviral therapy in human immunodeficiency virus type 1-infected children is associated with a sustained effect on growth
Impact of protease inhibitor substitution with efavirenz in HIV-infected children: Results of the first pediatric switch study
Protease inhibitor therapy improves protein catabolism in prepubertal children with HIV infection
A 12-month treatment with tenofovir does not impair bone mineral accrual in HIV-infected children
Growth hormone improves protein catabolism and growth in prepubertal children with HIV infection
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and an optimized background regimen of antiretroviral agents as salvage therapy for pediatric HIV infection
Effects of recombinant growth hormone on visceral fat accumulation: Pilot study in human immunodeficiency virus-infected adolescents
Normalization of fat accrual in lipoatrophic, HIV-infected children switched from stavudine to tenofovir and from protease inhibitor to efavirenz
Renal safety of tenofovir in HIV-infected children: A prospective, 96-week longitudinal study
Insulin-like growth factor-1 and lean body mass in HIV-infected children
Outcome of protease inhibitor substitution with nevirapine in HIV-1 infected children
Decreased bone mineral density with off-label use of tenofovir in children and adolescents infected with human immunodeficiency virus
Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and bone mineral density: A 60-month longitudinal study in a cohort of HIV-infected youths
Adipokine profiles and lipodystrophy in HIV-infected children during the first 4 years on highly active antiretroviral therapy
Effect of supplementation with cholecalciferol and calcium on 2-y bone mass accrual in HIV-infected children and adolescents: A randomized clinical trial
A randomized study of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in treatment- experienced HIV-1 infected adolescents
Long-term body composition and metabolic changes in HIV-infected children switched from stavudine to tenofovir and from protease inhibitors to efavirenz
Efficacy, safety and pharmacokinetics of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in virologic-suppressed HIV-infected children using weight-band dosing
Long-term efficacy and safety of tenofovir disoproxil fumarate in HIV-1-infected adolescents failing antiretroviral therapy: The final results of study GS-US-104-0321
Safety, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of a single-tablet regimen containing elvitegravir, cobicistat, emtricitabine, and tenofovir alafenamide in treatment-naive, HIV-infected adolescents: A single-arm, open-label trial
A 10–year follow−up of bone mineral density in HIV−infected youths receiving tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
Population Pharmacokinetics of Lopinavir in Severely Malnourished HIV-infected Children and the Effect on Treatment Outcomes
Effect of calcium and vitamin D supplementation on bone mineral accrual among HIV-infected Thai adolescents with low bone mineral density
Substituting Abacavir for Stavudine in Children Who Are Virally Suppressed Without Lipodystrophy: Randomized Clinical Trial in Johannesburg, South Africa
Alendronate Improves Bone Mineral Density in Children and Adolescents Perinatally Infected With Human Immunodeficiency Virus With Low Bone Mineral Density for Age
Bone outcomes in virally suppressed youth with HIV switching to tenofovir disoproxil fumarate
Influence of Healthy Habits Counseling on Biochemical and Metabolic Parameters in Children and Adolescents with HIV: Longitudinal Study
Physical Activity Questionnaire for Children: Validity and Cut-Points to Identify Sufficient Levels of Moderate- to Vigorous-Intensity Physical Activity Among Children and Adolescents Diagnosed With HIV
Searching and synthesising ‘grey literature’and ‘grey information’ in public health: Critical reflections on three case studies
Gray literature: An important resource in systematic reviews
Results of database search and flowchart of the process of studies selection and inclusion. HIV+ group: diagnosed with HIV infection group; HRPF: health-related physical fitness.
Characteristics of the included studies (period of publication, regions, design and studies purpose).
Period of Publication	Total of Studies (n = 246)	Average Studies per Year	 	1995 to 1999	8	1.6	 	2000 to 2009	80	8.0	 	2010 to 2019	104	10.4	 	2020 to May 2023	54	13.5	 	Region (UNICEF division)	Total of studies per region	% of total studies per region (n = 264)	 	North America and Western and Central Europe	132	50.0	 	Latin America and the Caribbean	65	24.6	 	Sub-Saharan Africa	50	18.9	 	Asia and the Pacific	17	6.4	 	Study design	Total of studies	% of total studies(n = 246)	 	Descriptive studies	92	37.4	 	Analytic studies	154	62.6	 	Propose of studies (to investigate)	Total of studies	% of total studies(n = 246)	 	Associations	139	56.5	 	Differences between HIV+ and HIV−	44	17.9	 	ART-related effects (with or without controls) 	37	15.0	 	Method validity	13	5.3	 	Prevalences	9	3.7	 	Interventions effects	4	1.6
UNICEF: United Nations Children’s Foundation; %: percentage; HIV+: HIV-diagnosed; HIV−: without HIV infection diagnosis; ART: antiretroviral therapy.
Protocols/tests applied to investigate health-related physical fitness components.
Component (Method/Protocol)	Total of Studies	% of Total Studies(n = 246)	 	Body composition	n = 244	99.2%	 	Anthropometry	235		 	Dual emission X-ray absorptiometry	127		 	Bioelectrical impedance analysis	21		 	Computed tomography	7		 	Ultrasonography	5		 	Deuterium dilution	4		 	Visual inspection	2		 	Air Displacement Plethysmography	3		 	X-ray	1		 	Muscular strength/endurance	n = 23	9.3%	 	Handgrip strength	11		 	Abdominal resistance test	3		 	Horizontal jump test	3		 	Vertical jump test	3		 	Handheld dynamometer	2		 	Isokinetic isometry	1		 	1-maximum repetition	1		 	Sit-up	1		 	Hand hang resistance test	1		 	Respiratory strength	1		 	Push-ups test	1		 	Cardiorespiratory fitness	n = 15	6.1%	 	Maximal effort treadmill test	4		 	Maximal effort cycle ergometer tests	4		 	Submaximal effort treadmill test	1		 	Six-minutes walking test	3		 	20 m shuttle run test	2		 	Incremental waling test	1		 	Flexibility	n = 6	2.4%	 	Sit-to-reach test	4		 	Modified sit-to-reach test	2
%: percentage.
Reference values and cut-points applied to investigate health-related physical fitness components.
Body Composition	n = 244	% *	 	NCHS/WHO growth curves	88	36.1%	 	Nationals’ growth curves	34	13.9%	 	Z-scores	22	9.0%	 	Previous study (HIV-sample)	16	6.6%	 	NHANES	14	5.7%	 	Percentiles	7	2.7%	 	Ten-State Nutrition Survey	4	1.6%	 	Not reported	4	1.6%	 	Osteoporosis WHO taskforce	3	1.2%	 	United States BMD in Childhood Study	3	1.2%	 	International Society for Clinical Densitometry	3	1.2%	 	New cut-point	1	0.4%	 	Terciles	1	0.4%	 	Not applied	42	17.2%	 	Muscular strength/endurance	n = 23		 	Z-scores	3	13.0%	 	Previous study (HIV-sample)	1	4.3%	 	PROESP-BR	1	4.3%	 	National Presidential Fitness Program	1	4.3%	 	Different batteries *	1	4.3%	 	Not reported	2	8.7%	 	Not applied	11	47.8%	 	Cardiorespiratory fitness	n = 15		 	Previous study (HIV-sample)	2	13.3%	 	ACSM guidelines	1	6.6%	 	National Presidential Fitness Program	1	6.6%	 	American Thoracic Society	1	6.6%	 	Not applied	8	53.3%	 	Flexibility	n = 6		 	PROESP-BR	1	16.7%	 	National Presidential Fitness Program	1	16.7%	 	Different batteries **	1	16.7%	 	Not applied	3	50.0%
%: percentage; NCHS: National Center for Health Statistics; WHO: World Health Organization; HIV−: without human immunodeficiency virus infection diagnosis; NHANES: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; BMD: bone mass density; PROESP-BR: Projeto Esporte Brasil; ACSM: American College of Sports Medicine. * Percentage of studies regarding each health-related physical fitness component. ** Use of three batteries without identifying which cut-point of each battery was applied to each component.