A Targeted Approach to Dental Treatment for Patients Prior To and After Head and Neck Radiation
ABSTRACT
This is a narrative review of contemporary radiotherapy for head and neck cancers, the role of pre‐radiation dental clearance, and rationale for a targeted approach to pre‐radiation treatment. Emphasis is placed on avoiding delay in the start of radiation. The goals of this article are to facilitate communication between the dentist and radiation oncologist, succinctly summarize current recommendations, and give suggestions on what qualifies as high priority dental care in the pre‐radiation setting.

Radiotherapy for Patients With Head and Neck Cancer
Cancers of the head and neck region are the 7th most common cancers globally with a projected increase in the future. Survival rate is approximately 60% at 5 years, with a trend toward increased survival now compared to in past years. Surgery alone can be curative for early‐stage cancers, but multi‐modality treatment is often necessary to obtain acceptable survival rates for more advanced stages. Adjuvant radiation is typically given with advanced stage tumors or those with pathological risk features like close or positive surgical margins, extranodal extension, and perineural invasion. Many patients with advanced pharyngeal cancers undergo curative radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy without surgery, which requires higher treatment doses. In the early 2000s, multiple retrospective studies reported on the significance of the human papillomavirus (HPV) in oropharyngeal tumors and improved treatment response with such tumors. A prospective clinical trial by Fakhry et al. found that compared to HPV negative tumors of the oropharynx and larynx, patients with HPV positive tumors had a 27% higher response rate to chemoradiation and 33% improved 2‐year overall survival. Approximately 70% of all oropharyngeal cancers in the United States have association with HPV, with a projected future increase through 2045. A review of 43 983 cases from the National Cancer Database found that 61% of oropharyngeal cancers received chemoradiation in 2009 compared to 21% in 1998. Given the increasing number of HPV‐related cancers, efficacy of radiotherapy for such cancers, and improved patient survival, the demand for dentists able to care for these patients before and after cancer treatment will increase accordingly.
Prior to the 1980s, radiation delivery was primarily with conventional radiation therapy, which resulted in significant toxicities to nearby normal tissues. With the advent of intensity‐modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) in the 1990s followed by increasingly conformal technologies, head and neck radiation can now be delivered with increased sparing of normal tissues.
For patients undergoing definitive radiotherapy without surgery, typical treatment doses are 66–70 Gy in 30–35 once‐daily fractions delivered over 6–7 weeks, with or without chemotherapy. In the postoperative setting, typical treatment doses are 50–66 Gy in 20–33 once‐daily fractions delivered over 5–6.5 weeks. In general, gross tumor, microscopic high‐risk regions (e.g., surgical bed), and microscopic low‐risk regions (e.g., low uninvolved neck) are treated to 70, 60, and 50–54 Gy, respectively. Radiotherapy targets are complex in shape and markedly differ based on the primary tumor site (e.g., oral tongue, lip, buccal mucosa, nasopharynx, oropharynx, larynx, hypopharynx, salivary glands, skin, paranasal sinuses, skullbase, or thyroid). The unilateral or bilateral neck lymph nodes are treated if lymph node metastases are present, or the risk of subclinical nodal metastasis is sufficiently high. These targets are delineated by the radiation oncologist on the simulation CT scan in conjunction with examination, pathology reports, and diagnostic imaging. In addition, nearby normal tissues are also separately delineated, including the spinal cord, brainstem, optic nerves, brachial plexus, mandible, salivary glands, oral cavity, larynx, pharyngeal constrictors, and esophagus. After these targets and normal tissues have been delineated (or “contoured”), dosimetric goals are established, and then inverse planning algorithms attempt to achieve maximal target coverage with radiation and maximal sparing of normal tissues. Modern radiation delivery techniques include volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT), tomotherapy, intensity‐modulated proton therapy (IMPT), and stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT). Most patients with head and neck cancers currently undergo treatment with VMAT owing to its widespread availability, speed of delivery, and high plan quality. This technique can achieve dose falloff of up to 10% per millimeter, or a reduction from 70 to 56 Gy in 2 mm.

Osteoradionecrosis
While radiation therapy can improve patient survival and tumor control, there are temporary and permanent effects on the soft and hard tissues in the oral cavity. Transient side effects of radiation are commonly xerostomia, candidiasis, mucositis, neuronal changes, and sensory changes. These are outside the scope of this paper, but description and management have been well documented previously by expert review. Perhaps the most common problem encountered by dentists in the community when treating these patients is xerostomia and resulting caries. This is still seen in many patients with IMRT sparing the parotid to <24 Gy.
A long‐term sequelae with significant morbidity is osteoradionecrosis (ORN). ORN is death of bone due to radiation (Figure 1). The pathophysiology of ORN is not completely understood, but two of the more accepted theories are the theory of hypoxia, hypovascularity, and hypocellularity proposed by Marx and the theory of radiation‐induced fibrosis described by Delanian et al.. Current estimates of incidence of ORN range widely from 3% to 20%, with general agreement that the risk of ORN increases at radiation doses >60 Gy. Some studies also observed that the total volume of mandible that receives >50 Gy is an associated risk factor. Known dental risk factors are tooth extractions in bone irradiated to >50 Gy, ongoing smoking, and periodontal disease. Because areas that receive 50 Gy or higher are at increased risk of ORN, teeth with caries and periodontitis in these areas are more likely to be recommended for extraction prior to radiotherapy. Cooper et al. conducted a trial of 459 patients and found that the 2‐year rate of local and regional tumor control was 10% higher for chemoradiation compared to radiation alone after resection. If concurrent chemotherapy is given, this is recognized as an added biologic equivalent dose of 8–10 Gy.
(A) Diffuse osteoradionecrosis of the maxilla requiring removal of teeth and maxillary bone. (B) Computed tomography scans of osteoradionecrosis of the mandible from inferior angle to tooth #18 requiring segmental mandibulectomy and osteocutaneous free flap reconstruction.
Conservative treatment of ORN confined to the alveolar bone includes medications, local debridement, and removal of sequestrum. This approach is useful for relatively small regions of necrosis confined to the alveolar bone. Cure rate falls to under 20% when ORN extends beyond the inferior alveolar canal, there is a skin fistula, or leads to a pathologic fracture. Segmental mandibulectomy and osseous free flap reconstruction of extensive ORN is a widely used treatment modality, with failure rates reported as low as 1.2%. The procedure involves harvest of bone from another part of the body—often the fibula, an approximately 10‐h long surgery consisting of two surgical teams, and a 7–14 day hospital stay. Total cost to the hospital for this surgery is estimated to be $40 000–50 000. Because insurance coverage for prosthetic reconstruction after segmental resection is inconsistent, and out‐of‐pocket costs are relatively high, oral rehabilitation after such resection is frequently left incomplete. Many hospitals also do not have a multidisciplinary care team in place to ensure high‐quality outcomes. As a result, quality of life for patients can be vastly compromised. For these reasons, prevention of ORN should be prioritized.

Pre‐Radiation Dental Clearance
Pre‐radiation dental consultation is recommended for all primary cancers in the head and neck when dentoalveolar bone or the oral cavity is anticipated to be in the field of radiation. The importance of dental care in this patient population is recognized by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid (CMS). CMS does not cover services related to teeth and supporting structures unless “inextricably linked to the clinical success of other Medicare‐covered procedures or services.” A specific example provided is “Dental or oral exams…to eliminate an oral or dental infection to prior to or contemporaneously with…Medicare‐covered treatment of head and neck cancer using radiation, chemotherapy, surgery, or any combination of these.”
A large observational study of 25 216 patients from the National Cancer Database found time between surgery and starting radiation less than 50 days was associated with improved survival compared to 50 days or more. A review of the National Cancer Database from 2006 to 2014 included 41 291 patients and found decreased survival when postoperative radiation was started after 6 weeks compared to before 6 weeks. The 5‐year overall survival rate when radiation was started within 6 weeks was 70.8%. This was 10% lower when radiation was started later than 6 weeks postoperatively. Five‐year survival rate decreased incrementally for each week radiation start was further delayed. It is generally recommended now that postoperative radiation be started within 6 weeks of surgery. There is no defined time frame for starting definitive radiotherapy, but timely dental consultation and pre‐treatment extractions, if indicated, are integral to avoiding delays in curative therapy.
From a financial perspective, delays in radiation start can cause the healthcare system more than $1 M in otherwise avoidable burden. The comparative cost of dental exam and treatment is insignificant. Obtaining dental clearance can be a contributing factor to why radiation is delayed beyond 6 weeks. Patients with lower socioeconomic status tend to have more delays in care and higher medical expenses. They also tend to have a higher incidence of dental caries and poor oral health. Complete removal of all dental disease is not always possible due to financial burdens, medical comorbidities, and logistical difficulties. In some circumstances, a targeted approach addressing the most urgent needs and leaving other dental pathology may be necessary to ensure oncologic care continues uninterrupted.
When the radiation oncologist refers the patient for evaluation, the following information should be requested: primary tumor site and staging, prognosis and goals of radiotherapy (curative or palliative), maximum dose, and anticipated dose to specific areas: maxillary right, maxillary left, maxillary anterior, mandibular right, mandibular left, and mandibular anterior (Figure 2).
Detailed dose images like these are not available at the initial dental visit. Anticipated dosing from the radiation oncologist aids in identifying high risk areas so that problematic teeth may be addressed. This patient's tumor was in the maxillary left sinus with radiation targeted to include the bilateral neck. In the pre‐radiation referral, the radiation oncologist indicated that the maxillary anterior and mandibular left posterior teeth would be in the field of >50 Gy.
The dentist should perform a comprehensive exam, which includes a panoramic radiograph or full mouth intraoral series. Most previously published studies support elimination of oral foci of infection, but there is a paucity of high‐quality evidence further defining these oral foci. Although there is considerable overlap between many published practices, there is no consensus on criteria for pre‐radiation dental clearance. Recently, a multi‐institutional study by the OraRad group described individual tooth characteristics associated with risk of loss at 2 years post radiation and recommend extraction of such teeth prior to radiation therapy. The current authors’ practice is to extract teeth with symptomatic pulpitis, symptomatic periodontitis, and symptomatic apical disease. Teeth in the projected field of >50 Gy are extracted if probing depths exceed 6 mm and/or there is furcation involvement, and if there is caries to the extent where excavation is likely to expose the pulp.
Other teeth with pathology and poor to guarded prognoses are considered for removal if the patient's overall health and time allows. Teeth with chronic dental disease in areas radiated to <50 Gy may be addressed after completion of radiation. Some patient specific criteria influence the decision to extract or retain teeth when there is insufficient time to resolve all dental disease (Table 1).
Patient and individual tooth factors influence the decision to extract or retain teeth when elimination of all dental pathology is not possible.
Extract	Do not extract	 	Radiation >50Gy	Radiation <50Gy	 	Mandible	Maxilla	 	Molar	Non‐molar	 	Curative treatment intent	Palliative treatment intent	 	High caries risk	Low caries risk
Arch: Osteoradionecrosis risk is three times greater in the mandible than the maxilla. If ORN does occur after extraction in the postradiation setting, debridement and a prosthetic obturator may be used to address the defect if in the maxillary arch. The obturator is a removable appliance that provides separation between the oral cavity and nasal cavity/sinuses. Progressive and advanced ORN in the mandible requires a more extensive composite resection and osteocutaneous free flap transfer (Figure 3). The non‐bone containing anterior lateral thigh flap may also be an option for repair of osteoradionecrosis not resolving with conservative treatments. Because ORN in the mandible is observed more frequently and often requires more extensive management, mandibular teeth with dental pathosis are more likely to be recommended for pre‐radiation extraction than maxillary teeth.
Segmental resection involves removing the entire necrotic section of the mandible until healthy bleeding bone is reached. A bone containing free flap, often from the fibula, is then harvested and connected to vasculature at the recipient site.
Molars: When ORN occurred after tooth extraction, previous studies found that it was usually after extraction of molar teeth. Out of 32 extraction sites that developed ORN, Khoo et al. found that 31 sites were in sockets of double rooted teeth. Tso et al. found in a 5‐year review of all segmental resections secondary to ORN at their institution that all cases occurring after tooth extraction were with molars. Extraction of molars tend to involve more surgical trauma than extraction of non‐molars and are more likely to be in the field of high dose radiation for oropharyngeal tumors and radiated neck nodes. For these reasons, extraction of diseased molars is more likely to be recommended than that of anterior teeth.
Caries risk: Without proper follow‐up or daily oral hygiene practices, patients can develop rampant dental caries within months after radiation (Figure 4). Patients with multiple existing carious lesions, many dental restorations, poor dental hygiene, lack of a dental home, and unfavorable eating habits are at higher risk of developing future carious lesions. For such patients, pre‐radiation extraction of teeth with chronic pathology is more likely to be recommended to eliminate the anticipated need for extractions in a radiated field. Financial burden and patient commitment to oral hygiene are considered in this decision.
Dental caries often occurring with xerostomia develop around root surfaces of teeth throughout the mouth. Rampant dental caries may start within the first couple months after radiation and progress to this state by months 3–6. This patient had radiation to 60 Gy to the left tonsil and presented to the dentist 6 months after radiation treatment.
Tumor stage: The reported times from radiation to the incidence of ORN range from months to years. A large study from Memorial Sloan Kettering found median time from RT to ORN diagnosis was 19.1 months (range 0–120 months), and a separate study from MD Anderson found median time to be 8 months (range 0–71 months). The average 5‐year survival with head and neck cancer varies largely influenced by tumor stage. The average 5‐year relative survival with localized head and neck cancer is 87.5%, regional lymph node metastasis is 69.5%, and distant metastasis is 37.8%. For patients with shorter anticipated survival time, the authors are less likely to recommend the extraction of at‐risk teeth with chronic dental infections. This spares the patient an additional surgical procedure and recovery during their remaining time. For patients treated with palliative radiotherapy, treatment doses are generally lower than 50 Gy and the goal of treatment is for symptomatic relief. Therefore, the risks of extracting asymptomatic diseased teeth may outweigh any future benefits in this population with limited life expectancy. Conversely, treating symptomatic dental disease may improve quality of life in this population that otherwise may have limited access to dental care.

Timing and Extraction Technique
After extraction, some time for healing is recommended prior to starting radiation. Previous authors have recommended from 10 to 21 days. The consensus recommendation from the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) in 2024 is to wait for 2 weeks. If the postextraction healing period is the sole reason for delaying RT, RT should be started as planned. Lee et al. performed a retrospective cohort study of 879 patients with pre‐radiation extractions and suggest that a 7‐day healing period is often sufficient. We agree with the recommendation by ASCO to wait 2 weeks between extraction and radiation when molars in the anticipated field of >50 Gy are involved. For other teeth, we believe 7 days is adequate. To ensure radiation is started within 6 weeks of surgery, dental evaluation should be performed 3–4 weeks after surgery at the latest to allow for a 2‐week healing period if dental extractions are performed. If the patient cannot be evaluated within this time frame, a more conservative plan that may leave chronic dental disease should be considered, rather than asking to delay radiation. Optimally, the dental team is informed of the need for pre‐radiation evaluation by the diagnosing surgeon's team so that needed extractions may be identified early on. Performing dental extractions in the operating room at the time of tumor ablation is a good option if it can be coordinated. This eliminates delays due to scheduling issues and insurance coverage.
Extraction should be conducted with minimally traumatic techniques. Sharp bony edges should be removed and smoothed. We recommend primary tissue closure with tension‐free suturing over the socket, especially over mandibular molar sites. If primary closure cannot be obtained, resorbable sutures may be placed to decrease the size of the mucosal defect. Note that there is currently no clear consensus on the extraction technique in the pre‐radiation setting.

Postradiation Dental Treatment
From the radiation oncologist's perspective, the patient can resume dental care once able to tolerate. This is typically in 4–6 weeks when mucositis resolves. In addition to caries management, the dentist plays an important role in addressing xerostomia, managing trismus, managing candidiasis, and early detection of ORN. A systematic review by Nabil in 2011 found that the total incidence of ORN after dental extraction in the irradiated patient was 7%, with the highest risk in the radiated mandible. The occurrence of ORN was highest at 22.6% when the time between extraction and radiation was 2–5 years and remained relatively high at 16% when the time between extraction and radiation was longer than 5 years. There is no consensus on when the optimum time is to perform dental extractions. The risk of ORN does not disappear with time, as multiple retrospective studies have found ORN can occur decades after radiotherapy. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) prior to extraction in the radiated patient has been reported by many groups with varying levels of success. Given that the cost of HBOT is usually in the tens of thousands of dollars, the typical HBOT course is 20–30 sessions, and there is a lack of high‐level evidence, we agree with ASCO and the Dana Farber/Brigham and Woman's group recommendations against routine use of HBOT for prevention and treatment of ORN. Use of pentoxifylline and tocopherol before and after tooth extraction has also been reported with some success, but high level evidence is still lacking. This regimen is relatively inexpensive and well‐tolerated by patients and should be considered when high risk extractions are performed. Non‐surgical endodontic treatment is an alternative to extraction for teeth in a highly radiated field even if the tooth is nonrestorable. Although reports are scarce, root canal treatment of teeth in radiated bone appears to be a safe option that is not known to cause osteoradionecrosis. Head and neck cancer treatments can be disfiguring and life‐altering. Patients deal with the sequelae long after completion of treatment and proper pre‐radiation dental care is something we as dentists can do to make their lives easier.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
Reviewing the Epidemiology of Head and Neck Cancer: Definitions, Trends and Risk Factors
Changes in Survival in Head and Neck Cancers in the Late 20th and Early 21st Century: A Period Analysis
Personalizing Postoperative Treatment of Head and Neck Cancers
Postoperative Radiotherapy of Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Head and Neck
Randomized Trial of Radiation Therapy Versus Concomitant Chemotherapy and Radiation Therapy for Advance‐Stage Oropharynx Carcinoma
Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinomas
NCCN Guidelines® Insights: Head and Neck Cancers, Version 1.2022
Improved Survival of Patients With human Papillomavirus‐Positive Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma in a Prospective Clinical Trial
Epidemiology and Incidence of HPV‐Related Cancers of the Head and Neck
Temporal Trends in Oropharyngeal Cancer Treatment and Survival: 1998–2009
Intensity‐Modulated Radiation Therapy: Emerging Cancer Treatment Technology
Parotid‐Sparing Intensity Modulated Versus Conventional Radiotherapy in Head and Neck Cancer (PARSPORT): A Phase 3 Multicentre Randomised Controlled Trial
Dose Fall‐Off Patterns With Volumetric Modulated Arc Therapy and Three‐Dimensional Conformal Radiotherapy Including the “Organ at Risk” Effect. Experience of Linear Accelerator‐Based Frameless Radiosurgery From a Single Instutition
Common Oral Complications of Head and Neck Cancer Radiation Therapy: Mucositis, Infections, Saliva Change, Fibrosis, Sensory Dysfunctions, Dental Caries, Periodontal Disease, and Osteoradionecrosis
Osteoradionecrosis: A New Concept of Its Pathophysiology
Striking Regression of Chronic Radiotherapy Damage in a Clinical Trial of Combined Pentoxifylline and Tocopherol
The Radiation‐Induced Fibroatrophic Process: Therapeutic Perspective via the Antioxidant Pathway
Osteoradionecrosis Prevention Myths
Prevention and Management of Osteoradionecrosis in Patients With Head and Neck Cancer Treated With Radiation Therapy: ISOO‐MASCC‐ASCO Guideline
Osteoradionecrosis and Radiation Dose to the Mandible in Patients With Oropharyngeal Cancer
Research Frontiers in Oral Toxicities of Cancer Therapies: Osteoradionecrosis of the Jaws
Management of Mandibular Osteoradionecrosis Corresponding to the Severity of Osteoradionecrosis and the Method of Radiotherapy
Postoperative Concurrent Radiotherapy and Chemotherapy for High‐Risk Squamous‐Cell Carcinoma of the Head and Neck
How Much Radiation Is the Chemotherapy Worth in Advanced Head and Neck Cancer?
Mucositis Versus Tumor Control: The Therapeutic Index of Adding Chemotherapy to Irradiation of Head and Neck Cancer
Changing Indications for Maxillomandibular Reconstruction With Osseous Free Flaps: A 17‐Year Experience With 620 Consecutive Cases at UCLA and the Impact of Osteoradionecrosis
Long‐Term Outcomes in Virtual Surgical Planning for Mandibular Reconstruction: A Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis
Association of Survival With Shorter Time to Radiation Therapy After Surgery for US Patients With Head and Neck Cancer
Effect of Time to Initiation of Postoperative Radiation Therapy on Survival in Surgically‐Managed Head and Neck Cancer
Influence of Time Between Surgery and Adjuvant Radiotherapy on Prognosis for Patients With Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma: A Systematic Review
Update on Adherence to Guidelines for Time to Initiation of Postoperative Radiation for Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Institutional Financial Toxicity of Failure to Adhere to Treatment Guidelines for Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Reducing the Time From Surgery to Adjuvant Radiation Therapy: An Institutional Quality Improvement Project
Development and Validation of Nomograms for Predicting Delayed Postoperative Radiogherapy Initiation in Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Oncologic Significance of Therapeutic Delays in Patients With Oral Cavity Cancer
Comparison of the Financial Burden of Survivors of Head and Neck Cancer With Other Cancer Survivors
Treatment Delays, Race, and Outcomes in Head and Neck Cancer
Socioecronomic Inequality and Caries: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Evidence Supporting Pre‐Radiation Elimination of Oral Foci of Infection in Head and Neck Cancer Patients to Prevent Oral Sequelae. A Systematic Review
Tooth‐Level Predictors of Tooth Loss and Exposed Bone After Radiation Therapy for Head and Neck Cancer
Incidence and Prevention of Osteoradionecrosis After Dental Extraction in Irradiated Patients: A Systematic Review
Conservative Management of Medication‐Related Osteonecrosis of the Maxilla With an Obturator Prosthesis
Evaluation of Anterolateral Thigh Fascia Lata Rescue Flap for Mandibular Osteoradionecrosis
Predictors of Osteoradionecrosis Following Irradiated Tooth Extraction
Predictive Factors of Osteoradionecrosis Necessitating Segmental Mandibulectomy: A Descriptive Study
The Evidence for Caries Management by Risk Assessment (CAMBRA®)
The Prevalence and Risk Factors Associated With Osteoradionecrosis of the Jaw in Oral and Oropharyngeal Cancer Patients Treated With Intensity‐Modulated Radiation Therapy (IMRT): The Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center Experience
Dental Management of Patients Irradiated for Head and Neck Cancer
Timing of Dental Extractions in Patients Undergoing Radiotherapy and the Incidence of Osteoradionecrosis: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Dental Extractions Before Radiation Therapy and the Risk of Osteoradionecrosis in Patients With Head and Neck Cancer
Preradiation Dental Extractions and the Incidence of Bone Necrosis
Dental Extractions in the Irradiated Head and Neck Patient: A Retrospective Analysis of Memorial Sloan‐Kettering Cancer Center Protocols, Criteria, and End Results
Head and Neck Cancers, Version 2.2020, NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology
Osteoradionecrosis of the Jaws: Clinical Characteristics and Relation to the Field of Irradiation
Osteoradionecrosis of the Jaws: A Retrospective Study of the Background Factors and Treatment in 104 Cases
The Use of Hyperbaric Oxygen for the Prevention and Management of Osteoradionecrosis of the Jaw: A Dana‐Farber/Brigham and Women's Cancer Center Multidisciplinary Guideline
Can the Prophylactic Use of Pentoxifylline and Tocopherol Before Dental Extractions Prevent Osteoradionecrosis? A Systematic Review
The Outcome of Primary Root Canal Treatment in Postirradiated Patients: A Case Series
An Evaluation of Root Canal Treatment in Patients Who Have Received Irradiation to the Mandible and Maxilla