Questionnaires for the subjective evaluation of patients with fibromyalgia: a systematic review
INTRODUCTION
The objective of this study was to identify and review the subjective assessment tools validated in patients with fibromyalgia, identifying their most significant structural characteristics, as well as the psychometric characteristics analyzed in each of the identified instruments.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION
This systematic review was registered in PROSPERO with the following reference: CRD42022306878. It analyzed documents published until June 30, 2022, through the Medline, Pedro and Scopus, Dialnet, Cinahl and Latin Index databases. The keywords used were: 1) fibromyalgia; 2) assessment; 3) questionnaire; 4) reliability; 5) validity; 6) scale; and 7) validation study. Combined using the Boolean operators “AND” and “OR.” The included articles were analyzed to extract: data on the structural characteristics of the questionnaires (including acronym, year of publication, number of items, sub-categories, time to complete the questionnaire, measurement range, cutoff score and cost) and psychometric characteristics of the selected questionnaires, including data on reliability (Cronbach’s alpha and test-retest) and data on the validity of the questionnaires (content, construct and criterion validity).
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS
Twenty-two studies containing 16 questionnaires were analyzed. The quality and risk of bias assessment was performed following the COSMIN checklist. In general, the quality of the subjective assessment studies validated in the population with fibromyalgia was good, with the exception of 5 studies, which did not exceed 5 points out of 10. The first questionnaire analyzed was published in 1991, and the last in 2020; the number of items ranged from 3 to 60. The most measured subcategories are function, overall impact and symptoms; other studies also include sleep and cognition disturbances. Only 6 studies described the time to complete them. The most analyzed psychometric characteristics were reliability (analyzed by 13 questionnaires), validity (analyzed by 7) and error measures (provided by only 3 of them).
CONCLUSIONS
There is a wide range of questionnaires specifically designed for patients with fibromyalgia that present good and/or excellent basic psychometric characteristics. The structural characteristics of the identified instruments were very heterogeneous, which makes it possible to select those that best adapt to the clinical/investigator scenario where the tool will be used.

Introduction
Fibromyalgia (FM) is a syndrome of unknown etiology, characterized by chronic widespread pain, fatigue, sleep disturbances, and functional symptoms. It is a type of “centralized” pain that can be present in 2-8% of the population, and can be a great burden for patients, relatives and society in general. In Spain, it has been calculated that a patient with FM can generate an average annual cost of over ¤5000 compared to a healthy subject, with 90% of this cost being due to productivity losses.
In recent years the diagnosis has improved with the development of more precise criteria, where subjective aspects of the disease have been included, which can be decisive for health professionals, playing a crucial role in the detection and measurement of the syndrome, and consequently in its evolution and treatment. In 1990, the American College of Rheumatology developed research classification criteria by counting tender points; later, in 2010, it proposed clinical diagnostic criteria.
Outcome assessment instruments directly or indirectly measure how patients feel, function, or survive in a pathology or condition. Choosing which type of outcomes to measure is challenging, involving a compromise between risk of bias, relevance to patients, tradition, and the practicality of clinical trial logistics. These results can be classified according to their origin into subjective and objective, depending on the instrument that provides said results. These instruments can be classified into objective clinical measurement instruments (OCOM, from Objective Clinical Outcome Measures) and subjective ones (PROM, from Patient-Related Outcome Measures).
The OCOMs consist of devices, tests, and tangible instruments that provide an objective result with a certain degree of validity and reliability. PROMs are tools commonly used by health professionals and researchers, helping to evaluate subjective aspects related to the pathology and the level of involvement in aspects such as quality of life, disability or the pain it produces. Since there are no biomarkers in FM, the evaluation of the characteristics of the syndrome is essential not only for adequate clinical care, but also for the evaluation of the efficacy or effectiveness of the treatment. In recent years, specific questionnaires have been generated to evaluate patients with FM and the perceived impact of FM in the patient, as well as to measure variables that could derive from their condition. The level of incidence of FM has increased so much in developed countries in recent years that specific questionnaires have been generated for this group of patients. In addition, validations of questionnaires that assess transversal dimensions (pain, quality of life, disability, etc.) have also been carried out in patients, in the population with FM.
Due to the great variety of questionnaires, selecting the ideal one could be complex or generate resource costs for the researcher or health professional. To our knowledge, no systematic review has been found to date that collects and analyzes the subjective tools validated in patients with FM, to help researchers select the most appropriate questionnaire according to their objectives.
The objective of this study was to find and review the subjective assessment tools validated in patients with FM, identifying their most significant structural characteristics, as well as the psychometric characteristics analyzed in each of the instruments found.

Evidence acquisition

Bibliographic search
This systematic review was conducted in accordance with the guidelines and recommendations of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA). In addition, it was registered in PROSPERO with the following reference: CRD42022306878.
This systematic review analyzed documents published up to June 30, 2022, using the Medline, Pedro and Scopus, Dialnet, Cinahl and Latin Index databases.
The following keywords were used: fibromyalgia, assessment, questionnaire, validity, reliability, scale and validation study. These keywords were combined using the Boolean operators “AND” and “OR”.

Study selection
Duplicate articles were removed. The selection of the articles was carried out independently by two blinded researchers with more than 10 years of experience in the identification and selection of scientific documents. Next, the two researchers interdependently evaluated all the articles collected based on the title and abstract, selecting the articles that potentially met the inclusion criteria. Then, in the same way, the full text of the selected articles was reviewed. Discrepancies in the selection of documents were resolved by a third investigator with more than 15 years of experience in the identification and selection of scientific documents.
The inclusion criteria in the selection were: 1) validation studies of questionnaires in patients with FM; and 2) studies that provided at least three of the psychometric characteristics established by the consensus-based Standards for the selection of health status Measurement Instruments (COSMIN).
The exclusion criteria were: 1) publications in a language other than English, Spanish, French, Portuguese and Italian; and 2) tools not originally designed for a population with FM.

Data collection process and synthesis of results
Data collection was also performed by two independent blinded investigators, and they were compared until consensus was reached. The information extracted from the articles included: 1) data on the structural characteristics of the questionnaires (including acronym, year of publication, number of items, sub-categories, time to complete the questionnaire, measurement range, cutoff score and cost); and 2) psychometric characteristics of the selected questionnaires, including data on reliability (Cronbach’s alpha and test–retest) and data on the validity of the questionnaires (content, construct and criterion validity).

Quality assessment of the results and risk of bias.
The evaluation of quality and risk of bias was carried out by two independent researchers; subsequently, the evaluations were compared to reach a consensus. The two researchers assessed the quality of the collected studies following the COSMIN checklist.
COSMIN is a tool that assesses the quality of instruments that provide patient-reported health data. It distinguishes three main domains, and one or more subcategories for each domain: 1) reliability (internal consistency, reliability and measurement error); 2) validity (content validity, construct validity and criterion validity); and 3) responsiveness. Although interpretability is not considered a domain, it was also considered relevant.
The quality of the results was analyzed after collecting the data and synthesizing the variables of each of the instruments included in this review, according to the criteria established by COSMIN for systematic reviews of measurements reported by patients.
The ten COSMIN items on methodological quality were: 1) internal consistency; 2) reliability; 3) measurement error; 4) content validity; 5) criterion validity; 6) structural validity; 7) cross-cultural validity; 8) hypotheses testing; 9) responsiveness; and 10) interpretability.
A total score is obtained for each questionnaire from 0 to 10 points, adding one point if it meets the requirement with (“+”), scoring 0 points if the value is below the requirement (with “-”), and, finally, scoring 0 points if the data are not mentioned in the article (with “?”).

Data availability
The data associated with the paper are not publicly available but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

Evidence synthesis

Search and study selection
After identifying the studies in the different databases (N.=11,250) and eliminating duplicates (N.=387), a total of 10,863 studies were analyzed, of which 10,747 were excluded after reading the title and the abstract, since its content was not consistent with the objectives set in this study. Subsequently, 116 studies were analyzed in full text, of which 94 were excluded based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The remaining 22 studies contained 16 different questionnaires that subjectively assessed various subjective aspects of FM (Figure 1).
—Process for identifying and selecting articles to be included into the study.

Quality results and risk of bias
The 16 additional questionnaires compiled from the 22 selected studies showed, in general, a good methodological quality for subjective assessment in patients with fibromyalgia, with a minimum and maximum score of 214 and 9 points; the FHAQ and FibroFatigue Scale questionnaires obtained a score of 2 and 3 points respectively. Together with FSQ, ICAF and VASFIQ, which scored 4 points, these were the only ones that did not exceed COSMIN’s 5 points out of 10. The data are displayed in Table I.
—Quality assessment of the results and risk of bias.
Questionnaire	Reliability	Validity	Total (0-10)	 	Internal consistency	Reliability	Measurement error	Content validity	Criterion validity	Construct validity	Responsiveness	Interpretability	 	Structural validity	Cross-cultural validity	Hypotheses testing	 	CRSFS	+	+	?	+	+	+	+	+	+	+	9	 	FAS	+	+	?	+	+	+	?	?	+	+	7	 	FHAQ	?	?	?	-	+	?	?	?	?	+	2	 	FibroFatigue Scale	?	+	?	+	?	?	?	?	?	+	3	 	FIQ	+	-	+	+	-	?	?	+	?	+	5	 	FIQR	+	-	?	+	+	+	+	?	?	+	6	 	FIQRS	+	+	?	+	+	?	?	?	?	+	5	 	FiRST	-	+	?	+	+	?	+	?	+	+	6	 	FSQ	+	+	?	+	-	?	?	?	?	+	4	 	ICAF	+	+	?	-	-	+	?	?	?	+	4	 	JAEN	+	?	?	-	+	+	+	?	+	+	6	 	MDF-fibro-17	+	+	?	+	+	+	?	+	?	+	7	 	MISCI	+	?	?	+	+	+	+	?	?	+	6	 	PPTS	+	+	?	-	+	?	+	+	+	+	7	 	PROMs-FM	+	+	?	+	+	?	?	?	?	+	5	 	VASFIQ	?	?	?	-	+	?	?	+	+	+	4
CRSFS: Comprehensive Rating Scale for Fibromyalgia Symptomatology; FA: Fibromyalgia Assessment Status Index; FHAQ: Fibromyalgia Health Assessment Questionnaire; FibroFatigue Scale: fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome rating scale; FIQ: Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire; FIQR: Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire; FIQRS: Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire with an integration of Soreness Assessment; FiRST: Fibromyalgia Rapid Screening Tool; FSQ: Fibromyalgia Survey Questionnaire; ICAF: Combined Index of Severity of Fibromyalgia; JAEN: Joint Assessment of Equilibrium and Neuro-motor Function; MDF-fibro-17: Multidimensional daily diary of fatigue-fibromyalgia-17 items; MISCI: Multidimensional Inventory of Subjective Cognitive Impairment; PPTS: Pressure Pain Threshold Scale; PROMs-FM: Fibromyalgia Patient Reported Outcome Measures Questionnaire; VASFIQ: VASFIQ Brief Symptom Scale.

Characteristics and structure of the questionnaires
Table II shows the data on the characteristics and structures of the 16 subjective assessment questionnaires validated in the FM population, arranged in alphabetical order according to their acronym. The first questionnaire analyzed was the Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ), which was published in 1991, whereas the latest questionnaire analyzed, i.e., the Joint Assessment of Equilibrium and Neuro-motor Function (JAEN) was published in 2020. The number of items in the questionnaires ranged from 3 items (in the Fibromyalgia Assessment Status Index [FAS]) to 60 items (in the Comprehensive Rating Scale for Fibromyalgia Symptomatology [CRSFS]). The most measured subcategories are function, overall impact and symptoms; other studies also include sleep and cognition disturbances.
—Characteristics and structure of the subjective assessment questionnaires validated in the population with FM.
Acronym	Questionnaire	Year published	N. items	Subcategory	Time to complete (min [SD])	Measurement	Cutoff score	Cost (¤)	 	CRSFS	Comprehensive Rating Scale for Fibromyalgia Symptomatology	2013	60	Symptoms	-	0-180	72	39.50	 	FAS	Fibromyalgia Assessment Status index	2009	3	Pain. Fatigue. Sleep disturbances	-	0-10	5.7	Free	 	FHAQ	Fibromyalgia Health Assessment Questionnaire	2000	8	Function. Overall impact	-	0-24	-	-	 	FibroFatigue Scale	Fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome rating scale	2002	12	Pain. Overall impact. Symptoms. Cognition disturbances. Emotional. Sleep disturbances. Autonomic disturbances.	-	0-72	-	Free	 	FIQ	Fibromyalgia impact questionnaire	1991	19	Function. Overall impact. Symptoms	5	0-100	-	-	 	FIQR	Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire	2009	21	Function. Overall impact. Symptoms	1.3 (0.02)	0-100	-	Free	 	FIQRS	Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire with an integration of Soreness Assessment	2019	26	Function. Overall impact. Symptoms.	-	0-100	-	Free	 	FiRST	Fibromyalgia Rapid Screening Tool	2010	6	Pain. Fatigue. Pain descriptors. Abnormal sensations. Associated somatic comorbidities. Sleep and cognition disturbances.	<3	0-6	5	Free	 	FSQ	Fibromyalgia Survey Questionnaire	2012	26	Widespread Pain Index (WPI). Somatic Severity Score (SSS).	-	0-31	≥13	Free	 	ICAF	Combined Index of Severity of Fibromyalgia	2010	59	Emotional. Physical. Active coping. Passive coping. Overall.	-		-	Free	 	JAEN	Joint Assessment of Equilibrium and Neuro-motor Function	2020	20	Balance and neuromotor function.	12-13	0-80	>22	Free	 	MDF-fibro-17	Multidimensional daily diary of fatigue-fibromyalgia-17 items	2017	17	Global fatigue experience. Cognitive fatigue. Physical Fatigue. Motivation. Impact on function.	-	0-170	-	Free	 	MISCI	Multidimensional Inventory of Subjective Cognitive Impairment	2015	10	Cognitive functioning	-	10-50	-	Free	 	PPTS	Pressure pain threshold scale	2017	18	Digital sensor and pressure algometry	45	0-18	11	Free	 	PROMs-FM	Fibromyalgia Patient Reported Outcome Measures Questionnaire	2016	50	Functional disability assessment (10 items). Quality of life were selected (10 items). Comorbidities/systemic affection (30 items).	8.46 (0.25)	-	-	Free	 	VASFIQ	VASFIQ Brief Symptom Scale	2011	7	Severity. Identify fibromyalgia. Symptoms	-	0-70	≥31.4 moderate / ≥45.0 severe	Free
CRSFS: Comprehensive Rating Scale for Fibromyalgia Symptomatology; FA: Fibromyalgia Assessment Status Index; FHAQ: Fibromyalgia Health Assessment Questionnaire; FibroFatigue Scale: fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome rating scale; FIQ: Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire; FIQR: Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire; FIQRS: Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire with an integration of Soreness Assessment; FiRST: Fibromyalgia Rapid Screening Tool; FSQ: Fibromyalgia Survey Questionnaire; ICAF: Combined Index of Severity of Fibromyalgia; JAEN: Joint Assessment of Equilibrium and Neuro-motor Function; MDF-fibro-17: Multidimensional daily diary of fatigue-fibromyalgia-17 items; MISCI: Multidimensional Inventory of Subjective Cognitive Impairment; PPTS: Pressure pain threshold scale; PROMs-FM: Fibromyalgia Patient Reported Outcome Measures Questionnaire; VASFIQ: VASFIQ Brief Symptom Scale.
Only 6 studies describe the time to complete the questionnaires. The longest time described to complete the questionnaire was in the Fibromyalgia Patient Reported Outcome Measures Questionnaire (PROMs-FM) Study, with a mean time of 45 minutes. This questionnaire presents the third largest number of items; the shortest time was 1.3 (0.02) minutes, in the Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQR).
The measurement ranges of the scales are variable, with most of the lowest ranges being 0, except in the Multidimensional Inventory of Subjective Cognitive Impairment (MISCI), which has a minimum range of 10; the highest range varies up to 180 in the CRSFS. Most of the questionnaires could be accessed free of charge, except for the Fibromyalgia Health Assessment Questionnaire (FHAQ) and the original version of the FIQ from 1991, which could not be identified; the CRSFS had a cost of ¤39.50 per item.

Variables analyzed by the selected instruments
Figure 2 presents schematically all the outcome variables that the different instruments included in this systematic review analyze. In this sense, nine different spaces are identified within the graph, although there are twenty-one evaluable variables for these instruments. In this sense, the variables most frequently assessed are function (7 questionnaires), symptoms, and general impact, evaluated by six questionnaires each.
—Variables evaluated by the different instruments included in this systematic review. The number in the graph corresponds to the number of instruments that measure the indicated variable.
On the other hand, there is a section called “others,” which brings together 13 outcome variables analyzed by a single questionnaire. Therefore, there is much heterogeneity in the variables of interest in patients with fibromyalgia, among which we could highlight the quality of life, motivation, severity level or the number of comorbidities that patients present, among other variables. To delve into which questionnaires measure which variable, it is advisable to consult Table II.

Psychometric characteristics of the questionnaires
The psychometric variables of the 16 questionnaires analyzed are described in Table III. The psychometric characteristics that were not obtained directly from the original articles were acquired through the remaining 6 articles.
—Psychometric characteristics of the subjective assessment questionnaires validated in the population with FM.
Questionnaire acronyms	Reliability of questionnaires analysed	Validity of questionnaires analysed	 	Internal consitency (Cronbach’s α)	Test-retest	Nº. Factor	Concurrent validity	 	CRSFS	0.96	0.89-0.99	4	CRSFSTotal - FIQ (CRSFSSubscales - FIQ): r= 0.816 (0.593-0.787)CRSFSTotal - VASP (CRSFSSubscales - VASP): r= 0.604 (0.456-0.604)CRSFSTotal - VASQoL (CRSFSSubscales - VASQoL): r= 0.470 (0.340-0.566)CRSFSTotal - Tender Points (CRSFSSubscales - Tender Points): r= 0.631 (0.456-0.608)CRSFSTotal - SF12MC (CRSFSSubscales - SF12MC): r= 0.571 (0.363-0.711)CRSFSTotal - SF12PC (CRSFSSubscales - SF12PC): r= 0.571 (0.363-0.711)CRSFSTotal - MOS (CRSFSSubscales - MOS): r= 0.670 (0.497-0.697)CRSFSTotal - MFIS (CRSFSSubscales - MFIS): r= 0.831 (0.677-0.773)CRSFSTotal - PHQ-9 (CRSFSSubscales - PHQ9): r= 0.761 (0.573-0.836)	 	FAS	0.781	0.853 (CCC)	1	FAS - FIQ: r= 0.347FAS - SF36: r= -0.531FASIndex - FIQ: r= 0.608FASIndex - HAQ: r= 0.423FASIndex - HAQAnxiety: r= 0.138FASIndex - HAQDepression: r= 0.174FASIndex - HAQComorbidities: r= 0.147	 	FHAQ	-	-	-	FHAQ - HAQ: r= 0.92FHAQ - FIQPhysical function: r=0.59	 	FibroFatigue Scale	-	0.86-0.97	-	-	 	FIQ	0.80 - 0.83	0.56-0.95	5	FIQ - AIMSLower Extrimity: r= 0.67FIQPain - AIMS: r= 0.69FIQDepression - AIMS: r= 0.73FIQAnxiety - AIMS: r= 0.76	 	FIQR	0.95	0.56-0.93	-	FIQR - FIQ: r= 0.88FIQRTotal - SF36: r= 0.39-0.71FIQRFunction - SF36: r= 0.26-0.80FIQROverall - SF36: r= 0.39-0.64FIQRSymptoms - SF36: r= 0.43-0.66	 	FIQRS	0.93	0.92	-	FIQRS - FQR: r= 0.97FIQRS - SS: r= 0.52	 	FiRST	0.66	0.87	-	FiRSTTotal - BDI: r = 0.1FiRST - HADsDepression: r = 0.19FiRST - HADsAnxiety: r = 0.15FiRST - PCS: r = 0.1FiRST - BPI: r = 0.01	 	FSQ	0.71	0.78	-	FSQ - PHQ4: r= 0.48FSQSSS - PHQ4: r= 0.56FSQSSS - PHQ4Depression: r= 0.52FSQSSS - PHQ4Anxiety: r= 0.51	 	ICAF	0.85 - 0.93	0.79-0.87	4	ICAF - FIQ (ICAFSubscales - FIQ): r= 0.686 (0.048-0.662)ICAF - FAS (ICAFSubscales - FAS): r= 0.558 (0.185-0.516)ICAF - BPI (ICAFSubscales - BPI): r= 0.615 (0.095-0.739)ICAF - HAQ (ICAFSubscales - HAQ): r= 0.593 (0.093-0.501)ICAF - HADsAnxiety (ICAFSubscales - HADsAnxiety): r= 0.472 (0.064-0.795)ICAF - HADsDepression (ICAFSubscales - HADsDepression): r= 0.463 (0.254-0.722)ICAF - CPCI (ICAFSubscales - CPCI): r= 0.697 (0.021-0.715)ICAF - GHQ-28 (ICAFSubscales - GHQ28): r= 0.559 (0.083-0.862)ICAF - ASES (ICAFSubscales - ASES): r= -0.086 (0.129-0.504)	 	JAEN	0.928	-	4	Functional TestStanding Eyes Closed (Romberg test)= 0.609Standing Tandem Left= 0.697Tandem Romberg Left= 0.597Standing Tandem Right= 0.684Tandem Romberg Right= 0.594The One-Legged Stance Time Left Eyes Open= 0.612The One-Legged Stance Time Left Eyes Closed= 0.533The One-Legged Stance Time Right Eyes Open= 0.587The One-Legged Stance Time Right Eyes Closed= 0.582Modified Head shaking Rotation Test Eyes Closed= 0.657Modified Head Shaking Flexion Test Eyes Open Left= 0.653Modified Head Shaking Flexion Test Eyes= 0.679Modified Head shaking Flexion Test Eyes Closed Right= 0.700Sphinx Pose (during 30 s)= 0.474Fukuda stepping Test 50 steps= 0.502Babinski-Weil Walk= 0.421Walk Tandem Eyes Open= 0.609Walk Shaking Neck Flexion–Extension Eyes Open= 0.639Walk Shaking Neck Rotation Eyes Open= 0.592	QuestionnairesJAEN - Number of falls in the last year: r= 0.486JAEN - DHIEmotional: r= 0.578JAEN - DHIFunctional: r= 0.650JAEN - DHIPhysical: r= 0.698JAEN - DHITotal: r= 0.675JAEN - ABC: r= -0.669JAEN - FES: r= 0.581JAEN - FIQ: r= 0.348JAEN - CSI: r= 0.656JAEN - SF12CS: r= -0.649JAEN - SF12MC: r= -0.370	 	MDF-fibro-17	0.94-0.99	0.71-0.82	5	MDF-fibro-17 - GFI: r= 0.73-0.80MDF-fibro-17 - SF36VT: r= 0.52-0.66MDF-fibro-17 - FIQTotal: r= 0.71-0.80MDF-fibro-17 - SF36PF: r= 0.42-0.40MDF-fibro-17 - SF36PCS: r= 0.41-0.50	 	MISCI	0.95	-	5	MISCITotal - MASQTotal (MISCI - MASQSubscales): r= 0.82 (0.57-0.76)MISCITotal - FIQ-RTotal (MISCI - FIQ-RSubscales): r= 0.67 (0.60-0.70)	 	PPTS	0.92	≥0.88	-	PPTS - VAS: r≥0.61	 	PROMs-FM	0.88-0.98	0.83-0.944	-	PROMs-FM - Stanford HAQ: r=0.933PROMs-FM - EQ-5D: r=0.882PROMs-FM- EQ-5d VAS: r= 0.891	 	VASFIQ	-	-	-	VASFIQ - FIQ: r= 0.94-0.97VASFIQ - PGIC: r= 0.58VASFatigue - MAFGFI: r= 0.67-0.76VASAnxiety - HADSAnxiety: r= 0.64-0.67VASDepression - HADSDepression: r= 0.57-0.62VASSleep - SPI: r= 0.50-0.67
ABC: Activities Balance Confidence Scale; AIMS: Arthritis Impact Measurement Scale; ASES: Arthritis Self-Efficacy Scale; BDI: Beck Depression Inventory; BPI: Brief Pain Inventory; CCC: concordance correlation coefficients; CPCI: Chronic Pain Coping Inventory; CSI: Central Sensitization Inventory; DHI: Dizziness Handicap Inventory; EQ-5D: EuroQol-5D; EQ-5D VAS: EuroQol-5D horizontal visual analogue scale; FAS: Fatigue Assessment Scale; FES: Falls Efficacy Scale-International; GFI: Global Fatigue Index; GHQ28: General Health Questionnaire 28; HADs: Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale; HAQ: Health Assessment Questionnaire; MAFGFI: Multidimensional Assessment of FatigueGlobal Fatigue Index; MASQ: Multiple Ability Self-Report Questionnaire; MFIS: Modified Fatigue Impact Scale; MOS: Medical Outcomes Study Sleep Scale; PGIC: PatientGlobal Impression of Change; PHQ4: The 4-item Patient Health Questionnaire-4; PHQ-9: Patient Health Questionnaire-9; SF12CS: Medical Outcomes Short Form 12 Component Summary; SF12MC: Medical Outcomes Short Form 12 Mental Component; SF12PC: Medical Outcomes Short Form 12 Physical Component; SF36: The MOS 36-item short form health survey; SF36PCS: 36-Item Short Form Health physical component score; SF36PF: 36-Item Short Form Health physical functioning subscale; SF36VT: 36-Item Short Form Health Survey vitality; SPI: Medical Outcomes Study Sleep Problems Index II; SS: fibromyalgia symptom severity score; VAS: Visual Analog Scale; VASP: Visual Analogical Scale of Pain; VASQoL: Visual Analogical Scale of Quality of Life.

Reliability
All questionnaires, except the FHAQ, the Fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome rating scale (FibroFatigue Scale), and the VASFIQ Brief Symptom Scale (VASFIQ) measured the internal consistency by calculating Cronbach’s alpha. The highest alpha value obtained was 0.99, in the range of the MDF-fibro-17 study, whereas the lowest alpha value was 0.66, in the Fibromyalgia Rapid Screening Tool (FiRST). The reliability of the response to the item (Test-retest) was given by 12 of the 16 questionnaires; FHAQ, JAEN, MISCI and VASFIQ did not provide data on stability measurements; the rest of the articles expressed it as an interclass correlation coefficient (ICC), except for FAS, which obtained 0.853 by calculating the concordance correlation coefficients (CCC). The lowest ICC obtained was 0.56, in the range of the FIQ and FIQR studies, while the highest ICC was 0.99, in the CRSFS range.

Validity
Only 7 of the 16 questionnaires had their validity assessed through a factor component analysis. The number of factors described in the questionnaires ranged from 1 for the FAS to 5 for the FIQ, MDF-fibro-17, and MISCI; the CRSFS, Combined Index of Severity of Fibromyalgia (ICAF) and JAEN questionnaires performed 4-factor analyses.
Four studies provided data on sensitivity and specificity. The highest sensitivity obtained was 90.5% in the FiRST, and the lowest was 78.8% in the FAS; the CRSFS and JAEN obtained 81.0% and 90.32%, respectively. The highest specificity was obtained, again, by the FiRST, with 85.7%, the lowest specificity was obtained by the CRSFS, with 73.8%, and, finally, FAS and JAEN obtained 74.5% and 83.33%, respectively.

Error measurements
Three questionnaires provided data on the standard error of measurement (SEM), obtaining: FHAQ SEM= 0.25; ICAF SEM= 0.53-0.84; and MDF-fibro-17 SEM= -2.55. Data on the minimal clinically important difference (MCID) were obtained only in the FIQ, with 14%. On the other hand, only the FibroFatigue Scale did not provide any concurrent validity data. The rest of the data on the validity of the construct and the comparison with the gold standard (GS) are summarized in Table III.

Discussion
The objective of this study was to identify and review the subjective assessment tools validated in patients with FM, identifying their most significant structural characteristics, as well as the psychometric characteristics analyzed in each of the identified instruments. Twenty-two studies containing 16 different questionnaires that subjectively assessed various subjective aspects of FM were analyzed.
Although a gold standard (gs) for the subjective evaluation of fibromyalgia has not been identified to date, the most used tools in the documents analyzed were the FIQ, which was developed in 1991, and its various versions up to the Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire with an integration of Soreness Assessment (FIQRS), which was developed in 2019. Since the appearance of the FIQ, several specific questionnaires have been designed for the subjective evaluation of patients with FM, aiming to score the level of impact that the patient perceives and the measurement of variables that could derive from their condition.
As was previously mentioned, since there are no biomarkers in fibromyalgia, and due to the great variety of questionnaires, selecting the ideal one is key both for adequate clinical care and for evaluating the efficacy or effectiveness of the treatment.
Although one of the most important factors for this choice is the psychometric properties of the questionnaire (e.g., validity and reliability), other factors must be taken into account, such as the characteristics and structure of the questionnaire, in order to achieve the objectives and adapt to the clinical or research needs.

Psychometric characteristics of the selected questionnaires

Reliability
Reliability is defined as the consistency of a method when measuring something; in this case, it is useful to know the reproducibility of the measurements of the questionnaires. Most studies measure it with internal consistency, to estimate whether a set of questions are equivalent and measure the same construct, using Cronbach’s alpha. All questionnaires collected, except three (FHAQ, FibroFatigue Scale and VASFIQ) provide Cronbach’s alpha. Of the 13 questionnaires that presented reliability values, three showed good reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha values above 0.6 and below 0.8, while the remaining 10 questionnaires presented excellent reliability, thus demonstrating that all the tools that have analyzed this psychometric variable are reliable for use in patients with fibromyalgia.
Furthermore, the response to the item was also analyzed in 12 of the 16 selected documents. In this sense, both the FIQ and the FIQR presented, in some of their dimensions, an ICC value ≤0.6, and could therefore be categorized as moderate. In the same way, there are some items of the FIQ, FIQR, FSQ, ICAF, and MDF-Fibro questionnaires whose ICC should be classified as good, for not reaching the value of 0.8 in the ICC. The rest of the items of the questionnaires that have analyzed this result variable present values in the response to the excellent item.
Although all the questionnaires that have analyzed the values of internal consistency and reliability present good results, it seems that the lower value observed in the ICC of some questionnaires does not affect the internal consistency of the questionnaire in a decisive way, which suggests that items with moderate measurement stability are exceptional, allowing the rest of the variables to favor a compensation that allows the maintenance of internal consistency at good or excellent levels.

Validity
Validity is defined as the precision with which a methodology measures the variable that it intends to measure; it is useful in the determination of the reliability of questionnaires, being a basic indicator of their validity or non-validity when it is high or low, respectively. The validity of the questionnaire data has been estimated through construct validity and criterion validity.
Construct validity is the adherence of an assessment to existing knowledge and theory of the measured concept; this was performed by 7 of the 16 questionnaires, through factor component analysis, from 1 to 5 factors. Although most of the studies did not mention whether they carried out a factor analysis, it would be expected to find that the questionnaires with a larger number of items would present a larger number of factors; in this case, no correlation was found, finding a 5-factor analysis for three questionnaires with 10, 17 and 19 items, and a 4-factor analysis for the questionnaires with a larger number of items, such as the CRSFS and ICAF, with 60 and 59 items. The only questionnaire analyzed using 1 factor was the FAS, with the smallest number of items (only 3).
Regarding criterion validity, it is the extent to which the measured data correspond to the other valid measures of the same domain or concept; in the analyzed questionnaires, it was normally estimated with the GS (concurrent validity). It was observed that different tools are used in each study. In fact, the most used reference tool to perform criterion validity is the FIQ, which has been used by 9 instruments (Table III), with correlation values that range between r=0.347 and 0.97. However, it is also common to use subjective assessment instruments of frequent variables in patients with fibromyalgia, such as the general state of health, used by 10 questionnaires, anxiety and/or depression, compared in four instruments, or the quality of life and pain, used by three instruments (Table III). It should be noted that only one of the identified questionnaires analyzed the correlation between the results obtained from the questionnaire and different functional tests.

Error measurements
Regarding the error of measurement (SEM) and minimal clinically important difference (MCID), although they are simple statistical ways to differentiate between real change and random measurement error, most studies did not provide data on them. The SEM is estimated from the standard deviation of a sample at baseline and a test-retest reliability index, which was given by only three questionnaires (FHAQ, ICAF and MDF-fibro-17). In this sense, it would be necessary to design studies that allow identifying the sensitivity and error means presented by the different questionnaires, enabling the description of the magnitude of the change required for the tool used to identify it. This reflection could be extended to the MCID, which is analyzed by none of the instruments identified, with the exception of the FIQ, which obtained a value of 14% (Table III).

Structural characteristics of the questionnaires
When selecting an instrument for the assessment and follow-up of patients with fibromyalgia, it is important to carry out a quantitative and qualitative evaluation of it. In this sense, the first criterion that should be used is qualitative, that is, trying to select the instrument that presents the best and largest number of possible psychometric values. Based on this identification, it is important that the researcher/clinical professional make the choice based on the structural characteristics of each instrument, considering, among other aspects, the outcome variables that it analyzes, the number of questions that make it up, or the time required to complete it. On the other hand, it is also important to be able to estimate the system and the time needed to extract the score, both for the main variable and for the sub-scales that could potentially make up the questionnaire.
Based on this clinical/investigative reality, the present study demonstrates that there are multiple options available for the assessment and follow-up of patients with fibromyalgia.

Transfer and clinical utility of the results
This study presents all the tools available for the subjective evaluation of patients with fibromyalgia, indicating both their structural and psychometric characteristics. In this sense, although there is significant heterogeneity between the tools analyzed, each clinical professional, depending on the outcome variables they wish to analyze, will be able to identify the one that best suits the different clinical or research realities. In which the evaluation of the patient is carried out.
Sometimes, it is essential to select the assessment tool not only based on the outcome variable to be analyzed but also on aspects external to the assessment tool itself, such as the time available or the patient’s profile to evaluate. In this sense, having a document that presents all the descriptive and psychometric characteristics dramatically facilitates the choice of the appropriate tool.

Limitations of the study
Although this is the first study to identify, compile, and review validated subjective assessment tools in patients with fibromyalgia, some weaknesses were identified that must be taken into account when interpreting the results. Although the search was carried out in different databases of international relevance, relevant documents may have been registered in another database and, for this reason, they were not included in the review. Similarly, despite the fact that a broad linguistic criterion was used, including five languages, there may be documents published in other languages that have not been included in this study.

Conclusions
The main conclusion that could be drawn after carrying out this study is that there is a wide range of questionnaires specifically designed for patients with fibromyalgia who present, on the one hand, good and/or excellent basic psychometric characteristics. On the other hand, the structural characteristics of the identified instruments are very heterogeneous, which makes it possible to select those that best adapt to the clinical/research scenario where the tool will be used.
However, it would be necessary to design studies aimed at evaluating some psychometric characteristics that have not been calculated in a generalized manner.
Conflicts of interest: The authors certify that there is no conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the material discussed in the manuscript.

References
Sumpton J, Moulin D. Fibromyalgia. In: Biller J, Ferro JM, editors. Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2014. p. 513-27.
Treating patients with fibromyalgia in primary care settings under routine medical practice: a claim database cost and burden of illness study.
Fibromyalgia: an update on clinical characteristics, aetiopathogenesis and treatment.
Measures of fibromyalgia: Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ), Brief Pain Inventory (BPI), Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI-20), Medical Outcomes Study (MOS) Sleep Scale, and Multiple Ability Self-Report Questionnaire (MASQ).
Subjective and objective outcomes in randomized clinical trials: definitions differed in methods publications and were often absent from trial reports.
Relationship between patient-reported outcome measures (PROM) and three measures of foot-ankle alignment in patients with metatarsal head pain: a cross-sectional study.
PRISMA Group. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement.
The COSMIN checklist for assessing the methodological quality of studies on measurement properties of health status measurement instruments: an international Delphi study.
The COSMIN study reached international consensus on taxonomy, terminology, and definitions of measurement properties for health-related patient-reported outcomes.
COSMIN guideline for systematic reviews of patient-reported outcome measures.
Development of a multidimensional measure of fibromyalgia symptomatology: the comprehensive rating scale for fibromyalgia symptomatology.
Development and validation of the self-administered Fibromyalgia Assessment Status: a disease-specific composite measure for evaluating treatment effect.
The assessment of functional impairment in fibromyalgia (FM): rasch analyses of 5 functional scales and the development of the FM Health Assessment Questionnaire.
A rating scale for fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome (the FibroFatigue scale).
The fibromyalgia impact questionnaire: development and validation.
The Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQR): validation and psychometric properties.
Evaluating soreness symptoms of fibromyalgia: Establishment and validation of the Revised Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire with Integration of Soreness Assessment.
CEDR (Cercle d’Etude de la Douleur en Rhumatologie). Development and validation of the Fibromyalgia Rapid Screening Tool (FiRST).
Validation of the Fibromyalgia Survey Questionnaire within a cross-sectional survey.
Development of a self-reporting tool to obtain a combined index of severity of fibromyalgia (ICAF).
Joint Assessment of Equilibrium and Neuromotor Function: A Validation Study in Patients with Fibromyalgia.
Multidimensional daily diary of fatigue-fibromyalgia-17 items (MDF-fibro-17). part 1: development and content validity.
Development and initial validation of a brief self-report measure of cognitive dysfunction in fibromyalgia.
Concurrent validation of a pressure pain threshold scale for individuals with myofascial pain syndrome and fibromyalgia.
Towards Tailored Patient’s Management Approach: Integrating the Modified 2010 ACR Criteria for Fibromyalgia in Multidimensional Patient Reported Outcome Measures Questionnaire.
Simplifying Fibromyalgia Assessment: The VASFIQ Brief Symptom Scale.
Psychometric properties of the Fibromyalgia Assessment Status (FAS) index: a national web-based study of fibromyalgia.
A Vallejo M; Grupo ICAF.
Fibromyalgia Health Assessment Questionnaire: sensitivity to change.
A confirmatory study of the Combined Index of Severity of Fibromyalgia (ICAF*): factorial structure, reliability and sensitivity to change.
Multidimensional daily diary of fatigue-fibromyalgia-17 items (MDF-fibro-17): part 2 psychometric evaluation in fibromyalgia patients.
Reliability and validity: Importance in Medical Research.
Validity and reliability of measurement instruments used in research.
Streiner D, Norman G, Cairney J. Health Measurement Scales. Fifth edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2015.
Intraclass correlations: uses in assessing rater reliability.
The Applicability of Standard Error of Measurement and Minimal Detectable Change to Motor Learning Research-A Behavioral Study.