Pre-clinical evaluation of mRNA-lipid nanoparticles’ potency and toxicity: current practices and future directions
Over the last few years, the success of COVID-19 mRNA vaccines has resulted in the emergence of RNA lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) with promising prospects for the prevention and treatment of various diseases. The context of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has led to the rapid development of vaccines with abbreviated non-clinical programs. However, there are currently no official guidelines defining the required standards for global marketing of mRNA based therapeutic products. Nevertheless, to guarantee a well-controlled product, it is essential to characterize both the drug substance and the final product in terms of their structure, composition, formulation, physico-chemical features, potency, and safety. This lack of guidance has resulted in a wide variety of heterogeneous in vitro tests being used to assess the potency and cytotoxicity of RNA-LNP. This review discusses the commonly used in vitro assays, primarily 2D monolayer assays, employed to evaluate the biological properties of RNA-LNP. We then explore novel alternative methods to bridge the gap between in vitro and in vivo results. We summarize (i) co-culture models, (ii) multilayer 3D assays and (iii) in vivo replacement models, exploring their potential applications in assessing the potency and safety of RNA-LNPs. Finally, we discuss the use of in silico and machine learning as models for optimizing and predicting the biological behavior of RNA-LNPs.
Graphical Abstract

Introduction
Given the success of messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines developed in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, RNA-based technologies have raised promising prospects for the prevention and treatment of various diseases. Indeed, RNA encoding a wide variety of viral antigens; tumor associated antigens, cytokines, monoclonal antibodies and gene editing therapies are currently under preclinical and clinical development.
The efficacy of RNA therapy depends on the ability of the delivery system to bring nucleic acid to the targeted cells, which is essential to induce biological effects. In fact, the use of a delivery system is fundamental for a range of reasons, including protection of the payload against degradation, facilitation of membrane crossing for cellular uptake and tissue targeting. For decades, lipid-based delivery systems have been well established to encapsulate nucleic acids, with the use of the first lipoplexes and liposomes in the 90’s. The selection of novel cationic lipids, unprotonated at pH 7, and novel lipidic compositions has led to the description of lipid nanoparticles (LNPs). These nanoparticles have firmly established their position as the main delivery platform for therapeutic RNAs enabling higher encapsulation efficiency and improved efficacy. Alternative non-viral vectors such as polymers, peptides and exosomes have been proposed, nonetheless LNPs remain the most used in clinical applications.
Comprehensive characterization of a pharmaceutical product is essential to guarantee therapeutic reliability and to comply with demanding regulatory standards, thus achieving a well-controlled product. Characterization of the final drug product (fDP) is essential to obtain knowledge about the structure, performance, and safety of the pharmaceutical product. In RNA vaccine development, characterizations are needed on both the drug substance (DS) (corresponding to the RNA), and the fDP (corresponding to the final formulated RNA). Physico-chemical characterizations as well as potency assay are required for each release of vaccine batches. The potency assay is a critical quality attribute that demonstrates the functional integrity of the antigens and supports the monitoring of batch-to-batch consistency and stability.
Today, industries are faced with various regulatory organizations with different requirements, according to the region of the world in which they wish to market their products. The regulatory and reference documents regarding mRNA-LNPs development are limited and inconsistent between regulatory agencies. The United States Pharmacopeia (USP) and the European agencies have proposed draft chapters on Analytical Procedures for assessing the analysis of quality of mRNA and mRNA-LNP to support their development. Typically, physico-chemical quality attributes such as size, polydispersity, encapsulation efficiency, or mRNA integrity are studied during the development process.
The in vitro potency of an RNA vaccine, often referred to as a functionality assay, is assessed using a quantitative and validated method. The characterization of the correct protein size and identity expressed from the mRNA can be achieved by a cell-based or cell-free assay. Moreover, the potency assay must respect some specifications, especially regarding the dose used. Therefore, to have predictive results it is necessary to adapt the potency assay according to the targeted application. Currently, there is no consensus on how best potency assays can be performed.
In addition to potency assay, toxicity and inflammatory responses should be assessed; as the innate immune system is highly sensitive to RNA molecules and LNPs components. In this context, nonclinical toxicity studies in animal models are built to predict immune indicators, including reactogenicity, immune response, and toxicities. In addition, biodistribution and persistence studies are needed to determine whether RNAs or LNPs components are released into non-targeted tissues, and their duration of persistence. Moreover, further studies are needed concerning the “novel” excipients, such as ionizable lipids, to support their safe use and assess their potential genotoxicity and systemic toxicity. Animal studies are still required by regulatory authorities for the development of nanomedicine therapies but could potentially be replaced by accelerated transitions toward animal-free regulatory testing in the near future. For this reason, it is of utmost importance to develop novel alternative methods (NAMs), allowing an optimal potency and toxicity evaluation of RNA-LNPs.
In this review, we will first describe in vitro potency and cytotoxicity assays, typically used for the development of RNA-lipid nanoparticles, and their limitations. We will then outline co-culture 2D models and innovative strategies based on 3D models such as organoids and organs-on-a-chip, as well as computational methods and their potential use for the study of potency and toxicity of RNA-LNPs. These models could bridge the gap between in vitro assays and animal study results, allowing for better predictivity and transposability to human safety and efficacy.

Current practices: two-dimensional monolayer cultures for mRNA-LNPs assessment
The evaluation of RNA-lipid nanoparticles functionality and cytotoxicity are commonly assessed on in vitro models using immortalized cell lines or primary human cells. The choice of the appropriate cell type depends on several parameters, including the targeted organ, the route of administration, and the ease of cell manipulation. Immortalized cell lines are derived from sources with chromosomal abnormalities or mutations, such as tumors, and are advantageous for research due to their constant growth and reproducibility to proliferate indefinitely. A various number of cell lines are available and differ by the phenotype (e.g. epithelial, endothelial, fibroblast), the organism (e.g. mice, monkey, human) and the derivate tissues (e.g. uterus, kidney, liver). Despite several advantages of immortalized cells, a major limitation to their use is that these cells will never be encountered in an in vivo organism, which may lead to a lack of transposability of findings with in vivo experiments.
Primary human cells are directly isolated from tissues, including blood and bone marrow, retaining the key characteristics of the source tissue, as well as inter-individual variability. This provides a model that more closely resembles human physiology, while generating more predictive data. However, primary cells are harder to handle than immortalized cells, which explains why they are often used in a second intention to establish translational relevance especially when the therapeutic application targets specific immune subsets.

In vitro assessment of RNA-LNPs functionality
The functionality of mRNA-LNPs is currently being studied using in vitro-based assays that determine protein expression in cells. A non-exhaustive list of studies describing (i) the assessment of protein expression after transfection and (ii) the trafficking of mRNA-LNPs reported in the literature are summarized in Table 1. A variety of immortalized cell lines, specifically human epithelial cells (e.g. HEK293, HeLa, HepG2…) are used. HEK293 are widely used in RNA transfection assays exhibiting high level of protein expression making them ideal for RNA delivery studies. Other cell types including muscle cells (e.g. C2C12, HSkMC) and immune cells (e.g. DC2.4, BMDCs, RAW264.7) are used in the context of mRNA vaccine studies. They are generally less transfected than epithelial cell types. These discrepancies may be associated to variable IFN-I signaling between epithelial and immune cells. Dendritic cells (DCs) internalize mRNA-LNPs through toll-like receptors (TLRs) and produce large amounts of IFNα, then mature, and stop proliferating due to the anti-proliferative effect of ISGs (interferon-stimulated genes). In addition, the secreted IFNα into the environment induce paracrine effect on the neighbor DCs instructing them to eliminate the foreign substance (i.e. the transfected mRNA).
The transfection efficacy is mainly evaluated using well-known methods such as flow cytometry, fluorescence microscopy, or luciferase reporter assays. Overall, the various reported studies are consistent with the fact that transfection level is dependent on the lipid, the RNA sequence, and the cell type. For example, Lo Presti et al. highlighted the cell specificity in optimizing transfection efficiency by testing nine helper lipid-modified LNPs on several cell lines representative of the main liver, lung and spleen population. Shi et al. compared the uptake and expression levels of mRNA-RBD encapsulated either in LNP, cationic nanoemulsion (CNE), or cationic liposome (lipo) in C2C12, DC2.4 and RAW267.4 cells. Interestingly, they observed different behaviors of the nanoparticles; while LNPs were mainly internalized by myocytes leading to humoral response after immunization, CNE and lipo were highly expressed in dendritic cells and induced cellular-preferred immunity in vivo.
Otherwise, cell-free translation (CFT) assays are being developed for rapid assessment of mRNA functionality without confounding their functionality by the quality of the LNP used to deliver the mRNA into the cells. The mRNA is directly delivered to the ribosomal machinery derived from several systems such bacteria, insects or mammalian cells. For example, Stiving et al. developed a CFT assay, using wheat germ extract, coupled to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (MS) enabling the characterization and quantification of antigen proteins from a multivalent mRNA drug in a dose-dependent manner. However, the functionality of the mRNA formulated in LNPs (fDP) was performed in cell-based assay to provide a more representative output of its in vivo functionality.
To gain a better understanding on the RNA pathways, research groups are focusing on RNA-LNPs trafficking, including the uptake by the cells and the endosomal disruption. Indeed, LNPs are internalized by endocytosis into endosomes. As the endosomes mature, their pH becomes more acidic, inducing the destabilization of the LNPs, endosome bursting, and therefore the release of mRNA into the cytoplasm for translation by ribosomes. The timing and quantity of payload release from the endosome are crucial for efficient translation of mRNA. Various methods are thus developed to study endosomal escape. Some studies have been carried out to analyze the intracellular distribution of LNPs using confocal microscopy, allowing subcellular localization. For instance, fluorescent proteins have been used to label critical organelles (early, late, and recycling endosomes) of DC2.4 cells to investigate the influence of helper lipids on intracellular trafficking of mRNA. Using the same method, a research group compared the subcellular trafficking of two types of LNPs on myoblasts. Some works highlighted the utilization of galectin-based imaging assays as a marker of endosomal damage induced by the LNPs. Munton et al. used a fluorescent Galectin-9 reporter to assess the endosomal escape events induced by different mRNA-LNPs in various cell lines. Recently, Omo-Lamai and team. demonstrated that galectin recruitment is strongly correlated with endosomal damages and LNP-induced inflammation, highlighting the need for fine selection of LNP according to the application.
Super-resolution optical imaging methods such as stimulated emission depletion (STED) microscopy and single-molecule localization techniques (SMLM, PALM, STORM) are developed to overcome the limitations of light sheet fluorescence imaging. These approaches are particularly powerful for tracking the intracellular trafficking of mRNA-LNPs, visualizing endosomal escape in real time, and correlating nanoparticle localization with specific endosomal markers at high resolution scale (20–60 nm), below the optical diffraction limit (250 nm). For instance, Paramasivam et al. used SMLM to visualize mRNA within the endosomes and cytoplasm and resolved LNPs in sub endosomal compartments.
In addition, a complementary method has been developed to monitor the dissociation of mRNA from LNPs using Fluorescence Energy Transfer (FRET). This method’s key benefit is that it allows quantitative molecular analysis (down to 10 nm), making it the go-to choice for mechanistic analysis, particularly in terms of disassembly and escape kinetics. The suitability of this technique for the application of mRNA-LNPs requires the components to be labelled with a FRET pair dye, either mRNA/lipids or mRNA/endosome. Fluorescence signals changes are then monitored allowing the observation of mRNA dynamic release from LNPs. For example, the authors have monitored mRNA release from LNP using Cy5 labelled mRNA and DiR lipophilic dye by detecting Cy5 fluorescence recovery, while Sahay et al. used two identical siRNA labelled with different fluorophores. Methods based on the pH property of the endosomal compartments, such as pH-sensitive dye-based microscopy, have also been used to study endosomal escape.
Overall, the assessment of RNA-LNPs trafficking and functionality is critical for understanding LNP properties. The major challenge is to determine the right in vitro model enabling a good prediction of their functionality. Unfortunately, in vitro assays are generally not harmonized between laboratories. Moreover, the poor correlation between in vitro assays and in vivo results remains a hurdle.
2D monoculture monolayer based assays used for the study of RNA-LNPs potency and trafficking
Test	Cell type	Organism	Tissue: cell line	Method	 	Determination of protein expression in mRNA/mRNA-LNP transfected cells	epithelial cells	Mouse	breast: 4T1 	flow cytometry 	 	Monkey	kidney: Vero 	fluorescence microscopy 	 	Human	eye, retina: ARPE-19 kidney: HEK293liver: HeLa - HepG2 - Hep3B - Huh7 lung: A549 ovary: SKOV-3 - IGROV-1 prostate: 22Rv1 	western on cell lysates western on cell supernatant flow cytometry luciferase reporter assay on cell lysate luciferase reporter assayfluorescent microscopy sandwich ELISA kit (GeneTex) 	 	endothelial cells	Human	lung: HULEC-5a 	luciferase reporter assay 	 	mesenchymal stem cells	Rat	rMSCs 	luciferase reporter assay 	 	Human	hMSCs 	luciferase reporter assay 	 	fibroblasts	Mouse	embryo: 3T3 - NIH3T3 large intestine, colon: CT-26 	flow cytometry luciferase reporter assay 	 	Hamster	kidney: BHK-21 	flow cytometry fluorescent microscopy 	 	Human	lung: HEL 299 skin: BJ 	western on cell lysate flow cytometry 	 	myoblasts	Mouse	muscle: C2C12 	luciferase reporter assay 	 	skeletal muscle cells	Human	skeletal muscle: HSkMC 	flow cytometry 	 	dendritic cells	Mouse	DC2.4 - JAWsII (bone marrow) - BMDCs 	flow cytometry luciferase reporter assay 	 	macrophages	Mouse	ascites: RAW264.7 	luciferase reporter assay flow cytometry 	 	T lymphoblasts	Mouse	B3Z T cell 	flow cytometry 	 	Human	peripheral blood: JURKAT 	luciferase reporter assay 	 	mRNA-LNP trafficking (entry, endosomal disruption…)	epithelial cells	Mouse	breast: 4T1 	confocal microscopy: uptake and intracellular trafficking of labelled mRNA FRET: endosomal escape 	 	Human	breast: MDA-MB-468 kidney: HEK293 liver: HeLa ovary: SKOV-3 	FRET live cell imaging High Content Imagingflow cytometry confocal microscopy multicolor SMLM 	 	myoblasts	Mouse	muscle: C2C12 	confocal microscopy 	 	dendritic cells	Mouse	DC2.4 	confocal microscopy FRET live cell imaging microscopy

In vitro evaluation of RNA-LNPs toxicity
While the pharmacological and toxicological properties of nanomedicines are often investigated during in vivo preclinical studies, in vitro tests would enable optimal development of these therapeutics. In the field of mRNA-LNPs, cytotoxicity needs to be assessed for each component; mRNA and lipidic components from LNPs as well as the mRNA-LNPs complexes. Several in vitro tests, summarized in Table 2, are available to assess cytotoxicity and the induction of inflammatory cytokines’ release in specific cell lines. One of the most well documented cytotoxicity assays is MTT colorimetric assay (3-(4,5-dimethyl-2-thiazolyl)−2,5-diphenyl-2 H-tetrazolium bromide) based on mitochondrial activity. For example DC2.4 cell line was well used for the evaluation of in vitro cytotoxicity of various LNPs. For inhaled formulations, pulmonary murine (MLE) or human (A549, Calu-3) epithelial cells commonly used for the evaluation of LNPs formulation. For instance, Calu-3 were used for the assessment of LNPs formulation cytotoxicity by performing real time impedance cell cytotoxicity study or MTT. In addition, the lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay is broadly used for assessing nanoparticles toxicity by measuring the cell membrane damage caused by the release of LDH enzymes into the extracellular medium. Using both MTT and LDH assays, researchers investigated the toxicity of mRNA-LNPs on HepG2 cells and highlighted that the MC3-based formulation induced higher cytotoxicity than the SM102-based formulations. There was no difference between the assays. Nevertheless, some particles are known to induce some specific interactions such as LDH inactivation caused by metallic nanoparticles or LDH adsorption.
Discontinuing preclinical development of nanomedicines is often related to nanoparticles reactogenicity inducing inflammatory reactions, complement activation, and disruption of the blood coagulation pathway. The evaluation of inflammation through the study of activation pathways (e.g. interferon regulatory factor -IRF- and nuclear factor-κBeta -NF-κB- pathways) and pro-inflammatory cytokines release induced by mRNA-LNPs is critical, notably due to achieving an optimal product design with reduced adverse effects. mRNA vaccines may trigger innate immune responses LNPs, even in the absence of mRNA, activate immune cells, mediating the adjuvant role of LNPs and the release of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α). In addition, the expression of IFN-β is highly specific to the mRNA component. In this context, a wide range of in vitro immunology assays have been set up such as immunosorbent and multiplex assays to detect a variety of cytokines and chemokines released by the cells.
The assessment of mRNA-LNPs compatibility with human blood components is therefore fundamental to ensure mRNA-LNPs safety through administration. This is further exemplified through several cases of thrombosis reported in patients following mRNA-COVID vaccines administration. In addition, other studies reported development or exacerbation of autoimmune hemolytic anemia in vaccinated patients, which is caused by the production of autoantibodies against red blood cells. A risk evaluation in the early phase of development of mRNA-LNPs is essential to prevent life-threatening complications. Moreover, in vitro hematological assays such the study of hemolysis and platelet aggregation induced by RNA-LNPs could be assessed. Finally, since complement activation can cause hypersensitivity reactions, thrombocytopenia or vascular inflammation, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay or western blot are commonly used to study complement activation and thus mitigate clinical risks.
2D monoculture monolayer based assays used for the study of RNA-LNPs cytotoxicity and pro-inflammatory cytokines
Test	Cell type	Organism	Cell line	Method	 	Cytotoxicity	epithelial cells	Human	lung: A549 Calu-3 liver: HeLa – Hep G2 ovary: SKOV-3 	MTT LDH 	 	fibroblasts	Hamster	kidney: BHK-21 	cells viability by flow cytometry 	 	Human	skin: BJ 	MTT 	 	myoblasts	Mouse	C2C12 	MTT 	 	dendritic cells	Mouse	DC2.4 - JAWsII (bone marrow) - BMDCs 	cells viability by flow cytometry MTT 	 	macrophages	Mouse	RAW264.7 	AlamarBlue - fluorescence 	 	Measurement of pro-inflammatory cytokine production	epithelial cells	Human	lung: A549 	ELISA: IFN-β, CCL5/RANTES 	 	macrophages	Mouse	RAW 264.7 	IL-6 	 	Human	THP 1 	ELISA: IL-6 multiplex: IL-1β, TNF-α, VEGF and MCP-1 	 	monocytes	Human	HMDM 	ELISA: IL-6 multiplex: IL-1β, TNF-α, VEGF and MCP-1

Limitations of 2D monoculture monolayer models
Monolayers models are limited by the lack of architectural complexity and biological heterogeneity. These models are therefore poorly representative of the physiological response to a therapeutic drug. Escalona-Rayo et al. have shown that SM-102 based LNPs displayed higher in vitro protein expression and T-cell proliferation than ALC-0315 and Dlin-MC3-DMA LNPs. Meanwhile, in vivo studies in zebrafish and mice revealed almost identical protein expression levels for the three LNPs, without significant differences in antigen-specific immune responses. In another study, the comparison between in vitro and in vivo nucleic acid delivered by hundreds of various LNPs to endothelial cells and macrophages concluded that in vivo delivery is not predicted by in vitro. In contrast, in vivo animal models permit the evaluation of therapies in a more complex environment but still with obvious biological differences with the human organism. A major distinction between species is linked to the mass ratio between individual organs and the total weight of the animal, as well as the difference in immune responses, which are not conserved in all species. Indeed, biodistribution studies conducted in mice could reveal an overexpression of off-target liver delivery compared to humans. LNPs delivery may also be impacted by metabolism variations between species. For example, Havel et al. investigated the importance of the use of non-human primates regarding metabolic diseases and concluded a greater similarity and susceptibility to metabolic disease with humans as compared to rodents. Although these species are essential resources in pharmaceutical development for toxicity studies, their use is limited for ethical, practical and economic reasons, novel alternative methods that could provide relevant information are needed.
Overall, the low representativeness of 2D monocultured models has led to the development and emergence of alternative in vitro technologies in particular the 3D models with the benefit of traditional cell culture while respecting ethical debates. These 3D models offer a fitting microenvironment that closely resembles to the inner conditions of the human body, therefore generating more realistic responses.

Toward a more predictive model

Co-culture monolayer models
Although co-culture models were initially used for studying cell interactions, they are now widely used in drug development applications because they provide a more physiologically relevant model than 2D monoculture.
Co-culture monolayer models can be divided into three categories including direct and indirect (transwell) models. Direct co-culture cells allow the cells to grow together in the same environment enabling physical contact and interactions, while indirect co-cultures use a physical barrier separating the cells but allowing the exchange of secreted factors. As the monocultures, the co-cultures involve either primary cells or immortalized cell lines. Several models are therefore being developed and largely described in literature, involving various cell types such fibroblasts, stem cells, immune cells as well as cancer cells, according to the studied disease. For example, a direct co-culture model involving myoblasts from healthy human donors and dendritic cells (DCs) generated from human peripheral blood was used for the study of Idiopathic Inflammatory Myopathies, in the absence of in vivo models. The authors demonstrated that myoblasts and activated DCs interact closely during inflammation, inducing myoblast differentiation, and thereby increasing antigen presentation. Another group reported that co-culturing of C2C12 muscle cells with RAW macrophages enhances inflammatory IL-6 secretion of the cells together, indicating a close interaction between skeletal muscle cells and macrophages. These models could be perfectly extended to the study of the interaction of muscle cells and antigen presenting cells in the context of mRNA-LNP vaccination. In the field of lipid nanoparticles, Yang et al. studied the mechanism of internalization of anti-inflammatory nanoliposomes in human colon adenocarcinoma cells (Caco-2) and RAW 264.7 co-culture model, which mimics an intestinal inflammation system. In their work, Han et al. engineered a co-culture platform for the screening of mRNA-LNP for the blood brain barrier (BBB). This model uses therefore endothelial cells and neuronal cells co-cultured in transwell, allowing the study of LNP transport and mRNA transfection through the system.
The advantages of the use of primary cells were described in the above section. BMDCs and splenocytes co-cultures are extensively used to study the mediated T cell immune response of mRNA-LNPs. In the context of cancer vaccine development, ex vivo matured BMDCs with mRNA-OVA model encapsulated in various LNPs were co-cultured with OT-1 CD8+ T cells presenting transgenic OVA-TCR. The tolerogenic effect of mRNA-LNPs loaded with an anti-inflammatory drug was assessed in co-cultures of BMDCs and splenic CD4 + T cells, allowing the generation of antigen-specific T regulatory response for the treatment of various diseases such as allergies. Zhai et al. mimic in vitro model for intramuscular vaccination by using transwell or direct co-culturing of human skeletal muscle cells and monocytes from healthy donors. They observed that direct cell-cell co-culture enhances eGFP expression encoded by mRNA-LNP, increases antigen presenting cells (APCs) markers and the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, particularly IL-6 playing a key role in B-cell activation. These data highlight the importance of the stromal environment in the response to RNA vaccination.

3D in vitro models
The first in vitro cellular 3D models emerged in the beginning of the 20th century with Harrissons’s hanging drop technique and Leighton’s work on 3D cell culture using a cellulose sponge saturated with embryonic bird plasma. Scientific advancements in the following decades have led to the emergence of Complex In Vitro Models (CIVMs) including spheroids, matrix-embedded culture, organoids, 3D bioprinting and organ-on-chip (OOC).
These technologies represent promising tools for more rigorous and representative studies of the efficacy and toxicity of therapeutic products. Most CIVMs involve a co-culture environment meaning that two or more different cell populations are grown in vitro together, with varying degrees of contact or a shared environment. In that way, these models produce better tissue architecture, cellular interactions, and microenvironment conditions than traditional 2D monocultures, bridging the gap between conventional 2D in vitro tests and animal models.
Studying the key effects of RNA-LNPs on CIVMs would be more relevant and predictive as the cellular functions are highly dependent on 3D organization. A variety of CIVMs have been developed, differing by their technical complexity and tissue organization (Fig. 1).
Schematic representation of multilayers in vitro models. Main 3D models, their advantages and limitations are presented

Spheroids
The spheroid model (Fig. 1.A) is the simplest 3D culture model currently used. It is defined as spherical aggregates of cells which mimic spatial architecture and promote the recovery of original tissue morphology and functions. Several groups have studied the toxicity of nanoparticles (NPs) on 3D cellular assays, notably using spheroids, and have compared the results with 2D monocultures and in vivo results.
In other studies, spheroids have been used for the evaluation of mRNA-LNPs trafficking and the determination of protein expression after being treated with fluorescent-labelled particles and fluorescent-labelled mRNA. Kim et al. have, for example, investigated the penetration within L929 spheroids of PE-rhodamine-labelled LNPs with prazole adjuvant (ESO-LNPs) and Cy5-labelled eGFP mRNA, highlighting their enhanced penetration compared to traditional LNPs (without adjuvant). The eGFP protein expression had also been determined using confocal microscopy, revealing an improved expression using ESO-LNPs. Using Western blot, they also demonstrated the ability of these formulations to inhibit the extracellular matrix (ECM) signaling pathway leading to an improved penetration of LNPs and mRNA. Even though spheroids are a straightforward, reproductive and robust predictive model, it is important to consider some limitations related to technical aspects such as controlling spheroid size and cellular density.

Matrix embedded culture
Matrix-embedded culture (Fig. 1.B) is a model where matrix components (e.g. collagen, fibronectin.) are added into cell culture to mimic the ECM. Thus, the cells grow in all directions with more appropriate mechanical, biochemical, and spatial cues. This model furnishes a closer in vivo environment and physiological cell behavior, rendering it a promising tool for drug testing. Belly et al. have notably investigated the mechanism of polystyrene nanoparticles uptake on 2D monolayer cultures and 3D collagen-matrix-embedded cultures. They have demonstrated that the endocytosis process is enhanced in 3D arrangements thanks to the ECM and the 3D structure, which increases the amount of cell surface available for NPs internalization. To the best of our knowledge, the potency and safety of LNPs were not assessed on matrix embedded culture, the main authors using more complex models like organoids.

Organoids
Organoids (Fig. 1.C) are 3D structures derived from stem cells (pluripotent stem cells, neonatal or adult tissue cells, adult progenitors), which differentiate and self-organize spontaneously. Despite the complexity of organoids development, they are among the most relevant CIVM, as they closely resemble in vivo characteristics. In the field of nanoparticles, induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) - derived hepatocyte cultures have been used to evaluate mRNA-LNPs uptake using a luminescence counter and to quantify protein levels in the culture medium after transfection using ELISA. Bayraktutan et al. evaluated the effectiveness of polysarcosine based polyplexes in delivering self-amplifying RNA (saRNA) to intestinal organoids, which naturally mimic some aspects of real organ physiology. Using confocal microscopy, they demonstrated the high expression of GFP within the dense matrix of cells in the deep core of the organoid, indicating nanoparticle penetration. Using patients’ biopsies, researchers have optimized episkin organoid by the addition of PBMCs isolated from patients to investigate microRNA-lipoplexes in the context of cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE). They demonstrated that these lipoplexes induce effective cellular penetration, low cytotoxicity and successfully modulated inflammatory pathways in the immune 3D skin organoid.

3D bioprinted model
3D bioprinting (Fig. 1.D) is one of the most automated and controlled methods, as it involves layer-by-layer deposition of biological materials such as cells or bio-inks (e.g. cells, growth factors.) from a pre-defined digital design model. This process mimics the architecture and function of natural tissues, producing tissue-like constructions. Similarly to other CIVMs, the 3D bioprinting model is used to study diseases and to develop new drugs. A 3D bioprinted model could therefore be useful for guiding the development of NPs prior to animal studies. For example, researchers have developed a reliable tumor model that mimics biological characteristics, including the ECM barrier, gradients, and cellular interactions. Using this model, they evaluated cellular uptake efficiency and the effect of ECM barrier on the penetration of the nanoparticles in the tumors. Zhuang et al. reviewed various applications and methods used to form muscle fibers. For example, Gholobova et al. evaluated the impact of multiple intramuscular injections and the release of the injected compound using human muscle tissue biopsies. Some authors also incorporate immune cells or endothelial cells into the model to study vaccine behavior. In another way, an example of a multilayer model is the 3D dermo-epidermal skin (DESE) constructed by Akagi et al., which was evaluated as an alternative to skin permeation and irritation tests. This approach could be used to study vaccines and to track the fate and toxicity of RNA-LNPs after injection. For the best of our knowledge, literature has not reported studies evaluating RNA-LNPs in 3D bioprinted models. Otherwise, immunocompetent skins are currently available from companies such as Genoskin® for the testing of drug efficacy and safety which could be applied in RNA-LNP development.

Organ-on-chip
Organ-on-chip (Fig. 1.E) mimics the fluid environment of living cells native to organs, reproducing on a small scale their key characteristics such as cellular architecture and functionality. This model offers also a tuned dynamic environment thanks to the high control over liquid flow in microfluidic chips. Today, a wide range of organs-on-chips have been successfully developed to investigate drug potency and toxicity. Lymphoid organoids and organ-on-chip methods using PBMCs and tonsil cells have been employed for vaccines testing previously. Goyal et al. developed a human lymphoid follicle (LF) showing many features of germinal centers found in lymphoid organs using primary human cells from PBMCs. They demonstrated that human LF Chips can be used to evaluate the vaccine immune responses in vitro. In the field of mRNA-LNPs, Jeger-Madiot et al. used the same system to model the memory B-cell response to COVID19 mRNA vaccine. They were able to study B lymphocytes proliferation and antibody production after prime and boost administration of mRNA-LNPs. Recently, the same group introduce a biomimetic module containing human skeletal myoblasts and antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to mimic intramuscular vaccination, followed by transfer of the activated APCs and soluble factors to the LF Chip to mimic lymphatic drainage. This offers a powerful alternative for evaluating mRNA-vaccine induced immunity in a relevant human model.

Toward in vivo replacement models
In the context of the 3Rs, the relative replacement of animals with less sensitive ones is recommended. The chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay is based on the strongly vascularized membrane found in fertilized chicken eggs. It is therefore used for a panel of testing such the study of vascularization, damage and irritation, in vivo circulation and finally the determination of median lethal dose (LD50). Furthermore, the CAM assay is known as an alternative option to the Draize test allowing evaluation of potential irritation of topical formulations, earlier in the development, before animal studies. The biocompatibility of LNPs developed for eye-controlled delivery of anti-inflammatory or antioxidant drugs were evaluated by the CAM assay. Almeida et al. demonstrated the absence of in vitro and in ovo cytotoxicity of their LNPs evaluated by the Alamar Blue assay using the Y-79 human retinoblastoma cell line and CAM assay after exposure to increasing concentrations. Interestingly, Fanguiero et al. observed a similar non-irritant profile of their cationic LNPs tested in the CAM assay and evaluated by the Draize-test in rabbits. In another context, the potential irritation of unloaded LNPs and photosensitizer-loaded LNPs were assessed by CAM, before being used for tumor treatment. No irritation such as hemorrhage, lysis, and coagulation occurred, confirming the biocompatibility of these LNPs. The development of safe and localized skin delivery system to improve drug availability and avoid systemic toxicity was also investigated. Passos et al. developed nanostructure LNPs delivering an antifungal drug for the treatment of fungal skin infections. They demonstrated, using the CAM assay, that unloaded and drug-loaded nanocarriers induced very low irritation scores, enabling their use in skin lesions without generating skin damage.
For biomedical research, the zebrafish (Danio rerio) is one of the most used alternative models. It offers a combination of practical, biological and genetic advantages, making it an ideal model organism for studying human diseases, developing new drugs and nanomaterials. In fact, they display a significant degree of hereditary resemblance to humans, around 70%, as well as a high fertility rate (approximately 300 eggs produced by a single female). In addition, the transparency of the embryos and their rapid development make it possible to perform many tests easily to investigate cellular interactions, organ-specific accumulation and circulation time. Finally, the rapid development of embryos allows the study of drug effect on several zebrafish generations.
In recent years, zebrafish has been proposed for the assessment of potency and toxicity of mRNA-LNPs. In their review, Bondue et al. illustrate how zebrafish can be used for cost-effective and high-throughput in vivo testing of mRNA-LNPs in genetic disease models (e.g. Duchenne muscular dystrophy, Classic galactosemia.) before testing in rodents. Within the field of veterinary research, a recent study demonstrated the first proof-of-concept for the efficacy of RNA vaccination in fish. It was therefore shown that LNPs-based mRNA vaccine candidate encoding the hemorrhagic septicemia virus (VHSV) induce neutralizing antibodies, therefore offering a complete protection in zebrafish.
In addition, the biodistribution of mRNA-LNPs could be assessed in the zebrafish model. For example, Patton et al. reported that following injection, GFP mRNA-LNPs were delivered to multiple tissues without any toxic effects on embryonic development. Subsequently, the GFP protein was expressed in several tissues such neural, vascular, cardiac, and skeletal muscle tissue, depending on the administration route. In another study, zebrafish was used for the rational design of LNPs targeting the reticuloendothelial system in the liver, avoiding the conventional unnecessary screening in animals. They observed concordance in LNP uptake pathways in zebrafish and rodents, rendering zebrafish a powerful model for LNPs discovery.
To improve the safety of mRNA-LNP therapeutics, research groups focused on the optimization of either mRNA sequences or LNP composition. Indeed, it has been reported that PEGylated LNPs induced hypersensitivity reactions and accelerated blood clearance (ABC). This phenomenon is likely due to the presence of pre-existing anti-PEG antibodies in patients. For this purpose, Bi et al. developed a PEG-free formulation by the substitution of PEGylated lipid by polysacrosine (pSar) lipopolymer. They showed the efficacy of pSar formulations to deliver mRNA either by intravenous route or intracranial route in the central nervous system of zebrafish without any acute toxicity. Furthermore, high doses of mRNA COVID19 vaccines induced adverse events in the patients. To diminish mRNA reactogenicity while increasing its stability and potency, Fernandez et al. have shown that optimization of untranslated regions, as well as purification methods, increase the potency of naked mRNA in zebrafish after intramuscular administration. However, validation in rodents and bigger animals is suggested by the authors for better predictivity.

In silico models for the prediction of potency and toxicity of RNA-LNPs
The phenomenal progress in computational sciences in the last decades allowed and accompanied the development of a wide variety of bioinformatics tools which, recently, raised interest in research related to RNA-based therapies. In addition, the increased use of automated processes and high-throughput methods allowed to generate large amounts of data, which is essential for the development of pharmaceutical products. The use of bioinformatics and artificial intelligence (AI) based tools could provide information and relationships with reduced resources and time.
The bioinformatics tools sustained by experimental data from various sciences, give access to upstream optimization of therapeutics, such as biologics, immunomodulators, vaccines, vectors and their components. These optimizations may concern an extremely vast range of characteristics of these therapeutics. For instance, it allows (i) to provide information regarding their interactions with cells, as T-cell epitopes, regulatory T-cell epitopes, patterns of self-T-cell epitopes, (ii) to attempt predictions of nucleic acids, proteins and small molecules properties and their interactions, as tridimensional protein structures, the protein-protein complexes formation, intermolecular interactions, protein and nucleic acids secondary structures and (iii) to predicate physico-chemical properties such as solubilities, hydrophobicities, pKas, isoelectrical points, apparent sizes, etc.
In addition to these benefits, bioinformatics tools allow to obtain optimized products and strategies towards related advantages such as the stability of sequences, secondary structures or even lipid vectors in the case of mRNA vaccines for example. The implementation of these new abilities will directly impact the effectiveness of the drugs and thus, allow the reduction of doses to be injected and consequently the potential deleterious effects of treatments.
Bioinformatics tools also enable to optimize personalized medicine development. For example, the analyses of individualized T-cell epitopes or mutanomes allow the design of personalized therapeutics in the context of oncological treatment. These tools could also be used to achieve an optimal therapeutics outcomes establishing nonlinear relationships between drug candidates and their potency and toxicity.
Applying computational tools and in silico models in the early stages of therapeutics design, antigen selection, and engineering is likely to result in the advancement of next generation products with minimum off-target or non-expected deleterious therapeutics efficacy.
The use of in silico models is hindered by some limits. As an example of a key limitation of bioinformatic modeling, protein structure prediction models typically predict static structures, and not the dynamic behavior of biomolecular systems in solution. Furthermore, the progress of bioinformatics tools, and even more those relying on the latest statistical learning methods, such as machine learning, based on neural networks or deep learning, depend necessarily on the support of a large database of in vitro/ex vivo or in vivo experiments. The availability of a large set of high-quality data, that produced under standardized and validated protocols would unlock the full potential of machine learning (ML). Recently, several studies reported the application of machine learning tools in the field of nanomedicine. ML allowed, for example, the prediction of the cellular internalization of PLGA NPs and the biodistribution of gold NPs using a set of experimental data produced in-house. This approach could be applied to predict and optimize the in vivo performance of mRNA-LNPs. In this context, the use of AI for the screening of new ionizable lipids was reported and allowed the prediction of the apparent pKa of LNPs, which is closely related to the efficiency of mRNA delivery. Recently, a new study described the use of ML to analyze a data set of LNPs formulations and to find relationships that linked the lipid composition and chemistry to transfection outcomes.
The effective integration of in silico immunoinformatic tools, ex vivo/in vitro and in vivo immune system technologies, and ML tools across the entire therapeutics development pipeline will allow to predict and assess safety, toxicity, efficacy, quality, and performance of drug candidates. This will certainly accelerate the development of safe, and effective immunotherapy for a broad range of pathogens and species.

Conclusion
mRNA-based therapeutics represent a transformative advancement in biomedical science and gene delivery. The emergence of this new class of drugs has been accompanied by confusion concerning the analytical procedures for the quality analysis of mRNA and mRNA-LNPs, due to a lack of guidance and inconsistency between regulatory agencies worldwide. While physico-chemical characterizations are quite well established, recommendations for in vitro potency and toxicity testing are still far from being comprehensive.
In this review, we provide a comprehensive and analytical overview of the in vitro toxicity and potency evaluation of mRNA-LNPs. The strengths and limitations of the currently used models and protocols, as 2D monolayer monocultured models, were explored. It is important to bear in mind the limitations of these models, particularly regarding their lack of representativeness of in vivo study results.
Currently, animal studies are still required by regulatory authorities, but the lack of representativeness of animal models and low predictivity for human have led to the development of new alternatives methods. Therefore, we discussed co-cultured 2D models and progressing to multilayer models such as spheroids, organoids, and organ-on-chip models. The key benefit of these models is that they enable the microenvironment and the architecture of the tissue to be replicated. Today, spheroids and organoids are well established in the research development of metallic and solid nanoparticles allowing their future use in the RNA-LNPs field. Moreover, the most cutting-edge CIVM is based on the parallelization of several organ-on-chip systems to approximate human physiology as closely as possible. These systems are generally referred to “human-on-chip” or “body-on-chip” which are used to predict the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of therapeutic products. Nevertheless, 3D multi-layer models continue to be costly and technically more challenging to develop and scale-up. In addition, these models are not widely used in the field of RNA-LNPs yet, most likely due to the limitations highlighted in this review. Other alternative models such as CAM and zebrafish are increasingly described in the literature for the study of RNA-LNPs functionality and toxicity. They offer a more complete environment and request fewer operating conditions. Moreover, they represent a real advantage for high-throughput screening of new LNPs due to their low cost. On the top, computational methods for the optimization of RNAs and LNPs could be introduced at all stages of the workflow, allowing a better selection of the formulation and reducing time and cost of development. Overall, this synthesis allowed us to highlight the landscape of available tools to guide the selection of most relevant models, ensuring the optimal preclinical evaluation.
In a nutshell, there is no consensus on how best to assess the potency and toxicity of RNA-LNPs in vitro. Although, the accelerated development of novel alternative methods (NAMs) could bridge the gap between in vitro studies and animal research, allowing more human predictive data and more specifically for sub-population groups who are not eligible for clinical trials (e.g. women pregnant, children.). Discoveries in lipid and mRNA chemistry and biology, advances in computational sciences, the use of high-throughput methodologies for screening, and the development of innovative models with high relevance will be vital to translate mRNA technology into clinically viable solutions.
A collaborative strategy that engages making decision stakeholders to establish clear, harmonized and standards criteria for the evaluation and validation of NAMs will accelerate their regulatory acceptance, benefiting human health with respect to 3Rs. In this context, plans and measures (e.g. increased resources for the development of new alternative models, the implementation of educational and training programs on the 3Rs) have been introduced by the European Commission and the FDA to accelerate the transition to animal-free innovation in research.
Katia Lemdani and Nathalie Mignet as co-last authors.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
Conception of the work: JS, KL, NM. Drafting of the manuscript: CM, JB, KL. Preparation of the tables and figures: CM. Review for intellectual content: JS, KL, KA, NM. Final review: all the authors.

Funding
The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received for the preparation of this review.

Data availability
Not applicable.

Declaration

Ethical approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
CM., JB., VS., and KL. are currently Neovacs employees. CM is a recipient of ANRT GRANT (French industrial research training agreement). The remaining authors declare no competing interests.

References
Engineering lipid nanoparticles for mRNA immunotherapy
Lipid nanoparticle-based mRNA delivery systems for cancer immunotherapy
Progress and prospects of mRNA-based drugs in pre-clinical and clinical applications
mRNA therapeutics: new vaccination and beyond
Patient-specific in vivo gene editing to treat a rare genetic disease
From influenza to COVID-19: lipid nanoparticle mrna vaccines at the frontiers of infectious diseases
Lipid nanoparticles for mrna delivery
Role of nanotechnology behind the success of mRNA vaccines for COVID-19
Overview on LNP-mRNA encapsulation unit operation: mixing technologies, scalability, and influence of formulation & process parameters on physico-chemical characteristics
Delivery strategies for mRNA vaccines
Glioblastoma-targeted, local and sustained drug delivery system based on an unconventional lipid nanocapsule hydrogel
Lipid nanoparticle-based delivery systema competing place for mRNA vaccines
mRNA delivery systems for cancer immunotherapy: lipid nanoparticles and beyond
Design strategies for hyaluronic Acid-based drug delivery systems in cancer immunotherapy
ICH guidelines. https://www.ich.org/page/ich-guidelines
COVID-19 vaccine platforms: delivering on a promise?
United State Pharmacopeia. Analatycal Procedures for quality of mRNA Vaccines and Therapeutics. usp.org.
European Commision. Procedure 2021/2784(RSP). 2022. SP(2021)787.
European Medicines Agencies (EMA). Concept Paper on the development of a guideline on the 5 quality aspects of mRNA vaccines. 2023. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/concept-paper-development-guideline-quality-aspects-mrna-vaccines_en.pdf.
World Health Organization. Evaluation of the quality, safety and efficacy of messenger RNA vaccines for the prevention of infectious diseases: regulatory considerations. 2021. https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/biologicals/ecbs/post-ecbs-who-regulatory-considerations-document-for-mrna-vaccines---final-version---29-nov-2021_tz.pdf.
Innate immune responses against mRNA vaccine promote cellular immunity through IFN-β at the injection site
mRNA lipid nanoparticle formulation, characterization and evaluation
Biodistribution of RNA vaccines and of their products: evidence from human and animal studies
Characterizing exogenous mRNA delivery, trafficking, cytoplasmic release and RNA–protein correlations at the level of single cells
Chemistry, manufacturing and controls strategies for using novel excipients in lipid nanoparticles
Commissioner O of the. FDA Announces Plan to Phase Out Animal Testing Requirement for Monoclonal Antibodies and Other Drugs. FDA. FDA. 2025. https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-announces-plan-phase-out-animal-testing-requirement-monoclonal-antibodies-and-other-drugs.
Carter M, Shieh JC, editors. Chapter 13 - Cell Culture Techniques. Guide to Research Techniques in Neuroscience. 2010. pp. 281–96. 10.1016/B978-0-12-374849-2.00013-6.
Stemcell Technologies. Human Primary cells. 2021. https://cdn.stemcell.com/media/files/brochure/BR27059-Human_Primary_Cells_ROW.pdf.
Ionizable lipid nanoparticle-mediated mRNA delivery for human CAR T cell engineering
Ionization and structural properties of mRNA lipid nanoparticles influence expression in intramuscular and intravascular administration
Optimized conditions for successful transfection of human endothelial cells with in vitro synthesized and modified mRNA for induction of protein expression
Expression kinetics of nucleoside-modified mRNA delivered in lipid nanoparticles to mice by various routes
Ready-to-use-type lyophilized lipid nanoparticle formulation for the postencapsulation of messenger RNA
Influence of ionizable lipid tail length on lipid nanoparticle delivery of mRNA of varying length
Transcriptomic analysis of the innate immune response to in vitro transfection of plasmid DNA
The replacement of helper lipids with charged alternatives in lipid nanoparticles facilitates targeted mRNA delivery to the spleen and lungs
Structural and functional characterization of a histidylated liposome for mRNA delivery
Regulation of type i interferon responses
Type I. Interferons: diversity of sources, production pathways and effects on immune responses
IPC: professional type 1 interferon-producing cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cell precursors
Induction of interferon and interferon signaling pathways by replication of defective interfering particle RNA in cells constitutively expressing vesicular stomatitis virus replication proteins
The crucial regulatory role of type I interferon in inflammatory diseases
Development and characterization of an in vitro cell-based assay to predict potency of mRNA–LNP-based vaccines
Structural and biochemical characteristics of mRNA nanoparticles determine anti–SARS-CoV-2 humoral and cellular immune responses
Functionality and translation fidelity characterization of mRNA vaccines using platform based mass spectrometry detection
Regulating mRNA endosomal escape through lipid rafts: a review
Induction of bleb structures in lipid nanoparticle formulations of mRNA leads to improved transfection potency
The dynamic process of mRNA delivery by lipid nanoparticles in vivo
Lipid nanoparticle topology regulates endosomal escape and delivery of RNA to the cytoplasm
Nanoscopy for endosomal escape quantification
In cellulo and in vivo comparison of cholesterol, beta-sitosterol and dioleylphosphatidylethanolamine for lipid nanoparticle formulation of mRNA
High-throughput A. Galectin-9 imaging assay for quantifying nanoparticle uptake, endosomal escape and functional RNA delivery | Communications Biology. https://www.nature.com/articles/s42003-021-01728-8#Sec9.
Limiting endosomal damage sensing reduces inflammation triggered by lipid nanoparticle endosomal escape
Imaging intracellular fluorescent proteins at nanometer resolution
Technologies enabling single-molecule super-resolution imaging of mRNA
Endosomal escape of delivered mrna from endosomal recycling tubules visualized at the nanoscale
FRET as the tool for in vivo nanomedicine tracking
Biomimetic noncationic lipid nanoparticles for mRNA delivery
mRNA-based FRET-FLIM imaging platform for quantifying lipid nanoparticle endosomal escape and membrane damage
Efficiency of siRNA delivery by lipid nanoparticles is limited by endocytic recycling
Endosomal escape: a bottleneck for LNP-mediated therapeutics
Multi-antigenic human cytomegalovirus mRNA vaccines that elicit potent humoral and cell-mediated immunity
N1-methylpseudouridine-incorporated mRNA outperforms pseudouridine-incorporated mRNA by providing enhanced protein expression and reduced immunogenicity in mammalian cell lines and mice
Characterization of HIV-1 nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccines in rabbits and rhesus macaques
Lipofection of plasmid DNA into human mast cell lines using lipid nanoparticles generated by microfluidic mixing
Strong immune responses induced by direct local injections of modified mRNA-lipid nanocomplexes
Generating the optimal mRNA for therapy: HPLC purification eliminates immune activation and improves translation of nucleoside-modified, protein-encoding mRNA
Incorporation of pseudouridine into mRNA yields superior nonimmunogenic vector with increased translational capacity and biological stability
Duffrène J, Muzard C, Seguin J, Izabelle C, Vrai T, Ejlalmanesh T et al. Post-encapsulation methods for the preparation of mRNA-LNPs. Drug Deliv and Transl Res. 2025. 10.1007/s13346-025-01866-0
Roth N, Schön J, Hoffmann D, Thran M, Thess A, Mueller SO et al. Optimised non-coding regions of mRNA SARS-CoV-2 vaccine CV2CoV improves homogeneous and heterogenous neutralising antibody responses. bioRxiv; 2022. p. 2021.05.13.443734. 10.1101/2021.05.13.443734
Schnee M, Vogel AB, Voss D, Petsch B, Baumhof P, Kramps T, et al. An mRNA vaccine encoding rabies virus glycoprotein induces protection against lethal infection in mice and correlates of protection in adult and newborn pigs. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2016;10:e0004746. 10.1371/journal.pntd.0004746.
Impact of lipid tail length on the organ selectivity of mRNA-Lipid nanoparticles
Role of pegylated lipid in lipid nanoparticle formulation for in vitro and in vivo delivery of mRNA vaccines
Kinetics of mRNA delivery and protein translation in dendritic cells using lipid-coated PLGA nanoparticles
Preparation of selective organ-targeting (SORT) lipid nanoparticles (LNPs) using multiple technical methods for tissue-specific mRNA delivery
Spontaneous, solvent-free entrapment of siRNA within lipid nanoparticles
Scaffold-mediated delivery for non-viral mRNA vaccines
Multifunctional triblock copolymers for intracellular messenger RNA delivery
Induction of HIV-1 gag specific immune responses by cationic micelles mediated delivery of gag mRNA
Machine learning-guided high throughput nanoparticle design
Illuminating endosomal escape of polymorphic lipid nanoparticles that boost mRNA delivery
Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to find the critical balance between extracellular association and intracellular dissociation of mRNA complexes
Delivery of mRNA vaccine with a lipid-like material potentiates antitumor efficacy through Toll-like receptor 4 signaling
Critical size limit of biodegradable nanoparticles for enhanced lymph node trafficking and paracortex penetration
Stern ST, Adiseshaiah PP, Potter TM. LLC-PK1 Kidney Cytotoxicity Assay: Version 1.3. National Cancer Institute’s Nanotechnology Characterization Laboratory Assay Cascade Protocols. Bethesda (MD): National Cancer Institute (US); 2005. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK604964/.
Stern ST, Adiseshaiah PP, Potter TM, Hep G. 2 Hepatocarcinoma Cytotoxicity Assay: Version 1.4. National Cancer Institute’s Nanotechnology Characterization Laboratory Assay Cascade Protocols [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): National Cancer Institute (US); 2005. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK612350/.
Feasibility of drug screening with panels of human tumor cell lines using a microculture tetrazolium assay
Optimized inhaled LNP formulation for enhanced treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis via mRNA-mediated antibody therapy
Realveolarization with inhalable mucus-penetrating lipid nanoparticles for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis in mice
Lipid Nanoparticle-Based inhibitors for SARS-CoV-2 host cell infection
Quality assessment of LNP-RNA therapeutics with orthogonal analytical techniques
Incompatibility of silver nanoparticles with lactate dehydrogenase leakage assay for cellular viability test is attributed to protein binding and reactive oxygen species generation
Validation of an LDH assay for assessing nanoparticle toxicity
National Cancer Institue. Protocols and Capabilities from the Nanotechnology Characterization Lab. https://www.cancer.gov/nano/research/ncl/protocols-capabilities
Rational design of anti-inflammatory lipid nanoparticles for mRNA delivery
The mRNA-LNP platform’s lipid nanoparticle component used in preclinical vaccine studies is highly inflammatory
IL-1 and IL-1ra are key regulators of the inflammatory response to RNA vaccines
Pro-inflammatory concerns with lipid nanoparticles
Cedrone E, Potter TM, Neun BW, Tyler A, Dobrovolskaia MA. Multiplex enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for detection of human cytokines in culture supernatants: version 1. national cancer institute’s nanotechnology characterization laboratory assay cascade protocols. Bethesda (MD): National Cancer Institute (US); 2005. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK604953/.
Risk benefit analysis to evaluate risk of thromboembolic events after mRNA COVID-19 vaccination and COVID-19
Development and exacerbation of autoimmune hemolytic anemia following COVID -19 vaccination: a systematic review
Neun BW, Cedrone E, Dobrovolskaia MA. Analysis of platelet aggregation by cell counting: version 4. national cancer institute’s nanotechnology characterization laboratory assay cascade Protocols. Bethesda (MD): National Cancer Institute (US); 2005. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK604943/.
Neun BW, Cedrone E, Dobrovolskaia MA. Analysis of hemolytic properties of nanoparticles: version 4. national cancer institute’s nanotechnology characterization laboratory assay cascade protocols. Bethesda (MD): National Cancer Institute (US); 2005. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK604925/.
Rodriguez J, Neun BW, Cedrone E, Dobrovolskaia MA. Analysis of platelet aggregation by light transmission aggregometry: Version 3. National cancer institute’s nanotechnology characterization laboratory assay cascade protocols. Bethesda (MD): National Cancer Institute (US); 2005. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK604948/.
Neun BW, Cedrone E, Dobrovolskaia MA. Analysis of complement activation by single-plex EIA or multiplex ELISA: Version 3. National cancer institute’s nanotechnology characterization laboratory assay cascade protocols. Bethesda (MD): National Cancer Institute (US); 2005. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK604912/.
Classical Complement Pathway Inhibition in a “Human‐On‐A‐Chip” Model of Autoimmune Demyelinating Neuropathies
Tolerogenic lipid nanoparticles for delivering self-antigen mRNA for the treatment of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
Phosphatidylserine enhances anti-inflammatory effects of reconstituted HDL in macrophages via distinct intracellular pathways
Choi JY, Mahadik B, Fisher JP. 3D printing technologies for in vitro vaccine testing platforms and vaccine delivery systems against infectious diseases. Jang J, editor. Essays in Biochemistry. 2021;65:519–31. 10.1042/EBC20200105
In vitro and in vivo evaluation of clinically-approved ionizable cationic lipids shows divergent results between mRNA transfection and vaccine efficacy
A direct comparison of in vitro and in vivo nucleic acid delivery mediated by hundreds of nanoparticles reveals a weak correlation
Drug delivery systems for RNA therapeutics
Use and importance of nonhuman primates in metabolic disease research: current state of the field
Activated dendritic cells modulate proliferation and differentiation of human myoblasts
Co-culture models for investigating cellular crosstalk in the glioma microenvironment
Co-culture systems and technologies: taking synthetic biology to the next level
Principles of indirect Co-culture method using transwell
Kuppusamy P, Kim D, Soundharrajan I, Hwang I, Choi KC. Adipose and muscle cell co-culture system: a novel in vitro tool to mimic the. vivo cellular environment. biology. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 2021;10:6. 10.3390/biology10010006.
Activated dendritic cells modulate proliferation and differentiation of human myoblasts
IL-6 production of C2C12 cells is enhanced in the presence of macrophages and Pravastatin
Cellular uptake, transport mechanism and anti-inflammatory effect of cyanidin-3-glucoside nanoliposomes in Caco-2/RAW 264.7 co-culture model
Predictive high-throughput platform for dual screening of mRNA lipid nanoparticle blood–brain barrier transfection and crossing
Lipid nanoparticle-based. mRNA candidates elicit potent T cell responses - Biomaterials Science (RSC Publishing). 10.1039/D2BM01581A. https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlehtml/2023/bm/d2bm01581a.
Lipid Nanoparticle-mRNA engineered dendritic cell based adoptive cell therapy enhances cancer immune response. - Das – 2025 - Small Methods - Wiley Online Library. [cited 2025 Oct 15]. https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/smtd.202400633.
Lipid nanoparticle-mediated mRNA/siRNA dual-bioengineered dendritic cell vaccines combined of PD-1/PD-L1 blockade for boosting tumor immunotherapy
Spleen-Targeted A. Tolerogenic mRNA‐LNPs vaccine for the treatment of experimental asthma - wang – 2025 - Advanced Science - Wiley Online Library. https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/advs.202412543.
Zhai Y, Ku MW, Yang K, Patil A, Prabhala P, He L et al. Ex vivo recapitulation of intramuscular mRNA vaccination with naïve and recall antigens using a human Lymphoid Follicle Chip platform. bioRxiv; 2025. p. 2025.04.16.649172. 10.1101/2025.04.16.649172.
Lipid nanoparticles enhance the efficacy of mRNA and protein subunit vaccines by inducing robust T follicular helper cell and humoral responses
A brief history of cell culture: from Harrison to Organs-on-a-chip
A historical perspective of thinking in three dimensions
Complex in vitro model: a transformative model in drug development and precision medicine
Bioengineering-inspired three-dimensional culture systems: organoids to create tumor microenvironment
Emerging trends in the methodology of environmental toxicology: 3D cell culture and its applications
Critical analysis of 3-D organoid in vitro cell culture models for high-throughput drug candidate toxicity assessments
Strategies to reduce the risks of mRNA drug and vaccine toxicity
3D cell culture systems modeling tumor growth determinants in cancer target discovery
Assessing toxicity of fine and nanoparticles: comparing in vitro measurements to in vivo pulmonary toxicity profiles
Monolayer (2D) or spheroids (3D) cell cultures for nanotoxicological studies? Comparison of cytotoxicity and cell internalization of nanoparticles
In vitro toxicity testing of nanoparticles in 3d cell culture
Transport of ultrasmall gold nanoparticles (2 nm) across the blood–brain barrier in a six-cell brain spheroid model
COG133 peptide-conjugated lipid nanoparticles sensitize Medulloblastoma to radiation therapy in mice
G AM, K OO, N AS, L. I. V VA, S LA, K, et al. Transfection efficacy and drug release depends upon the PEG derivative in cationic lipoplexes: evaluation in 3D in vitro model and in vivo. J Biomed Mater Res. 2023;111:1614–28. 10.1002/jbm.b.35259.
Lipid nanoparticles with prazole adjuvant to enhance the efficacy of mRNA cancer vaccines
Corosolic acid derivative-based lipid nanoparticles for efficient RNA delivery
Simplified in vitro 3d co-culture-based blood-brain barrier model using transwell
Three-dimensional cell culture systems as an in vitro platform for cancer and stem cell modeling
Three-dimensional cell culture systems and their applications in drug discovery and cell-based biosensors
Is it time to start transitioning from 2D to 3D cell culture?
Successful reprogramming of cellular protein production through mRNA delivered by functionalized lipid nanoparticles
Polysarcosine functionalised cationic polyesters efficiently deliver self-amplifying mRNA
Topical miRNA delivery via elastic liposomal formulation: a promising genetic therapy for cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE)
Generation and maturation of human iPSC-derived 3D organotypic cardiac microtissues in long-term culture
3D printed nervous system on a chip
An insight on advances and applications of 3d bioprinting: a review
3D bioprinted tumor model with extracellular matrix enhanced bioinks for nanoparticle evaluation
Bioprinting of 3D in vitro skeletal muscle models: a review
Human tissue-engineered skeletal muscle: a novel 3D in vitro model for drug disposition and toxicity after intramuscular injection
Vascularization of tissue-engineered skeletal muscle constructs
Incorporation of macrophages into engineered skeletal muscle enables enhanced muscle regeneration
Construction of Three-Dimensional Dermo-Epidermal skin equivalents using cell coating technology and their utilization as alternative skin for permeation studies and skin irritation Tests < sup/>
Investigation of absorption, metabolism and toxicity of ginsenosides compound K based on human organ chips
A pump-free tricellular blood–brain barrier on‐a‐chip model to understand barrier property and evaluate drug response
Reconstituting organ-level lung functions on a chip
Human organoids and organs-on‐chips for addressing COVID‐19 challenges
Ectopic lymphoid follicle formation and human seasonal influenza vaccination responses recapitulated in an organ-on-a-chip
Modeling memory B cell responses in a lymphoid organ-chip to evaluate mRNA vaccine boosting
The Chorioallantoic membrane assay in nanotoxicological Research—An alternative for
Grace) Intasa-ard S, Birault A. Nanoparticles characterization using the CAM assay. The Enzymes. Elsevier; 2019. pp. 129–60. 10.1016/bs.enz.2019.09.001.
Hen’s egg chorioallantoic membrane test for irritation potential
New thermoresponsive eyedrop formulation containing ibuprofen loaded-nanostructured lipid carriers (NLC): development, characterization and biocompatibility studies
Biopharmaceutical evaluation of Epigallocatechin gallate-loaded cationic lipid nanoparticles (EGCG-LNs): in vivo, in vitro and ex vivo studies
Modern photodynamic glioblastoma therapy using Curcumin- or Parietin-loaded lipid nanoparticles in a CAM model study
Development, skin targeting and antifungal efficacy of topical lipid nanoparticles containing Itraconazole
The use of zebrafish (Danio rerio) as biomedical models
Directing nanoparticle biodistribution through evasion and exploitation of Stab2-dependent nanoparticle uptake
Zebrafish embryos allow prediction of nanoparticle circulation times in mice and facilitate quantification of nanoparticle–Cell interactions
Mapping the Glyco-Gold nanoparticles of different shapes toxicity, biodistribution and sequestration in adult zebrafish
The zebrafish embryo as a model organism for testing mRNA-based therapeutics
An LNP-mRNA vaccine protects fish against rhabdovirus infection
Lipid nanoparticle packaging is an effective and nontoxic mRNA delivery platform in embryonic zebrafish
Anionic lipid nanoparticles preferentially deliver mRNA to the hepatic reticuloendothelial system
PEGylation technology: addressing concerns, moving forward
Characterization and dynamics of cytoplasmic F-actin in higher plant endosperm cells during interphase, mitosis, and cytokinesis
Combining an optimized mRNA template with a double purification process allows strong expression of in vitro transcribed mRNA
Better epitope discovery, precision immune engineering, and accelerated vaccine design using immunoinformatics tools
Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3
A perspective on the apparent pKa of ionizable lipids in mRNA-LNPs
CodonBERT large language model for mRNA vaccines
Prediction of the apparent pK a value of lipid nanoparticles by density functional theory
JAX-RNAfold: scalable differentiable folding
Calculating apparent pKa values of ionizable lipids in lipid nanoparticles
Algorithm for optimized mRNA design improves stability and immunogenicity
Revolutionizing drug formulation development: the increasing impact of machine learning
AI-assisted autonomous manufacturing of tailored drug-loaded nanoparticles by multi-step continuous-flow platform
Microfluidic manufacturing of liposomes: development and optimization by design of experiment and machine learning
GANDA: a deep generative adversarial network conditionally generates intratumoral nanoparticles distribution pixels-to-pixels
Supervised learning and mass spectrometry predicts the in vivo fate of nanomaterials
Artificial intelligence-driven rational design of ionizable lipids for mRNA delivery
Adipocyte-selective mRNA lipid nanoparticles for cell programming with machine learning analysis
A multi-organ chip with matured tissue niches linked by vascular flow
A four-organ-chip for interconnected long-term co-culture of human intestine, liver, skin and kidney equivalents
Pires de Mello P, Carmona-Moran C. C-M. Microphysiological heart-liver body-on-a-chip system with skin mimic for evaluating topical drug delivery. 2021.
Drug absorption related nephrotoxicity assessment on an intestine-kidney chip