A scoping review of neuromodulation techniques for controlling blood pressure: what are the ups and downs to this approach?
Background and Objectives
While there has been rapid progress in research aimed at developing device-based neuromodulation therapies for blood pressure (BP) disorders, there is a paucity of FDA-approved therapies. Currently, the only approved devices for treating resistant hypertension use renal denervation, however, this could soon change as clinical research progresses. With the evolution of interventional strategies for BP regulation, it is important to comprehend the developments to date in order to gauge directions for future research. The objective of this scoping review was to provide the current range of device-based BP neuromodulation approaches, overview salient characteristics of the included studies, address limitations, and detail avenues of further investigation.
Methods
Our review was conducted using the Preferred Reporting Items for Reviews and and Meta-analysis framework. The literature search was performed across the Web of Science Core Collection, Scopus, and Pubmed databases. The search yielded 3503 studies, of which 100 studies remained following the screening process. In the last 10 years, there has been an increase in the number of experimental neurostimulation studies detailing increases and decreases in BP. Of all the included studies, most adopted a non-randomized experimental approach (89%), used animal participants (65%), used invasive neuromodulation methods (74%), and performed acute experiments (84%). More studies documented only depressor responses (49%) compared to pressor responses (35%), and 13% reported both pressor and depressor responses using multiple neural targets.
Conclusions
This review addressed developments in device-based BP neuromodulation, highlighting a dominant focus on treating resistant hypertension compared to hypotensive disorders. While advancements in implantable electrodes have improved spatial selectivity of stimulation, non-invasive neurostimulation devices have become increasingly popular in recent years.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s42234-025-00181-w.

Introduction
Clinical disorders characterized by impaired regulation of arterial blood pressure (BP) can have a wide range of detrimental effects on patient health, resulting in pathological conditions that include chronic elevation (hypertension) or acute drops (hypotension) in arterial BP. Hypertension is the foremost contributor to premature death (responsible for 13.5% of deaths per annum globally), and a prevalent risk factor for cardiovascular disease worldwide (Arima, Barzi and Chalmers). The socioeconomic burden of hypertension is immense, with billions of dollars spent annually in many countries on both direct (medication, hospitalization, etc.) and indirect costs (i.e. out-of-pocket pharmaceutical expenses, absence from work due to illness, etc.) (Wierzejska et al. ). Its prevalence has been shown to increase with age, afflicting approximately 60% of people in developed countries over the age of 65 (Arima, Barzi and Chalmers; Burnier et al.). Despite the use of at least 3 antihypertensive drugs, there is a subset of patients (10% to 20%) that still exhibit uncontrolled BP and are defined as having resistant hypertension (Sim et al.; Siddiqui and Calhoun; Carey et al.; Leung et al.). Multiple factors can contribute to resistant hypertension, such as an inadequate treatment plan or non-adherence to medication. A rare phenotype of resistant hypertension (called refractory hypertension) is also observed in 0.5% to 5% of patients (Siddiqui and Calhoun), where BP remains uncontrolled despite using at least 5 antihypertensive medications. While the mechanism of this resistance to drug therapy is not fully comprehended, resistant hypertension is associated with comorbidities including chronic kidney disease and obstructive sleep apnea that are linked to elevated sympathetic tone (Hering and Schlaich; Mann).
At the opposite end of the spectrum lies orthostatic hypotension (OH), which is characterized by a sudden and rapid decrease in BP upon standing, making it one of the most common causes of syncope and by association highly correlated with significant morbidity/mortality (Mosnaim et al.; Joseph et al.; Kim). Orthostatic hypotension is defined as a decrease in systolic BP ≥ 20 mmHg or in diastolic BP ≥ 10 mmHg within 3 min of standing (Joseph et al.). Its prevalence varies markedly by age, where approximately 6% of the general population and up to 55% of the elderly population can be affected by OH symptoms (Joseph et al.). Sudden drops in arterial BP pose a significant health threat in the elderly population due to the increased risk of injury and complications from falls (Ungar et al.; Joseph et al.). Syncope and OH in this demographic can have lasting detrimental effects to quality of life and general health. Notably, atrial fibrillation and increased risk of stroke, heart failure, myocardial infarction, and ischemic attacks are all cardiovascular threats associated with hypotension and syncope in the elderly (Rutan et al. ; Jansen et al.). Difficulty walking as well as psychological stressors including depression and anxiety can manifest in those afflicted by these conditions (Gracie et al.; Jansen et al.). Dizziness, a symptom of OH and often prodromal symptom of syncope, has also been linked to a higher risk of dementia (Ma et al.). Syncope accounts for up to 3% of all emergency department visits (Furlan et al.), and there is a preponderance of young women and elderly persons who experience these syncopal episodes (Ganzeboom et al.; Duncan et al.). An estimated 73% of those who experience vasovagal syncope (temporary loss of consciousness caused by a decline in BP and/or heart rate due to increased vagal tone) are ≥ 60 years of age (Ganzeboom et al.), and female students ≤ 21 years of age reported more syncopal episodes (47%) compared to male students (24%) in a survey conducted at the Amsterdam Academic Medical Centre (Duncan et al.). An estimated 74% of individuals with acute spinal cord injury (SCI) experience OH in the form of dizziness, blurred vision, and syncope (Illman et al.).
Standard first line hypertension treatment entails lifestyle changes, such as reducing sodium intake, moderating alcohol consumption, maintaining a high-fiber, low-fat diet, engaging in regular aerobic exercise, and weight loss (Goit and Yang). Several forms of pharmacotherapy commonly used to treat hypertension are thiazide diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, α- and β-blockers, and α-adrenoceptor agonists. These medications lower BP by inhibiting sodium reabsorption to reduce fluid volume in the bloodstream and cardiac output, reducing the formation of angiotensin II, blocking adrenergic receptors, and stimulating adrenoceptors in the brain to reduce sympathetic outflow, respectively (Ram). Interestingly, patients often exhibit co-existent hypertension and OH such as in elderly patients taking antihypertensive medications (Cohen et al.; Mosnaim et al.; Zia et al.). Notably, α-blockers and angiotensin II receptor antagonists have been shown to cause OH by reducing vasoconstriction of vessels and systemic vascular tone (Zia et al.). The Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial (ALLHAT), however, found that the choice of diuretics, calcium channel blockers, or ACE inhibitor medications did not impact the risk of long-term OH, syncope, or falls in older adults (Juraschek et al.).
Neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson disease and pure autonomic failure are strongly linked to this comorbidity (Ricci et al.; Joseph et al.; Turana et al.; Pacholko and Iadecola). While it is warranted to consider the potential threat of OH and cardiovascular disease events when treating hypertension, research by Juraschek and colleagues has indicated that a more intense medication-based BP treatment goal (mean BP ≤ 92 mmHg) does not increase the risk of these threats compared to a standard goal (mean BP of 102–107 mmHg) (Juraschek et al.). In this trial, multiple antihypertensive agents were added to the pharmacotherapy regimen as necessary to reach the specified BP target. Among 5 compared trials, a more intensive treatment goal has been associated with a decreased risk of OH (Juraschek et al.). This revelation may impact the risk factors considered when prescribing an antihypertensive medication plan.
It is estimated that up to 25% of hypertensive patients are non-adherent to medications (Tomaszewski et al.), and neurodegenerative disease patients exhibit even lower adherence rates due to cognitive impairment (Shin and Habermann). As an alternative, various modalities of electrical neuromodulation are being developed to control cardiovascular function via the nervous system (Smith et al.). With regards to treating resistant hypertension, renal denervation devices are currently the only therapy to have received Food & Drug Administration (FDA) approval (e.g., ReCor Paradise and Medtronic Symplicity Spyral) (Maini, et al.,). Elevated renal sympathetic tone has been linked to the pathogenesis of hypertension by facilitating increased renal vascular resistance, renin activity and sodium retention (DiBona). This elevates sympathetic tone through a cascade of hormonal reactions (known as the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system) and alters the balance between BP and natriuresis/diuresis (DiBona). Additionally, experimental evidence suggests that the projection of renal afferents to central vasomotor centers upregulates sympathetic outflow (Wyss, Aboukarsh and Oparil ; Xu et al.). Thus, the effects of dysfunctional renal nerve activity cause vasoconstriction, increased blood volume and increased cardiac output which can result in hypertension. Renal denervation therapy typically uses radiofrequency or ultrasound emissions via catheter electrodes to ablate the nerves in the renal perivascular space, disrupting the transmission of sympathetic activity to decrease BP (Rey-Garcia and Townsend ).
Detail the range of neuromodulation approaches currently being used for controlling hypertension/hypotension.
Overview the extent to which these approaches demonstrated effectiveness in influencing BP levels.
Identify gaps in existing literature to inform directions of future research.
The objective of this scoping review is to highlight the progress made in the field of bioelectronic medicine as a potential intervention for treating hypertensive/hypotensive conditions. The aims of this review are:

Methods

Protocol and eligibility criteria
Under the guidelines for Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) (‘PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and Explanation’ ), this scoping review included all studies involving BP control that employed device-based electrical neuromodulation approaches applied to the central or peripheral nervous systems. The selection criteria were (1) original research employing a preclinical or clinical experimental methodology, (2) presented results of neuromodulation on arterial BP, and (3) peer-reviewed article. Publication sources such as conference papers, reviews, theses, editorials and case studies were excluded. Human studies were limited to adult-only participants and pharmacological interventions were omitted.

Literature search protocol
The search terms used for the initial article selection were (TS = (”blood near/1 press*”) OR TS = (”hyperten*”) OR TS = (”hypoten*”)) AND (TS = (”neuromod*”) OR TS = (”electrical near/1 stim*”) OR TS = (”neurofeedback”) OR TS = (”neural implant*”) OR TS = (”neural near/1 feedback”) OR TS = (”continuous monitor*”)). Searches were carried out across three electronic databases, i.e., Web of Science Core Collection, Scopus, and Pubmed. The search was conducted on Oct. 23, 2024. The search was limited to English language literature. The literature search was limited from Jan. 1, 2000 to the search date, as this date was deemed to represent a sufficiently long period of time to capture all major BP control articles. This choice was supported by the second rapid rise of publications observed in BP in the biomedical domain (Supplementary Fig. 1).

Selection of sources of evidence
Data extraction template
Category	Characteristic	Description	 	Publication Details	Title	Title of the publication	 	Lead author	First author of the study	 	Year	Year of publication	 	Methodology	Study Design	Type of study conducted (e.g. non-randomized experimental study, randomized controlled trial)	 	Participants	Category of subjects used in study (e.g. rodent and small animal, large animal, non-human primate, human)	 	Population	Species, if animal participants used, and disease/condition of animal and/or human participants e.g. hypertension)	 	Sample size	Number of participants	 	Neural interface	Mechanism or method used for neuromodulation	 	Neural target	Area of the nervous system targeted for neuromodulation	 	Level of intervention	Whether neuromodulation approach was invasive or non-invasive	 	Outcome	BP modulation direction	Whether neuromodulation increased, decreased, bidirectionally changed, or had no impact on BP
PRISMA flow diagram
The entire screening and extraction process was conducted using Covidence (Veritas Health Innovation, Australia), where an initial review of study titles and abstracts was followed by data extraction according to a customized template (Table 1). Each step of the review process was performed independently by two reviewers and a third reviewer was used to reach a consensus, when necessary. The literature search using the PRISMA framework is summarized in Fig. 1.

Results
In the subsections below we present a narrative synthesis of the study characteristics and findings. Note that for some extracted categories, studies could incorporate more than one attribute, which is why the cumulative number of studies for certain characteristics may exceed the total number of 100 studies included in this review. Studies are quantitatively summarized in Supplementary Table 1.

State of the field
The prominence of preclinical experimental studies (n = 65) reflects the emergent nature of the field, where two notable themes were identified: 1) exploratory studies investigating autonomic reflexes characterized by pressor or depressor responses through electrical stimulation, and 2) application of these reflexes for clinical translation. The former group included studies that focused on a mechanistic understanding or characterization of BP reflexes, such as Turner et al. who explored the neural pathway governing baroreflex neuromodulation (Turner et al.). The latter group of studies explored the application of neurostimulation techniques (e.g. stimulation protocol, stimulus modality) for modulating BP. Zhang et al., for instance, investigated the feasibility of eliciting baroreceptor responses by using transcutaneous magnetic stimulation as an alternative to electrical stimulation for targeting the carotid sinus (Zhang et al.). Indeed, various neural targets, including the carotid sinus baroreceptors, have been investigated in clinical studies and represent a shift toward human translation and clinical relevance (Illig et al.). Peer-reviewed publications involving human participants were roughly one third (n = 36) of the reviewed studies.

Relevant clinical indications
BP neuromodulation research placed greater emphasis on treating hypertension than hypotension. This is indicated by the number of studies that reported stimulation-induced depressor responses (n = 62 studies); however, pressor-inducing renal nerve stimulation was also used in several studies to determine optimal anatomical ablative sites for antihypertensive renal denervation therapy (Chinushi et al.; Hori et al.). Targeting sympathetic renal nerves is difficult given the heterogenous population of fibers among the renal plexus. Thus, this research intended to improve the accuracy of renal denervation by inferring the location of sympatho-excitatory nerve fibers from acute pressor responses. For this reason, the subset of studies that aimed to support neuromodulation-based hypertension research (n = 42) is derived from neurostimulation studies that yielded both depressor and pressor BP responses (refer to Supplementary Table 1). In this subset are studies that concentrated on disorders associated with hypertension or specific manifestations of high BP (e.g. autonomic dysreflexia (Sachdeva et al.) and obstructive sleep apnea (Alsharifi et al.)). Among the neural targets used experimentally to reduce BP, there was a noted focus on the carotid sinus baroreceptors (n = 9) and the vagus nerve (n = 13). This may indicate that FDA-approved device-based therapies for hypertension may expand beyond renal denervation in the near future.
Representation of neuromodulation targets that induced pressor/depressor responses. Highlighted nerve targets represent those associated with clinical trials (available on the ClinicalTrials.gov database) in the recruitment, active, or completed phase, which use neuromodulation to treat hypertension (blue) or hypotension (red)
Only 4 of the 48 studies that documented an evoked pressor reflex had implemented nerve stimulation with the explicit aim of addressing OH (Green et al.; Tarasova et al.; Yoshida et al.; Phillips et al.), while another study intended to treat neurocardiogenic (or vasovagal) syncope (Madhavan et al.). But, as shown in Fig. 2, there were a significant number of studies that observed or demonstrated the feasibility of evoking pressor responses in either preclinical or clinical studies. Some of these studies used nerve stimulation to study neurogenic aspects of hypertension (Kawabe et al.; Liang et al.; Ong et al.), others focused on the treatment of different forms of cardiovascular dysfunction such as acute myocardial infarction or ventricular arrhythmia (Nakahara et al.; Tanaka et al.; Yu et al.; Moreira et al.; Chinushi et al.; Zheng et al.), while another subset tested novel methods aimed at enhancing nerve stimulation (i.e. selective nerve targeting and non-invasive stimulation) (Antonino et al.; Angius et al.; Horn et al. ; Jeong et al.).

Electrical neuromodulation modalities
Trend in neural interfaces used for BP neuromodulation. A A stacked column chart that illustrates the number of publications using invasive and non-invasive interventional approaches per year. B Comparison of the number of publications employing invasive versus non-invasive approaches, along with the distribution of neural interface modalities used to deliver invasive and non-invasive interventions
Development of both implantable neural interfaces and non-invasive devices were prominent trends in the advancement of BP neuromodulation. In this review, instances of invasive modalities being utilized were more frequently observed (n = 74) when compared to non-invasive devices (n = 26). However, as depicted in Fig. 3, there is an emerging trend in studies investigating non-invasive therapeutic approaches.
Nevertheless, invasive devices are the primary modality for delivering neurostimulation, in part due to their superior selectivity in the stimulation of specific neural targets. This has enabled research to design implantable electrodes that can achieve preferential activation of nerve fibers within a nerve bundle to mitigate off-target effects. To exemplify, studies have explored the concept of spatially selective or fiber-selective activation of cervical vagal afferent fibers to mitigate bradycardic and respiratory side effects, reporting a reduction in these responses while lowering BP (Plachta et al.; Jeong et al.). Such innovations are possible because implantable electrodes allow for direct contact with the neural target being stimulated.
The main limitation of non-invasive methods is that they are less accurate and precise in stimulating their intended target. More recent studies have focused on non-invasive ultrasound-based neuromodulation as it has a higher spatial resolution compared to non-invasive electrical analogues, attempting to improve stimulation selectivity (Ji et al.; Li et al.; Cao, et al.,). This may contribute to more consistent results in future non-invasive trials, including non-invasive auricular vagus nerve stimulation for antihypertensive therapy. There have been inconsistencies in the reported effectiveness of this technique, which is partially attributed to the difficulty in effectively targeting this stimulus site non-invasively (Šinkovec et al.).

Discussion
Our scoping review suggests that developments in neuromodulation have preferentially concentrated on the treatment of hypertension compared to hypotension. The key difference being the greater progress made towards clinically translating antihypertensive therapies (Fig. 2). Renal denervation and carotid sinus baroreceptor stimulation appeared most frequently in clinical trials. Previously, the SYMPLICITY HTN-1, HTN-2, and HTN-3 trials conducted using the Symplicity Flex radio-frequency renal ablation device demonstrated mixed efficacy (Symplicity HTN-2 Investigators. ; Bhatt et al.; Krum et al.), however, follow-up studies have led to promising results. The SPYRAL HTN-OFF MED trial (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT02439749) and SPYRAL HTN-ON MED trial (NCT02439775) used the Symplicity Spyral device to treat patients with uncontrolled hypertension (office systolic BP ≥ 150 mmHg and < 180 mmHg, diastolic BP ≥ 90 mmHg) after being off medications (SPYRAL HTN-OFF MED) or after receiving medications (SPYRAL HTN-ON MED) (Kandzari et al.). In a 2-year follow-up report, the SPYRAL HTN-ON MED study yielded a significant change in office systolic BP by − 17.4 ± 16.1 mmHg compared to − 9.0 ± 19.4 mmHg in the sham population (P = 0.0034) (Kandzari et al.). At the 3 month endpoint, the SPYRAL HTN-OFF MED study yielded a significant decrease in office systolic BP (reduction of 6.6 mmHg, P < 0.0001) (Böhm et al.). This study’s short duration was designed to avoid extended medication withdrawal at the cost of being unable to discern long-term effects of off-medication renal denervation. Regardless, both trials demonstrated significant BP changes in their respective cohorts.
Additionally, the RADIANCE trials tested the ultrasound ReCor Paradise ablation system, and the currently active RADIANCE II trial (NCT03614260) reported a significant decrease in BP (−5.4 mmHg systolic BP) at 6 months post-procedure when accounting for titration of antihypertensive medications (Azizi et al.). These 2 devices are FDA-approved for treating resistant hypertension, and the RADIOSOUND-HTN trial (NCT02920034) compared the efficacy of these different ablation systems. In resistant hypertension patients at 6 months after denervation of the main renal arteries, ultrasound ablation produced a significantly greater reduction in ambulatory systolic BP (−12.1 ± 11.5 mmHg) compared to radiofrequency ablation (−6.0 ± 11.0 mm Hg) (Fengler et al.). At 12 months and after optimizing drug treatment, however, this difference was not statistically significant. It was postulated that the greater ablation depth of the ultrasound system or its circumferential catheter design may explain the 6-month difference in BP change compared to that of the spiral-shaped radiofrequency catheter (Fengler et al.).
Renal nerve stimulation has been implemented for improved ablation targeting and has the potential to improve the efficacy of this therapy (Chinushi et al.; Hori et al.). Stimulation for enhanced targeting, or renal nerve mapping, has been used to perform effective renal denervation with fewer ablations compared to previous trials. This technique has been implemented in the Sympathetic Mapping/Ablation of Renal Nerves Trial (SMART) (NCT02761811) to treat uncontrolled hypertension patients, resulting in decreased antihypertensive drug dependency and clinically significant reductions in BP among trial participants (Wang et al.).
Furthermore, the Barostim neo device developed for carotid baroreflex activation therapy (BAT) has received FDA approval for treating heart failure (Schäfer et al.), and the Neo Non-Randomized Hypertension Study (NCT01471834) demonstrated sustained acute effectiveness for decreasing BP after a long-term follow up (−14.5 mmHg systolic BP) (Halbach et al.). The recent randomized Nordic BAT pilot trial (NCT02572024) also demonstrated a statistically significant long-term reduction in BP using the Barostim neo, but larger randomized controlled trials are needed to support this device as a treatment for resistant hypertension (Gordin et al.). Wallbach et al. found that this therapy was effective on resistant hypertension patients who had undergone prior renal denervation, indicating that this treatment may also be suitable for non-responders to renal denervation (Wallbach et al.).
Other neuromodulation devices, including cardiac pacemakers, have shown promising results in clinical trials. Kalarus et al. published results from the MODERATO II double-blinded randomized pilot study (NCT02837445), which used the BackBeat Moderato pacemaker device and achieved a net decrease in ambulatory systolic BP of 8.1 mmHg after accounting for control levels (6 months post-implantation) (Kalarus et al.). Vagus nerve stimulation has also been reported to reduce BP (see Fig. 2), however, only limited attempts at clinical translation for hypertension treatment (including a clinical trial case study (NCT00983632)) have been carried out (Rozman et al.). This technique has already been adopted into clinical practice and received FDA approval for epilepsy, depression, obesity, and stroke rehabilitation (Austelle et al. ; Keser and Feng). Similarly, the eCoin electroacupuncture device, which was used to test median nerve stimulation for lowering BP (NCT02926495), has instead received FDA approval for treating urgency urinary incontinence via tibial nerve stimulation (Lucente et al.).
In contrast to the myriad of hypertension therapies being developed, there are no analogous FDA-approved devices for treating OH; however this does not reflect a lack of patients who might benefit from such therapies. As the population ages, there is a concurrent increase in both hypertensive and hypotensive symptoms, emphasizing the need for developing effective therapeutic techniques to treat both conditions (Gupta and Lipsitz; Abdelhafiz et al.). This need also applies to individuals with chronic SCI in whom autonomic dysfunction can cause significant cardiovascular issues. Depending on the level of spinal injury, either sympathetic, parasympathetic or both sets of autonomic circuits can lose their ability to effectively regulate BP. Failure of these regulatory mechanisms can result in OH and/or autonomic dysreflexia (extremely high BP spikes) (Krassioukov). The primary clinical focus of neuromodulation therapy in this patient population has been to alleviate OH, such as by activating these autonomic circuits or promoting venous return through neuromuscular stimulation (Yoshida et al., Solinsky et al.). Transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation has been used in clinical trials (NCT05230147, NCT05731986) to induce pressor responses and mitigate or reverse OH symptoms (Phillips et al.; Engel-Haber et al.; Solinsky et al.). Neuromuscular electrical stimulation of the lower limb muscles has also been explored to prevent OH in individuals with SCI (NCT01891110), and although it did not achieve statistically significant results, there was documented improvement in BP stability (Tesini et al. ). Epidural spinal cord stimulation has also been shown to mitigate the effects of OH in individuals with SCI (Aslan et al. ), and an active clinical trial (NCT04598035) is investigating this form of stimulation as a means of treating hypertension in neuropathic pain patients. Yoshida et al. used functional electrical stimulation of the same targets of the lower extremities in individuals with SCI to support the therapeutic benefit of this treatment, finding a significant increase in mean BP during applied orthostatic stress (Yoshida et al.).
Technological developments in non-invasive neuromodulation techniques may provide an avenue for accelerating the progress of therapies aimed at treating hypertension and OH. Cao et al. demonstrated a sustained decrease in BP through ultrasound stimulation of the solitary tract nucleus, exemplifying how ultrasound may be used for targeting brain structures (Cao et al.). Non-invasive modalities have become popular in recent years (Fig. 3), and there is potential for ultrasound to expand into other targets within the central nervous systems that have demonstrated pressor responses (n = 18, Fig. 2: Brain + Spinal Cord). There is also experimental evidence that deep brain stimulation can increase baroreflex sensitivity and sympathetic outflow (Green et al.), suggesting that non-invasive activation of deep brain structures by techniques such as interferential stimulation may be a promising direction for research (Huang et al.).
When targeting cortical regions, transcranial alternating current stimulation may provide an effective means of modulating arterial BP. The application of transcranial alternating current generates an electric field in surrounding cortical regions which causes neural entrainment (synchronizing the brain’s electrical activity with the stimulating current) (Khatoun et al.). This form of stimulation may be a more desirable therapeutic option compared to deep brain stimulation given its non-invasive nature. In Braun and colleagues’ study, this stimulus modality was used to influence activity in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, modulating sympathetic outflow to generate transient decreases in BP (Braun et al. ). A meta-analysis of transcranial magnetic stimulation studies has also found that targeting the same cortical structure with this stimulus modality repeatedly results in decreased BP (Lee et al.). Further exploration of stimulus parameters may allow for these forms of stimulation to increase sympathetic tone and elevate BP for treating hypotensive disorders. Foerster and colleagues, for example, demonstrated both increases and decreases in BP using transcranial magnetic stimulation targeting the primary motor cortex (Foerster et al.). Given that both forms of non-invasive stimulation have shown the ability to elicit BP changes, a direct comparison of the effect each transcranial stimulation modality has on BP and autonomic function should be studied in future research.
The optimization of nerve stimulation paradigms based on observed patterns in neural activity is another area of research with the potential to improve the effectiveness of BP neuromodulation therapy. Autonomic nerve fibers fire with specific bursting sequences and defined frequency bands that often align with cyclic physiological events (e.g. cardiac rhythm) (Malpas). Implementing these waveforms and patterns can augment the response to stimulation, as exemplified by Dibona and Sawin who demonstrated that the use of renal stimulation waveforms resembling in vivo recordings of renal sympathetic bursting activity (diamond-shaped waveforms) enhanced renal vasoconstriction compared to that of conventional (square-shaped) waveforms (DiBona and Sawin). Dibona has also substantiated the frequency dependent response of renal function (i.e. renin secretion rate, tubular sodium reabsorption, and renal blood flow) to renal nerve stimulation (DiBona). The application of such biomimetic stimulation parameters to BP neuromodulation therapy should be further investigated for varying stimulus modalities and anatomical locations.
Because the onset and symptoms of hypotension can occur rapidly, an emphasis should also be placed on developing closed-loop solutions that provide stimulation when BP begins to or is predicted to decline. Advancements in continuous BP monitoring technologies, including photoplethysmography, have the potential to be incorporated as feedback for a closed-loop neuromodulation system to mitigate drops in BP due to hypotension (Park et al.). This concept has been explored in preliminary studies using a system known as the ‘bionic baroreflex’ (Sunagawa and Sugimachi) for combatting both hypertension and hypotension associated with baroreflex failure. This disorder is characterized by impaired carotid sinus baroreceptors, resulting in dysfunctional BP regulation that is difficult to manage with medication and other forms of treatment (Biaggioni et al.). Additionally, Madhavan and colleagues proposed that neurocardiogenic syncope could be treated through renal nerve stimulation (Madhavan et al.). Through the implementation of a closed-loop treatment with feedback to monitor BP and/or heart rate, therapy (e.g. electrical nerve stimulation) may be delivered more effectively by responding to pre-syncopal episodes and preventing unnecessary stimulation when the patient is not experiencing symptoms.
Lastly, a future avenue for BP neuromodulation research is the development of bidirectional strategies. Bidirectional neuromodulation refers to neurostimulation techniques that can selectively increase or decrease BP. Approximately 50% of patients with primary autonomic failure have OH and supine hypertension (Shannon et al.), demonstrating a demographic that could potentially be treated with this therapeutic approach.

Limitations
The literature cited in this review was limited to publications written in English. Furthermore, we omitted articles that focused on BP monitoring devices because the objective of this review was to assess the current state of functional/clinical effectiveness of neuromodulation approaches.

Conclusion
In this review, we present an account of original research related to neuromodulation technologies aimed at controlling arterial BP. Our report highlighted the prominence of antihypertensive therapies in the literature, when compared to antihypotensive research. Although the elderly population comprises the majority of hypotensive patients and are at an increased risk of serious injury due to this condition, neuromodulation practices for this cohort remain largely undeveloped. Advancements in device-based neuromodulation approaches may have the potential to help bridge this research gap and further testing is warranted to elucidate the full range of applications for this budding technology. Looking forward, the literature suggests that interventional approaches for BP management will become more efficacious as technology improves, a better understanding of autonomic reflex mechanisms is established, and translational research builds upon current clinical practices.

Supplementary Information

Abbreviations
BP
Blood Pressure
OH
Orthostatic Hypotension
SCI
Spinal Cord Injury
ACE
Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme
ALLHAT
Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial
FDA
Food & Drug Administration
PRISMA
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analysis
SMART
Sympathetic Mapping/Ablation of Renal Nerves Trial
BAT
Baroreflex Activation Therapy
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Peter L. Greechan and Ryan G. L. Koh contributed equally to this work.

Authors’ contributions
Peter L. Greechan, Dr. Ryan G. L. Koh, and Dr. Paul B. Yoo designed and conducted the review. Data extraction and data analysis were performed by Peter L. Greechan and Dr. Ryan G. L. Koh. Peter L. Greechan and Dr. Ryan G. L. Koh also prepared the manuscript draft with important intellectual input from Dr. Paul B. Yoo. Peter L. Greechan, Dr. Ryan G. L. Koh, and Dr. Paul B. Yoo had complete access to the data. All authors approved the final manuscript.

Funding
This research was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (RGPAS-2020–00114, RGPIN-2020–06237), the Ontario Graduate Scholarship and the Data Sciences Institute postdoctoral fellowship. The funding bodies had no role in the design of the study or the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data and in writing the manuscript.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Management of hypertension in older people
The effect of transcutaneous electrical stimulation of the submental area on the cardiorespiratory response in normal and awake subjects
The effect of anodal transcranial direct current stimulation over left and right temporal cortex on the cardiovascular response: a comparative study
Intermittent electrical stimulation of the right cervical vagus nerve in salt-sensitive hypertensive rats: effects on blood pressure, arrhythmias, and ventricular electrophysiology
Chronic low-level vagus nerve stimulation improves long-term survival in salt-sensitive hypertensive rats
Non-invasive vagus nerve stimulation acutely improves spontaneous cardiac baroreflex sensitivity in healthy young men: A randomized placebo-controlled trial
Arima H, Barzi F, Chalmers J. Mortality patterns in hypertension. J Hypertens. 2011;29(1):S3-S7.
Aslan SC, Legg Ditterline BE, Park MC, et al. Epidural spinal cord stimulation of lumbosacral networks modulates arterial blood pressure in individuals with spinal cord injury-induced cardiovascular deficits. Front Physiol. 2018;9:565.
Austelle CW, OLeary GH, Thompson S, et al. A comprehensive review of vagus nerve stimulation for depression. Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface. 2022;25(3):309–315.
Patient-level pooled analysis of endovascular ultrasound renal denervation or a sham procedure 6 months after medication escalation: the RADIANCE clinical trial program
Attenuation of hypertension by C-fiber stimulation of the human median nerve and the concept-based novel device
Increasing blood pressure by greater splanchnic nerve stimulation: a feasibility study
A controlled trial of renal denervation for resistant hypertension
Blood Pressure Management in Afferent Baroreflex Failure: JACC Review Topic of the Week
Efficacy of catheter-based renal denervation in the absence of antihypertensive medications (SPYRAL HTN-OFF MED Pivotal): a multicentre, randomised, sham-controlled trial
Electrical stimulation of the ventromedial prefrontal cortex modulates muscle sympathetic nerve activity and blood pressure
Hypertension and drug adherence in the elderly
Effects of optic tract stimulation on baroreflex vagal bradycardia in rats
Cao F, Zhang J, Li D, et al. Non-invasive ultrasound modulation of solitary tract nucleus exerts a sustainable antihypertensive effect in spontaneously hypertensive rats. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2023;70(6):1869-78.
Prevalence of Apparent Treatment-Resistant Hypertension in the United States: Comparison of the 2008 and 2018 American Heart Association Scientific Statements on Resistant Hypertension
Blood pressure and autonomic responses to electrical stimulation of the renal arterial nerves before and after ablation of the renal artery
Electrical stimulation-based evaluation for functional modification of renal autonomic nerve activities induced by catheter ablation
Enhanced arrhythmogenic potential induced by renal autonomic nerve stimulation: Role of renal artery catheter ablation
Predictors of medication use, compliance and symptoms of hypotension in a community-based sample of elderly men and women
Renal nerve stimulation identifies aorticorenal innervation and prevents inadvertent ablation of vagal nerves during renal denervation
Parabrachial complex glutamate receptors modulate the cardiorespiratory response evoked from hypothalamic defense area
Physiology in perspective: The Wisdom of the Body. Neural control of the kidney
Sympathetic nervous system and the kidney in hypertension
DiBona GF, Sawin LL. Functional significance of the pattern of renal sympathetic nerve activation. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 1999;277(2):R346–53.
Subdiaphragmatic vagal nerve stimulation attenuates the development of hypertension and alters nucleus of the solitary tract transcriptional networks in the spontaneously hypertensive rat
Vasovagal syncope in the older person: differences in presentation between older and younger patients
Neuromodulation in Spinal Cord Injury Using Transcutaneous Spinal Stimulation—Mapping for a Blood Pressure Response: A Case Series
6- and 12-Month Follow-Up From a Randomized Clinical Trial of Ultrasound vs Radiofrequency Renal Denervation (RADIOSOUND-HTN)
Safety of rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation: heart rate and blood pressure changes
Syncope in the Emergency Department: A Practical Approach
Prevalence and triggers of syncope in medical students
Effect of selective vagal nerve stimulation on blood pressure, heart rate and respiratory rate in rats under metoprolol medication
Treatment of Hypertension: A Review
Impact of the glutamatergic neurotransmission within the A5 region on the cardiorespiratory response evoked from the midbrain dlPAG
Renal nerve activity and arterial depressor responses induced by neuromodulation of the deep peroneal nerve in spontaneously hypertensive rats
A sham-controlled randomised pilot trial on baroreflex activation therapy in patients with resistant hypertension: What will the future hold?
The role of psychological factors in response to treatment in neurocardiogenic (vasovagal) syncope
Intra-operative deep brain stimulation of the periaqueductal grey matter modulates blood pressure and heart rate variability in humans
Deep brain stimulation can regulate arterial blood pressure in awake humans
Controlling the heart via the brain: a potential new therapy for orthostatic hypotension
Orthostatic hypotension in the elderly: diagnosis and treatment
Acute on/off effects and chronic blood pressure reduction after long-term baroreflex activation therapy in resistant hypertension
Sympathetic hyperactivity, hypertension, and tachycardia induced by stimulation of the ponto-medullary junction in humans
Low-frequency stimulation of group III and IV hind limb afferents evokes reflex pressor responses in decerebrate rats
Hering D, Schlaich M. The role of central nervous system mechanisms in resistant hypertension. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2015;17(8):58.
Aorticorenal ganglion as a novel target for renal neuromodulation
Horn CC, Forssell M, Sciullo M, et al. Hydrogel-based electrodes for selective cervical vagus nerve stimulation. J Neural Eng. 2021;18(5):055008.
Left renal nerves stimulation facilitates ischemia-induced ventricular arrhythmia by increasing nerve activity of left stellate ganglion
Optimization of interferential stimulation of the human brain with electrode arrays
An implantable carotid sinus stimulator for drug-resistant hypertension: surgical technique and short-term outcome from the multicenter phase II Rheos feasibility trial
The prevalence of orthostatic hypotension during physiotherapy treatment in patients with an acute spinal cord injury
Symplicity HTN-2 Investigators. Renal sympathetic denervation in patients with treatment-resistant hypertension (The Symplicity HTN-2 Trial): a randomised controlled trial. The Lancet. 2010;376(9756):1903-09.
Parasympathetic reflex vasodilatation in the masseter muscle compensates for carotid hypoperfusion during the vagus-mediated depressor response
Simultaneous measurement of parasympathetic reflex vasodilator and arterial blood pressure responses in the cat
AF is associated with self-reported syncope and falls in a general population cohort
Short-pulsed micro-magnetic stimulation of the vagus nerve
Blood pressure modulation with low-intensity focused ultrasound stimulation to the vagus nerve: a pilot animal study
Pathology influences blood pressure change following vagal stimulation in an animal intubation model
Orthostatic hypotension: A review
Hypertension treatment effects on orthostatic hypotension and its relationship with cardiovascular disease results from the AASK trial
Effects of Antihypertensive Class on Falls, Syncope, and Orthostatic Hypotension in Older Adults: The ALLHAT Trial
Effects of intensive blood pressure treatment on orthostatic hypotension a systematic review and individual participant-based meta-analysis
Pacemaker-Based Cardiac Neuromodulation Therapy in Patients With Hypertension: A Pilot Study
The SPYRAL HTN Global Clinical Trial Program: Rationale and design for studies of renal denervation in the absence (SPYRAL HTN OFF-MED) and presence (SPYRAL HTN ON-MED) of antihypertensive medications
Carotid baroreceptor stimulation blood pressure response mapped in patients undergoing carotid endarterectomy (C-Map study)
Cardiovascular responses to somatosensory stimulation and their modulation by baroreflex mechanisms
Vestibular stimulation leads to distinct hemodynamic patterning
Vagus Nerve Stimulation for Stroke Motor Recovery—What Is Next?
How does transcranial alternating current stimulation entrain single-neuron activity in the primate brain?
Kim JK. Blood pressure and mortality: Joint effect of blood pressure measures. J Clin Cardiol Cardiovasc Ther. 2020;2(1):1009.
Exaggerated pressor and sympathetic responses to stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotor region and exercise pressor reflex in type 2 diabetic rats
Role of the spinal trigeminal nucleus in the rat autonomic reflex
Autonomic function following cervical spinal cord injury
Percutaneous renal denervation in patients with treatment-resistant hypertension: final 3-year report of the Symplicity HTN-1 study
Differential cardiovascular responses to cutaneous afferent subtypes in a nociceptive intersegmental spinal reflex
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation improves cardiovascular autonomic nervous system control: A meta-analysis
Epidemiology of Resistant Hypertension in Canada
Electroacupuncture modulation of reflex hypertension in rats: role of cholecystokinin octapeptide
Repetitive electroacupuncture attenuates cold-induced hypertension through enkephalin in the rostral ventral lateral medulla
Low-intensity focused ultrasound stimulation treatment decreases blood pressure in spontaneously hypertensive rats
The sustainable antihypertensive and target organ damage protective effect of transcranial focused ultrasound stimulation in spontaneously hypertensive rats
Exaggerated sympathetic and cardiovascular responses to stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotor region in spontaneously hypertensive rats
The pressor response to concurrent stimulation of the mesencephalic locomotor region and peripheral sensory afferents is attenuated in normotensive but not hypertensive rats
Effects of electrical stimulation of carotid baroreflex and renal denervation on atrial electrophysiology
Dynamic baroreflex control of blood pressure: influence of the heart vs. peripheral resistance
Sustained suppression of sympathetic activity and arterial pressure during chronic activation of the carotid baroreflex
Glutamate receptors of the A5 region modulate cardiovascular responses evoked from the dorsomedial hypothalamic nucleus and perifornical area
Two-year pivotal study analysis of the safety and efficacy of implantable tibial nerve stimulation with eCoin® for urgency urinary incontinence
Orthostatic Blood Pressure Change, Dizziness, and Risk of Dementia in the ARIC Study
Transvenous stimulation of the renal sympathetic nerves increases systemic blood pressure: a potential new treatment option for neurocardiogenic syncope
The rhythmicity of sympathetic nerve activity
Neurogenic hypertension: Pathophysiology, diagnosis and management
Electrical stimulation of the mesencephalic ventral tegmental area evokes skeletal muscle vasodilatation in the cat and rat
Stimulation of the mesencephalic ventral tegmental area blunts the sensitivity of cardiac baroreflex in decerebrate cats
Transcutaneous Electrical Stimulation of PC5 and PC6 Acupoints Modulates Autonomic Balance in Heart Transplant Patients: A Pilot Study
Etiology and risk factors for developing orthostatic hypotension
Frequency-dependent depression of the NTS synapse affects the temporal response of the antihypertensive effect of auricular vagus nerve stimulation (aVNS)
Real-time closed-loop brainstem stimulation modality for enhancing temporal blood pressure reduction
Electroacupuncture most effectively elicits depressor and bradycardic responses at 1 Hz in humans
Examination of the periaqueductal gray as a site for controlling arterial pressure in the conscious spontaneously hypertensive rat
Characteristics of the trigeminal depressor response in cats
Renal sensory nerves increase sympathetic nerve activity and blood pressure in 2-kidney 1-clip hypertensive mice
PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and Explanation. Ann Intern Med. 2018;169(7):467–473.
Hypertension, neurodegeneration, and cognitive decline
Photoplethysmogram analysis and applications: an integrative review
Preliminary observations on the vasomotor responses to electrical stimulation of the ventrolateral surface of the human medulla
An autonomic neuroprosthesis: noninvasive electrical spinal cord stimulation restores autonomic cardiovascular function in individuals with spinal cord injury
Blood pressure control with selective vagal nerve stimulation and minimal side effects
Effect of cardiac-cycle-synchronized selective vagal stimulation on heart rate and blood pressure in rats
Antihypertensive drugs: An overview
Differences in the regulatory mechanism of blood flow in the orofacial area mediated by neural and humoral systems
Renal denervation: a review
Orthostatic hypotension: epidemiology, prognosis, and treatment
Acute and short-term autonomic and hemodynamic responses to transcranial direct current stimulation in patients with resistant hypertension
Heart function influenced by selective mid-cervical left vagus nerve stimulation in a human case study
Orthostatic hypotension in older adults. The Cardiovascular Health Study. CHS Collaborative Research Group
Noninvasive Neuroprosthesis Promotes Cardiovascular Recovery After Spinal Cord Injury
Estrogen blocks the cardiovascular and autonomic changes following vagal stimulation in ovariectomized rats
Low intensity stimulation of aortic baroreceptor afferent fibers as a potential therapeutic alternative for hypertension treatment
Sanchez-Larsen A, Principe A, Ley M, Vaquerizo B, Langohr K, Rocamora R. Insular role in blood pressure and systemic vascular resistance regulation. Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface. 2024;27(7):1218-26.
Time course of corticospinal excitability and autonomic function interplay during and following monopolar tDCS
Acute device-based blood pressure reduction: electrical activation of the carotid baroreflex in patients undergoing elective carotid surgery
Acute cardiovascular effects of epidural spinal cord stimulation
Stimulation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex modulates muscle sympathetic nerve activity and blood pressure in humans
Shah J V, Collar BJ, Ditslear E, Irazoqui PP. An ASIC system for closed-loop blood pressure modulation through right cervical vagus nerve stimulation. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2022;69(10):3021–3028.
The hypertension of autonomic failure and its treatment
Medication adherence in people with Parkinson disease
Refractory versus resistant hypertension
Characteristics of Resistant Hypertension in a Large, Ethnically Diverse Hypertension Population of an Integrated Health System
Cardiovascular responses to low-level transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation
Hemodynamic responses to low-level transcutaneous auricular nerve stimulation in young volunteers
Neural modulation for hypertension and heart failure
Transcutaneous spinal cord stimulation and its impact on cardiovascular autonomic regulation after spinal cord injury
Differential hemodynamic and respiratory responses to right and left cervical vagal nerve stimulation in rats
Electrical stimulation of deep peroneal nerve mimicking acupuncture inhibits the pressor response via capsaicin-insensitive afferents in anesthetized rats
Electrical stimulation of vascular autonomic nerves: effects on heart rate, blood pressure, and arrhythmias
Sunagawa K, Sugimachi M. Development of artificial bionic baroreflex system. In: 2010 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology. 2010:3446–3448.
Changes in blood pressure induced by electrical stimulation of the femur in anesthetized rats
Differentiated baroreflex modulation of sympathetic nerve activity during deep brain stimulation in humans
Human dorsal root ganglion stimulation reduces sympathetic outflow and long-term blood pressure
A Single Session of Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation Enhances Vascular Endothelial Function and Peripheral Blood Circulation in Patients With Acute Myocardial Infarction A Quasi-Randomized Controlled Trial
Orthostatic response in rats after hindlimb unloading: effect of transcranial electrical stimulation
Tesini S, Frotzler A, Bersch I, Tobon A. Prevention of orthostatic hypotension with electric stimulation in persons with acute spinal cord injury. Biomedical Engineering/Biomedizinische Technik. 2013;58(SI-1-Track-A):000010151520134029.
Electrical stimulation of the midbrain increases heart rate and arterial blood pressure in awake humans
High rates of non-adherence to antihypertensive treatment revealed by high-performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HP LC-MS/MS) urine analysis
Neurodegenerative diseases and blood pressure variability: A comprehensive review from HOPE Asia
Sustained reduction in blood pressure from electrical activation of the baroreflex is mediated via the central pathway of unmyelinated baroreceptors
The management of syncope in older adults
Electrical activation of the human vestibulo-sympathetic reflex
Baroreflex activation therapy in patients with prior renal denervation
Carotid baroreceptor stimulation improves pulmonary arterial remodeling and right ventricular dysfunction in pulmonary arterial hypertension
Occurrence of parasympathetic vasodilator fibers in the lower lip of the guinea-pig
Wierzejska E, Giernaś B, Lipiak A, Karasiewicz M, Cofta M, Staszewski R. A global perspective on the costs of hypertension: a systematic review. Arch Med Sci. 2020;16(1):1078-91.
Wyss JM, Aboukarsh N, Oparil S. Sensory denervation of the kidney attenuates renovascular hypertension in the rat. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 1986;250(1):H82-6.
Activation of afferent renal nerves modulates RVLM-projecting PVN neurons
Rationale and evidence for the development of a durable device-based cardiac neuromodulation therapy for hypertension
Trigeminal nerve-mediated reflex arterial blood pressure decrease and vasodilatation in lower lip of the rabbit
Yoshida T, Masani K, Sayenko DG, Miyatani M, Fisher JA, Popovic MR. Cardiovascular response of individuals with spinal cord injury to dynamic functional electrical stimulation under orthostatic stress. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2013;21(1):37-46.
Impacts of renal sympathetic activation on atrial fibrillation: the potential role of the autonomic cross talk between kidney and heart
Ultrasound neuromodulation of an anti-inflammatory pathway at the spleen improves experimental pulmonary hypertension
Hemodynamic responses to magnetic stimulation of carotid sinus in normotensive rabbits
Pulmonary Artery Denervation Inhibits Left Stellate Ganglion Stimulation-Induced Ventricular Arrhythmias Originating From the RVOT
The association of antihypertensives with postural blood pressure and falls among seniors residing in the community: A case-control study