Systematic Evaluation of Lower Urinary Tract Sensations to Improve Management of LUTS: ICI‐RS 2024
ABSTRACT
Aims
Lower urinary tract (LUT) sensations form an essential part of diagnostic criteria for many LUT symptoms, additionally LUT sensations are used to evaluate the effectivity of therapeutic interventions. The accurate measurement of LUT sensations, however, is severely hampered by the subjective nature of these sensations.
Methods
This paper summarizes the discussions from the 2024 meeting of the International Consultation for Incontinence‐Research Society (ICI‐RS 2024) regarding systematic evaluations of LUT sensations and the design of more objective tools to measure these.
Results
Here, we discuss factors that influence sensations that are under the control of the caregiver/investigator, the signaling of sensations from the LUT toward the central nervous system, and currently used diagnostic tools to measure LUT sensations. Recent methodological advances to objectively measure factors that correspond with changes in LUT sensations are introduced along with recommendations for future research to optimally enable objective assessment of processes underlying LUT sensations.
Conclusions
Advancing the objective measurement of LUT sensations will require interdisciplinary collaboration, integrating insights from neuroscience, engineering, and clinical practice. Such efforts hold the potential to transform patient care by enabling more precise diagnostics and personalized therapeutic strategies.

Introduction
Reliable processing and evaluation of sensory information from the lower urinary tract (LUT) by the central nervous system (CNS) is essential for optimal storage and voiding of urine. Afferent sensory nerves carry information from the LUT to the spinal cord. LUT sensory information subsequently arrives in the brain at the level of the periaqueductal gray, from where it is relayed to higher cortical and subcortical areas. When needed, these higher brain centers make sure we direct our attention toward the bladder and plan a timely visit to the toilet.
In conditions in which the structural integrity of the CNS is affected at the level of the spinal cord or brain (such as spina bifida, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury, or Parkinson's disease) optimal voluntary control over the LUT, and accurate processing of LUT sensations, may be compromised resulting in neurogenic LUT dysfunction. Psychological conditions, including anxiety and depression and chronic stress, are also known to alter LUT sensations and can contribute to conditions like interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS). Additionally, conditions that negatively impact the health of the bladder wall, such as the process of aging or bladder outlet obstruction, may alter the extent to which the bladder can effectively send sensory information toward the CNS (ref to CGRP paper) and subsequently also diminish sensory processes at the level of the CNS.
It is evident that structural or functional impairment in one or more levels along the sensory pathways from bladder to brain is underlying a wide variety of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS). The evaluation of LUT sensations, therefore, forms an essential part of many diagnostic and therapeutic evaluations. For example, for the diagnosis of overactive bladder (OAB) the sensation of urinary urgency is the main diagnostic criterium. For IC/BPS sensations of pain, pressure or discomfort perceived to be related to the urinary bladder form the most important diagnostic criterium. To accurately diagnose these conditions and evaluate patients' responses to therapeutic interventions it is vital to be able to accurately measure sensory processing of LUT information. However, the subjective nature of sensations severely limits this.
The current paper reports the discussions of a think tank hosted at the 2024 meeting of the International Consultation on Incontinence—Research Society (ICI‐RS) regarding the interactions between the LUT and CNS that give rise to sensations and the development of more objective measurement tools to evaluate processing of LUT sensations. The authors discuss the current state of the field and suggest future directions for research to improve diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

Subjective Nature of LUT Sensations
A large body of research, for example, in the area of “psychophysics” has looked at surrounding conditions, perceptual processes (encoding, awareness of, responding to symptoms), selective monitoring of specific sensations, accuracy of perception relative to physiological state, and cognition and emotions regarding symptom reporting. Early research into LUT sensations described (i) the normal sensation giving rise to the desire to void; (ii) the sensation that voiding is imminent; (iii) distant sensations in the upper part of the body associated with a full bladder; (iv) an abdominal sensation associated with a full bladder; (v) the sensation that urine is passing; (vi) an increase in abnormal sensations present elsewhere in the body associated with voiding. In a study of 450 patients, sensory thresholds of the bladder wall and of different parts of the urethra were determined with constant‐current stimulation, giving additional information on exteroceptive innervation of the different parts of the LUT. Several sensations have been described in the LUT which can be classified as physiologic (sensations of bladder filling and sensation during micturition), pathologic (urgency and pain), and externally induced (sensation of touch, temperature, and sensation due to electrical stimulation).
Outside the research setting, most of us will not register mild sensations if asked to focus on our LUT, our sensory processing will, unavoidably, be altered by this task. Individuals differ in the words they choose to describe sensations and the quality and intensity of these sensations. For example, there are differences in what is understood by the terms frequency and urgency. The medical terminology used by clinicians when describing LUTS is poorly understood, often misinterpreted by many patients, and is inherently confusing. A study conducted in female LUTS patients indicates that most women do not know the correct meaning of LUTS terminology currently used by physicians. Healthcare providers attempt to recalibrate the patient's reported experience to reflect their own understanding. In a study of patients with interstitial cystitis, after questioning, no predominant reason was given by patients for suspecting their bladder to be the source of pain.
Research into LUT sensations demonstrated three phases: the early filling phase yielding vague, weak sensations which are not localized to the bladder, followed by the first sensation that there is the desire to void and then a strong desire. In the final stage, cognitive and psychosocial components come into play (e.g., concerns about whether there is a toilet nearby and whether it is socially acceptable). The decision to void is primarily a cognitive process influenced by multiple elements of which bladder fullness sensation is only one.
Tools to measure sensations include cystometry, validated surveys, micturition diaries, verbal sensory threshold responses, sensation meters, focused introspection, an urge keypad, electrical testing, and neuroimaging. Different tools are often combined to enhance their diagnostic value. The methods of assessing and recording bladder sensation have been reviewed. Methodological difficulties included (i) some techniques (e.g., cystometry) are invasive and artificial, (ii) instructions to study participants might introduce bias. LUT sensations experienced during cystometry are different in perceived location within the LUT and their duration for different urodynamic diagnoses. Therefore, uniform descriptions of sensations during filling cystometry might not be appropriate to different urodynamic diagnoses. A review of the literature on bladder sensation suggested that there are differences in what can be described as “introspective bladder sensations” and the sensations reported immediately before a void, “void sensations”.
More nuanced approaches to measure sensation were developed including bladder sensation diaries and focus groups. Focused introspection, a method developed to study the development of bladder sensation noninvasively, avoided confounding factors by using a water loading protocol to induce a constant, elevated, diuresis and bladder filling rate, aiming to have the sensation of an absolute need to void within a 60–90 min time span. Also, words to describe bladder sensation were avoided, to minimize confusion. Instead, sensation intensity was graded on a graph with absolute need to void as maximal (100%) intensity. In a study with three focus groups, it was possible to describe the development of normal bladder sensation and to refine terminology used by healthy participants. The findings show that two types of bladder sensations are reported spontaneously by healthy uninitiated volunteers, pressure and a tingling sensation, of which the first develops in a continuous manner. The pattern is described by the terms: no sensation, weak awareness, stronger awareness, weak need, stronger need, and absolute need to void. New technologies which have been developed to improve our diagnostic capabilities in urinary urgency and bladder sensation include MRI‐based neuroimaging and novel tablet‐based sensation meters that can be used during urodynamics as well as during oral hydration.

Sex‐ and Age‐Related Characteristics in LUT Sensation
The proximal urethra and the bladder neck play a fundamental role in the afferent signaling pathways and bladder reflex activity. Since anatomy and innervation varies according to sex, these aspects should be considered together with the different hormonal sensitivity which may also change throughout the age.
The smooth muscle sphincter, more pronounced in the male bladder neck, provides protection against retrograde ejaculation in men, whereas in women, the location and the complexity of the urogenital sphincter striated structures preserves urinary continence.
In addition, the incidence and distribution of hormonal receptors in the LUT is different between sexes. In women, estrogen receptors have been found in the squamous epithelia of the trigone and urethra irrespective of female estrogen status. On the contrary, in men, estrogen, when present, is low and mainly located distally in the urothelium of the prostatic urethra. It has been hypothesized that there is a relationship between estrogens and urethral function, suggesting that higher levels of estrogen increase urethral sensitivity and decrease bladder sensitivity. This is likely because striated sphincter overactivity, such as in Fowler's syndrome, is associated with polycystic ovary syndrome, whereas low levels of oestradiol due to menopause in elderly women lead to a reduced sphincter tone and increased bladder sensitivity.
A higher density of adrenergic innervation is present in males compared to females. A qualitative difference in the experienced sensation and thresholds between sexes has been reported by Wyndaele when comparing proximal and distal male urethral stimulation. Alpha1‐adrenoceptor (α1‐AR) blockers have an inhibitory effect on the micturition reflex, suggesting the excitatory urethra to bladder reflex is mediated by α1‐ARs in men. Moreover, Kojima et al. found that the expression levels of α1‐AR mRNA in prostate biopsy specimens have a significant positive correlation with patient age, but not with prostate volume. Thus, the increase of α1‐AR expression in elderly men could be considered a key factor in the pathogenesis of bladder oversensitivity independently of the presence of bladder outlet obstruction.

Sympathetic Innervation of the LUT
The bladder and urethra are innervated via the pelvic (parasympathetic), hypogastric (sympathetic), and pudendal (somatic) nerves. During filling, sympathetic activity maintains urethral smooth muscle tonic contraction and mediates relaxation of bladder smooth muscle (detrusor), whereas during emptying, parasympathetic nerves mediate detrusor contraction, and nitrergic nerves activity relaxes urethral smooth muscle. In parallel, somatic activity enables voluntary relaxation of the external urethral sphincter. However, the role of the sympathetic nervous system in mediating bladder body relaxation and urethral contraction during the filling phase has not been fully verified in humans, and much of this understanding stems from animal studies rather than human evidence. Thus, a cautious interpretation of these pathways in human bladder physiology is warranted.
Adrenergic innervation of the detrusor is sparse compared with the urethra, with expression most apparent in the mucosal microvasculature. β‐adrenoceptors (β‐AR) are more abundant than α‐AR in the bladder; moreover, β3‐AR have highest expression in human bladder. It is unclear whether localization is on the detrusor smooth muscle, or other cells within the detrusor layer and evidence supporting β3‐AR expression on smooth muscle or urothelial cells is inconsistent, potentially reflecting species difference but more likely due to expression on nerves or other cells.
We know that adrenergic stimulation of the ex vivo guinea‐pig bladder, inhibits phasic contractions and reduces neurogenic contractions, via a β3‐AR pathway. Yet, the β3‐AR agonist, mirabegron, is less effective on spontaneous contractions in rat bladder strips than the broad β‐AR agonist isoprenaline, which suppresses activity, and also inhibits nonvoiding contractions in in vivo rat bladder cystometry. This is intriguing as Mirabegron is clinically effective in the management of OAB syndrome as an additional treatment option for patients who have discontinued antimuscarinics. Interestingly, Mirabegron was thought to have its main effect by acting directly on detrusor smooth muscle, suppressing spontaneous or nonvoiding contractions; however, while there is some laboratory‐based evidence to support this, the concentrations required are unlikely to be achieved clinically.
An alternative hypothesis based on human and rat bladder studies proposes that β3‐AR activity inhibits acetylcholine release from detrusor nerves prejunctionally, due to adenosine release following A1‐receptor stimulation that then acts to decrease spontaneous contractions. Spontaneous or nonvoiding contractions represent one of the bladder's sensing mechanisms, whereby as the bladder fills, these events trigger bursts of afferent signaling which is relayed to higher centers, communicating bladder fullness, eventually translated as sensation. Therefore, the proposed β3‐AR/adenosine/acetylcholine release pathway that diminishes spontaneous contractions, would silence afferent signaling, and reduce sensation, alleviating sensory symptoms of OAB syndrome. This makes a compelling case for better utilization of sensations as an outcome measure for therapeutic efficacy.
During the ICI‐RS 2024, β3‐AR in the urethra was discussed, given that mirabegron induced relaxation of precontracted mouse urethra and reduced urethral pressure of rats undergoing cystometry. β3‐AR effects on the urethra may/may not be beneficial and we do not know whether mirabegron can reduce (bothersome) urethral sensation or relax the internal urethral sphincter during filling to the extent that incontinence would ensue. Additionally, nitric oxide (NO) signaling may play a role in urethral relaxation, but this pathway has similarly been demonstrated primarily in animal models, and its relevance in human urethral physiology remains uncertain. Until more definitive evidence is available, both the therapeutic benefits and risks of β3‐AR activation in the urethra require further investigation to assess their true clinical significance.
We propose that researchers adopt an integrated framework. Our current knowledge of the cell‐based effects of β3‐AR signaling do not fully explain the clinical impact of Mirabegron. This is partly due to the limited ability of preclinical models to assay symptoms of sensation and how these might be mitigated with treatments. Adoption of ex vivo models that facilitate interrogation of physiological cross‐talk between tissue layers of the bladder would be beneficial, including the key mechanisms of contraction and neurotransmission. Researchers may wish to consider the ex vivo combined pressure–volume and afferent recordings methodology and enhancement by comparing recordings from rodent whole bladder versus the “detrusor‐free bladder”. Pharmacological and physical modulation of bladder local sensing mechanisms including the myriad TRP, K+, and Piezo ion channels in addition to purinergic receptors within this framework, also including age, sex, and circadian rhythm will markedly advance our knowledge of their therapeutic potential.

Evaluation of LUT Sensations
As discussed above, sensation is inevitably subjective, but that does not make sensory information unreliable. One must accept that sensory information sent to the brain in relation to events in the LUT, will be interpreted differently by each individual, dependent of the personal afferent innervation, emotional psychological, environmental factors, and events in memory. A small component of afferent potentials arriving at the brain will result in sensation especially during physiological processes. In pathological circumstances and with external stimuli, afferents will mostly elicit sensation immediately if the stimulus is strong enough. Gillespie et al. underline that it is crucial to appreciate the diversity of the bladder afferent system and distinguish between afferent and sensory information, representing an underlying complexity. The CNS receives vast amounts of information from the bladder, which arises from different locations, and uses different fiber types. The CNS is continually being bombarded with “afferent noise.” Some will be noticed, many not.
There are ways to partly overcome the subjectivity: repeated measurements in identical circumstances, large data from comparable patient groups, combining different sensory tests.
The ways to investigate are by history taking, standardized questionnaires, (sensation related) micturition diaries. If a patient is requested to report what he or she feels in the bladder, the outcome is most successful if sensations are graded: when do you feel “something” in the bladder, when a first desire to void, a strong desire to void, urgency. Furthermore, reporting of sensations during cystometry (standardized as first sensation of bladder filling, first desire to void, strong desire to void) and evaluation of the reproducibility are very useful. Others have been evaluated as strict water loading protocol, focus group studies.
Beside the grading of filling sensations, bladder related pain and discomfort can be graded on 1–10 scale or other. Sensation of touch is reported during touching the wall inside the bladder and urethra as with an endoscope. Determining electrical perception threshold uses numeric figures of the lowest amplitude in mA felt with electrical stimulation in different locations of the LUT with increasing amplitude. The electrical potential thresholds (EPT) in the bladder have been shown to be higher than in the urethra, while urethral EPT's differ in different parts of the urethra. This test is important as semiobjective, repeatable, done by urologists themselves, and giving information of different neurologic pathways directly. Filling sensations and EPT do not correlate what shows that both depend on a different afferent innervation, though with sinusoidal current better correlations have been found. There is a different sensation with age, sex, infection, neurologic pathology.
The quantity of possible diagnostic information which can be obtained with each test and their combination is impressive. One may consider the development of a standardized set of sensory stimuli mentioned above. These may then be combined with auditory (running water, waterfalls) and visual (toilet, front door, keylock) stimuli or with methods for distraction such as giving persons mental tasks, such as performing certain calculations or just counting. Different changes in posture can be used with lying down being inhibitory and standing up an excitatory on bladder sensation. This can be done during a urodynamic investigation or also during a session of forced diuresis in which persons are asked to drink a large amount of water in a short time. Such a set of standardized challenges may provide additional information to differentiate between different types of bladder activity disorders within the OAB and underactive bladder spectrum.

New Diagnostic Parameters and Their Instrumental Evaluations
As previously described, bladder sensations are subjective and may vary with different factors, including attention, emotional state, and conditions of urodynamic testing. The ICS recommends recording bladder sensations during urodynamics, however, sensory perception of the patient is subject to perceptual variability due to outside factors such as instructions or questions given by the investigator. Therefore, assessing bladder sensations in an objective manner is challenging.
Sympathetic skin responses (SSR) during urodynamic could provide a more objective assessment as they appear with first desire to void, and gradually increase in frequency with strong desire to void. The main issue is related to the technical conditions to record them, since their occurrence is highly sensitive to any stimulus linked with emotions (e.g., temperature, noise, pain). Moreover, age impacts SSR, as only 75% of patients over 60 have normal SSR on hands. This likely reflects an age‐dependent decline in sympathetic responsiveness, associated with high interindividual variability for SSR. In patients with neurological diseases, SSR may be absent or impaired.
Heart rate variability is another way to assess the autonomic nervous system, and frequency analysis provides an assessment of sympathetic and parasympathetic activation. The high‐frequency/low‐frequency ratio, reflective of the sympathovagal balance, remains stable during bladder filling until the appearance of strong desire to void, where an increase of the ratio is observed in healthy subjects. It could then be used to determine the occurrence of strong desire to void. However, a 5‐min period of recording is usually recommended, and heart rate variability is also variable with stress, and thus requires strict conditions of recording.
Another approach is the use of functional neuroimaging. Using neuroimaging we may be able to access neural mechanisms underlying sensory processes before a subjective interpretation is given to sensations. This could facilitate an objective method to evaluate sensory processing of LUT afferent signaling and patients' responses to therapeutic interventions. Prior functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) research has established differences in brainstem functional organization between healthy adults and OAB patients. Furthermore, differences in functional connectivity between cortical and subcortical areas have been observed between older women with and without urgency urinary incontinence. This study, additionally, was able to differentiate responders to conservative treatment options from nonresponders based on brain connectivity patterns. It should be kept in mind that the supine position and MRI environment may alter patient behavior and influence sensations and micturition during an fMRI scan. Considering that fMRI scanners are usually expensive to use, and interpretation of data requires expert analysis, it is essential for research in this area to aim to link fMRI finding to conventional diagnostic tools used to diagnose and evaluate LUTS. Another option to assess brain activity, which gives patients more freedom to move and maintain a physiological posture during LUT sensation and micturition, is functional near‐infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). However, using fNIRS only the superficial areas such as the prefrontal cortex can be explored, and none of the deep cerebral and subcortical areas involved in bladder sensations can be studied. Sensory evoked potentials (SEP) with direct stimulation of the bladder mucosa or the urethra allow an objective assessment of sensations, however, is not linked with perception of desire to void. Absence or delayed SEPs may suggest neurological lesion, but some uncertainties about the clinical significance of SEPs remain as abnormalities of vesicourethral junction SEPs were not associated with peripheral neuropathy in diabetic patients.
The integration of AI and advanced technology in functional urology presents a groundbreaking opportunity for deeper insights and improved patient care. One significant advancement is the introduction of wearable devices, such as watches and bracelets, which can continuously monitor physiological markers like heart rate, respiratory rate, ECG anomalies, and blood glucose variations. These indicators provide valuable data, acting as proxies for subjective sensations and offering real‐time health feedback. In functional urology, wearables hold promise in addressing limitations of current diagnostic procedures, which typically assess patients at isolated points in time. By offering continuous data, these devices enable clinicians to track fluctuations in sensations that occur throughout the day, reflecting a more holistic picture of a patient's health status. Importantly, sensation assessment must consider various social and environmental influences, as these can profoundly affect patient experiences and symptom perception. Moreover, the introduction of AI models enhances the ability to analyze vast data sets, allowing for a comprehensive understanding of patterns and trends in patient health. Recently developed AI‐powered glasses further extend this capability, providing a unique tool to capture environmental contexts associated with LUT sensations. By recording and analyzing surroundings, AI glasses may help correlate specific environmental factors with changes in LUT symptoms, opening new avenues for personalized care in functional urology.
Future perspectives in the assessment of bladder sensations include the rapidity of appearance of the different needs to void which can reduce the warning time and thus be involved in OAB, and the development of methods to assess urethral sensations, as urethra is known to play a role in the occurrence of urgency and in the micturition reflex. Finally, the relationship between skin sensations over the genitalia and bladder/urethral sensations has to be explored. SEPs of the pudendal nerve and sacral dermatomal areas are easily recorded, and represent an objective assessment of the efferent pathways, excluding the sensations of bladder filling.

Discussion
LUT sensations are essential for the diagnosis of LUTS and evaluating the effectiveness of therapeutic interventions. However, accurately measuring and interpreting these sensations presents a challenge due to their subjective nature. Each individual's perception of sensations like bladder fullness, urgency, and pain is shaped by various factors, including their unique afferent innervation, emotional and psychological states, environmental influences, and prior experiences. This variability complicates both diagnosis and treatment evaluation.
Despite these challenges, recent advances in therapeutic approaches emphasize the importance of targeting LUT sensations to improve clinical outcomes. Sacral neuromodulation has demonstrated success in modulating the sensory signals transmitted from the bladder to the brain, thereby improving control over urgency and frequency in patients with OAB. Botulinum toxin (Botox) primarily works by inhibiting acetylcholine release at the neuromuscular junction in the detrusor muscle, reducing involuntary contractions. However, emerging evidence suggests that Botox may also affect sensory pathways by reducing the release of sensory neurotransmitters such as substance P and ATP, which may contribute to reduced urgency and bladder pain sensations. Similarly, β3‐adrenergic receptor (β3‐AR) agonists like Mirabegron likely alleviate urgency sensations and help to keep the detrusor muscle relaxed by their effects on sensory processes.
Given the subjective interpretation of LUT sensations, there is a need for more objective tools to assess them in clinical practice. Current diagnostic criteria for conditions like OAB and IC/BPS rely heavily on patients' self‐reporting. Tools such as cystometry, validated surveys, and neuroimaging provide valuable insights but come with limitations in terms of standardization and the variability of responses across different patients.
Newer methods, such as SSR and heart rate variability, offer promising avenues for more objective measurements of bladder sensations. In addition, functional neuroimaging, including fMRI, has provided a deeper understanding of how the brain processes LUT sensory information, although technical and environmental challenges remain. Research is ongoing to link these advanced techniques with more conventional diagnostic tools, enhancing their clinical utility. An overview of directions for future research, proposed during this Think Tank at the ICI‐RS 2024 meeting, is presented in Table 1.
Research questions and future directions.
Paragraph	Research questions	Type of study	 	Subjective nature of lower urinary tract sensations	In clinic, how can we improve the communication and measurement of sensation through patient self‐report?Can we improve on shared understanding of terminology?How can we optimize a neutral environment where patients' sensations are minimally influenced by the clinician or the environment?	Qualitative descriptive study.Consensus development study (e.g., Delphi method).Cross‐sectional observational study.	 	Sex‐ and age‐related characteristics in lower urinary tract sensation	How do sex‐specific anatomical and hormonal differences in the lower urinary tract influence bladder and urethral sensation across different age groups?How do variations in neurotransmitter and hormonal receptor distribution contribute to sex‐and age‐specific LUT sensation, and what therapeutic implications might these differences suggest?	Comparative cross‐sectional study.Comparative cross‐sectional study.	 	Sympathetic innervation of the LUT	What are the effects of β3‐AR agonists on the urethra?Can we harness ex vivo pressure‐volume recordings with combined afferent nerve measurements to ascertain the effects of pharmacological modulators of adrenergic, cholinergic, nitrergic signaling etc. on the bladder?How do β3‐AR agonists affect bladder and urethra physiology in animal models of LUTD?What are the specific neural pathways and neurotransmitters involved in transmitting distinct sensations from the bladder and urethra to the spinal cord and brain?	Pharmacodynamic study at tissue or organ level.Pharmacodynamic study at tissue or organ level.Preclinical study (in vivo).Neuroanatomical tracing study and functional neurophysiology study.	 	Evaluation of LUT sensations	What is the impact of wearables in the assessment of LUT sensations?Is AI able to capture sensations from objective physiological parameters?How do social contexts influence LUT sensations?	Feasibility and validation studies.Machine learning model development and validation study.Qualitative study.	 	New diagnostic parameters and their instrumental evaluations	Is a more objective assessment of bladder sensations during filling necessary to understand the pathophysiology of LUT symptoms and dysfunction?Should we include different sensory parameters such as the velocity of bladder sensations occurrence, a continuous assessment of bladder sensations, etc., when we perform urodynamic?How can we assess urethral sensations and what is the role of impaired/increased urethral sensations in LUTS?Do neuroimaging “fingerprints” of LUTS correlate with conventional diagnostic markers?	Systematic review or cross‐sectional study.Feasibility study.Diagnostic validation study or case‐control study.Correlational neuroimaging study.
In conclusion, while the subjective nature of LUT sensations complicates diagnosis and treatment evaluation, recent advancements in therapeutic approaches and diagnostic tools are making it possible to more effectively target these sensations. Treatments such as sacral neuromodulation, Botox, and β3‐AR agonists have shown promise in modifying sensory and motor components of bladder function, improving outcomes for patients with LUTS. Future research should focus on developing and refining objective measures to assess bladder sensations, enabling more accurate diagnosis and better evaluation of therapeutic interventions.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Data Availability Statement
No primary data were acquired or analyzed for this work. All data referred to are from previously published sources.

References
The Neural Control of Micturition
Neural Control of the Lower Urinary Tract
Ultrastructural Evidence for a Paucity of Projections From the Lumbosacral Cord to the Pontine Micturition Center or M‐Region in the Cat: A New Concept for the Organization of the Micturition Reflex With the Periaqueductal Gray as Central Relay
Functional Imaging and the Central Control of the Bladder
Summary of the 2024 Update of the European Association of Urology Guidelines on Neurourology
Neurogenic Bladder: Epidemiology, Diagnosis, and Management
Depressive Disorders and Panic Attacks in Women With Bladder Pain Syndrome/Interstitial Cystitis: A Population‐Based Sample
Affective Symptoms and the Overactive Bladder—A Systematic Review
Stress‐Induced Changes in Trophic Factor Expression in the Rodent Urinary Bladder: Possible Links With Angiogenesis
Quantification of Aging‐Related Decreases in Sensory Innervation of the Bladder Trigone in Rats
The International Continence Society (ICS) Report on the Terminology for Adult Male Lower Urinary Tract and Pelvic Floor Symptoms and Dysfunction
An International Urogynecological Association (IUGA)/International Continence Society (ICS) Joint Report on the Terminology for Female Pelvic Floor Dysfunction
A Standard for Terminology in Chronic Pelvic Pain Syndromes: A Report From the Chronic Pelvic Pain Working Group of the International Continence Society
Sensations Associated With Micturition
Studies on Sensory Threshold of Different Parts of the Lower Urinary Tract Measured Electrically
The Sensory Bladder (1): An Update on the Different Sensations Described in the Lower Urinary Tract and the Physiological Mechanisms Behind Them
Should We Explain Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms to Patients?
Lower Urinary Tract Symptomatology: Its Definition and Confusion
“Sometimes You Wonder, Is This Really True?”: Clinician Assessment of Patients' Subjective Experience of Pain
Interstitial Cystitis/Painful Bladder Syndrome: What Do Patients Mean by “Perceived” Bladder Pain?
The Relationship between Cognition and Sensation in Determining When and Where to Void: The Concept of Cognitive Voiding
Methods of Assessing and Recording Bladder Sensation: A Review of the Literature
Bladder Sensations During Filling Cystometry Are Different According to Urodynamic Diagnosis
On the Nature of Bladder Sensation: the Concept of Sensory Modulation
Focused Introspection” during Naturally Increased Diuresis: Description and Repeatability of a Method to Study Bladder Sensation Non‐Invasively: Bladder Sensation Evaluated Non‐Invasively
Normal Bladder Sensations in Healthy Volunteers: A Focus Group Investigation
New Concepts in Bladder Sensation and Urinary Urgency
Urothelial Mucosal Signaling and the Overactive Bladder‐ICI‐RS 2013
Clinical and Functional Anatomy of the Urethral Sphincter
Oestrogen and Progesterone Receptor Expression in the Female Lower Urinary Tract, With Reference to Oestrogen Status
Estrogen Receptors in the Human Male Bladder, Prostatic Urethra, and Prostate: An Immunohistochemical and Biochemical Study
Fowler's Syndrome—Progesterone Deficiency or Oestrogen Excess?
Analyse De La Douleur Urétrale Lors De La Pratique De L'autosondage: Étude Rétrospective Sur 77 Patients
Urethral Sensations Are Related to the Development of Detrusor Overactivity
Quantification of Alpha1‐Adrenoceptor Subtypes by Real‐Time RT‐PCR and Correlation With Age and Prostate Volume in Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia Patients
Adrenergic Signaling Elements in the Bladder Wall of the Adult Rat
On the Site and Mechanism of Action of β3‐Adrenoceptor Agonists in the Bladder
Beta‐3 Adrenoceptor Signaling Pathways in Urothelial and Smooth Muscle Cells in the Presence of Succinate
Beta‐3 Adrenergic Receptor Is Expressed in Acetylcholine‐Containing Nerve Fibers of the Human Urinary Bladder: An Immunohistochemical Study
Noradrenaline Inhibits Autonomous Activity in the Isolated Guinea Pig Bladder
Inhibition of Cholinergic Neurotransmission by β3‐Adrenoceptors Depends on Adenosine Release and A1‐Receptor Activation in Human and Rat Urinary Bladders
Mirabegron in the Management of Overactive Bladder Syndrome
Transient Contractions of Urinary Bladder Smooth Muscle Are Drivers of Afferent Nerve Activity During Filling
Mirabegron Relaxes Urethral Smooth Muscle by a Dual Mechanism Involving β3‐Adrenoceptor Activation and α1‐Adrenoceptor Blockade
An Ex Vivo Bladder Model With Detrusor Smooth Muscle Removed to Analyse Biologically Active Mediators Released From the Suburothelium
On the Origins of the Sensory Output From the Bladder: The Concept of Afferent Noise
Combining Different Evaluations of Sensation to Assess the Afferent Innervation of the Lower Urinary Tract After SCI
Cystometrical Sensory Data From a Normal Population: Comparison of Two Groups of Young Healthy Volunteers Examined With 5 Years Interval
Are Sensations Perceived During Bladder Filling Reproducible During Cystometry?
The Effect of Age on the Autonomic Innervation of the Urinary Bladder
Influence of Urodynamic Conditions on Bladder Sensations and Detrusor Activity in Patients With Multiple Sclerosis
Electrophysiological Assessment of Sensations Arising From the Bladder: Are There Objective Criteria for Subjective Perceptions?
Heart Rate Variability: An Objective Measure of Autonomic Activity and Bladder Sensations During Urodynamics
Assessment of Brainstem Functional Organization in Healthy Adults and Overactive Bladder Patients Using Ultra‐High Field FMRI
Functional Connectivity of the Brain in Older Women With Urgency Urinary Incontinence
Real‐Time Measurement of Oxyhemoglobin Concentration Changes in the Frontal Micturition Area: An fNIRS Study
Sensory Evoked Cortical Potentials of the Lower Urinary Tract in Healthy Men
How Sudden Is a Compelling Desire to Void? An Observational Cystometric Study on the Suddenness of This Sensation
Bladder Sensation Measures and Overactive Bladder
The Urethra in Continence and Sensation: Neural Aspects of Urethral Function
Sacral Tarlov Cysts: Neurophysiology Abnormalities and Correlation With Pelvic Sensory and Visceral Symptoms
Real‐Time Changes in Brain Activity During Sacral Neuromodulation for Overactive Bladder
Botulinum Toxin for the Lower Urinary Tract
Neuroimaging in Neuro‐Urology
Functional Neuroimaging Related to Lower Urinary Tract Sensations: Future Directions for Study Designs and Selection of Patient Groups: ICI‐RS 2023