Long‐term population dynamics of western tent caterpillars: History, trends and causes of cycles
Abstract
This is a story of unique long‐term studies of the population ecology of a gregarious, cyclic forest insect, the western tent caterpillar (WTC), Malacosoma californicum pluviale. Early work by W.G. Wellington proposed that variation in the ‘quality’ and activity of larvae and moths influenced their population ecology. Our subsequent studies monitored six WTC populations over 29–50 years in south‐western BC to determine the consistent characteristics of cyclic population dynamics.
The six studied populations fluctuated more or less in synchrony with an eight to 11‐year periodicity. Fecundity and tent size (an indication of early larval survival) increased with population increase and declined several years before the population peak. Fecundity and tent size were positively related to the population growth rate and declined before the population peak. Mortality from a baculovirus was high at peak densities, and the rate of population growth was negatively related to infection levels. Resistance to the virus varied among families and was higher following the epizootic at peak host density.
Factors that might influence changes in fecundity were explored. Viral resistance was not related to moth fecundity, but sublethal effects as a result of surviving virus exposure could reduce fecundity. Declines in fecundity and tent size prior to the peak density could be a result of reduced foliage availability and quality from induced effects of larval feeding.
Introduction and cropping experiments were unsuccessful at creating out‐of‐phase populations, and introduced insects appeared to carry the ‘quality’ of the source populations and declined synchronously with them.
Warming temperatures influence the phenology of egg hatch and leaf development, but field experiments show that WTC larvae are resilient to this variation. No signal of an influence of a warming climate was apparent in long‐term data.
Longterm field observations indicate that changes in fecundity and viral infection can drive population cycles and inform the theory of cyclic dynamics. The early focus on variation among individuals was a prelude to the eco‐evo thinking that has become accepted today but should include both genetic and phenotypic change as being relevant.
The length and in‐depth nature of this population study make it unique. It represents perhaps the most extensive monitoring of viral infection in a wild insect population. We have used laboratory and field experiments to test many hypotheses about mechanisms that potentially impact the dynamics of this cyclic species. Of importance is the phenotypic plasticity of fecundity over the cycle in density. The increase phase is associated with high fecundity and larval survival that are lower in peak and declining populations. Similar reductions in reproduction are typical of other cyclic species. Viral epizootics occur in peak populations and increase larval mortality. We suggest that this phenotypic plasticity is as important as the eco‐evo speculation for population ecology.

INTRODUCTION AND HISTORICAL CONTEXT FOR CYCLIC DYNAMICS
Understanding the determinants of population dynamics requires long‐term studies (Krebs, ). Fluctuating or cyclic populations provide opportunities for ecologists to distinguish between the characteristics of increasing and declining populations and identify possible drivers of population change. Thus, cyclic populations have received an inordinate amount of attention from population ecologists (Myers, ).
That animal populations can be influenced by external factors, such as predators, parasitoids, pathogens and the environment and/or by intrinsic factors, such as behaviour and physiology, is an important dichotomy in population ecology (Solomon, ). Density dependence, the relationship between survival and reproduction to population numbers, plays a fundamental role in population regulation (Herrando‐Pérez et al., ; Nicholson, ). In the 1950s and 1960s, interest in intrinsic mechanisms and the self‐regulation of animal populations surged (Wynne‐Edwards, ).
How could variation among individuals play a role in population regulation? Elton suggested that selection could act on variation among individuals over a population cycle (Elton, ). This idea focused on the variation within a population and potential density or environmental influences on the selection of phenotypes and changes in gene frequencies. Later, Pimentel  proposed the ‘Genetic feedback hypothesis’ that integrated density, selection and genetic change among herbivores and plants, parasites and hosts, and predators and prey. This hypothesis was not widely accepted at the time because it depended on rapid evolution or genetic change, which was considered by many to be unlikely.
Theory developed related to variation in the behaviour or physiology of individuals that could change with population density and influence population regulation. Chitty  proposed that genetically based variation in the behaviour of individuals can prevent indefinite increase in populations. As the population increases, phenotypes with high reproductive success are selected for, but eventually, phenotypes resistant to high density become more successful. These would have lower reproductive success and cause the population decline.

THE WESTERN TENT CATERPILLAR AS A STUDY SYSTEM
In the 1950s William G. Wellington, an insect population ecologist, turned his attention to an outbreak of cyclic western tent caterpillars Malacosoma californicum pluviale (WTC) on Vancouver Island, British Columbia. He, like Chitty, was interested in whether changes in individual quality with density could regulate populations (Wellington, ). This interest in variation among individual insects in high‐ and low‐density populations initiated the development of a more inclusive approach to determining the drivers of population density (Wellington, ). Attention to the ‘quality’ of insects contrasted to the focus on parasitoids as regulating factors (Berryman, ), and of insecticides, at that time particularly DDT, to control forest insects (McLaughlin, ).
Shortly after Wellington's work focusing on variation in quality of insects, another area of study developed around the idea that the quality of host trees could change in response to insect attack, the ‘induced defense hypothesis’ (Haukioja, ; Haukioja & Hakala, ; Karban, ; Karban & Myers, ; Rhoades, ; Rhoades & Cates, ). If food plant quality responds to insect feeding by producing induced chemical defences, changing plant quality could influence larval development resulting in females with reduced yolk quantity and quality for their eggs. This could then modify their fecundity and the phenotypes of their offspring.
WTC populations provide a perfect study system for investigating the influences of phenotypic changes of individuals and of the food quality of attacked trees. Over the next 50 years, we carried out many experiments and observations to explore the relevance of these two mechanisms.

WESTERN TENT CATERPILLAR BIOLOGY
WTC (also known as the northern tent caterpillar) occurs in western North America from Oregon to British Columbia and east to Ontario and Nebraska (Stehr & Cook, ). They are univoltine, and females lay their 100–250 eggs in a single mass in July. Pharate larvae diapause over winter in the egg and hatch in early April. The larvae are gregarious, and individuals from a single family remain together to create a silken tent (Figure 1). They go through five, sometimes six, instars and pupate in late June. The larvae are polyphagous and feed on a wide range of deciduous trees and shrubs, particularly red alder (Alnus rubra) and various fruit trees (apples, cherries and pears). The adults do not feed and mate soon after emergence. Some females fly to new locations before laying eggs, while others lay their egg masses near their tents. Egg masses remain attached to branches after larvae hatch and can be collected and the eggs counted.
Western tent caterpillars (WTC) bask in the sun on elongate tents (a) and compact tents (b). When temperatures are too warm, they move into the shade under the tent (c). Defoliation occurs at peak densities (d).
WTC are attacked by a range of natural enemies. The most obvious is a baculovirus, Malacosoma pluviale nucleopolyhedrovirus (McplNPV) (Wellington, ). Baculoviruses are insect‐specific viruses, and McplNPV is specific for WTC. Infected caterpillars break down at death, releasing millions of virus transmission stages, 2–10 μm diameter occlusion bodies (OBs). These contaminate foliage, bark and soil and can survive for long periods in the environment if protected from UV (Cory & Myers, ). Thus, when host densities are high, the likelihood of larvae ingesting OBs is also high, and this is increased due to the gregarious behaviour of the larvae (Myers & Cory, ).
Other pathogens, particularly bacteria and entomopthorales fungi (Fitzgerald, ), also occur and cause larval death. Mortality from unidentified causes is high for larvae reared in the laboratory after the peak (Cory & Myers, ; Sarfraz, Cory, et al., ). Whether the high mortality from disease observed in the laboratory accurately reflects that in the field is impossible to say. It is likely, however, that this also is a major component of the observed rapid population declines.
WTC also attracts a suite of hymenopteran (Rogas sp. [Braconidae]) and dipteran parasitoids (Rileymia americana and Tachinomyia similis [Tachinidaea]) (Iwao & Wellington, ), which attack the larval stage. The caterpillars are hairy and do not appear attractive to birds, and invertebrate predators are limited (Myers & Cory, personal observation). The pupal stage is short, and while we have observed what appears to be bird predation of pupae, we have not monitored the pupae which are difficult to find. Some evidence of egg parasitism exists, but it is temporally and spatially patchy and has not been monitored (Myers & Cory, personal observation).

THE DEVELOPMENT OF AN APPROACH TO THE STUDY OF WTC DYNAMICS
A unique aspect of Wellington's work was the development of techniques to assess variation in individual quality of larvae. He did this by measuring the directed movement of first instars towards a light source; some larvae moved rapidly towards the light and others not at all. Adult activity was estimated by the wing wear of moths kept in glass jars (Wellington, ). He proposed that family groups containing a higher proportion of active larvae would be more successful at finding food and that high wing wear indicates better dispersal in the wild. He predicted that reduced larval and moth activity levels would be associated with poor survival in declining populations. Wellington further suggested that the activity level of the larvae was reflected in the shape of the tent they formed (Wellington, ), with active larvae forming elongate tents (increasing populations) and sluggish larvae building compact tents (declining populations) (Figure 1a,b). Although these ideas on how insects might vary in activity in a way that could influence population densities were interesting, the only characteristic that changed with density was fecundity. Larval activity, wing wear and tent shape did not change as predicted (Myers  based on data from Wellington  and presented graphically in Supporting Information S1).

INSIGHTS FROM LONG‐TERM STUDIES OF THE POPULATION DYNAMICS OF WTC
In an analysis of the theory of population cycles, Barraquand et al.  concluded that ‘an inclusive theory must be grounded in observational or experimental data’. Thus, the collection of detailed demographic data is crucial to unravelling the drivers of population cycles. A major and unique advantage of the WTC system is that the tents of family groups are visible, and are often near the egg mass from which larvae hatched. In addition to counting the number of WTC tents annually, we monitored changes in fecundity (number of eggs per mass) and early larval survival as indicated by tent size (maximum length × width) when the larvae were in the fourth instar. In 1990, we began monitoring the levels of infection by McplNPV using DNA analysis (Kukan & Myers, ). Beginning in 1999, NPV infection in all sites was estimated by collecting samples of 10 fourth instar larvae per tent (family) and rearing them on alder leaves in the laboratory until one larva died of viral infection or pupation occurred. The number of parasitoids emerging from the larval sample was also recorded (Myers & Cory, ). Dispersal could also be estimated by recording the appearance of tents in areas previously lacking WTC. If these characteristics are related to population dynamics, they should change in a consistent pattern.
Since 1975, we have counted tents each May on the 7 ha Mandarte Island by following a set path around the whole island and scanning for tents on all the vegetation we could see using binoculars. Wild rose (Rosa nutkana) is the main host plant here. The Tsawout and Tseycum Bands of Saanich kindly allowed us to work on XOX DEL/Mandarte Island. Over the next 10 years, additional sites were identified and defined areas were monitored. On Galiano Island, the main site is an approximately 1 km section of road where the primary host plants are red alder (Alnus rubra) and bitter cherry (Prunus emarginata). A second site on Galiano Island is at Montague Harbour where the host trees are primarily domestic apples, Malus domestica, and wild rose. On Saturna Island, the site is a grassy area surrounded by red alder. The Westham site is an open field along a slough where crab apple (Malus diversifolia) and alders are the dominant host trees. Alders are also the dominant host trees on Cypress Mountain, where monitoring comprises three sites along the road up the mountain. Study sites are indicated in Figure 2.
Six study sites in the lower mainland of British Columbia are indicated by red dots.
Cyclic dynamics of these populations are relatively synchronous across the sites, although the peaks of some populations are out of phase by a year or two (Figures 3 and 5). Dynamics in the mainland populations were erratic and peaks were not always apparent. Population increases occurred over three to eight generations (average 5.5 se 0.32, N = 19), while declines occurred more rapidly over two to five generations (average 3.1 se 0.14, N = 18). These data show the slower increase and rapid decline phases that are a common characteristic of cyclic animal populations (Myers, ).
Population cycles in western tent caterpillar (WTC) in south‐western British Columbia as shown by the numbers of tents counted annually on three islands in the Georgia Strait of British Columbia (a) and two mainland populations (b). Mandarte (dark blue), Galiano (green), Saturna (purple) Islands and mainland populations, Westham (blue) and Cypress (red). Black lines indicate peak years for the Galiano population. Updated from 2015 for Galiano and 2013 for the other sites (Franklin et al., ; Myers, ; Myers & Cory, ).
Over the last 29–50 years, we have used field and laboratory experiments to examine trends in long‐term changes in WTC numbers, tent size, fecundity, virus infection and parasitism. Our goal was to provide a historical overview of studies of the population dynamics of this species and the factors that determine the cyclic patterns. Finally, we consider the current state of thinking about rapid changes in population quality as drivers of population dynamics.

PATTERNS OF CHANGE WITH DENSITY OF INTRINSIC AND EXTRINSIC CHARACTERISTICS
Long‐term monitoring demonstrates that as population density changes over the cycle, so do fecundity and tent size (early larval survival) in a strikingly similar pattern. Both initially rise as density increases, but then decline a year or two before the population peak (Figure 4a).
(a–c) Three characteristics of western tent caterpillar (WTC) that change over the population cycles on Galiano Island (grey bars) are: (a) fecundity (blue) and tent size (early larval survival) (green), (b) infection by McplNPV (pink). Parasitism (c) (purple) varies erratically. (d–f) Linear regressions of: (d) population size (number of tents) and viral infection levels (r
2 = 0.42, p < 0.0008), (e) levels of viral infection and the rate of population increase (loge N

t+1/N

t
 where N is the number of tents counted) (r
2 = 0.57, p = 0.001) and (f) fecundity and the rate of population increase (r
2 = 0.41, p < 0.0004). Fecundity and infection data updated from Myers and Cory ; parasitism from Myers and Cory , tent size (unpublished data, Myers and Cory).
Peak populations of WTC are characterized by high levels of infection by their species‐specific baculovirus, (McplNPV), and this declines rapidly after the peak (Figure 4b). The occurrence of NPV in Lepidoptera, particularly in species of Lasiocampidae and Erebidae, including WTC, has been recognized from the early 20th century (Chapman & Glaser, ). Models indicate that pathogens with the characteristics of baculoviruses are capable of driving forest insect population cycles (Dwyer et al., ; Dwyer & Elkinton, ) and are discussed in Myers and Cory . However, long‐term empirical data to support this have been rare. To our knowledge, our observations provide the best example of the relationship between viral infection and population density of any cyclic species. One major focus of our work, therefore, was to investigate the ecology and role of this pathogen in WTC populations (Cory & Myers, ; Myers & Cory, ).
Parasitoids are frequently considered to be the driving force of cyclic dynamics of forest caterpillars (Berryman, ; Klemola et al., ; Myers & Cory, ; Roland, ). Parasitism varies over time and among populations of WTC (Figure 4c). Analysis of the tent caterpillar data from 1976 to 2016 (MacDonald, ) (Supporting Information S2) showed no relationship between parasitism and the rate of population growth of WTC populations. Thus, parasitoids seem not to be driving dynamics in this system.
Viral infection increases with population numbers and is negatively related to the rate of population growth (Figure 4d,e). Fecundity is positively related to population growth (Figure 4f). The sizes of tents, an indication of early larval survival, are also weakly related to the rate of population growth (r 2 = 0.18, p = 0.03). Multiple regression analysis of the data from 1976 to 2016, carried out by MacDonald  (Supporting Information S2), shows that population numbers in the previous generation, fecundity and viral infection are all strong predictors of the population growth rate. Considering all this information, we conclude that fecundity, an intrinsic factor and viral infection, an extrinsic factor, are the main contributors to the population dynamics of this system.

MOTH MOVEMENT AND POPULATION GENETIC STRUCTURE
Movement of moths among areas can strongly influence the genetic composition and synchrony of populations. Detailed long‐term spatial data are required to explore these relationships (Kendall et al., ; Liebhold et al., ; Zytynska, ). Wellington was interested in linking his observed changes in tent shape and larval behaviour with the spread of outbreaks. He recorded in detail the number of tents along 156 miles (251 km) of road margin on the Saanich peninsula, British Columbia, starting during a WTC outbreak in 1955, through the trough and into the next cycle in 1961 (density change—Supporting Information S1) (Wellington, ). His data showed a rapid increase in tent numbers during the increase phases and both the spread of WTC locally and the infestation of new areas further away. He suggested that the different behaviours observed in the larvae (active and sluggish) passed through to the adults, resulting in differential dispersal capacity. He further proposed that this variation, originating from differences in maternal egg provisioning, could be a bet‐hedging strategy to cope with an unpredictable environment (Rossiter, ; Wellington, ).
Similar to Wellington, we have observed that during the increase of source populations, WTC occurred in areas that lacked tents in the previous year (Myers, ). This pattern can be seen following temporary extinctions at the Saturna, Galiano and Cypress sites (Figure 3), and is clearly shown at a small, semi‐isolated peninsula on Galiano Island, Montague Harbour Park (Figure 5). Clearly, WTC adults move between sites and into new areas as their densities increase.
Immigration of western tent caterpillar (WTC) is indicated by the intermittent populations at a coastal area of Galiano Island (red dots) with the population data from Mandarte indicative of potential source populations in grey bars. Data were not collected from Mandarte in 2020.
The development of more accessible genetic techniques allowed us to examine the genetic structure of the WTC populations to explore whether the islands supported distinct populations and whether genetic structure changed between population outbreaks. We compared adults from four island and one mainland population of WTC during two outbreaks separated by 8 years, using microsatellite markers and mitochondrial haplotypes (Franklin et al., ). Although considerable genetic variation existed among families within sites, no spatial or temporal heterogeneity occurred among populations. This homogeneity suggests that migration may be common between the islands. These observations are consistent with studies on the eastern tent caterpillar, M. americanum (Costa III & Ross, ), and other cyclic animal species reviewed by Franklin et al. . Thus, we conclude that sufficient movement of moths occurs among populations to contribute to maintaining synchronous fluctuations and genetic similarity.

POTENTIAL CAUSES OF VARIATION IN WTC FECUNDITY
Our long‐term data show that fecundity is an important contributor to population growth in WTC. It declines 1 or 2 years before the populations peak, and this reduction continues into the trough phase (Myers & Cory, ) (Figure 4a). What mechanism(s) might be responsible for this pattern that could be key to driving WTC dynamics? We consider four potential causes of reduced fecundity with changing population density: a cost of resistance to virus infection, sublethal effects of viral infection, reductions in food availability and changes in food quality.

Costs of resistance to NPV infection
Given the large fluctuations in population size and virus infection levels in WTC, we might expect that host resistance would vary over the cycle. The single egg mass of WTC makes it relatively straightforward to compare differences in virus resistance between families, although finding sufficient egg masses is only achievable when the populations are high. We collected egg masses from four of the long‐term populations in the increase phase, and then continued collecting, when possible, over the peak (2003–2005). A detailed bioassay of each family demonstrated considerable variation in resistance to NPV within each site (overall mortality varied from roughly 15%–75% among families), providing the variation on which selection could act (Cory & Myers, ).
A commonly held view is that genetically based resistance to pathogens and parasites should have a cost, such as decreased growth or reduced fecundity (smaller egg batch size) (Boots & Haraguchi, ; Dwyer et al., ; Govaert et al., ). If virus resistance incurs a fecundity cost, the susceptibility to McplNPV of larvae from different sized egg masses should vary consistently: insects from smaller egg masses should be more resistant. This was not the case (Cory & Myers, ; Rothman & Myers, ). Comparison of the resistance of families in the populations before, during and after the peak suggested that resistance in some sites increased over the population peak (Cory & Myers, ).
Genetic analysis based on microsatellites also indicated considerable variation among families and a positive relationship between genetic heterozygosity and larval survival. However, no relationship existed between microsatellite variation and resistance to viral infection (Franklin et al., ). Given these two studies, we conclude that the pattern of reduced fecundity in peak and declining populations is not a cost of resistance to infection.

Sublethal effects of viral exposure on fecundity
Reductions in fecundity could be related to virus exposure. Baculoviruses are usually highly pathogenic (they kill their host), but this is dose dependent. Larvae that have been challenged with the virus can survive, particularly if exposed in later instars when a higher infective dose is required (Cory & Myers, ). Surviving baculovirus infection can reduce fecundity (Cabodevilla de Andrés et al., ). Exposure of final instar WTC larvae to an approximate LC50 concentration of NPV reduced fecundity by 17% (Rothman & Myers, ). It is unclear whether reduced fecundity is a cost of fighting infection, such as via damage to the gut when the virus enters, or a cost of immunity, or is caused by some type of persistent viral infection.
Evidence suggests that both overt and covert viral infections can pass to the offspring either on or within the eggs, and this capacity varies with host species (Cory, ). In the bioassays carried out to measure virus resistance where the egg masses were surface‐sterilized prior to hatch (Cory & Myers, ); approximately a quarter of the families had some background NPV infection, suggesting transovarial (within the egg) transmission when populations are high. However, this level could have been exacerbated by rearing the families in the laboratory. Our qPCR analysis also showed the presence of non‐symptomatic covert infection in adults (a stage that cannot be directly infected), with levels varying considerably over a cycle (Myers & Cory, ). However, we still do not know whether a persistent baculovirus infection carries a cost, such as reduced fecundity, nor whether it plays a role in reintroducing virus into a population as no consistent triggers have been found (Williams et al., ). Thus, while surviving viral infection can reduce fecundity, this is only likely to be significant after the population peak. An additional explanation is likely needed to account for the pre‐peak decrease in fecundity when overt NPV infection is low.

Assessing the impact of food quantity on fecundity
WTC are capital breeders, so their pupal weight and fecundity are reliant on the food ingested during the later larval period. Reducing larval food in two laboratory experiments clearly reduced survival and fecundity (Myers et al., ; Olson et al., ) with halving the food supply resulting in a reduction in fecundity of over 60%. Pupal weight was not reduced in the next generation (Olson, ). It is challenging to measure the link between the quantity of food eaten and pupal weight in the field. The gregarious habit of WTC means food can be locally depleted, and at peak densities, defoliation is widespread (Figure 1d). Clearly, increasing density in WTC populations could reduce food availability, resulting in lower fecundity.

Assessing the impact of food quality on fecundity
Induced chemical responses in plants to insect feeding can directly impact the growth, survival and fitness of insects (Karban, ; Karban & Myers, ). Several experiments were carried out to examine whether previous feeding by WTC influenced pupal mass and fecundity both within and across seasons. Early experiments indicated that female pupal weight only decreased when the insects were fed on leaves from trees that had suffered multiple (>3) years of WTC attack (Myers & Williams, ). Within‐season effects are less clear. In one whole tree experiment, female pupal mass and fecundity were lower for female moths reared as larvae on foliage from a high WTC density (similar to field outbreak treatment) compared with those reared on low WTC density foliage (Rothman, ). In contrast, in an experiment where the treatments were carried out on branches of the same trees (i.e. both ‘induced’ and non‐induced foliage came from the same tree), Sarfraz, Cory, et al.  found reduced fecundity in larvae fed from induced branches. Olson et al.  found no reduction in fecundity with ‘induced foliage’ produced in the same manner, but the eggs of these females were smaller, which could influence larval quality. In both of these experiments, the larvae were only fed undamaged leaves.
These studies suggest that WTC larval feeding on foliage can reduce the fecundity of moths in sites with long‐term damage relative to non‐outbreak areas, but within site and within season effects are less clear. The similar patterns of change in fecundity and tent size over time (Figure 4a) suggest that deterioration in leaf quality during the increase phase, as well as lower food availability, could reduce the fecundity of WTC in high‐density populations.

EXPERIMENTS TO DISRUPT WTC POPULATION CYCLES
One way to identify density‐driven changes in insect and host tree quality is to attempt to create out‐of‐phase populations or populations in areas lacking the factors causing the decline. We hypothesized that keeping a population at low density for several generations might maintain Wellington's proposed active insects and delay the population increase and peak. Over an outbreak monitored on Mandarte Island from 1975 to 1976, we cropped a population on nearby (approximately 7 km distance) Imrie Island by removing larvae and/or egg masses to prevent damage to the wild rose host plants. The population on Imrie Island still declined in synchrony with that on Mandarte Island (Myers, ). These data suggest that protecting host plants from herbivore damage does not prevent a population decline and that immigration of moths to the island from other larger populations continued to initially be high and then declined.
If the population dynamics are associated with the condition of the insects, rather than their host trees, insects from peak populations should not cause an outbreak in areas of previously unattacked trees. For example, Wellington's  surveys of populations with different histories associated with dispersal during the increase phase showed simultaneous declines. For field experiments, we predicted that if the condition of the host trees deteriorated with herbivory, WTC introduced to previously undamaged areas should increase and reach peak densities later than source populations that reached peak densities in 1985–1986. Alternatively, if the introduced insects reflected the conditions of the source population prior to dispersal, they should decline at the same time as the source population.
To test whether the introduction of insects to previously unattacked trees could create a population outbreak, in 1984 through 1986, Myers  introduced egg masses to seven areas consisting of defined copses of unattacked red alder trees within 15 km of the University of British Columbia. Source populations (Westham, Galiano and Mandarte) peaked in 1986, and introduced populations peaked in 1986 and 1987. Egg masses of moths that developed in the peak year were smaller than the previous year for both source and introduced populations. All study populations declined by 1988 (Myers, ). Based on these experiments, we conclude that the quality of the introduced insects is influenced by their previous history, and they decline at much the same time as source populations, without defoliation damage to reduce the quantity or quality of the available foliage.

THE INFLUENCE OF WEATHER AND WARMING CLIMATE ON WTC POPULATIONS
Climate warming is influencing forest insects by changing their distributions and dynamics (Halsch et al., ; Pureswaran et al., ). A value of long‐term data is that changes in patterns over time can be explored in relation to climatic variables. Wellington predicted that ‘poor’ spring weather, cloudiness (reduced sunshine) and rain would be the driving forces in the population dynamics of WTC (Wellington et al., ). However, to thrive, WTC must be well adapted to variable early spring conditions, such as cool temperatures, rain and cloudiness. Western tent caterpillar larvae can modify their body temperatures by basking in the sun or moving to the shade under the tent (Frid & Myers, ) (Figure 1c). Also, females tend to lay their eggs on sun‐exposed branches of trees (Moore et al., ), and this could accelerate the time of egg hatching. An earlier study (Frid & Myers, ) found a positive relationship between hours of sunshine in May and the proportion of families infected by McplNPV in the field, suggesting a link between temperature and NPV infections.
Spring temperatures have warmed slightly in our study area; the average temperature in May, the month over which most larval development occurs, increased by approximately 1°C between 1977 and 2022 (MacDonald et al., ). MacDonald  found that the rate of population increase in five populations of WTC was positively related to the number of degree days below the historical average and negatively related to the number of degree days above average (Supporting Information S2). This supports the association between cool springs and outbreaks of forest caterpillars reported earlier (Myers, ). Cooler temperatures or delayed spring might promote population increase. We therefore investigated two relationships that might be influenced by temperature: the time of egg hatch as related to leaf development, and the link between larval behaviour and virus transmission.

Phenological change as a potential influence of warmer temperatures
The phenology of budburst and egg hatch could be influenced by temperature change. Budburst is determined by the interaction between overwinter chilling, spring warming (forcing) and, to a lesser extent, photoperiod. Temperature interactions can either produce delays or, more likely, advances in budburst with climate warming (Ettinger et al., ). Temperature (chilling as well as warming) is the most important determinant of egg hatch in Lepidoptera, and will be advanced by a warming climate, potentially resulting in asynchrony with their host plants (Hill et al., ). We have observed that WTC eggs hatch earlier at warmer temperatures in the laboratory (personal observation). In addition, early work on the related, gregarious forest tent caterpillar M. disstria found that the time to egg hatch decreased significantly with increasing temperature between 10°C and 30°C (Hodson & Weinman, ).
A series of experiments explored the outcomes of various WTC‐host plant mismatches by either delaying or advancing egg hatch by storing egg masses and deploying them at different times. Earlier studies on wild rose indicated that larvae that hatched in early April survived less well than those that hatched a few weeks later (Myers, ), even though buds had burst by early April. In further field studies, the phenology of egg hatch was manipulated by placing egg masses on trees (alder and crab apple) 3–6 weeks after natural ‘control’ eggs had hatched. Survival (tent size) was not affected, as the warmer conditions later in the spring allowed larvae from the delayed egg masses to grow rapidly after hatching and catch up the control larvae (Myers, ).
It is possible that increased warming could cause earlier egg hatch, but with limited changes to budburst. A field experiment in which eggs were deployed on sun‐exposed alder branches (warm) or shaded branches (cool) showed more rapid leaf development and egg hatch on warm branches, but no change in the synchrony between egg hatch and leaf development (Sarfraz, Kharouba, et al., ). To further investigate the influence of warming on egg hatch and budburst, Kharouba et al.  placed aerated plastic bags over branches of red alder trees with deployed egg masses. This increased the local temperature (2.93°C [0.18 SE]) and caused earlier egg hatch, but did not modify leaf development. Larvae from eggs that hatched as much as 25 days before leaf emergence had high survival and were resistant to starvation (Kharouba et al., ). These experiments lead us to conclude that the variation in spring conditions from year to year slows directional selection on the mismatch between egg hatch and leaf development and promotes resilience to starvation. Western tent caterpillars appear to be well adapted to variation in spring weather.

Temperature and virus transmission
Temperature can influence factors related to larval development, disease immunity and activity, all of which could influence virus transmission and survival. The key question is whether warmer temperatures translate to changes in viral dynamics at the population and field level. Laboratory experiments showed that temperature had no effect on the innate susceptibility of larval WTC to the virus (Frid & Myers, ). In the field, temperatures in May have only increased by about 1°C over the years we have studied WTC, and the average levels of infection in the populations showed no signal of change at a broad level (MacDonald et al., ). This is not surprising given the small change and the strong effect of population density on infection and its high variability over time.
Basic susceptibility is only part of disease transmission. A warming climate is likely to increase activity in ectotherms and in a disease system where the pathogen is primarily acquired horizontally by feeding, transmission and infection should increase through behavioural change. In laboratory studies, feeding activity and larval growth of WTC increased with temperature (MacDonald et al., ). Virus‐infected larvae also died more rapidly with increasing temperature; this might be expected to reduce the number of transmission stages (OBs) produced, but yield surprisingly remained the same (MacDonald et al., ).
Next, we tested how temperature effects on larval feeding and activity might impact virus transmission at the population level. In a greenhouse experiment at two temperatures, one ambient and the other approximately 10°C warmer, virus was introduced to occupied tents by releasing pre‐infected larvae and later, ‘healthy’ larvae were collected to monitor the infection. Contrary to our predictions, virus infection and transmission were greater at the cooler temperature, although larval movement and feeding were greater, as expected, at the higher temperature (MacDonald et al., ). Because larvae were less active at cooler temperatures, they spent more time on the tent and more importantly, more insects died on the tents, thus exposing the healthy larvae to the virus. This outcome parallels the suggestion of Wellington and co‐workers (Iwao & Wellington, ) that viral infection was related to the activity levels of larvae. Sluggish larvae in compact tents were more likely to succumb to disease than more active larvae in elongate tents during the population decline, although this was not related to temperature.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
This unique, prolonged study of tent caterpillars identifies the consistent changes in fecundity, early larval survival and viral infection over time and with population density. The contributors to population decline are reduced fecundity and viral infection in peak populations. A key issue is what causes the reduction in fecundity? Sublethal effects, food limitation and reduced leaf quantity and quality are all possibilities. The similar patterns of increase and decline in fecundity and early larval survival indicate that conditions may change with increasing density before infection levels become high. Continued poor larval survival and reduced fecundity during the decline phase provide the delayed density‐dependent factors to create cyclic dynamics.
Over this study we used many field and laboratory experiments to test hypotheses about the relationships between insects, host trees and viral infection (Table 1). A remaining question is why populations with different histories, either experimental introductions or natural dispersal, decline in synchrony. Although some experiments show influences of larval feeding on leaf quality reflected in moth size or fecundity, these simultaneous population declines do not reflect a history of feeding on host trees.
Hypotheses about interactions of western tent caterpillar (WTC) with host plants, temperature and viral infection tested over the years of study.
Hypotheses tested	Result	Citations	 	Individual variation in larval activity and tent shape changes with density	No	Myers 	 	Cropping a population to prevent outbreak and foliage quality reduction delays outbreak	No	Myers 	 	Introductions to new areas will delay population peak and decline	No	Wellington  and Myers 	 	Moths spread from areas of initial outbreak	Yes	Wellington  and Myers; Figures 3 and 5	 	Populations will vary genetically between areas and peaks	No	Franklin et al. 	 	Fecundity and tent size change with population density	Yes	Myers  and Myers and Cory ; Figure 3	 	Fecundity is related to population growth	Yes	MacDonald ; Figure 4	 	Infection by McplNPV changes with host density	Yes	MacDonald ; Figure 4	 	Infection by McplNPV is related to population growth	Yes	MacDonald ; Figure 4	 	Parasitization changes with population size	Variable	MacDonald ; Figure 4	 	Resistance to McplNPV increases following viral epizootics	Yes	Cory and Myers 	 	Microsatellite variation and resistance to viral infection are related	No	Franklin et al. 	 	Resistance to McplNPV is related to fecundity	No	Cory and Myers 	 	Sublethal infection can reduce fecundity	Yes	Rothman and Myers  and Cory and Myers 	 	McplNPV can be vertically transmitted	Yes	Myers and Cory 	 	Reduced food lowers fecundity	Yes	Myers et al.  and Olson et al. 	 	Feeding damage reduces food quality and fecundity	Variable	Myers and Williams , Rothman , Sarfraz, Kharouba et al.  and Olson et al. 	 	Induced foliage increases survival to unknown causes and resistance to viral infection	Yes	Sarfraz, Kharouba et al.  and Olson, 	 	Early egg hatch is beneficial	No	Myers 	 	Warmer temperature promotes McplNPV transmission	No	MacDonald et al. 	 	Cooler temperature is associated with population growth and outbreaks	Yes	Myers  and MacDonald
The study of WTC population dynamics informs the broader field of population ecology and sheds light on the mechanisms behind population cycling and the role of disease in driving these cycles (Myers, ). Population cycles are more than just increases and declines in numbers, but a complex pattern of changing characteristics and conditions that must be identified, tested and explained for an in‐depth understanding (Barraquand et al., ).

ECO‐EVO DYNAMICS OR PHENOTYPIC PLASTICITY: WHICH IS MORE IMPORTANT?
A major feature of the WTC story is the recognition of phenotypic variability related to population dynamics (Wellington, ). Simultaneous with this work came the idea that population density could select the different types of individuals as population density changes and influence population dynamics (Chitty, ). We can ask how these ideas fared with time. For Wellington, most of the variation he proposed did not change with population density (Supporting Information S1), except for fecundity. Chitty's hypothesis of genetic change, although widely investigated, has never been supported for cyclic mammal populations for which it was developed. Even so, it is often cited in the eco‐evo literature (Bassar et al., ; Govaert et al., ; Reznick et al., ).
Our work and Wellington's show repeatable changes in fecundity over the population cycle from high in the increase phase to lower during the peak and decline. This is most likely a phenotypically plastic feature that is influenced by food plant quality and quantity, and possibly sublethal infection. In addition, variation among families in resistance to NPV is very high, and if this has a genetic basis, it could be selected on (Cory & Myers, ). Resistance was higher following the epizootic at peak density, suggesting selection occurred. The relevant factors in this system are an increase in population numbers and associated increase in levels of viral infection (ecological factors) with possible selection for greater resistance over the viral epizootic (evolution). Thus, selection possibly acts on the ecological time scale (Bassar et al., ).
A similar situation has been described in another cyclic Lepidoptera, the spongy moth, Lymantria dispar. Dwyer et al.  developed a population model that included a shift in resistance to viral infection over the epizootic. They included a cost of resistance associated with fecundity based on earlier work (Elderd et al., ; Páez et al., ), that also showed heritability of resistance which we did not find in WTC. Elderd et al. found reduced infection in three out of five populations post infection indicating that selection can occur. The Dwyer et al.  model indicates more realistic dynamics after adding variation in resistance, and they propose that this fits the eco‐evo paradigm, one of few examples based on field data.
We suggest that the importance of phenotypic variation in physiology, behaviour and morphology (fecundity) created through stress, food limitation, responses to predators etc., may be overshadowed by the interest in eco‐evo dynamics. Phenotypic plasticity (Stearns, ) can explain the rapid change in fecundity and influence the cyclic population dynamics of populations. Although much of the variation among individuals proposed by Wellington to be relevant to population dynamics did not show consistent patterns (Supporting Information S1), changing fecundity and viral infection have proven to be important drivers of the cyclic dynamics of WTC, and phenotypic variation in reproduction is likely to be relevant in the dynamics of other cyclic species (Myers, ).

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
This paper is a retrospective of 70 years of studies of the western tent caterpillar in British Columbia. Studies by Judith H. Myers were started in the 1970s and studies of NPV were guided by Jenny S. Cory from 1990 onward. The manuscript was initially prepared by Myers and developed through discussion and detailed editing by Cory. This work has been a collaborative effort by us and our students at the University of British Columbia and Simon Fraser University.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data used for Figures 3, 4, 5 are available at Dryad: https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.sxksn03fz (Myers & Cory, ).

REFERENCES
Moving forward in circles: Challenges and opportunities in modelling population cycles
Towards a more precise—And accurate—View of eco‐evolution
The origins and evolution of predator‐prey theory
What causes population cycles of forest Lepidoptera?
The evolution of costly resistance in host‐parasite systems
Intra‐and intergenerational persistence of an insect nucleopolyhedrovirus: Adverse effects of sublethal disease on host development, reproduction, and susceptibility to superinfection
A preliminary list of insects which have wilt, with a comparative study of their polyhedra
Population processes in the vole and their relevance to general theory
The natural selection of self‐regulatory behaviour in animal populations
Insect virus transmission: different routes to persistence
The ecology and evolution of insect baculoviruses
Within and between population variation in disease resistance in cyclic populations of western tent caterpillars: A test of the disease defence hypothesis
Hierarchical genetic structure and geneflow in macrogeographic populations of the eastern tent caterpillar (Malacosoma americanum)
Pathogen‐driven outbreaks in forest defoliators revisited: Building models from experimental data
The combined effects of pathogens and predators on insect outbreaks
Using simple models to predict virus epizootics in gypsy moth populations
Can eco‐evo theory explain population cycles in the field?
Host‐pathogen interactions, insect outbreaks, and natural selection for disease resistance
Periodic fluctuations in the numbers of animals: Their causes and effects
Winter temperatures predominate in spring phenological responses to warming
Genetic similarity of Island populations of tent caterpillars during successive outbreaks
Multiple mating and family structure of the western tent caterpillar, Malacosoma californicum pluviale: Impact on disease resistance
Thermal ecology of western tent caterpillars Malacosoma californicum pluviale and infection by nucleopolyhedrovirus
Eco‐evolutionary feedbacks—Theoretical models and perspectives
Insects and recent climate change
On the role of plant defences in the fluctuation of herbivore populations
Herbivore cycles and periodic outbreaks. Formulation of a general hypothesis
Density dependence: An ecological tower of babel
Climate change effects on animal ecology: Butterflies and moths as a case study
The western tent caterpillar: Qualitative differences and the action of natural enemies
The ecology and evolution of induced resistance against herbivores
Induced plant responses to herbivory
Dispersal, environmental correlation, and spatial synchrony in population dynamics
The effects of experimental warming on the timing of a plant–insect herbivore interaction
Delayed density‐dependent parasitism of eggs and pupae as a contributor to the cyclic population dynamics of the autumnal moth
The experimental paradigm and long‐term population studies
Prevalence and persistence of nuclear polyhedrosis virus in fluctuating populations of forest tent caterpillars (Lepidoptera: Lasiocampidae) in the area of Prince George, British Columbia
Spatial synchrony in population dynamics
Warmer temperatures reduce the transmission of a virus in a gregarious forest insect
Population dynamics of the western tent caterpillar: The roles of fecundity, disease and temperature
Green shoots: Aerial insecticide spraying and the growth of environmental consciousness in New Brunswick, 1952‐1973
Western tent caterpillars prefer the sunny side of the tree, but why?
Interactions between western tent caterpillars and wild rose: A test of some general plant herbivore hypotheses
Population cycles of western tent caterpillars: Experimental introductions and synchrony of fluctuations
Experimental manipulation of the phenology of egg hatch in populations of tent caterpillars
Synchrony in outbreaks of forest Lepidoptera. A possible example of the Moran effect
Population fluctuations of the western tent caterpillar in southwestern British Columbia
Population cycles: Generalities, exceptions and remaining mysteries
Population cycles in forest lepidoptera revisited
Ecology and evolution of pathogens in natural populations of Lepidoptera
Long‐term population dynamics of western tent caterpillars: History, trends and causes of cycles
The effect of food limitation on immunity factors and disease resistance in the western tent caterpillar
Lack of short or long‐term inducible defenses in the red alder: Western tent caterpillar system
Phylloplane bacteria increase the negative impact of food limitation on insect fitness
Eco‐evolutionary theory and insect outbreaks
Animal population regulation by the genetic feed‐back mechanism
Forest insects and climate change
From low to high gear: There has been a paradigm shift in our understanding of evolution
Large‐scale forest fragmentation increases the duration of tent caterpillar outbreak
Maternal effects generate variation in life history: Consequences of egg weight plasticity in the gypsy moth
Immediate and delayed effects of a viral pathogen and density on tent caterpillar performance
Nuclear polyhedrosis virus treatment effect on reproductive potential of western tent caterpillar (Lepidoptera: Lasiocampidae)
Debilitating effects of viral diseases on host Lepidoptera
Life‐history consequences and disease resistance of western tent caterpillars in response to localised, herbivore‐induced changes in alder leaf quality
Tent caterpillars are robust to variation in leaf phenology and quality in two thermal environments
The natural control of animal populations
The evolutionary significance of phenotypic plasticity
A revision of the genus Malacosoma Hübner in North America (Lepidoptera: Lasiocampidae): Systematics, biology, immatures, and parasites
Individual differences as a factor in population dynamics: The development of a problem
Qualitative changes in natural populations during changes in abundance
Population quality and the maintenance of nuclear polyhedrosis between outbreaks of Malacosoma pluviale (Dyar)
Qualitative changes in populations in unstable environments
Some maternal influences on progeny quality in the western tent caterpillar
Returning the insect to insect ecology: Some consequences for pest management
A stochastic model for assessing the effects of external and internal heterogeneity on an insect population
Covert infection of insects by baculoviruses
Self‐regulating systems in populations of animals
Spatial synchrony of population dynamics: Empirical testing of mechanisms