Flexibility in zeolites: origin, limits, and evaluation
Numerous pieces of evidence in the literature suggest that zeolitic materials exhibit significant intrinsic flexibility as a consequence of the spring-like behavior of Si–O and Al–O bonds and the distortion ability of Si–O–Si and Al–O–Si angles. Understanding the origin of flexibility and how it may be tuned to afford high adsorption selectivity in zeolites is a big challenge. Zeolite flexibility may be triggered by changes in temperature, pressure, or chemical composition of the framework and extra-framework compounds, as well as by the presence of guest molecules. Therefore, zeolite flexibility can be classified into three categories: (i) temperature and pressure-induced flexibility; (ii) guest-induced flexibility; and (iii) compositionally-induced flexibility. An outlook on zeolite flexibility and the challenges met during the precise experimental evaluations of zeolites will be discussed. Overcoming these challenges will provide an important tool for designing novel selective adsorbents.
Numerous pieces of evidence in the literature suggest that zeolitic materials exhibit significant intrinsic flexibility as a consequence of the spring-like behavior of Si–O and Al–O bonds and the distortion ability of Si–O–Si and Al–O–Si angles.

Introduction
Zeolites are microporous materials that play a key role in industrial applications as catalysts, gas adsorbents and ion exchangers in many processes intimately related to environmental and economic challenges. Different approaches have been applied to control the selectivity of zeolite adsorbents and simultaneously control the adsorption and release of guest molecules. One of the key contributors to the selectivity towards adsorbed gas molecules was recently regarded to result from the zeolite framework's flexibility.Yet, there is not a generally established definition in the literature of the term “flexibility of zeolites”. This flexibility may be defined as a reversible framework deformation (expansion/contraction) or dynamics of the zeolite structure including the movement of extra-framework cations, an intrinsic property of zeolitic frameworks due to the spring-like behavior of Si–O and Al–O bonds and the distortion of Si–O–Al and Si–O–Si angles as a response to an external trigger such as gas adsorption/desorption or a change in temperature or pressure. This spring-like behavior was used in the development of flexible force field parameters for the modeling of porous materials (zeolites) using Monte Carlo calculations or molecular dynamics simulations for many years. These models allow us to simulate the dynamics-related parameters in zeolites such as diffusion coefficients. Moreover, theoretical calculations of minimal and maximal possible framework densities showed that zeolitic frameworks exhibit a flexibility window in their all silica forms and almost all of them show some degree of flexibility in their aluminosilicate forms. As a result of these framework density calculations, 25 zeolitic frameworks were highlighted as potentially flexible structures: ACO, AST, ASV, DFO, EAB, EMT, ERI, FAU, KFI, LEV, LTA, LTL, MER, MOZ, MTN, OFF, PAU, RHO, SAS, SOD, SSF, TSC, UFI, UOS, and UOZ.
The term flexibility window and its related parameters are merely theoretical and they have been used to predict the synthesis of millions of hypothetical zeolitic frameworks. However, a cohesive experimental factor describing zeolite flexibility is still not established and different aspects of zeolite flexibility are not fully explored yet. In this contribution, the different aspects of zeolite flexibility are summarized into three categories: (i) temperature and pressure-induced flexibility; (ii) guest-induced flexibility; and (iii) compositionally-induced flexibility.

Temperature and pressure-induced flexibility
Zeolite flexibility can be observed as a response to temperature and pressure changes. Temperature-induced flexibility usually manifests as alteration of the lattice parameters of the zeolite framework (e.g. RHO, SOD, MFI, etc.) or by migration of extra-framework cations within the zeolite structure (e.g. RHO, CHA, etc.). Zeolites undergo alterations in their lattice parameters when subjected to pressure. These alterations are reversible until they reach maximum pressure, commonly referred to as the ‘threshold pressure’ in the literature. These physical triggers can occur in gas adsorption, gas storage, and sensing applications.

Temperature-induced flexibility
The change in the zeolite's lattice parameters in response to temperature variation was the first to be highlighted in the literature. The most prominent example is the work reported for RHO zeolite in 1984. The structural flexibility of RHO zeolites can be observed due to changes in temperature, however, the effect of temperature can also be linked to guest molecules (dehydration) and extra-framework cation behavior. RHO zeolite has shown a unit cell deformation and, subsequently, a change in its symmetry from acentric (I4̄3m) to centric (Im3̄m) when heated from 30 to 800 °C and these results were supported by both theoretical and experimental data (a variation of around 8% in RHO's unit cell volume – see Fig. 1).
(a) In situ variable-temperature XRD scans of nanosized RHO zeolite from 30 to 700 °C and back to 28 °C, (b) plot of the ellipticity of eight-membered ring opening (in blue) and the lattice parameter (black). The dashed line delineates the adoption of either the acentric (squares) or centric (diamonds) space groups (reprinted with permission from ref., copyright 2022 American Chemical Society).
Recently, our group observed such changes in the zeolite RHO's lattice parameter by in situ variable-temperature XRD measurements and the expansion of the lattice parameter was also visualized by in situ TEM imaging (Fig. 2) which was identified due to the temperature-induced oscillations of the extra-framework Cs+ around their average position. Another example is the encapsulation of Ar and Kr atoms (kinetic diameters of 3.3 and 3.6 Å, respectively) inside the sodalite framework with a pore diameter of 2.4 Å. Admission of these gases was only possible because of sodalite's framework flexibility at elevated temperatures as it was shown by molecular dynamics simulations. Similar behavior about the flexibility of zeolites at higher temperatures was observed for other zeolite topologies, e.g. MFI, MEL, and CHA.
(a and b) High-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) analysis of the nanosized RHO submitted to thermal treatment between 200 and 800 °C at different magnifications. Scale bars of 50 and 20 nm for the first and second rows, respectively. (c) Superimposed micrographs acquired at different temperatures show the volume expansion of the region highlighted by red color and denoted by t (adopted with permission from ref., copyright 2023 American Chemical Society).
An expansion of the lattice parameter does not always happen when the temperature increases. In some zeolitic frameworks, a contraction of lattice parameters is observed upon the increase of temperature which is called negative thermal expansion. This phenomenon is only observed in some metal oxides, metal cyanides, polymers, and zeolites. In zeolites which show negative thermal expansion (e.g. CHA, LTA, and FAU) upon increasing the temperature, the whole tetrahedra SiO4 units rotate inside the zeolite structure reducing the unit cell volume.
The temperature-induced zeolite flexibility is not limited to contractions or expansions of the zeolite lattice; changes within the structure, such as cation movements, are also triggered by temperature variations. For example, when cadmium-exchanged zeolite RHO (Cd-RHO) is heated up to 300 °C, the pore-blocking Cd2+ cations relocate from the double eight-ring to the six-ring site, which are 5.7 Å apart. This phenomenon was also reported for Ba2+ and Sr2+ cations, which migrate from the single to the double eight-rings of RHO. However, for Cd-RHO it was later found that the migration of the cation was associated with the removal of water upon increasing the temperature. Another well-known example of cationic movements triggered by temperature is the potassium-exchanged CHA zeolite (K-CHA). Depending on the temperature, it is possible for the pores of K-CHA to permit access to certain guest molecules due to their interactions with the K+ cations; the movement of the K+ cations is described as a temporary and reversible displacement. Upon decreasing the temperature the K+ cations go back to their original position in the middle of CHA main pores (eight-membered rings), blocking the access of guest molecules. This behavior is very important for gas storage applications and was observed for different zeolitic frameworks.Fig. 3 illustrates the effects of temperature and pressure-induced flexibility on zeolites.
Schematic illustration of temperature and pressure-induced, guest-induced, and compositionally-induced flexibility in zeolites (Mn+ and Nn+ are two arbitrary cations assuming smaller cationic diameter for Mn+ compared to Nn+).

Pressure-induced flexibility
Zeolites undergo alterations in their lattice parameters when subjected to pressure. These alterations are reversible until they reach a maximum pressure, commonly referred to as the “threshold pressure” in the literature. Beyond the threshold pressure, an irreversible change in the zeolite topology occurs reaching amorphization at high pressures. The threshold pressure limit is a distinct quality of zeolite frameworks. The pressure-induced flexibility observed in zeolites is mainly associated with movements of the rigid tetrahedra around the shared O atoms that behave like hinges within the framework. The channel content, i.e. adsorbed gasses (H2O, CO2, etc.) or extra-framework cations, govern the compressibility of the cavities, leading to different degrees of unit cell volume changes. For instance, sodium-exchanged LTA (Na-LTA) and natural yugawaralite zeolites can exhibit 18.4% and 15% reversible volume changes, respectively, in a non-intrusive medium at a pressure of up to 10 GPa. All zeolites related to the ANA framework family with initial space groups of Ia3̄d, I41/a, Ia3̄d, and I2/a for analcime, leucite, pollucite, and wairakite, respectively change and converge their symmetry to triclinic (P1̄) under pressures as low as 1.08 GPa followed by a reduction of their average Si–O–T (T = Al or Si) angle from 150 to 123°. Similar behavior was observed for NAT-type zeolite with a reduction of its Si–O–T angle from 133 to 119° under 8.5 GPa. CHA and MFI zeolites also show 10% and 16% volume variations under pressures of up to 8 GPa, respectively. KFI (ZK-5 type zeolite), RHO and SOD frameworks change their space group symmetry from Im3̄m to I4/mmm, I4̄3m, and I4̄3m respectively, under pressure (Fig. 3).
Both temperature and pressure variations change the energy level of the zeolite structure thermodynamically (ΔG, Gibbs free energy), hence, there is always an energy barrier to see the aforementioned structural flexibilities. Temperature changes vary the entropic term of Gibbs free energy (ΔG = ΔH − TΔS). However, pressure changes are directly correlated with the Gibbs free energy and unit cell volume as well (ΔG = VΔP). As a result, these structural flexibilities categorized as temperature and pressure-induced flexibility are all of a thermodynamic nature and the necessary energy barriers for these structural changes can be estimated via thermodynamic simulations. More studies are needed to determine these energies.

Guest-induced flexibility
Zeolite flexibility can also be observed as a response to guest molecule adsorption or desorption. This can manifest as changes in the zeolite lattice parameters (framework dynamics) or by the relocation of extra-framework cations within zeolite pores (extra-framework dynamics). Guest-induced flexibility is highly interesting for gas separation and storage applications.

Framework dynamics
The first attempts to describe guest-induced flexibility in zeolites were done using molecular dynamics simulations. Rigid zeolitic force fields were dynamically modified using transition state theory to include lattice flexibility, and the results obtained by these models were in good agreement with experimental data. It was shown that framework flexibility in silicalite-1 (MFI-type framework) is responsible for the adsorption of large molecules such as isobutane and heptane with inflection behavior at high loadings, while enhanced self-diffusivity at low loadings of short alkanes (i.e. methane and n-butane) was observed. Framework flexibility is also crucial for aromatics adsorption on MFI zeolite, especially at high pressures. While the use of rigid zeolitic models led to the underestimation of the aromatics adsorption in MFI zeolite by a factor of two, the use of flexible models to simulate diffusion coefficients of various alkanes in silicalite-1 zeolite resulted in a convergence of experimental and theoretical values. Recently by using in situ integrated differential phase contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy (iDPC-STEM) while adsorbing benzene molecules on MFI zeolite, Xiong et al. showed that the MFI structure goes through severe deformations giving another proof of guest-induced flexibility in zeolites (see Fig. 4).
Integrated differential phase contrast scanning transmission electron microscopy (iDPC-STEM) images of MFI straight channels (a) before and (b) after benzene adsorption. MFI structure flexibility is also schematically highlighted (c) before and (d) after benzene adsorption. Scale bar, 500 pm (reprinted with permission from ref., copyright 2022 The American Association for the Advancement of Science).
For the diffusion of small gas molecules such as methane through AFI and LTL pores, the diffusion coefficients were calculated and measured at high loadings. Calculations of methane adsorption in LTA zeolites showed that using flexible zeolitic models largely influences the diffusion coefficients and it is dependent on the type of extra-framework cations, the loading of methane in the structure, and the force field parameter used for simulations. Small-pore ITQ-55 zeolite with a minimal pore aperture diameter of 2.4 Å showed expansion of this minimal aperture to 3.1 Å, while allowing for ethylene to be adsorbed. This framework flexibility was used for separation of ethylene from ethane with a selectivity enhanced by a factor of ∼100.Fig. 3 illustrates the guest-induced flexibility in zeolites.
Water adsorption on Na-LTA zeolite showed a phase transition with a small contraction followed by an expansion of the LTA framework, suggesting a hydration-driven flexibility transition, with a two-phase region separating hydrated zeolite A from its dehydrated form. Moreover, it was also observed that preferential water adsorption sites are within the beta cages of zeolite A. Thus, it was suggested that the diffusion of water molecules can only be simulated when flexible models are employed. Furthermore, the S-shaped water adsorption isotherms observed in LTA zeolite resemble those found in another significant category of porous materials: metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), known for their remarkable flexibility. This type of S-shaped adsorption behavior in MOFs is linked to pore expansion induced by adsorbates, which is comparable to the outcomes observed in various zeolites like LTA. These results suggest that zeolites, to varying degrees, may exhibit similar flexibility behavior to MOFs in the presence of guest molecules.
Na+ form of zeolite PAU, up to 5% unit cell shrinkage was observed upon dehydration. Water adsorption in silicalite-1 showed a transition from monoclinic to orthorhombic and this behavior was successfully modeled using flexible framework parameters during molecular dynamics simulations. Similar behavior was recorded for both water and CO2 adsorption on Na+ and Rb+ forms of gismondine (Na-GIS and Rb-GIS) where the ellipticity of the empty pores is reduced significantly by CO2 and water adsorption to a circular pore shape with up to 14% expansion of the unit cell volume. Ni-exchanged zeolite Y (FAU framework type) undergoes a series of structural rearrangements during dehydration from 20 to 400 °C. The Ni2+ cations start migrating towards tightly confined sites when water molecules desorb, thus a unit cell contraction happens with a strong deformation of the hexagonal prism of the FAU framework. Similar behavior was also observed for the Na–Y sample. Dehydration of zeolites Na-MER, K-MER, and Cs-MER also results in 10, 8, and 7% shrinkage of their unit cell volumes, respectively. All these studies suggested a zeolite framework flexibility in the presence of guest molecules. The most important flexibility observed was the 8% variation of the unit cell volume of RHO zeolite by dehydration, a completely reversible process after adsorption of H2O or CO2 molecules (Fig. 5).
Schematic illustration of reversible ellipticity of RHO nanosized zeolites upon dehydration and CO2 adsorption (adopted with permission from ref., copyright 2020 American Chemical Society).

Extra-framework dynamics
Similar to the cation relocations within the zeolite framework triggered by temperature (vide supra), it has been shown in the literature that sorption of guest molecules can also trigger such cation movements. The migration of Fe3+ cations inside the FAU cages after dehydration was confirmed by electron spin resonance spectroscopy. Similarly, the migration of La3+ cations from the supercages of FAU to small sodalite cages was observed during dehydration. In Li+ and Mg2+ forms of ZK-5 zeolite (KFI framework type), the migration of these cations from the center of the hexagonal prisms of their structure to the α-cages was observed after CO2 adsorption. These cation relocations are known as “cation gating” (also known as “trapdoor behavior”), and they were proposed simultaneously by P. A. Wright and P. Webley and co-workers in 2012. It was shown that the gating movement of cations is responsible for opening or closing the pore access depending on the nature of guest molecules. In Na-RHO, migration of the Na+ cations was described and CO2 molecules could pass through the pores between the α-cages while Na+ cations migrate from the single eight-membered rings (see Fig. 6a). In K-CHA, however, K+ cations reject or admit the guest molecules based on their attraction and repulsion towards them and the movement of K+ cations is completely reversible from and to the single eight-membered rings (see Fig. 6b). Based on DFT calculations, door-keeper cations have to pay an energy penalty to move away from the center of the pore aperture (thus allows gas admission) in typical trapdoor zeolites such as Cs-CHA, Na-RHO, etc. The difficulty of this pore opening process is reflected by the energy barrier associated with the cation movement path from its most stable position (where it blocks the entrance of the pore aperture) to the second most stable position inside the zeolite (where the pore aperture is open). The energy difference between these two configurations can qualitatively feature the actual energy barrier. The presence of polarizable gas molecules that possess some sort of dipole or quadrupole interactions with the door-keeper cations such as CO2 and CO can substantially lower the energy difference, whereas those non-polar molecules such as N2, CH4, and H2 can hardly change the energy difference. Hence, the polarizable guest molecules (e.g. CO2) induce the door-keeper cations to move out from the center of the pores of the zeolite and selectively admit CO2 to the CHA or RHO structure while rejecting nonpolar molecules such as N2 and CH4. Similar behavior was observed also for other zeolitic types such as MER and PAU frameworks. Another interpretation of the “cation gating” phenomenon, namely the “swinging door” mechanism focuses on the thermal motions of door-keeper cations rather than their movement. Based on this interpretation, the amplitude of the thermal motion of the door-keeper cations is always large and thus CO2 can squeeze in while the gate is swinging because of the stronger attraction to the framework (quadrupole interactions of CO2 and the cations), while nonpolar guests such as methane cannot. The consequence of the “cation gating” phenomenon, regardless of which interpretation (“trapdoor behavior” or “swinging door” mechanism) used, is superior selectivity for separation of CO2 from CH4 or N2 (CO2/CH4 up to 583 and CO2/N2 up to 688 for K-CHA with Si/Al = 1.9). In summary, a large opportunity is available to design materials for gas separation applications already suggested by many studies.Fig. 6 shows a schematic illustration of the trapdoor behavior in Cs-CHA proposed by Shang et al.
Schematic illustration of cation gating (a) permanent relocation of Na+ cations, this is a cooperative mechanism by which CO2 molecules could pass through a window site between α-cages in zeolite Na-Rho proposed by Lozinska et al. (reprinted with permission from ref., copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). (b) Reversible Cs+ relocations namely trapdoor behavior in Cs-CHA proposed by Shang et al. (adopted with permission from ref., copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).

Compositionally-induced flexibility
Compositional changes in zeolites were also shown to play an important role in framework flexibility. Substitution of Si atoms with Al (framework composition) and the type and content of extra-framework cations inside the zeolite structure (extra-framework composition) can also induce significant changes in the zeolite lattice parameters. The ability to engineer the pore diameter and pore shape of zeolites is another important aspect of zeolite flexibility especially for gas separation applications. A schematic illustration of compositionally-induced flexibility in zeolites is presented in Fig. 3.

Framework composition
Based on computational studies, it was found that the flexibility of LTA zeolite also depends heavily on the Al content. Higher Al amounts result in longer Al–O bond lengths and more flexibility of the Si–O–Al bridging angles which creates a more open and more flexible framework. In our group, we recently showed for a series of RHO zeolites with different Si/Al ratios and lattice parameters, that changes to the Al distribution within the nanosized RHO samples, represented by the shift in the 29Si NMR barycenter, could be correlated with the CO2 adsorption capacity. Changing the Si/Al ratio of RHO from 1.5 to 1.7 resulted in an increase of the CO2 capacity from 1.37 to 2.01 mmol g−1. This is due to changes in the framework charge distribution, which play a fundamental role in controlling the CO2 adsorption capacity and should not be overlooked as the cation distribution will always be guided by the negative charge distribution within the framework.

Extra-framework composition
Another important factor affecting zeolite flexibility is the type and content of the extra-framework cations. The calcium-exchanged RHO zeolite is an example: the partial exchange of deuteron cations with calcium cations resulted in a 21% decrease in the zeolite's unit cell volume. Depending on the cationic composition, RHO zeolites have shown significantly different unit cell volumes, pore diameters, and pore shapes (see Fig. 7). For example, the proton form of RHO (H-RHO) shows a circular pore with a size of 3.9 Å, while a lithium form shows an elliptical pore with a size of 1.9 Å (Fig. 7a);however Si/Al ratios of these RHO samples are the same.
Ellipticity of zeolite RHO containing different cations (a) based on experiments and (b) based on simulations (adopted with permission from ref. and, copyright 2015 and 2016 American Chemical Society).
Similarly to RHO, different alkali-metal (Li+, Na+, K+, Rb+, and Cs+) and alkaline earth metal (Mg2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, and Ba2+) forms of zeolites PST-3 and PST-4 (NAT framework) show significantly different pore shapes and sizes with unit cell volumes ranging from ∼2120 Å3 (for Li-form of natural NAT) to ∼2680 Å3 (for Cs-PST-4). Using different alkali-metal cations, it is possible to tune the pore opening of different GIS samples with unit cell volumes of 877, 853, and 851 Å3 for Na-GIS, K-GIS, and Rb-GIS, respectively. Similarly, the unit cell volume of different alkali-metal forms of MER zeolite can be tuned to 1809, 1823, and 1881 Å3 for Na-MER, K-MER, and Cs-MER, respectively. These changes are due to the tetrahedral tilts and changes in T–O–T bonds and angles (T = Si or Al). The extent of these changes is influenced by the polarizing power of the extra-framework cations and their interaction with the negative charge of the framework due to the presence of Al (Fig. 7b).

Evaluation of the framework flexibility of zeolites
A major effort was made by Sartbaeva and co-workers to identify and explain flexibility in zeolites. They have analyzed the geometry of the structural polyhedra in 14 pure silica zeolite structures determining a flexibility window explained by the coulombic inflation: a repulsion between close oxygen atoms that appeared to play a role in stabilizing the open frameworks of zeolites when dehydrated. The flexibility index is defined as the ratio of the maximum over the minimum feasible framework densities for a particular framework type (ρmax/ρmin). It has been tabulated for most of the known zeolite framework types but remains a limited descriptor of actual framework flexibility because most framework types can be folded along multiple paths starting from the maximum symmetry point, which occurs very often at the minimum framework density. Furthermore, real zeolite materials tend to occupy the low-density end of the flexibility window, so flexibility behavior at higher densities may not play a key role in determining flexibility. In addition, to compare the flexibility of different zeolitic frameworks with each other (both pure silica and aluminosilicates), and perhaps to other porous materials like metal organic frameworks (MOFs), a quantitative parameter is missing in the literature. To illustrate that, Fig. 8 shows the maximum changes in the unit cell volume observed for the most flexible structures found in the literature. Based on Fig. 8, the changes in the unit cell volume upon different flexibility triggers can be as significant as 20%, which once more proves the importance of understanding flexibility as a way to design smart materials for selective separation or catalysis in porous materials. However, standard protocols are missing in the literature to be able to quantify flexibility in zeolites and compare them with other porous materials. Perhaps, performing in situ powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements at different temperatures would be sufficient to explore the temperature-induced flexibility of different zeolites. XRD patterns of dehydrated forms of different zeolites with variable compositions (mainly their Si/Al ratios and extra-framework cationic contents) could be used to study compositionally-induced flexibility. However, to study the guest-induced flexibility, the immediate challenge is whether the probe molecule is a non-polarizable molecule such as N2 or Ar or a polarizable one such as CO2. If a non-polarizable probe molecule is selected, some parts of guest-induced flexibility related to the cation gating effect will be hindered. On the other hand, the selection of polarizable probe molecules may interfere with compositionally-induced flexibility due to the dynamics of cations inside the zeolite structure. Additional work is required to establish a protocol for the experimental evaluation of zeolite flexibility. This is of great importance as it will substantially help in designing smart materials for selective gas separation or catalytic applications.
Maximum changes in the unit cell volume of the most flexible zeolite structures presented in the literature.

Challenges in the characterization of flexibility
To establish rigid protocols for the evaluation of zeolite flexibility using different in situ spectroscopic techniques can be considered as a solution to probe zeolites' atomic order. Temperature-induced flexibility can be assessed using in situ XRD measurements at different temperatures (e.g. from 25 to 800 °C) followed by lattice parameter evaluations by Le Bail and Rietveld refinement. Similar procedures have been reported for RHO zeolite. Pressure-induced flexibility can be measured by in situ XRD when applying a non-intrusive pressure (e.g. up to 15 GPa); this has also been reported for several zeolites including LTA, ANA, etc.
The biggest challenge is to quantify guest-induced flexibility. The guest-induced flexibility can manifest both in the form of changes in zeolites' lattice parameters or by a dynamic movement of extra-framework cations within the zeolite structure. Both these phenomena often happen simultaneously and they are intertwined. As a result, their quantification is not a trivial task. To tackle this issue, the use of in situ spectroscopic techniques can be considered. In situ XRD measurements can be considered while different gas molecules are adsorbed on the zeolite samples. Conterosito and co-workers reported CO2 and Xe adsorption in FAU zeolite followed by in situ XRD thus enabling estimation of the lattice parameters and location of extra-framework cations during adsorption and desorption processes. The in situ XRD under adsorption of gases can be coupled with DFT calculations and machine learning approaches in order to provide information concerning the necessary energies for extra-framework cation relocations. Additionally, in situ solid-state NMR while adsorbing guest molecules can be of importance to clarify the atomic order that contributes to the guest-induced flexibility. Recently, Ilkaeva and co-workers developed a method to follow CO2 adsorption using in situ solid-state NMR which shed light on different CO2 chemisorbed species on SBA-15.In situ FTIR while adsorbing guest molecules also illustrates the atomic orders especially those of the silanol sites. As a result, combining all these in situ techniques (i.e. XRD, NMR, and FTIR), while adsorbing guest molecules, can help to solve the intertwined dynamics between the zeolite framework and extra-framework cations.
For the compositionally-induced flexibility due to the framework's T-site composition, we propose to consider lattice parameters of all silica zeolites of any particular framework as the reference in the future. Thus, the flexibility can be compared to all silica zeolites when Al is replacing the Si and the Si/Al ratio varies. The use of NMR spectroscopy may give insights into the distortion of the framework due to the inclusion of Al tetrahedra by monitoring changes in the quadrupolar coupling constants of 27Al and 17O nuclei but also the chemical shifts of 29Si nuclei. For the compositionally-induced flexibility due to the extra-framework cation compositions, the proton form (H-form) of zeolites can be considered as a reference and different cationic forms can be compared to the proton form of zeolites at a constant Si/Al ratio. The framework distortions can be examined by conducting Rietveld refinement of the XRD patterns and by monitoring the framework's vibrational bands through Raman spectroscopy. This terminology was used to estimate the changes in unit cell volume of several zeolites (GIS, RHO, NAT, and MER) presented in Fig. 8. Significantly more detailed studies are needed to explore zeolite flexibility; however, understanding flexibility in zeolites can open a new avenue for zeolite utilizations.

Emerging applications related to the flexibility of zeolites
The concept of inducing and controlling flexibility in zeolites can be utilized in different applications. The most prominent one is the bulk separation and purification of small gas molecules such as gas drying (H2O removal), CO2 separation from N2 in flue gas, CO2 separation from CH4 in landfill gas separation or bio-methane upgrading, CO2 separation in dilute streams for direct air capture, etc. The main advantage of using flexible zeolites for gas separation is the ability to fine-tune the zeolite pore aperture (size and shape) due to compositionally-induced flexibility by using various extra-framework cations. This has been illustrated for zeolite RHO. In addition, thanks to guest-induced flexibility (extra-framework dynamics – cation gating phenomenon), superior selectivity was observed towards any non-neutral gas molecules such as H2O (polar) and CO2 (polarizable molecule – quadrupole moments). These separations are important since enormous efforts have been dedicated to developing materials for carbon capture and storage since the rising concentration of CO2 is contributing to the current anthropogenic global climate change.
In addition, gas storage of CH4, CO2, O2, H2, etc. is of significant importance. Storage of these small gas molecules is extremely hard and can be achieved only at very high-pressures and low-temperatures. Thanks to guest-induced flexibility (extra-framework dynamics), it is possible to selectively admit and store specific gas species at pressures and temperatures near ambient conditions. One example is the storage of CH4 and H2 in CHA zeolite as reported by Li et al. The additional advantage of using flexible zeolite for gas storage is the controlled release of the guest molecules under ambient conditions (e.g. CH4) which is much safer compared to the traditional gas storage inside high-pressure vessels (usually between 50 and 200 bars); the encapsulation and release of CH4 gas molecules inside K-CHA zeolite were reported as well by Li et al. Another example of controlled guest molecule release is in biological applications where FAU zeolites were used to deliver O2 as well as other necessary drugs to cancer cells.
Finally, flexible zeolites are also suitable candidates for sensing applications as it was reported before. Wales et al. demonstrated that zeolites hold great promise for various sensing applications, as discussed in their work. In this prospective review, we have highlighted zeolites such as FAU, MFI, MOR, and others, showcasing their remarkable flexibility. This underscores the idea that understanding various aspects of zeolite flexibility can also contribute to sensing applications. Another important class of porous materials used as gas adsorbents or sensors, which exhibit structural flexibility, is MOFs. However, zeolites offer advantages in terms of greater chemical and thermal stability (some zeolites can withstand temperatures up to 1200 °C compared to 500 °C for MOF-related zeolitic imidazolates), environmentally-friendly synthesis methods, and ease of integration into smaller devices such as sensors. This perspective is further supported by the work of Wales et al., who reviewed zeolitic and MOF-based sensors for automotive applications and found that approximately 62% of these sensors were zeolite-based, while 38% were MOF-based.
Zeolites can no longer be considered exclusively as rigid materials. Based on calculations, all zeolitic frameworks can theoretically show different degrees of flexibility. Flexibility in zeolites can be defined as a reversible framework deformation (expansion/contraction) or a dynamic of extra-framework cations, an intrinsic property of zeolitic frameworks due to the spring-like behavior of Si–O and Al–O bonds and the distortion of Si–O–Al and Si–O–Si angles as a response to an external trigger such as gas adsorption/desorption or a change in temperature or pressure. Based on these different triggers, we categorized zeolite flexibility into three categories: (1) temperature and pressure-induced flexibility, (2) guest-induced flexibility, and (3) compositionally-induced flexibility. Evaluation of zeolite flexibility is another challenge which can be solved by combining in situ spectroscopic techniques (XRD, FTIR, and NMR), gas adsorption measurements, high resolution microscopy, DFT calculations, and machine learning techniques. Understanding and quantifying zeolite flexibility can open a new avenue for applications such as gas separation, gas storage, drug delivery, sensing applications, etc.

Conclusions and outlook
In this perspective article, the origin of zeolite flexibility is revealed based on the understanding of spring-like features of Si–O and Al–O bonds and the distortion of Si–O–Al and Si–O–Si angles as a response to an external trigger. Different aspects of zeolites' flexibility were presented including the main triggers of zeolite flexibility identified as temperature and pressure, guest-molecules, and composition variations. By tuning the temperature and zeolite composition, one can tune the size and shape of zeolite pores. Guest molecule chemistry can also be used to design smart zeolites to capture/separate targeted molecules. The zeolite flexibility can be either at the unit cell level (changes in the lattice parameters) or at the atomic level (relocation of extra-framework cations within the zeolite). Further studies are necessary to develop experimental methods to quantify, normalize and compare the flexibility of different zeolite frameworks and perhaps for other porous materials. By gaining a deep understanding of zeolite flexibility, we can manipulate and control zeolite adsorption and separation properties. Moreover, this newfound ability opens up exciting possibilities for diverse applications, such as drug delivery and sensing. In drug delivery, the flexible nature of zeolites can be exploited to design innovative carriers that respond to specific stimuli, releasing therapeutic agents precisely when and where needed. Similarly, in sensing applications, zeolite flexibility can be leveraged to create advanced sensor materials with improved sensitivity and selectivity. These sensors can detect and quantify various substances, ranging from gases and liquids to biomolecules, enabling their application in environmental monitoring, healthcare, and other industries. Overall, the growing understanding of zeolite flexibility opens up a vast array of emerging applications in diverse fields.

Author contributions
S. G., E. D., and S. M. have conceptualized the paper and the figures. S. G. has written the first draft. Critical inputs were added by E. D and S. M. after revising the manuscript. All authors contributed to the final revisions of the paper.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.

Supplementary Material

References
Nanosized Microporous Crystals: Emerging Applications
Nanosized Zeolites: Quo Vadis?
Alkali Metal Cations Influence the CO2 Adsorption Capacity of Nanosized Chabazite: Modeling vs. Experiment
Gating Effect for Gas Adsorption in Microporous Materials—Mechanisms and Applications
Cation Control of Molecular Sieving by Flexible Li-Containing Zeolite Rho
Determination of Composition Range for “Molecular Trapdoor” Effect in Chabazite Zeolite
Ion Exchange Equilibria and Kinetics in Zeolites: Influences of Framework Flexibility and Charge Density* *Dedicated to the Memories of Richard M. Barrer (1910 – 1996) and Lovat V.C. Rees (1927 – 2006)
A Review of Adsorbate and Temperature-Induced Zeolite Framework Flexibility
Flexible Template-Free RHO Nanosized Zeolite for Selective CO2 Adsorption
Temperature-Regulated Guest Admission and Release in Microporous Materials
Compressibility of Microporous Materials with CHA Topology: 1. Natural Chabazite and SAPO-34
Interplay of Structure and Dynamics in Lithium/Ionic Liquid Electrolytes: Experiment and Molecular Simulation
Molecular Simulation Studies of Separation of CO2/N2, CO2/CH4, and CH4/N2 by ZIFs
Structure and Self-Diffusion of Water Molecules in Chabazite: A Molecular Dynamics Study
Carbon Dioxide and Methane Transport in DDR Zeolite: Insights from Molecular Simulations into Carbon Dioxide Separations in Small Pore Zeolites
Development and Optimization of a New Force Field for Flexible Aluminosilicates, Enabling Fast Molecular Dynamics Simulations on Parallel Architectures
Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Zeolite NaY: A Study of Structure, Dynamics, and Thermalization of Sorbates
Rigid-Unit Modes and the Quantitative Determination of the Flexibility Possessed by Zeolite Frameworks
The Behaviour of Water Confined in Zeolites: Molecular Dynamics Simulations versus Experiment
A Comment on the Flexibility of Framework in Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Zeolites
A Molecular Dynamics Investigation of the Diffusion Characteristics of Cavity-Type Zeolites with 8-Ring Windows
Molecular Dynamics Simulations of the Diffusion of Small Chain Hydrocarbons in 8-Ring Zeolites
Molecular Simulation of Zeolite Flexibility
Improved Hill–Sauer Force Field for Accurate Description of Pores in 8-Ring Zeolites
Flexibility of Ideal Zeolite Frameworks
Flexibility versus Rigidity: What Determines the Stability of Zeolite Frameworks? A Case Study
Defining the Flexibility Window in Ordered Aluminosilicate Zeolites
Density of Mechanisms within the Flexibility Window of Zeolites
Intrinsic Flexibility of Porous Materials; Theory, Modelling and the Flexibility Window of the EMT Zeolite Framework
Flexibility Mechanisms in Ideal Zeolite Frameworks
Visualizing the Flexibility of RHO Nanozeolite: Experiment and Modeling
Elastic Behavior of MFI-Type Zeolites: Compressibility of H-ZSM-5 in Penetrating and Non-Penetrating Media
Extreme Deformation Mechanisms in Open-Framework Silicates at High-Pressure: Evidence of Anomalous Inter-Tetrahedral Angles
Flexibility Windows and Compression of Monoclinic and Orthorhombic Silicalites
Flexibility of the Framework of Zeolite Rho. Structural Variation from 11 to 573 K. A Study Using Neutron Powder Diffraction Data
Relations and Correlations in Zeolite RHO and Computer Simulations of Its Crystal Structure
Flexibility in Zeolites:29Si NMR Studies of ZSM-5 Frame Transitions
Flexibility of the Zeolite RHO Framework; Relocation of Cadmium Accompanying Transformation of the Unit Cell at High Temperatures
Flexibility Of The Zeolite Rho Framework: The Redistribution Of Extra Framework Cations As A Function Of Temperature
Flexibility of Network Structures
Simulation Study of Structural Changes in Zeolite RHO
Engineering RHO Nanozeolite: Controlling the Particle Morphology, Al and Cation Content, Stability, and Flexibility
Trapping of Inert Gases in Sodalite and Cancrinite Crystals
Diffusion of Inert Gases in Silica Sodalite: Importance of Lattice Flexibility
Synthesis of Discrete CHA Zeolite Nanocrystals without Organic Templates for Selective CO2 Capture
Negative Thermal Expansion: A Review
The Thermal Expansion of the Zeolites MFI, AFI, DOH, DDR, and MTN in Their Calcined and as Synthesized Forms
Strong Negative Thermal Expansion in Siliceous Faujasite
Strong Negative Thermal Expansion in the Siliceous Zeolites ITQ-1, ITQ-3 and SSZ-23
Variable-Temperature Microcrystal X-Ray Diffraction Studies of Negative Thermal Expansion in the Pure Silica Zeolite IFR
The Widespread Occurrence of Negative Thermalexpansion in Zeolites
An X-Ray Diffraction and MAS NMR Study of the Thermal Expansion Properties of Calcined Siliceous Ferrierite
The Effect of Extra Framework Species on the Intrinsic Negative Thermal Expansion Property of Zeolites with the LTA Topology
Entrapment and Controlled Release of Xenon in Cd2+-Exchanged Zeolite Rho
Flexibility of Zeolite Rho: Xenon-129 NMR Studies of Entrapped Xenon in Cadmium-Rho
New Insight into Cation Relocations within the Pores of Zeolite Rho: In Situ Synchrotron X-Ray and Neutron Powder Diffraction Studies of Pb- and Cd-Exchanged Rho
Calculating the Energy Barriers to Sodium Cation Motion through the Six-Rings of Zeolite Y
Pressure-Induced Symmetry Changes in Body-Centred Cubic Zeolites
Zeolites at High Pressure: A Review
Structural Deformation Mechanisms of Zeolites under Pressure
Elastic Behavior, Phase Transition, and Pressure Induced Structural Evolution of Analcime
Leucite at High Pressure: Elastic Behavior, Phase Stability, and Petrological Implications
Elastic Behavior and Phase Stability of Pollucite, a Potential Host for Nuclear Waste
Pressure-Induced Structural Deformation and Elastic Behavior of Wairakite
Flexibility Window Controls Pressure-Induced Phase Transition in Analcime
Flexibility Windows and Phase Transitions of Ordered and Disordered ANA Framework Zeolites
Framework Flexibility and Rational Design of New Zeolites for Catalysis
A Comparative Study of Fibrous Zeolites under Pressure
High-Pressure Deformation Mechanism in Scolecite: A Combined Computational experimental Study
High-Pressure Structural Behaviour of Scolecite
Gas Permeation Characteristics of a Hydrogen Selective Supported Silica Membrane
Flexibility of the Zeolite RHO Framework: In Situ X-Ray and Neutron Powder Structural Characterization of Divalent Cation-Exchanged Zeolite RHO
Phase Transition of Zeolite RHO at High-Pressure
Compression Mechanism of Cubic Silica Sodalite [Si12O24]: A First Principles Study of the Im3̄m to I4̄3m Phase Transition
Single Crystal Study of Sodalite at High Pressure
Discriminative Separation of Gases by a “Molecular Trapdoor” Mechanism in Chabazite Zeolites
Cation Gating and Relocation during the Highly Selective “Trapdoor” Adsorption of CO2 on Univalent Cation Forms of Zeolite Rho
In-Depth Study of the Influence of Host−Framework Flexibility on the Diffusion of Small Gas Molecules in One-Dimensional Zeolitic Pore Systems
Influence of Framework Flexibility on the Adsorption Properties of Hydrocarbons in the Zeolite Silicalite
Self-Diffusion of n-Alkanes in Silicalite Using Molecular Dynamics Simulation: A Comparison between Rigid and Flexible Frameworks
Force Fields for Classical Atomistic Simulations of Small Gas Molecules in Silicalite-1 for Energy-Related Gas Separations at High Temperatures
Efficient and Accurate Methods for Characterizing Effects of Framework Flexibility on Molecular Diffusion in Zeolites: CH4 Diffusion in Eight Member Ring Zeolites
Effects of Framework Flexibility on the Adsorption and Diffusion of Aromatics in MFI-Type Zeolites
Adsorption of Aromatics in MFI-Type Zeolites: Experiments and Framework Flexibility in Monte Carlo Simulations
Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Longer N-Alkanes in Silicalite: A Comparison of Framework and Hydrocarbon Models
In Situ Imaging of the Sorption-Induced Subcell Topological Flexibility of a Rigid Zeolite Framework
Modeling Adsorption and Self-Diffusion of Methane in LTA Zeolites: The Influence of Framework Flexibility
Control of Zeolite Framework Flexibility and Pore Topology for Separation of Ethane and Ethylene
Hydration Dynamics in Zeolite A – An X-Ray Diffraction and Infrared Spectroscopic Study
Water Adsorption in Hydrophilic Zeolites: Experiment and Simulation
Thermodynamic Evidence of Flexibility in H2O and CO2 Absorption of Transition Metal Ion Exchanged Zeolite LTA
Theoretical Isotherm Equation for Adsorption-Induced Structural Transition on Flexible Metal–Organic Frameworks
Water Adsorption in MOFs: Fundamentals and Applications
Studies of the Water Adsorption on Zeolites and Modified Mesoporous Materials for Seasonal Storage of Solar Heat
Structural Changes of Synthetic Paulingite (Na,H-ECR-18) upon Dehydration and CO2 Adsorption
Host and Adsorbate Dynamics in Silicates with Flexible Frameworks: Empirical Force Field Simulation of Water in Silicalite
Framework Flexibility-Driven CO2 Adsorption on a Zeolite
Cation Migration and Structural Deformations upon Dehydration of Nickel-Exchanged NaY Zeolite: A Combined Neutron Diffraction and Monte Carlo Study
The Thermodynamics of Gas Absorption and Guest-Induced Flexibility in Zeolite Y
Triggered Gate Opening and Breathing Effects during Selective CO2 Adsorption by Merlinoite Zeolite
Flexibility of the Zeolite RHO Framework: Effect of Dehydration on the Crystal Structure of the Beryllophosphate Mineral, Pahasapaite
Structural Changes Occurring upon Dehydration of Zeolite Rho. A Study Using Neutron Powder Diffraction and Distance-Least-Squares Structural Modeling
Thermodynamics of H2O and CO2 Absorption and Guest-Induced Phase Transitions in Zeolite RHO
Zeolite Rho: A Highly Selective Adsorbent for CO2/CH4 Separation Induced by a Structural Phase Modification
Thermodynamic Analysis of Framework Deformation in Na,Cs-RHO Zeolite upon CO2 Adsorption
Adsorption-Induced Deformation of Nanoporous Materials—A Review
Cation Environment and Migration in Iron-Exchanged Zeolite Na Y Studied by ESR
Cation Location and Migration in Lanthanum-Exchanged NaY Zeolite
On the Structure–Property Relationships of Cation-Exchanged ZK-5 Zeolites for CO2 Adsorption
Understanding Carbon Dioxide Adsorption on Univalent Cation Forms of the Flexible Zeolite Rho at Conditions Relevant to Carbon Capture from Flue Gases
Trapdoors in Zeolites
A Density Functional Theory Study for the Adsorption of Various Gases on a Caesium-Exchanged Trapdoor Chabazite
Potassium Chabazite: A Potential Nanocontainer for Gas Encapsulation
Adsorption of CO2, N2, and CH4 in Cs-Exchanged Chabazite: A Combination of van Der Waals Density Functional Theory Calculations and Experiment Study
Molecular Insight into CO2 “Trapdoor” Adsorption in Zeolite Na-RHO
An Optimal Trapdoor Zeolite for Exclusive Admission of CO2 at Industrial Carbon Capture Operating Temperatures
Understanding CO2 Adsorption in a Flexible Zeolite through a Combination of Structural, Kinetic and Modelling Techniques
The Steric Influence of Extra-Framework Cations on Framework Flexibility: An LTA Case Study
Role of Al Distribution in CO2 Adsorption Capacity in RHO Zeolites
Flexibility of the Zeolite Rho Framework. Neutron Powder Structural Characterization of Ca-Exchanged Zeolite Rho
Flexibility of the RHO Framework: A Comparison of the Rb-Exchange Zeolite and the Novel Composition Rb24Be24As24O96·3.2 D2O
Understanding Nanopore Window Distortions in the Reversible Molecular Valve Zeolite RHO
Structural Characterization of Various Alkali Cation Forms of Synthetic Aluminosilicate Natrolites
Natrolite Is Not a “Soda-Stone” Anymore: Structural Study of Alkali (Li+), Alkaline-Earth (Ca2+, Sr2+, Ba2+) and Heavy Metal (Cd2+, Pb2+, Ag+) Cation-Exchanged Natrolites
Abnormal Expansion of a Disordered Zeolite upon Ion Exchange of K+ by Mg2+
The Flexibility Window in Zeolites
Flexibility Windows in Faujasite with Explicit Water and Methanol Extra-Framework Content
Flexibility As an Indicator of Feasibility of Zeolite Frameworks
In Situ X-Ray Diffraction Study of Xe and CO2 Adsorption in Y Zeolite: Comparison between Rietveld and PCA-Based Analysis
Interplay between Alkali-Metal Cations and Silanol Sites in Nanosized CHA Zeolite and Implications for CO2 Adsorption
Assessing CO2 Capture in Porous Sorbents via Solid-State NMR-Assisted Adsorption Techniques
Altering the Atomic Order in Nanosized CHA Zeolites by Postsynthetic Silylation Treatment
Internalization Study of Nanosized Zeolite Crystals in Human Glioblastoma Cells
Nanosized Zeolites as a Gas Delivery Platform in a Glioblastoma Model
Zeolites — Versatile Materials for Gas Sensors
Exploitation of Unique Properties of Zeolites in the Development of Gas Sensors
Zeolite-Based Materials for Gas Sensors
Gas Sensing Using Porous Materials for Automotive Applications
Metal–Organic Framework Materials as Chemical Sensors
MOF Thin Films: Existing and Future Applications
Investigation of the MOF Adsorbents and the Gas Adsorptive Separation Mechanisms
A Pressure-Amplifying Framework Material with Negative Gas Adsorption Transitions