Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment: An Update on the Concept and Its Evaluation Tools in Latin America and the Caribbean—A Literature Review
In recent decades, Latin America and the Caribbean region have experienced accelerated aging. However, despite the significant progress of gerontology in the region, the number of geriatricians and professionals trained in the field is low; a notable gap in the training related to the assessment of older adults can also be observed. Therefore, in this literature review, we update the concept of Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment (CGA) for its application in the region. We compile the characteristics, validity, and reliability of CGA tools, and their usage in government documents across countries in the region. We also analyze the adaptations made to CGA during the COVID-19 pandemic, and discuss challenges related to CGA administration, academic training, research, innovation, and management. This study is particularly relevant as it proposes lines of action for decision-makers, academics, researchers, university students, and the general community, which will allow for more tailored interventions aimed at meeting the needs of older adults, their families, and caregivers. Such actions will positively impact functionality, autonomy, and quality of life, while promoting healthy, active, and successful aging in the region.

1. Introduction
Globally, the population aged 60 years and older is expected to increase from 900 million in 2015 to over 1.4 billion by 2030, representing a 64% rise in just 15 years, making it the fastest-growing age group. In Latin America and the Caribbean, although the aging process is still incipient or moderate in half of the countries (many of which are developing nations), the region is entering a phase of accelerated aging, with the most significant changes expected by 2030. This rise in the proportion of older adults (OA) is occurring alongside an increase in chronic diseases, geriatric syndromes, disability, and dependency. These demographic and epidemiological transitions have created a new healthcare reality, leading to increased needs and intervention opportunities for the older population in the region.
In this context, the science dedicated to studying aging and the elderly population is gerontology, which addresses all aspects of OA, their families, and their environment, drawing from multiple and diverse disciplines and professions. Geriatrics, on the other hand, is the branch of this science focused on addressing the potentialities, needs, problems, and geriatric syndromes of OA at different levels of healthcare. Both gerontology and geriatrics have experienced slow and gradual growth in the region, lagging behind the rapid demographic and epidemiological transitions. This means that, to date, few undergraduate academic programs (for health and psychosocial professionals) include subjects or training content related to these fields, and they are almost non-existent in areas such as law, engineering, design, and architecture.
At the same time, the number of geriatricians, as a medical specialty, and other professionals with specialized training in the field is still very low in the countries of the region, with a greater presence in more aged countries such as Mexico, Costa Rica, Brazil, Colombia, Uruguay, Argentina, and Chile. Additionally, many doctors and professionals who already work with OA did not receive undergraduate training, resulting in a persistent educational gap. Consequently, these professionals lack the knowledge, skills, and competencies related to key aspects of the OA care, such as geriatric syndromes and Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment (hereinafter, CGA). Furthermore, there are few opportunities for continuing education, specialization, or postgraduate training in these areas across the region.
CGA application aims to go beyond the traditional medical model by considering OA in all their complexity. It has been shown to effectively reduce mortality, and complications, while enhancing functionality, cognitive and emotional states, and the accuracy of diagnoses. Additionally, CGA optimizes the use of programs and services for OA, reduces healthcare costs, and increases patient satisfaction, improving the likelihood that OA remain in their homes and reducing hospital admissions and readmissions, as well as polypharmacy at discharge. Furthermore, CGA guides multicomponent interventions for OA.
Globally, CGA has expanded beyond hospital settings to primary healthcare (PHC), communities, and long-term care facilities for OA. Various CGA assessment tools have been documented, for example, in Spain, where the most frequently used tools have been outlined; in other cases, only specific assessment tools have been analyzed. However, to date, there has been no comprehensive update on the validated and most commonly used CGA tools in the Latin American and Caribbean region.
Various CGA definitions underline the necessity of the assessment tools being validated and reliable. Validation and reliability are key for the assessment process, since the needs and problems evaluated in OA are complex, requiring measurements that assign numerical value to subjective traits. However, a major limitation of CGA is the lack of standardization in both assessment and intervention. Therefore, to obtain valid and reliable results, improve the efficiency of assessments, and ensure comparability, it is essential to standardize these tools and determine cut-off points based on local realities.
Validity (accuracy) refers to the degree to which a measurement reflects the true nature of a phenomenon, assessing whether the instrument or method accurately measures or classifies what it is intended to. There are three types of validity: construct, content, and criterion. Criterion validity includes concurrent and predictive validity. On the other hand, reliability (precision) relates to the consistency of measurement scores, indicating how free they are from measurement error, that is, when measurements are repeated under constant conditions, they should yield similar results. Reliability is linked to the instrument’s stability, regardless of the person that applies it (observer) or timing of the application. Various methods and statistics are used to analyze reliability.
Therefore, CGA tools’ validity and reliability should converge to obtain greater confidence in the results. In the CGA context, and after decades of aging in the region, it is relevant to identify the tools that have undergone transcultural adaptation (since they typically come from another language, usually English), and determine their validity and/or reliability. Furthermore, it is useful to identify the tools that have been designed and/or validated in countries in the region, as well as public policies that have included CGA, including the tools they use and/or recommendations made in their government documents.
In addition to the above, the COVID-19 pandemic generated a series of negative effects on the health of OA, even being described as a geriatric emergency, exacerbating some existing problems and bringing others to light. The pandemic, at the same time, emerged as an opportunity to implement telehealth with OA. Telehealth refers to a modality that uses information and communication technologies (ICTs) to provide health services, medical care, and information, regardless of distance; it also includes telemedicine and telerehabilitation as specific modalities. This led to CGA evaluation and intervention through telehealth, providing continuity of care for OA during the pandemic. Furthermore, prior to the pandemic, there were already experiences of the usage of validated CGA assessment tools for telephone use, which could offer an opportunity for innovation in interventions with OA through telehealth, during the pandemic and beyond. The CGA adaptations that were implemented during the pandemic and involved the use of telehealth could provide valuable lessons for employing this modality of care in regular and non-emergency situations as well.
On the one hand, the local reality in the region reveals the growing and multiple intervention needs of OA, the lack of doctors and specialized professionals, the lack of training of professionals already working with OA on CGA issues, and the lack of undergraduate and postgraduate training in gerontology and geriatrics. On the other hand, the increasing advancement of research regarding CGA and its assessment tools (pre- and post-pandemic), and the need for CGA standardization in the region create an opportunity for updating in this field. Therefore, this literature review aims to: (a) conceptualize Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment for its use in the Latin America and Caribbean region; (b) analyze the characteristics of the validated and most commonly used CGA tools in the region; (c) analyze the adaptations made to CGA during the COVID-19 pandemic in the region; (d) discuss challenges and opportunities regarding the administration, academic training, research, innovation, and management of CGA in the region, which will lead to an improvement in CGA management by doctors and professionals, and enhance the quality of life for OA.

2. Materials and Methods

Search Strategy
A literature review was chosen as it allows for a broader and more diverse identification of available literature, as well as for more flexible and contextual exploration. To achieve the aims of this literature review, a literature search was conducted to answer the question: How were the Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment (CGA) and its assessment tools implemented in Latin America and the Caribbean before, during, and after the COVID-19 pandemic? The keywords and search terms (Mesh/DeCS), in both English and Spanish, were: older adult, older person, older people, geriatric assessment, comprehensive gerontological assessment, comprehensive geronto-geriatric assessment, comprehensive geriatric assessment, tool, instrument, validation, reliability.
The databases consulted were PubMed, Scopus, and Scielo, and included articles published in Spanish, Portuguese, and English. Google Scholar and government documents from the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean were also consulted. The search was conducted from the year 2000 onwards.
Scientific articles were included if they contributed to answering the objectives of the literature review in conceptual and contextual terms or if they determined the validity, reliability, and/or provided reference values for any of the assessment tools in the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. This could involve studies focusing exclusively on populations aged 60 years and older or as part of the general population.
Additionally, government documents and technical guidelines from countries in the region were included, whether they focused specifically on older populations or the general population. These documents needed to include any of the tools identified as valid and/or reliable in this review or propose CGA batteries for older adults at different levels of care, programs, and/or social-health services for older adults in countries in Latin America and the Caribbean region.
Abstracts from conferences, scientific congress reports, dissertations, research reports, theses, letters to the editor, editorials, and commentaries were excluded.
The following steps were followed in the literature review process, depending on the type of document. In the case of scientific articles, the steps were: strategy-based search, article identification, duplicate elimination, title and abstract screening, full-text reading, selection, compilation into tables, analysis, interpretation of results and discussion, and referencing. Using the list of assessment tools for which validity, reliability, and/or reference values were determined, the review process proceeded to government documents from countries in the region. In the case of government documents, the steps were: search, identification, full-text reading focused on identifying the selected tools and CGA battery proposals mentioned in the document, selection, compilation into tables, analysis, interpretation of results and discussion, and referencing. A reference librarian, part of the research team, collaborated throughout the various stages of the literature review process.
A total of 800 scientific articles and 40 government documents were initially identified for the literature review. There were 254 duplicates, which were eliminated. After applying inclusion and exclusion criteria, 129 documents were finally selected for the literature review (110 scientific articles and 19 government documents). Figure 1 provides a diagram of the article selection process for the literature review.
The information extracted from the studies and documents included in this review was synthesized by the authors to specifically address each objective of the present study.

3. Results

3.1. Conceptualization of Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment: A Current and Expanded Perspective
Traditionally, from the field of geriatrics and through the expertise of geriatricians, the concept of Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment was initially proposed and used. This type of assessment—with its classic four domains: biomedical or clinical, functional, mental, and socio-familial —has a biomedical, reductionist, and geriatrized view of the social and healthcare services for older adults. This concept has got closer to gerontology (with a biopsychosocial, broad, and holistic vision) and has transitioned to the concept of Comprehensive Geronto-Geriatric Assessment, which has already been used in some public policy programs. However, considering the geographic, demographic, and ethnic diversity (from north to south, from coast to mountain ranges, from plains to valleys, from continent to islands) that characterizes Latin America and the Caribbean, the significant progress in gerontology, the diversity of university professions that address OA in the region (some of which are unique and present only in certain countries, such as gerontologists, psychometricians, and music therapists), and the variety of contexts in which interventions with OA take place (ranging from the hospital to the community, urban and rural), this concept should definitively transition to the concept of Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment, a proposal which we make in this literature review. CGA should also be understood as one of the three main pillars or cornerstones of gerontology and geriatrics, along with interdisciplinary work and level-based coordination and management.
This concept is not new and has been used before, for example, at the XXV International Congress of the Galician Society of Gerontology and Geriatrics in 2013 in Spain. Furthermore, it has been incorporated into postgraduate programs aimed at physicians, health professionals, and psychosocial workers, such as the Master’s in Gerontological and Geriatric Kinesiology at Universidad San Sebastián in Chile, and the Doctorate in Gerontological Research at Universidad Maimónides in Argentina. Additionally, it has been used in recent scientific articles in both Spanish and English, and in resolutions by the Ministry of Health of Argentina.
CGA is a technology within gerontology and geriatrics, which we conceptualize as ‘the interdisciplinary diagnostic process aimed at identifying and/or quantifying the needs, problems, potentialities, and opportunities that older adults and their environment present in biomedical, physical-functional, cognitive, affective, socio-familial, environmental, and quality-of-life aspects, with the goal of developing promotional, preventive, therapeutic, rehabilitative, and palliative care and a follow-up care plan that is integrated and coordinated to meet these needs in order to achieve maximum autonomy, functionality, and quality of life for the older adult’. This diagnostic process emphasizes the early detection of pre-frail and frail OA with multimorbidity for the prevention of geriatric syndromes, disability, and dependency, and serves as an admission protocol for any institution.
CGA includes a set of assessment tools (objective, specific, valid, reliable, standardized, reproducible, simple, and low-cost) for these domains and spheres of OA’s lives, and employs scales, questionnaires/surveys, indexes, clinical and performance tests, and schematics/drawings/pictograms, which are used in various contexts, levels of care, programs, and services involving OA and their environment.
The assessment made with these tools needs to be accompanied, on the one hand, by an interview with the OA, their family member, and/or caregiver, and, on the other hand, by clinical evaluations and the expertise of each profession, identifying quantitative polypharmacy and potentially inappropriate medication, as well as laboratory and imaging tests aimed at delving into the different CGA domains and spheres. Conducting CGA and addressing these domains requires specialized training and time, which may vary from several sessions to a process lasting up to two weeks, as described in some programs. All the information gathered should be recorded in a geronto-geriatric registration form, as seen in primary healthcare in Mexico, and day centers and residences for OA in Chile.
Ideally, this diagnostic process should continue with the presentation of the assessments conducted by each professional in the interdisciplinary team meeting, with the aim of defining general, specific, and discipline-specific intervention objectives, timelines, intervention and prognoses. At the same time, it is important to prioritize which factors, diseases, or geriatric syndromes should be addressed first in the OA; these are usually the conditions that pose the greatest health risk, are triggering factors, or have the most significant impact on OA’s quality of life and survival. Consequently, the CGA as a process, includes the evaluation and the definition of the intervention plan, which is a strength.
It is important to include OA in the CGA process, by actively involving them in their assessment and in the definition of objectives, prognoses, and the intervention plan, considering their expectations, needs, fears, preferences, and values, as well as their context, and following the principles of the person-centered care model, which permeates gerontology throughout this process.
This is how CGA allows for the systematization of information, the establishment of a common language, the unification of criteria and diagnoses, and the objective evaluation of the problems or conditions that OA present, enabling proper follow-up. It also allows for the evaluation of the intervention and reduces assessment time, as its use provides a general and comprehensive view of OA’s health status.
Consequently, it is necessary to move towards a vision of CGA from the perspective of gerontology, considering the progression of aging and the diverse characteristics of OA in the countries of the region. It is important to go beyond its current conceptualizations, expanding its horizons and perspective by including other domains and/or assessment tools that address various relevant aspects of life and interventions with OA. In this context, there are already assessment tools designed and/or validated in the OA population of Latin America and the Caribbean, for example, for elder abuse and oral health in Mexico and Colombia, health empowerment in Argentina, risk of falls at home in Cuba, and extrinsic fall risk assessment in residences in Chile. Other tools have already been incorporated as part of public policy (for example, environment and quality of life). New tools could also be developed (for example, in areas such as quality of life, environment, health literacy, technology usability, user satisfaction with interventions, spirituality and religiosity, and legal, cultural, and ethnic aspects).

3.2. Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment Tools in Latin America and the Caribbean
With regards to the commonly used CGA tools in the countries of the region, a total of 50 have been compiled. Of these tools, 14 correspond to the biomedical or clinical domain (Table A1), which deals with health history, medication, protective and risk factors, health problems, diseases, and geriatric syndromes. Sixteen tools belong to the mental domain (Table A2), of which eleven are cognitive tools that address baseline cognitive function, its alterations, and associated geriatric syndromes, and five are mood-related tools that focus on mood state and geriatric syndromes. Twelve tools correspond to the functional domain (Table A3), which deals with baseline functional capacity, activities of daily living (basic, instrumental, and advanced), their impairments, disability and dependency, performance, and physical activity. Eight tools correspond to the social domain (Table A4), which addresses the socio-familial network, participation, and socioeconomic aspects of OA and their environment. Specifically, 28 tools have focused on identifying or categorizing geriatric syndromes.
The main countries where CGA tool validations have been identified, in order of frequency, are Chile (19), Colombia (14), Brazil (10), Mexico (8) and Argentina (6). Additionally, 14 validations that were conducted in Spain, which are used in the region due to the shared language, have been compiled (Table A1, Table A2, Table A3 and Table A4). Notably, the tools that show three or more validations in countries are Charlson comorbidity index (three validations), Mini Nutritional Assessment (five), Eating Assessment Tool-10 (three), MiniMental State Examination (five), Montreal Cognitive Assessment (six) and the Geriatric Depression Scale of Yessavage (three). Furthermore, the tools that have been used in government documents from three or more countries are the Mini Nutritional Assessment (four countries), the MiniMental State Examination (five), the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (three), the Geriatric Depression Scale of Yessavage (six), the Katz Index (seven), the Barthel Index (five), the Lawton–Brody Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scale (four), Timed Up and Go (three), the Gijon Social-Family Scale (three) and the Zarit Caregiver Burden Interview (four) (Table A1, Table A2, Table A3 and Table A4).
It is important for doctors and professionals in the health and psychosocial fields, within their professional work at their service, center, or program with OA, to gain a deeper understanding of various aspects that can improve CGA implementation and management, either as a whole or for specific tools. This will help avoid a lack of knowledge, the associated risks, and biases in the interpretation of results.
To thoroughly understand the most commonly used CGA assessment tools in the region, these are presented by describing the tool’s name, objective, the dimensions it evaluates, the number of questions, cut-off scores and/or classification results, administration method, validity, and reliability (including the context and characteristics of the OA population analyzed, and the main psychometric analyses conducted), and how these tools have been included in the countries’ government documents (Table A1, Table A2, Table A3 and Table A4).

3.3. Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment During the COVID-19 Pandemic
The pandemic and the health measures implemented to manage it (quarantines, isolation, and restrictions on social mobility) imposed by health authorities in various countries worsened certain biopsychosocial health issues in OA, such as prevalent chronic diseases, geriatric syndromes, disability, and dependency. This also increased physical inactivity and mental health problems among OA, a situation that was described as a geriatric emergency. In this context, the geriatrics team at a hospital in Colombia developed an abbreviated CGA proposal for emergency settings for OA with suspected or confirmed COVID-19, taking into account the CGA tools to be applied at the time of admission to guide the treatment plan.
At the same time, the pandemic affected the continuity of various interventions with this age group. However, it accelerated the implementation of telehealth for OA, their families, and caregivers, allowing for continued care and creating an opportunity for the development of CGA through telehealth. It has been shown that CGA via telehealth was conducted using online questionnaires, videoconferencing, remote monitoring devices, mobile applications, among others, with a focus on evaluating the functional domain and activities of daily living. Additionally, it has been documented that videoconference sessions were comparable to in-person visits in terms of cost, acceptance, and diagnostic accuracy, allowing for early disease detection, monitoring of chronic disease progression, providing personalized care, optimizing healthcare resources, and improving health outcomes for OA. Furthermore, it has been reported that barriers for OA with visual or hearing disabilities were reduced. Notably, some CGA proposals through telehealth have already been suggested in the United States and Japan, that identify which domains can be evaluated through telehealth.
Among the CGA experiences through telehealth in the region, the Day Centers program for OA by the National Service for the Elderly (SENAMA) in Chile gathered local experiences from some of its centers and convened a group of experts to design a centrally coordinated, multidimensional, abbreviated CGA. This CGA included key questions extracted from different CGA tools, forming a set of essential questions covering the various CGA domains (as a screening tool). It was administered via a phone interview by any member of the team, allowing the exploration of the physical, functional, psycho-affective, and social aspects of OA. This enabled local teams to continue with specific evaluations and interventions through synchronous or asynchronous telehealth modality. Other teams implemented these assessment tools through the Google Forms platform, allowing them to reach OA either by phone or email. This latter strategy has also been implemented in previous research and during the pandemic to optimize data management and validation in research.

4. Discussion

4.1. Challenges and Opportunities for Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment in Latin America and the Caribbean

4.1.1. CGA Considerations from an Administration Perspective of Tools
A series of aspects should be considered when including/using an assessment tool as part of the CGA and as part of clinical reasoning in gerontology and geriatrics; these aspects are detailed in Figure 2 and Table 1. Analyzing these factors will allow the professional team to decide which tool(s) are the best to include or use in a service, center, program, or intervention, and consequently achieve optimal analysis and interpretation of results.
The objective of the tool(s) or the CGA as a whole should be kept in mind, whether such an objective is clinical, where it is necessary to know the baseline state and the effect of the intervention on OA or whether it is for research, where it is essential to have tools validated in Spanish and/or Portuguese, to ensure the stability and reliability of their psychometric characteristics throughout the process. It is important to highlight that, in several CGA tools, the goal is to screen for geriatric syndromes, where the tool’s questions arise from causal factors and/or symptoms that generate them (for example, the FRAIL scale: fatigue, resistance, ambulation, illnesses, loss of weight). Additionally, some of these same factors or symptoms (questions) are, in fact, other geriatric syndromes (cascade etiology); consequently, it is necessary to further evaluate the second geriatric syndrome that appeared as a factor or symptom of the first one, in order to understand the various needs of OA (for example, in the Mini Nutritional Assessment, where some altered questions reflect the presence of another geriatric syndrome; it is recommended to assess the second syndrome as well).
It will also be necessary to identify, in those tools that have two parts (e.g., the Goldberg Anxiety and Depression Scale or the Tinetti Gait and Balance Assessment Tool), whether these parts can be applied separately—only one part—or if they need to be administered together, and whether the scores from the different parts need to be combined. Additionally, it is important to identify tools that should be or are recommended to be applied together (e.g., One-Leg Balance and Timed Up and Go, or the Insomnia Severity Index and the Epworth Sleepiness Scale), as they show better performance when used in combination or are complementary in analyzing the multiple causes and consequences of geriatric problems or syndromes.
Before administering the evaluation tool, it is also important that the person conducting the assessment and analyzing the results is familiar with the scoring direction and the overall score. In some tools, a higher score indicates a problem or deficit and vice versa (i.e., directly related, as with the Pfeffer Functional Activities Questionnaire, where a higher score indicates “functional impairment”), while in others, a higher score does not indicate a problem or deficit, and vice versa (i.e., inversely related, as with the Barthel Index, where a higher score indicates “independence”). Additionally, it is crucial to understand the minimum and maximum scores, the cut-off points (which are especially relevant in tools influenced by education level, such as cognitive tools), the classification provided by the tool, and/or the reference tables for performance in physical, functional, or cognitive clinical tests. Likewise, it is important to know whether the tool provides an overall result and/or results by dimensions, and conduct both analyses if applicable (e.g., the Food Quality Survey of Elderly, ECAAM). It is also necessary to delve into and specifically analyze questions/items that reflect altered results, revealing a particular problem or deficit (for example, the Montreal Cognitive Assessment, which, in addition to detecting cognitive impairment, identifies specific higher cognitive function alterations). All of this allows for a comprehensive view of the OA’s or caregiver’s results in the evaluated domain, enabling the identification of key areas for intervention.
It is essential to recognize the number and type of questions the assessment tool includes. A question with two response categories (e.g., Yes/No, as in the Yesavage abbreviated questionnaire) presents less difficulty for the professional to administer and is easier for the OA or their caregiver to understand than one with five categories (e.g., Never/Rarely/Sometimes/Most of the time/Always, as in the Medical Outcomes Study-Social Support Survey). Therefore, we propose some strategies to facilitate administration: ensure that the OA is using their glasses and/or hearing aids; detail and explain the purpose of the assessment and response options in advance; read the responses aloud in the case of low educational level (when there are few alternatives); laminate the response categories as a card and show this card while applying the tool, so that the OA can select the appropriate answer; provide the tool and read it together; and start from the response indicated by the OA, asking again to refine the answer toward the most accurate option (especially when there are more than 4–5 categories, as people often default to middle or extreme options).
It is important to consider the setting where the evaluation will take place, as some tools require a physical space for their execution (e.g., the Senior Fitness Test) or privacy and calm for their administration (e.g., the Yesavage abbreviated questionnaire or the Zarit caregiver burden scales). Additionally, in the case of clinical tests, it is necessary to ensure the safety conditions and availability of required equipment, as well as the relevance and feasibility of obtaining such equipment locally. It is also essential to consider the time needed to carry out the evaluation, which is directly related to the number of questions or response items included in the tool.
The CGA should be applied before and after interventions, ensuring that the application conditions are the same at the time of reevaluation. In the context of programs or services within public policy, it is recommended to assess regularly once a year, and consecutively each year throughout the lifespan of OA. However, in cases of frailty, this interval should be shorter, every 6 months, as it improves health outcomes. Additionally, in situations such as serious illness, falls, hospitalization, or bed confinement, during and/or after these events, it is necessary to reevaluate the OA with the CGA. It is also important to note in “observations” any relevant aspects associated with the assessment and/or adaptations that have been made, so that if the physician or professional conducting the reevaluation is not the same (due to leave, replacement, or a change in professional), the evaluation is conducted under the same initial conditions.

4.1.2. CGA Considerations from an Academic Training Perspective
Topics related to CGA and its associated evaluation tools should be included as part of the regular curriculum in all undergraduate courses related to gerontology and geriatrics across various disciplines that address OA. It is important to recognize that there is still a need for the regular inclusion of these subjects in the curricula of university-level professional careers. Similarly, it should be one of the core subjects within postgraduate programs (diplomas, master’s, and doctorates) for doctors and professionals in the region, considering the training gaps in the area, and aiming at promoting interdisciplinary work within the context of person-centered care.
It is also necessary to train and provide updated knowledge on CGA to professionals already working in various programs and services for OA, particularly in primary healthcare (PHC). Additionally, replicating micro-learning experiences, such as those already implemented in perioperative settings, has shown significant improvements in doctors’ management of CGA following this educational intervention. As a strategy, it will be important for those beginning work with OA and CGA to self-administer the tool and/or apply it to a family member to become thoroughly familiar with it. Furthermore, self-training by watching application videos produced by the National Institute of Geriatrics in Mexico, which are available online, and taking specific courses on CGA would be beneficial.

4.1.3. CGA Considerations from a Research Perspective
Efforts should be made to design, translate, culturally adapt, and/or determine the validity and reliability of assessment tools that address various aspects of the life of OA not yet covered by the CGA. Additionally, validations of the same tool in two or more countries, as done in Argentina and Chile, should be carried out, incorporating all these tools into the regular use of CGA in the region. This presents an opportunity to transfer scales, questionnaires, or clinical tests from CGA to be used in telehealth evaluations of OA and their caregivers. It may even be possible to create a repository of validated CGA tools in the region under the COMLAT-IAGG (Latin American and Caribbean Committee—International Association of Gerontology and Geriatrics) as a regional branch or under IAGG globally, following the good practices implemented in the field of psychology in Argentina by the Society for Psychotherapy Research. Alternatively, it would also be beneficial to create websites with psychometric information and/or administration details about the assessment tools, as it was done with The Fototest in Spain.
In parallel, it is essential to advance qualitative, quantitative, and mixed research with an interdisciplinary emphasis from gerontology, recognizing the particularities and strengths of our region. This research should aim to diagnose how well medical, professionals and healthcare providers know and utilize the CGA tools, or which CGA tools use to address geriatric syndromes, similar to studies that have already been conducted in geriatricians in European countries. Furthermore, efforts should be made to apply CGA tools at the Latin American, national, local, and multicentric levels, targeting large population groups or cohorts of OA, as this is not regularly addressed in national public health surveys in the countries. This will enable the validation of CGA tools, as it has been done in Mexico.
Such initiatives will help generate new databases, allowing for a more precise analysis and understanding of OA and their intervention needs, with a special emphasis on groups of greater interest, where evidence is still limited, such as octogenarians, nonagenarians, and centenarians in the region. All of this will facilitate the development of a research line at the regional level. Additionally, updating and consolidating the validated tools in the region is crucial, with the current compilation (Table A1, Table A2, Table A3 and Table A4) serving as a valuable resource for the methodological aspects of undergraduate and postgraduate theses, as well as for research projects.

4.1.4. CGA Considerations from an Innovation Perspective
The COVID-19 pandemic left a series of lessons regarding CGA implementation through telehealth which can be adapted to the realities of the region. Therefore, efforts should be made to advance innovation and research aimed at determining the validity and reliability of CGA tools when administered via telephone or video, comparing these methods with in-person assessments, as has already been done with the Barthel Index conducted over the phone.
Given that telehealth experiences have diminished following the return to in-person services in the countries of the region, it is necessary to revisit them and generate new ones that can serve as a regular strategy for doctors and professionals working with OA. These strategies are not only useful in a pandemic context, but also in situations of natural disasters, rural settings, disability, and caregiving, which limit social mobility and/or restrict the socio-health participation of OA.
In addition, web applications can be designed and implemented that include the CGA and/or its evaluation tools, such as the Dependency Indices or GeriatriApp developed in Spanish, GeriKit in English, or ICOPE (Integrated Care for Older People) in both languages. These applications can include visual and/or auditory elements that also allow for long-term follow-up of OA with cognitive impairments, which presents a challenge for both innovation and research.

4.1.5. CGA Considerations from a Management Perspective
Proposals should be advanced for a limited screening of the CGA, following previous experiences, which would allow for a more comprehensive CGA to be conducted later. This includes developing batteries of CGA tools to be used at different levels of care and in social health programs as part of public policy in the countries of the region. Such initiatives have already been implemented in primary care settings or in residences for OA in Chile, thus creating a contextually relevant CGA application aligned with social healthcare models and levels of attention. This offers the possibility of generating new contextually tailored CGA proposals for day centers for OA and community rehabilitation centers; in hospital settings such as day hospitals, emergency rooms, general inpatient wards, outpatient clinics, and home care, as documented in Colombia; and specialized geriatric units within hospitals, such as orthogeriatric units in Colombia and acute geriatric units in Chile. This approach facilitates the continuity and sustainability of interventions for OA across various levels of social healthcare in a coordinated manner, which we propose in Figure 3 and Table 2, based on this literature review and the authors’ experiences.
Similarly, it is important to advance contextualized CGA that address major specified issues such as dementia, disability, oncology, or palliative care. At the same time, CGA units could be established within the array of programs and services for OA, as is the case in Uruguay. Additionally, in certain programs or centers, CGA results could be integrated with intervention protocols for managing OA, preventing, and addressing geriatric syndromes—a practice already implemented in nursing homes as part of public policy in Chile, stemming from collaborative academic, expert, and interdisciplinary efforts. Furthermore, these assessments should be linked to multicomponent interventions. The results from applying CGA tools should also be set as management goals within public policy, as seen in Panama.
It is expected that the Interuniversity Network for Healthy Aging in Latin America and the Caribbean (RIES-LAC) will serve as a platform for generating collaborative networks, research, community engagement, advanced human capital training, and contributions to public policies. Drawing on the expertise of academics from across the region, it will enhance CGA, considering that the four micro networks within this network, from both gerontology and geriatrics, used the four traditional spheres of CGA in their conceptual definitions, thereby contributing to the CGA as a whole.
One of the limitations of this study is that it did not assess which CGA tool is most commonly used in each country; it identified instead which tools are used or recommended in each country based on government documents. Furthermore, no government documents were found concerning the utilization of CGA tools in countries with an incipient demographic transition and low rates of population aging. Despite these limitations, our study updated the concept of Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment for its application in the Latin America and Caribbean region, which can serve as a reference for other regions of the world. The compilation of the different CGA tools, the examination of CGA adaptations during the COVID-19 pandemic, and the challenges related to CGA administration, training, research, innovation, and management can provide useful information for health practitioners and policy makers, that can contribute to the subsequent elaboration of more effective, multidimensional care plans for OA.

5. Conclusions
Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment (CGA) is an essential tool for addressing the needs of OA; however, there is a need for greater knowledge and training on its various assessment tools. This literature review highlights the importance of evaluation in the context of gerontology, while also synthesizing the validated and most commonly used tools in Latin America and the Caribbean region. It proposes considerations for the inclusion of these tools and outlines CGA battery tools for different levels of care, programs, and socio-health services for OA. This is of particular interest as it offers lines of action for decision-makers, academics, researchers, university students, and the community at large. Consequently, the Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment (CGA) batteries presented in this literature review establish a minimum standard for implementation in care models and public policies for the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
We recommend that the professionals working with OA become familiar with the different spheres of CGA and its evaluation tools, by practicing and applying them regularly, so as to develop greater skills in their application, analysis, and interpretation. This will enable more tailored interventions that meet the needs of OA, their families, and caregivers, promoting their rights, which will lead to improved functionality, autonomy, and quality of life, while also fostering healthy, active, and successful aging.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, R.P.-M. and E.S.R.; methodology, R.P.-M., E.S.R. and G.R.-B.; resources, R.P.-M.; writing—original draft preparation, R.P.-M., E.S.R., D.C.-C., P.A.W., M.F.L., C.P.D., S.P.-S., I.B.-C., F.R.-W. and G.R.-B.; writing—review and editing, R.P.-M., E.S.R., D.C.-C., P.A.W., M.F.L., C.P.D., S.P.-S., I.B.-C., F.R.-W. and G.R.-B.; supervision, D.C.-C.; project administration, R.P.-M.; funding acquisition, R.P.-M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Institutional Review Board Statement
Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement
Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement
Not applicable.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Appendix A
Tools for Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment in the biomedical or clinical sphere, their validity and reliability determination in Spanish or Portuguese, and their use in technical guidelines (in government documents) in Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Name of Evaluation Tool or Instrument 	Objective(s)	Evaluation Dimension(s) or Aspect(s) 	Number of Questions or Items 	Cutoff Score, Classification and/or Reported Categorization #	Administration Form	Validity and Reliability	Use in Government Document (Country)	 	Characteristics of Analyzed Sample 	Analysis of Psychometric Tests Performed	 	Charlson comorbidity index (CCI)	Calculate 1-year comorbidity and mortality	1. Myocardial infarction 2. Heart failure3. Peripheral vascular disease4. Cerebrovascular disease5. Dementia 6. Chronic pulmonary disease7. Rheumatologic disease8. Peptic ulcer disease9. Mild chronic liver disease10. Diabetes11. Hemiplegia 12. Moderate/severe chronic kidney disease 13. Diabetes with target organ damage 14. Tumor or solid neoplasm 15. Leukemia 16. Lymphoma17. Moderate/severe chronic liver disease 18. Tumor or solid neoplasm with metastasis 19. AIDS 	19 items	Colombia: Classification:0 comorbidities: 27.86% 1–2 comorbidities: 51.60% 3–4 comorbidities: 18.42% 5 or more comorbidities: 2.12%In-hospital mortality: 0.5% 30-day mortality: 0.48% 1-year mortality: 1.21%Spain: CCI: 4.38 ± 2.01 pointsSpain: Classification:0–1 point: absence of comorbidities 2 points: low comorbidity 3 or more points: high comorbidity* For this study, it was considered: 0–1 point: low–moderate comorbidity 2 or more points: moderate–high comorbidityCCI 65–75 years Low–moderate comorbidity: 60.4% Moderate–high comorbidity: 39.6%CCI 76–85 years Low–moderate comorbidity: 38.9% Moderate–high comorbidity: 61.1%CCI 86 years and older Low–moderate comorbidity: 34.4% Moderate–high comorbidity: 65.6%	Administered by healthcare professional base do n medical reports 	C: Colombia Co: health insurance system (hospital) n: 3.849.849 x: 42.9 (17.9) yearsR: 18 and more years or ageC: Spain Co: acute geriatric ward and intermediate care center (medium stay)n: 343 OAx: 82.3 years R: no informationC: Spain Co: outpatient clinic, Internal medicine, Residence n: 375 OAx: 81.3 (8.0) yearsR: no information	AdaptationPredictive value of 1-year mortality of the CCI in hospitalized patients for all causes.	 	* In both adaptations, the original 19 comorbidity categories were reduced to 17, with “leukemia”, “lymphoma”, and “tumor or solid neoplasm” grouped into a single category, “any tumor” Predictive value of institutionalization and mortalitySensitivity, specificity, and ROC curve Evaluate CCI usefulness to predict mortality in older adults and the concordance between various indices 		 	SARC-F (Strength, Assistance in walking, Rise from chair, Climb stairs- Falls) questionnaire	Detect probable presence of sarcopenia (clinical suspicion/screening)	1. Force2. Help to walk3. Get up from a chair 4. Climb stairs5. Falls	5 questions	Classification:0–3 points: without sarcopenia/without alteration/low probability 4–10 points: suggests sarcopenia/suspicion of sarcopenia/high probability 	Self-administeredAdministered by professional to OAAdministered by phone	C: Mexico Co: communityn: 487 OAx: 73.2 (8.0) yearsR: no information	Transcultural adaptationCriterion validityReliability	Mexico Argentina 	 	Sarcopenia Geriatric Scale (SARCO-GS)	Detect sarcopenia 	Subjective walking speed1. Have you noticed that you walk slowly (last 3 months)Subjective measurement of muscle strength 2. Amount of strength to lift something heavy weighing 4 kg or more 3. Difficulty climbing one flight of stairsSubjective measurement of muscle mass 4. Have you noticed that your legs or arms have thinned (last 3 months) 5. Have you noticed that your legs or arms are thinner compared to people of your same age (last 3 months)6. Objective measurement of muscle strength:Five-time sit-to-stand test7. Objective measurement of muscle mass: calf circumference	7 items 	Cutoff score: ≥3 pointsClassification:0–2 points: without sarcopenia 3–14 points: with sarcopenia	Administered by professional to OA	C: Mexico Co: community n: 852x: 68.9 (10.2) yearsR: 56.2% (50–69 years) and 43.8% (≥70 years)	Document reviewTool conceptualization and designConstruct and criterion validitySensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliability		 	FRAIL Scale (fatigue, resistance, ambulation, illnesses, loss of weight)	Detect biological fragility 	FatigabilityResistanceAmbulationComorbidityWeight loss	5 questions 	Classification:0 point: not biologically frail or robust 1–2 points: biologically pre-fragile 3–5 points: biologically fragile Classification:0 points: no alteration1–2 points: suspicion of pre-fragility3–5 points: suspicion of fragility	Self-administeredAdministered by professional to OAAdministered by phone	C: Mexico Co: community n: 606 (534 ≥ 50 years)x: 71.3 (9.6) years (group ≥ 50 years)R: no information	Transcultural adaptationCriterion validityReliability	Mexico Uruguay 	 	TilburgFrailty Indicator (TFI)	Detect multidimensional fragility (physical, psychological, and social domain) 	Physical domain: 1. Feeling healthy2. Unintentional weight loss3. Difficulty walking4. Difficulty maintaining balance5. Worse hearing6. Worse vision7. Loss of hand strength8. FatiguePsychological domain: 9. Memory problems 10. Feeling sad 11. Feeling nervous or stressed 12. Ability to confront problems Social domain: 13. Live alone 14. Missing having people around 15. Receiving help from others 	15 questions 	Classification:0–4 points: no multidimensionally fragile 5–15 points: mutidimensionally fragile (biopsychosocial) 	Self-administeredAdministered by professional to OAAdministered by phone	C: Spain Co: independent, not institutionalized OA n: 856 OAx: 78.1 (4.9) yearsR: no information	Transcultural adaptationCriterion validityReliability	Uruguay 	 	International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire Short-Form (ICIQ-SF)	Detect urinary incontinence (severity and possible causes) 	Severity: 1. Frequency of urine loss2. Perception of quantity of urine loss 3. Impact on daily lifePossible causes:4. Situations related to urine loss	4 questions	Classification: score of 1 or higher for the first 3 questions: indication of urinary incontinence 	Self-administeredAdministered by professional to OA	C: Chile Co: hospitaln: 77 womenx: 51 years R: 21–80 years	Construct and content validityReliability	El Salvador Chile 	 	Norton Scale	Detect risk of pressure ulcer	1. Physical state 2. Mental state 3. Activity4. Mobility5. Sphincter control	5 items	Colombia: Cutoff score: ≤17 points Classification:5–12 points: high risk13–16 points: moderate riskClassification:5–9 points: very high risk 10–12 points: high risk13–14 points: moderate risk15–20 points: low risk	ObservationAdministered by professional to OAAdministered by professional to caregiver or family member	C: Colombia Co: hospitaln: 938x: no informationR: 18–94 years (25.1% between 52–69 years of age; and 26.2% between 70–94 years of age)	Criterion validitySensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curve	Mexico Chile 	 	Braden Scale 	Detect risk of developing pressure ulcer 	1. Sensory perception 2. Humidity exposure 3. Activity4. Mobility5. Nutrition6. Friction and risk of injury	6 items 	Colombia: Cutoff score: ≤18 pointsColombia: Cutoff score: 16 pointsClassification:1–12 points: high risk 13–14 points: moderate risk15–23 points: low risk (* 15–16 if younger than 75 years of age, 15–18 if 75 years of age and older)	ObservationAdministered by professional to OAAdministered by professional to caregiver or family member	C: Colombia Co: hospitaln: 938 x: no informationR: 18–94 years (25.1% between 52–69 years of age; and 26.2% between 70–94 years of age)C: Colombia Co: hospitaln: 831 OAx: 71.9 (8) yearsR: no information 	Criterion validitySensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curve Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curve 	Mexico 	 	Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA)	Detect nutritional status and risk of malnutrition 	1. BMI2. Upper arm circumference3. Leg circumference4. Recent weight loss5. Lives at home6. Takes more than three medications7. Acute illness or stressful situation8. Mobility9. Neuropsychological problems10. Ulcers or skin lesions11. Complete meals per day12. Consumes (dairy products; eggs or legumes; meat, fish, or poultry)13. Consumes fruits or vegetables14. Has lost appetite15. Amount of glasses of water or liquid intake16. Method of feeding17. Self-perception of nutritional status18. Self-perception of health compared to other OA	18 items	Cutoff score: Autonomous OA in Health Centers: 24 pointsNot autonomous OA in Health Centers: 25 points Institutionalized: 21 points Classification:0–16 points: malnutrition 17–23.5 points: risk of malnutrition24–30 points: no malnutrition or well-nourished	Administered by professional to OA	C: Spain Co: OA with different functional levels in community (PHC) and residencen: 248 OA (121 autonomous OA in health centers; 68 not autonomous OA in health centers; 59 institutionalized OA)x: 75.7 years-old autonomous OA in health centers; 86.5 years old not autonomous OA in health centers; 86.7 years old institutionalized OA R: 65 years of age and older	Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curveReliability	Mexico Uruguay Chile Argentina 	 	Mini-NutritionalAssessment-Short Form(MNA-SF)	Detect nutritional status 	1. Loss of appetite2. Recent weight loss3. Mobility4. Acute illness or psychological stress situation5. Neuropsychological problems6. BMI7. Calf circumference	7 items 	Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Mexico and Uruguay:Cutoff score: 31 cm for calf circumferenceClassification:0–7 points: malnutrition/undernutrition8–11 points: risk of malnutrition/risk of undernutrition 12–14 points: no malnutrition or well-nourished/satisfactory nutritional status 	Administered by professional to OA	C: Brazil, Chile, Cuba, Mexico and Uruguay Co: Community n: 5.722 OA (Brazil: 1.449; Chile: 1.160; Cuba: 1.220; Mexico: 817; and Uruguay: 880)x: Brazil: 73.3 (8.4); Chile: 71.5 (8.0); Cuba: 72.0 (8.7); Mexico: 69.7 (7.6); and Uruguay: 71.2 (7.3) years R: 60–102 years	Sensibility, specificity, ROCcurveCriterion validity (only Chilean sample)Reliability* The objective was to validate the MNA-SF and the cutoff point of 31 cm for calf circumference in OA in Latin America 	Mexico Argentina 	 	Food Quality Survey of Elderly (ECAAM)	Determine nutrition quality in OA 	Healthy eating habits (15 items): 1. Eats breakfast2. Consumes dairy products3. Fruits4. Vegetables5. Fish6. Legumes7. Oats or whole grain bread8. Homemade meals9. Dinner10. Water or liquids11. Meat or poultry12. Eggs13. Number of meals per day14. Golden years soup15. Dairy beverageNon-healthy eating habits (8 items):16. Consumes sugary drinks or juices17. Consumes alcoholic beverages18. Fried foods19. Uses lard in making dough or for frying20. Junk food21. Sweet snacks22. Coffee23. Adds salt to food	23 items 	Classification:Healthy eating habits: 13–51 points: poor quality of nutrition 52–65 points: good quality of nutrition Non-healthy eating habits: Classification:8–30 points: poor quality of nutrition 31–38 points: good quality of nutrition Quality of general nutrition: Classification:21–82 points: poor quality of nutrition 83–103 points: good quality of nutrition 	Self-administeredAdministered by professional to OA	C: Chile Co: Community n: 458 OA x: No informationR: 60–100 years	Content validity 		 	Eating Assessment Tool-10 (EAT-10)	Evaluate specific symptoms of dysphagia/Screening for dysphagia 	1. The swallowing problem has led to weight loss.2. The swallowing problem interferes with the ability to eat out.3. Swallowing liquids requires extra effort.4. Swallowing solids requires extra effort.5. Swallowing pills requires extra effort.6. Swallowing is painful.7. The pleasure of eating is affected by the swallowing problem.8. When I eat, food gets stuck in my throat.9. I cough when I eat.10. Swallowing is stressful.	10 questions 	Chile: Cutoff score: ≥7 pointsColombia: Cutoff score: ≥3 pointsSpain: Does not specify cutoff score, classification and/or categorization. Only mentions that higher scores indicate a higher perception of dysphagia	Self-administered	C: Chile Co: community, PHC, community rehabilitation center, Geriatrics Institute (outpatient service), professional private consultationn: 80 OA x: 75 (14) years R: no information C: Colombia: Co: hospital n: 133 x: 55 (17.1) yearsR: no informationC: Spain Co: hospital, PHC, communityn: 75 OAx: 75 (9.1) yearsR: no information	Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curveReliabilityTranscultural adaptationCriterion validitySensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliability Transcultural adaptationReliability		 	The Downton fall risk assessment scale	Detect multidimensional fall risk 	1. Previous falls2. Medication intake 3. Sensory deficits4. Mental status5. Ambulation	5 items 	Classification:0–2 points: low risk3–4 points: moderate risk 5–9 points: high risk	Administered by health professional on the basis of medical reportsAdministered by professional to caregiver or family member	Despite its use in public policies, no validation could be identified	Despite its use in public policies, no validation could be identified	Chile 	 	Denmark dismobility stage (ETADI)	Classify dismobility stages 	Five stages: 1. Stays standing most of the day2. Stays sitting most of the day3. Stays lying down most of the day (with the ability to get up or sit up)4. Stays lying down most of the day (with the ability to move in bed)5. Stays lying down most of the day (without the ability to move in bed)2 sub-stages: A: with helpB: without help 	5 items/2 sub-items	Classification:10 dismobility stages: 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, 3A, 3B, 4A, 4B, 5A, 5B	ObservationAdministered by professional to OAAdministered by professional to caregiver or family member	C: Chile Co: indicated in different programs and services with OA n: no information x and R: suitable for OA of 60 years of age and older 	Tool conceptualization and design 	Chile
Abbreviations: C: country; Co: context; n: sample size; x: mean age (standard deviation); R: age range; OA: older adults; PHC: primary health care. # In the column “Cutoff score, classification and/or reported categorization”, the reported cutoff point from validation articles is presented first in descending order, followed by the classifications that appear in these validation articles or in any government documents. * Corresponds to a clarification of the aspect described in the evaluation tool.
Tools for Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment in the mental sphere (cognitive and emotional sub-spheres), their validity and reliability determination in Spanish or Portuguese, and their use in technical guidelines (in government documents) in Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Name of Evaluation Tool or Instrument (Cognitive Sub-Sphere)	Objective(s)	Evaluation Dimension(s) or Aspect(s) 	Number of Questions or Items 	Cutoff Score, Classification and/or Reported Categorization #	Administration Form	Validity and Reliability	Use in Government Document (Country)	 	Characteristics of Analyzed Sample 	Analysis of Psychometric Tests Performed	 	Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)	Screening and rapid detection of suspected delirium (confusional syndrome)	Criteria:1. Acute onset and fluctuating course2. Inattention3. Disorganized thinking4. Altered level of consciousness	5 items	Chile and ColombiaClassification: Criteria 1 and2, and either criterion 3 or 4: delirium diagnosisClassification: Criteria 1 and 2, and either criterion 3 or 4: deliriumCriterion 1 or 2: subsyndromal deliriumNo criterion: no delirium	ObservationAdministered by professional to OAAdministered by professional to caregiver or family member	C: Chile Co: intensive care unitn: 29x: 70 years R: 58–77 yearsC: Colombia Co: intensive care unitn: 129x: 47.7 (21.2) yearsR: no information	Transcultural adaptation Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value ReliabilityCriterion validity Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value Reliability	Chile 	 	Short PortableMental Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ) of Pfeiffer	Detect and determine the degree of cognitive impairment (screening of cognitive function assessment) 	1. Short- and long-term memory2. Orientation3. Knowledge of everyday facts4. Ability to perform serial mathematical tasks	10 questions	Spain:Cutoff score: 3 or more errors, for people who at least can read and write Cutoff score: 4 or more errors, for illiterate individuals* Subtract 1 error, when the individual has primary education or no schooling, and add 1 error, if the individual has secondary or higher education Brazil: Does not specify cutoff score, classification, and/or categorization Classification: 0–2 errors: normal (preserved cognitive abilities/no cognitive impairment) 3–4 errors: mild cognitive impairment5–7 errors: moderate cognitive impairment 8–10 errors: severe cognitive impairment. 	Administered by professional to OA	C: Spain Co: PHCn: 255 OAx: 74.5 years R: 65 years of age and olderC: Brazil Co: community and residence n: 30 OAx: 72.1 (10.1) yearsR: 60–92 years	Transcultural adaptationConstruct validity Sensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliabilityTranscultural adaptationContent validity 	Peru Chile 	 	Mini-Mental StateExamination (MMSE)	Detect mild cognitive impairment or dementia (Assessment of higher functions)	1. Orientation in time2. Orientation in space3. Short-term memory4. Attention and calculation5. Recall6. Language7. Visuoconstructive skills	30 questions	Chile:Cutoff score: ≤21 points for cognitive impairment diagnosisMexico: Cutoff score: 23/24 points Colombia:Cutoff score: ≤27 points Discriminate between patients with Alzheimer’s type dementia or other dementias, and normal subjectsArgentina: 0–4 years of schoolingCutoff score: 24 points (56–75 years)Cutoff score: 22 points (76 years and older)5–7 years of schoolingCutoff score: 26 points (56–75 years)Cutoff score: 25 points (76 years and older)8–12 years of schoolingCutoff score: 27 points (56–75 years)Cutoff score: 25 points (76 years and older)13 or more years of schoolingCutoff score: 27 points (56–75 years)Cutoff score: 26 points (76 years and older)Brazil, mean score: Illiterate: 20 points1–4 years of schooling: 25 points5–8 years of schooling: 26.5 points9–11 years of schooling: 28 pointsMore than 11 years of schooling: 29 pointsClassification:0–24 points: probable cognitive impairment 25–30 points: no cognitive impairment* For individuals with <3 years of formal education, assign 8 entry points and disregard the subtraction of 7 from 100 (5 points), the reading of “close your eyes” (1 point), the writing of a sentence (1 point), and the copying of pentagons (1 point)Classification: 0–5 years of schooling + inferior or equal score to 21: suspicion of cognitive impairment6–12 years of schooling + inferior or equal score to 24: suspicion of cognitive impairment More than 12 years of schooling + inferior or equal score to 26: suspicion of cognitive impairment In all these cases, send to psychiatrist or neurologist * Add 2 points, if the individual has obvious visual impairment • Add 1 point, if the individual is older than 65 years • Add 2 points, if the individual is older than 75 years. Classification: Suggested cutoff score: Illiterate: 19 points1–3 years of schooling: 23 points4–7 years of schooling: 24 points>7 years of schooling: 28 pointsClassification: Less than 25 points: mild impairmentLess than 15 points: moderate impairmentLess than 5 points: severe impairment 	Administered by professional to OA	C: Chile Co: urban and rural n: 94 OA (76 OA without cognitive impairment; 18 OA with dementia)x: no informationR: 65–>84 years C: Mexico Co: different contexts not specified n: 203 OAx: 70.8 years R: 60–99 yearsC: Colombia Co: memory clinic n: 248 (47 mild cognitive impairment; 123 Alzheimer-type dementia; 17 mixed dementias; 18 other dementias; 32 normal; 11 other diagnosis) x: 71 years R: 19–95 years (22.6% between 76–80 years, most common age group)C: Argentina Co: community n: 634x: 62.9 (14.2) yearsR: 34–90 yearsC: BrazilCo: hospital, outpatient (neurology service), communityn: 433x: 58.9 (17.7) yearsR: 16–92 years	Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curve Transcultural adaptationConstruct validitySensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curveDistribution of scores for the evaluation tool and cutoff points with better discrimination for the diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment and dementiaReference values according to age and educational level Transcultural adaptationReference values according to educational level 	Mexico Colombia Brazil Chile Argentina 	 	Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCa)	Detect mild cognitive impairment or dementia (Assessment of higher functions)	1. Visuoconstructive abilities2. Executive functions3. Naming4. Memory5. Attention6. Concentration7. Language8. Calculation9. Orientation	30 questions	Chile:Cutoff score: <21 points, to distinguish amnestic mild cognitive impairment of controls Cutoff score: <20 points, to distinguish mild dementia of controls Mexico: Cutoff score: 26 points, for mild cognitive impairment diagnosis Cutoff score: 24 points, for dementia diagnosis Argentina: Cutoff score: 26 points, to differentiate between healthy OA and those with mild cognitive impairment Colombia: Cutoff score: ≤24 points Discriminates between patients with Alzheimer-type dementia and other dementias against normal subjectsBrazil: Cutoff score: 15 points discriminates between OA with dementia and OA with normal cognitive statusCutoff score: 19 points: Discriminates between OA with cognitive impairment without dementia and OA with normal cognitive statusEcuador:Does not specify cutoff score, classification, and/or categorization Classification:0–25 points: probable cognitive disorder26–30 points: normal* For individuals with less than 12 years of schooling, the scoring needs to be adjusted by adding 1 extra point at the total score	Administered by professional to OA	C: Chile Co: community, PHC, hospital n: 172 OA (24 OA with mild amnesic cognitive impairment; 24 OA with mild non-amnesic cognitive impairment; 20 OA with mild dementia; 104 OA controls)x: 75.3 (5.8) years for OA with mild amnesic cognitive impairment; 74.3 (7.9) years for OA with mild non-amnesic cognitive impairment; 75.1 (8.2) years for OA with mild dementia; 72.3 (5.4) years for OA controls R: no informationC: Mexico Co: memory clinicn: 168 OA (52 OA with mild cognitive impairment; 57 OA with dementia; 59 OA controls)x: 75.1 (6.2) years OA with mild cognitive impairment; 81.7 (5.8) years OA with dementia; 69.9 (1.1) years OA controls R: no informationC: Argentina Co: hospital n: 269 OA (154 OA with mild cognitive impairment; 115 OA controls)x: 72.3 (7.7) years for OA with mild cognitive impairment; 72.9 (7.5) years for OA controls R: 60–91 years C: Colombia Co: memory clinic n: 248 OA (47 OA with mild cognitive impairment; 123 OA with Alzheimer-type dementia; 17 OA with mixed dementias; 18 OA with other dementias; 32 OA normal; 11 OA with other diagnosis) x: 71 years R: 19–95 years (22.6% between 76–80 years of age, most common age group)C: Brazil Co: communityn: 630 OA (110 OA with dementia; 135 OA with cognitive impairment without dementia; 385 OA with normal cognitive status)x: no informationR: 60–≥ 85 yearsC: Ecuador Co: community and residence n: 200 OAx: 75 years R: 66–82 years	Construct validity Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curveReliabilityConstruct and criterion validity Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curveReliabilitySensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curveDistribution of scores for the evaluation tool and cutoff points with better discrimination for the diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment and dementiaReference values according to age, educational level, and cognitive function of the tool Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curveConstruct validityReliability	Mexico Chile Argentina 	 	Alzheimer Disease 8 (AD8)	Detect cognitive impairment and dementia 	1. Judgment problems2. Decreased interest in activities or hobbies3. Repeating questions or stories4. Difficulty learning to use technological devices/appliances5. Forgetting the month or year6. Difficulty managing complex financial matters7. Difficulty remembering commitments8. Persistent memory and thinking problems	8 questions	Spain: Cutoff score: 3/4 points, discriminates between subjects with and without cognitive impairment Chile:Cutoff score: superior to 2 points, to differentiate between dementia and controls 	Administered by professional to caregiver or family memberAdministered by telephone	C: Spain Co: neurology service (hospital) n: 407 dyads OA/informer (99 OA with cognitive impairment without dementia; 203 OA with dementia; 105 OA without cognitive impairment)x: 72.6 (8.9) years for OA with cognitive impairment without dementia; 78.4 (6.6) years for OA with dementia; 69.8 (10.2) years for OA without cognitive impairment; 54.2 (13.5) years for informer R: no informationC: Chile Co: neurology service (hospital)n: 54 dyads OA/Informer (28 OA with dementia; 26 OA controls)x: 72.6 (1.9) years for OA with dementia; 75.9 (1.0) years for OA controls R: no information	Sensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliabilityTranscultural adaptationConstruct validity Sensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliability		 	Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-Revised (ACE-R)	Detect early cognitive deficits associated with dementia 	1. Orientation and attention2. Memory3. Verbal fluency4. Language5. Visuospatial skills	5 items 	Argentina: Cutoff score: 85 points, for the detection of dementia Chile: Cutoff score: 76 points, to distinguish between subjects with dementia and healthy subjects Cutoff score: 91 points, to distinguish between subjects with mild cognitive impairment and healthy subjects 	Administered by professional to OA	C: Argentina Co: neurology clinic n: 127 OA (46 OA with Alzheimer disease; 41 OA with behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia; 40 OA controls)x: 73.4 (5.7) years for OA with Alzheimer disease; 70.0 (9.3) years for OA with behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia; 71.5 (5.6) years for OA controls R: no information C: Chile Co: neurology service (hospital)n: 127 OA (60 OA with dementia, 22 OA with mild cognitive impairment, 45 OA healthy controls)x: 73.3 (8.7) years for OA with dementia; 71.5 (8.9) years for OA with mild cognitive impairment; 73.7 (7.4) years for OA healthy controlsR: no information 	Transcultural adaptationCriterion validitySensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliabilityTranscultural adaptationConstruct validity Sensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliability		 	Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III (ACE-III)	Detect cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer-type dementia and behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia * Due to copyright issues with the MMSE, the recent version (ACE-III) replaces all MMSE items with analogous ones.	1. Orientation and attention2. Memory3. Verbal fluency4. Language5. Visuospatial skills	5 items	Chile and Argentina: Cutoff score: 86 points, for the detection of Alzheimer-type dementia and behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia	Administered by professional to OA	C: Chile and Argentina Co: neurology institute and service (hospital)n: 240 OA (70 OA with Alzheimer type dementia; 31 OA with behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia; 139 controls)x: 76.7 (7.6) years for OA with Alzheimer-type dementia; 68.0 (7.9) years for OA with behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia; 68.0 (10.4) years for controlsR: no information 	Adaptation of the assessment tool Sensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliability		 	Memory, fluency, and orientation (MEFO)	Detect cognitive impairment and dementia	1. Memory2. Phonetic fluidity3. Orientation	3 items 	Cutoff score: 6/7 points, distinguishes people with dementiaCutoff score: 8/9 points, distinguishes people with cognitive impairment	Administered by professional to OA	C: Chile Co: hospital n: 214 OA (49 OA with dementia; 47 with mild cognitive impairment; 118 OA without cognitive impairment) x: 73 (7) years for OA with dementia; 75 (7) years for OA with mild cognitive impairment; 70 (7) years for OA without cognitive impairment R: no information 	Construct validity Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curve Reliability		 	The Fototest	Detect cognitive impairment and dementia * Applicable to illiterate individuals	1. Memory2. Language 3. Executive functions 	3 items	Classification:40–64 years: Mean and SD: 38.7 ± 4.8 points −1 SD: 34 points −1.5 SD: 31 points−2 SD: 29 points≥65 years: Mean and SD: 34.4 ± 4.4 points−1 SD: 30 points −1.5 SD: 28 points−2 SD: 26 points Cutoff score: 26/27 points, to detect dementia Cutoff score: 28/29 points, to detect cognitive impairment 	Administered by professional to OA	C: SpainCo: communityn: 223 x: 54.3 (15.8) yearsgroup ≥ 65 years, R: 20–85 years (39.5% between 50–64 years; and 29.6% ≥ 65 years)	Normative study Reliability 		 	Insomnia Severity Index (ISI)	Detect insomnia and evaluate its severity 	1. Severity of the sleep problem in relation to: (a) Difficulty falling asleep (b) Difficulty staying asleep (c) Waking up very early2. Satisfaction with current sleep3. Interference of the sleep problem with daily functioning4. Others’ perception of the sleep problem affecting quality of life5. Worry about the sleep problem	7 questions 	Classification:0–7 points: absence of clinical insomnia8–14 points: subclinical insomnia 15–21 points: clinical insomnia (moderate) 22–28 points: clinical insomnia (serious)	Self-administered Administered by professional to OAAdministered by telephone	C: Spain Co: communityn: 230 x: 71.1 (5.5) yearsR: 56–87 years	Construct validity Reliability	Chile 	 	Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS)	Evaluate the propensity to fall asleep in eight situations, mostly monotonous and some more soporific than others 	Evaluation of sleepiness in 8 situations: 1. Sitting and reading2. Watching TV3. Sitting, inactive at a show4. In a car, as a passenger on a 1-h trip5. Lying down in the afternoon6. Sitting and conversing with someone7. Sitting after a meal (without consuming alcohol)8. In a car, stopped for a few minutes due to traffic	8 questions 	Classification:0–9 points: normal 10–12 points: marginal sleepiness13–24 points: suggestive of excessive sleepiness	Self-administered Administered by professional to OAAdministered by telephone	C: Mexico Co: not specified n: 281x: 40.4 years R: 13–74 years	Transcultural adaptation Construct validity Reliability	Chile 	 	The Geriatric Depression Scale of Yessavage (GDS)	Screening for depression in OA	Cognitive-behavioral aspects related to the special characteristics of depression in OA:10 positive aspects5 negative aspects	15questions 	Spain: Cutoff score: 5 pointsCuba: Cutoff score: 5 pointsColombia: Does not specify cutoff score, classification, and/or categorization Classification:0–5 points: normal 6–9 points: mild depression 10–15 points: established depression Classification:0–5 points: normal6–10 points: moderate depression 11–15 points: severe depression Classification: 0–5 points: normal6–10 points: mild depression 11–15 points: severe depressionClassification:0–4 points: normal5–15 points: presence of depressive symptoms 	Self-administered Administered by professional to OA	C: Spain Co: PHCn: 249 OAx: 74.3 years R: 65 years and olderC: Cuba Co: university polyclinic n: 101 OAx: 76.8 years R: 65–≥ 90 years C: Colombia Co: day centers n: 500 OAx: no information R: 60–96 years	Transcultural adaptation Construct and criterion validity Sensibility, specificity, ROC curve ReliabilitySensibility, specificity, ROC curveConstruct validity Reliability	Mexico El Salvador Panama Brazil Chile Argentina 	 	Goldberg Anxiety and Depression Scale (GADS)	Detect psychopathological disorders, as well as to differentiate anxiety and depression	2 subscales: 1. Anxiety (9 questions)2. Depression (9 questions) In each subscale, there are 4 initial screening questions to determine whether it is probable that a mental disorder exists. Then, there are 5 questions that are asked, if positive responses are obtained to the screening questions (2 or more points for anxiety and 1 or more points for depression)	18 questions	Cutoff score: ≥4 points, in the anxiety subscale Cutoff score: ≥2 points, in the depression subscale * There is an independent score for every subscale 	Administered by professional to OA	C: Cuba Co: communityn: 548x: 58.4 (17.1) yearsR: 22–103 years	Criterion validity Sensibility, specificity, ROC curve	Chile 	 	Falls Efficacy Scale-International (FES-I)	Detect preoccupation for falling 	Preoccupation for falling in the following activities: 1. Cleaning the house2. Dressing and undressing3. Preparing simple meals4. Taking a bath or shower5. Going shopping6. Sitting down or getting up from a chair7. Going up or down stairs8. Walking in the neighborhood9. Reaching for something that is high or on the floor10. Going to answer the phone before it stops ringing11. Walking on slippery surfaces12. Visiting a friend or family member13. Walking in crowded places14. Walking on uneven surfaces15. Going up and down a slope or hill16. Going out to a social event	16 questions	Brazil:Classification:16 points: no preoccupation 64 points: extreme preoccupation * Score > 23 suggests association with a history of sporadic falls Score > 31 leads to association with recurring falls Spain: Does not specify cutoff score, classification, and/or categorization 	Self-administered Administered by professional to OA	C: BrazilCo: communityn: 163 OA (108 OA did not present falls; 33 OA presented falls; 22 OA presented recurring falls, in the last) x: 73.4 (5.5) yearsR: No information C: Spain Co: community/clinic n: 100 womenx: 57.5 (3.9) yearsR: 50–65 years	Construct validity Sensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliabilityTranscultural adaptation Construct, content, and criterion validity Reliability		 	The Short Falls Efficacy Scale-International (Short FES-I)	Detect preoccupation for falling	Preoccupation for falling in the following activities: 1. Dressing and undressing2. Bathing or showering3. Sitting down or standing up from a chair4. Going up or down stairs5. Reaching for something that is high or on the ground6. Going up and down inclined surfaces (ramp)7. Going out to a social event	7 questions	Classification:7–8 points: low preoccupation 9–13 points: moderate preoccupation14–28 points: high preoccupation 	Self-administered Administered by professional to OA	C: ChileCo: hospital (geriatrics program)n: 113 OAx: 71 yearsR: 60 years and more 	Transcultural adaptation Construct validity Reliability		 	Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale	Evaluate self-esteem 	10 statements about the feelings a person has about themselves, divided equally into:5 positively directed statements (items 1, 2, 4, 6 y 7)5 negatively directed statements (Items 3, 5, 8, 9 y 10)	10 items	Theorical values: fluctuate between: 10 (low self-esteem) and 40 (high self-esteem) 60–75 years: 32.3 ± 4.2 points	Self-administered	C: Chile Co: community n: 473 x: no information R: 30–75 years	Construct validity Reliability
Abbreviations: C: country; Co: context; n: sample size; x: mean age (standard deviation); R: age range; OA: older adults; PHC: primary health care. # In the column “Cutoff score, classification and/or reported categorization”, the reported cutoff point from validation articles is presented first in descending order, followed by the classifications that appear in these validation articles or in any government documents. * Corresponds to a clarification of the aspect described in the evaluation tool.
Tools for Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment in the functional sphere, their validity and reliability determination in Spanish or Portuguese, and their use in technical guidelines (in government documents) in Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Name of Evaluation Tool or Instrument	Objective(s)	Evaluation Dimension(s) or Aspect(s)	Number of Questions or Items	Cutoff Score, Classification and/or Reported Categorization #	Administration Form	Validity and Reliability	Use in Government Document (Country)	 	Characteristics of Analyzed Sample	Analysis of Psychometric Tests Performed	 	Katz Index	Evaluate independence/dependence in basic activities of daily living	1. Dressing2. Bathing (sponge, shower, or tub)3. Using the toilet4. Transfers/mobility5. Urinary/fecal continence6. Eating	6 items	Classification: 0: independent in all 6 functions 1: independent in 5 functions and dependent in 1 function 2: independent in 4 functions and dependent in 2 functions3: independent in 3 functions and dependent in 3 functions4: independent in 2 functions and dependent in 4 functions5: independent in 1 function and dependent in 5 functions6: dependent in all 6 functionsClassification:6 points: Total independence 5 or fewer points: dependence, which can reach “0” (total dependence)Likewise, the alphabetical score should be recorded to ensure a descriptive interpretation. The activity or activities for which the person retains or does not retain independence should be mentioned.Classification:A: independence in all basic activities of daily living B: independence in all basic activities of daily living, minus oneC: independence in everything except bathing and one additional activity D: independence in everything except bathing, dressing, and one additional activity E: dependence in bathing, dressing, using the toilet, and one additional activity F: dependence in bathing, dressing, using the toilet, transfers, and one additional activity G: dependence in all six basic activities of daily living H/Others: dependence in two activities but does not classify in C, D, E, or FClassification:Grades A–B or 0–1 point: absence of disability or mild disability Grades C-D or 2–3 points: moderate disability Grades E-G or 4–6 points: severe disabilityClassification:1 = no positive items of dependency: independent 2 = 1 to 5 positive items of dependency: partial dependency 3 = 6 positive items of dependency: total dependency	Administered by professional to OA Observation	C: BrazilCo: residence, hospital, geriatric outpatient service n: 156 (includes OA, but does not specify how many)x: No information R: No information	Transcultural adaptationReliability 	Mexico El Salvador Panama Brazil Peru Chile Argentina 	 	Barthel Index	Evaluate the degree of independence or dependence in basic activities of daily living	1. Eating/feeding2. Washing/bathing3. Dressing4. Grooming5. Bowel control6. Urinary control7. Using the toilet8. Transferring (from bed to chair)9. Walking/moving10. Stairs/using steps	10 items	Mexico: Does not specify cutoff score, classification, and/or categorization Classification:Less than 20 points: total dependence20–35 points: severe/serious dependence40–55 points: moderate dependence60 points or more: mild dependence100 points: independentMaximum score: 100 (90 points, if using a wheelchair)Classification:0–20 points: total dependence21–60 points: severe/serious dependence61–90 points: moderate dependence91–99 points: slight dependence100 points: independence	Administered by professional to OA Administered by professional to caregiver or family memberAdministered by telephoneObservation	C: Mexico Co: community n: 476 OAx: 74.2 (9.4) years R: 60–98 years	Construct validity Reliability 	Mexico El Salvador Colombia Chile Argentina 	 	Lawton–Brody Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scale (IADL)	Evaluate the degree of independence or dependence in instrumental activities of daily living	1. Ability to use the phone2. Do/go shopping/shopping3. Cooking/meal preparation4. Housekeeping/doing housework/domestic chores5. Washing clothes6. Using transportation7. Management of medication/Responsibility regarding medication8. Ability to handle money/Management of financial matters/Finance	8 questions	Spain:Classification:The summarized score ranges from 0 (low function, dependent) to 8 (high function, independent)Brazil: Classification: ≤5 points: total dependence >5–<20 points: partial dependence 21 points: independence Classification:0–7 points: functional impairment; except when activities that the OA never performed are omitted8 points: total independence* The maximum score may be lower when activities that the OA has never performed are omitted, for example, if the OA has never cooked. Total: 7/7.Classification:0 points: maximum dependence8 points: total independenceClassification: 0–1 point: total dependence2–3 points: severe/serious dependence 4–5 points: moderate dependence 6–7 points: mild/light dependence 8 points: autonomous/independent Classification:5 points (men): normal 8 points (women): normal	Administered by professional to OA	C: Spain Co: emergency room (hospital)n: 1.965 OAx: 80.0 (8.0) yearsR: No informationC: Brazil Co: communityn: 16 OAx: 67 (6.9) yearsR: 60–89 years	Construct and criterion validity ReliabilityTranscultural adaptation Criterion validity Reliability 	Mexico El Salvador Colombia Brazil Chile Argentina 	 	Spanish version of the Activities of Daily LivingQuestionnaire (SV-ADLQ)	Evaluate independence or dependence in basic, instrumental, and advanced activities of daily living	1. Self-care2. Household care3. Employment and recreation4. Shopping and money management5. Travel6. Communication	28 items	Does not clearly specify	Self-administeredAdministered by professional to OA Administered by professional to caregiver or family member	C: Argentina Co: outpatient (Institute of Cognitive Neurology) n: 39 caregivers of OA with different types of dementia (22 Alzheimer type; 10 frontotemporal variants; 7 other types)x: 79.0 (5.9) years for OA with Alzheimer type; 75.5 (11.0) years for OA with frontotemporal variant; 76.6 (8.9) years for OA with other types R: No information	Criterion validity Reliability		 	The Technology—Activities of Daily Living Questionnaire (T-ADLQ)	Evaluate independence or dependence in Basic, Instrumental, and Advanced Activities of Daily Living(includes technological item)	1. Self-care2. Home care3. Employment and recreation4. Shopping and money management5. Travel6. Communication7. Technology	33 items	Cutoff score: more than 29.25%, in order to determine clinically relevant functional impairment	Self-administeredAdministered by professional to OA Administered by professional to caregiver or family member	C: Chile Co: neurology service (hospital)n: 128 OA, information provided by informants (63 OA with dementia; 21 OA with mild cognitive impairment; 44 OA controls)x: 73.9 (8.7) years for OA with dementia; 71.3 (9.1) years for OA with mild cognitive impairment; 74.0 (7.2) years for OA controlsR: no information	Development and adaptation of new version Construct validity Sensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliability	Chile 	 	Pfeffer Functional Activities Questionnaire (PFAQ)	Evaluate functional capacity to perform Instrumental Activities of Daily LivingMoreover, it is highly associated with cognitive impairment	1. Money managementAbility to:2. Buy clothing, household items, and groceries independently3. Heat water for coffee/tea and turn off the stove.4. Prepare a meal.5. Stay informed about current events in the community or neighborhood.6. Pay attention to, understand, and discuss a radio program, TV show, newspaper, or magazine.7. Remember appointments, family events, and vacations.8. Manage their own medications.9. Walk around the neighborhood and find their way back home.10. Greet friends appropriately.11. Be left at home safely.	11 questions	Chile: Cutoff score: ≥6 points for cognitive impairment Brazil: Does not specify cutoff score, classification, and/or categorization Classification: below 6 points: normalcy (no dependence) 6 or more points: functional alterationClassification: The higher the score, the greater the assisted dependency	Administered by professional to caregiver or family member	C: Chile Co: urban and rural n: 94 OA (76 OA without cognitive impairment; 18 OA with dementia)x: no information R: 65->84 years C: Brazil C: communityn: 110 OA (37 OA with cognitive impairment; 73 OA without cognitive impairment)x: 71.5 yearsR: no information	Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curve Sensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliability 	Chile Brazil 	 	One-Leg Balance Test	Evaluate static balance on one foot and the risk of falls	1. Static balance 2. Risk of falls	Does not apply	Classification: 5 or more seconds (maintaining position): normal balance 4 s or less (maintaining position): altered balance and risk of falls	Administered by professional to OA	Despite its use in public policies, no validation was identified	Despite its use in public policies, no validation was identified	Chile 	 	Timed Up and Go (TUG)	Evaluate dynamic balance in walking and the risk of falls	1. Dynamic balance 2. Risk of falls	Does not apply	Classification:10 s or less: normal 11–13 s: mild mobility impairment 14 s or more: high risk of fallsClassification:10 s or less: normal 11–20 s: mild risk of falls More than 20 s: high risk of falls	Administered by professional to OA	Despite its use in public policies, no validation was identified	Despite its use in public policies, no validation was identified	Mexico El Salvador Chile 	 	Tinetti Gait and Balance Assessment Tool	Evaluate static and dynamic balance and the risk of falls	(a) Balance subscale (9 items):1. Sitting balance2. Standing up3. Attempts to stand up4. Balance in immediate bipedal stance5. Balance in bipedal stance6. Pushing7. Eyes closed8. 360-degree turn9. Sitting down(b) Walking subscale (7 items)10.Initiation of walking11. Step length and height (right foot and left foot)12. Step symmetry13. Step fluidity14. Trajectory15. Trunk16. Posture while walking	16 items	Colombia: Classification:0–18 points: high risk of falls19–24 points: minimal risk of falls Classification:0–18 points: high risk of falls19–24 points: risk of falls25–28 points: less risk of fallsClassification: 16 points: balance subscale 12 points: walking subscale 28 points: TotalThe higher the score, the better the functioningClassification: The lower the score, the greater the problem. A score below 19 points indicates a 5 times higher risk of falls	Administered by professional to OA Observation	C: Colombia Co: residence and community n: 90 OAx: 77.1 (7.9) yearsR: no information C: Colombia Co: community and residence n: 135 OA (45 OA that exercise; 45 sedentary OA; 45 institutionalized OA)x: 65 (4.2) years for OA that exercise; 70 (7.6) years for sedentary OA; 76 (7.0) years for institutionalized OA R: no information	Construct, content, and criterion validity Reliability* Only balance subscale Construct validitySensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive valueReliability* A 12-item version was used (in the balance subscale; 24 points maximum)	Chile Brazil 	 	Balance Evaluation Systems Test (BESTest)	Evaluate balance and risk factors of falls (discriminates the risk of falls and functional profile)	1. Biomechanical limitations 2. Limits of stability/verticality 3. Anticipatory postural adjustments 4. Postural responses 5. Sensory orientation6. Stability while walking	36 items	Cutoff score: <80 points, high risk of falls	Administered by professional to OA	C: Colombia Co: communityn: 222x: 64.2 (8.7) yearsR: 50–80 years	Criterion validity Sensibility, specificity, ROC curveReliability		 	Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB)	Evaluate 3 aspects of mobility (specifically lower limb functionality)/level of physical functioning* Supports potential detection of adverse outcomes such as mortality and institutionalization, as well as its association with disability and dependence on care	1. Balance in 3 positions (feet together, semi-tandem, and tandem) 2. Gait speed over 4 m3. Lower limb strength to stand up from a chair	3 items	Spain: 70–75 years: SPPB: 9.1 ± 2.5 pointsBalance test: 3.2 ± 1.1 pointsWalking speed test: 3.3 ± 0.8 pointsTest LSS5: 2.6 ± 1.2 points76–80 years:SPPB: 8.1 ± 2.7 pointsBalance test: 2.7 ± 1.2 pointsWalking speed test: 3.0 ± 0.9 pointsTest LSS5: 2.4 ± 1.2 pointsMore than 80 years: SPPB: 7.0 ± 2.7 pointsBalance test: 2.2 ± 1.3 pointsWalking speed test: 2.6 ± 0.9 pointsTest LSS5: 2.2 ± 1.3 pointsColombia: SPPB: 9.7 ± 2.0 pointsBalance test: 3.7 ± 0.75 pointsWalking speed test: 3.4 ± 0.74 pointsTest LSS5: 2.6 ± 1.05 pointsClassification:0 points: worse performance12 points: better performanceClassification:Less than 8 points: low physical performance Classification: <9 points: low physical performance 10 or more points: normalClassification: ≤9 points: high risk of falls, fragility and sarcopenia 10 or more points: adequate performance, repeat in 6 months * A difference of 1 between 2 measurements is considered a minimum significative change.	Administered by professional to OA	C: SpainCo: PHCn: 593 OAx: 76.5 (4.8) yearsR: 70–> 80C: Colombia Co: day centersn: 150 OA x: 69.5 (3.1) yearsR: 65–75 years	Reference values according to sex and age Construct and criterion validity Reliability	Mexico Costa Rica 	 	Senior Fitness Test (SFT)	Evaluate physical-functional condition of OA	1. Leg strength (lower body)2. Dominant arm strength (upper body)3. Aerobic endurance4. Leg flexibility (lower body)5. Arm flexibility (upper body)6. Agility and dynamic balance	6 items	Percentiles are presented for the SFT test battery in physically active older Chilean women according to age ranges (60–64, 65–69, 70–74, 75–79 y ≥ 80 years).	Administered by professional to OA	C: Chile Co: communityn: 1.048 OA physically active womenx: 70.6 (6.2) yearsR: 60–85 years	Reference values according to age
Abbreviations: C: country; Co: context; n: sample size; x: mean age (standard deviation); R: age range; OA: older adults; PHC: primary health care; LSS5: stand up and sit down test in a chair 5 times. # In the column “Cutoff score, classification and/or reported categorization”, the reported cutoff point from validation articles is presented first in descending order, followed by the classifications that appear in these validation articles or in any government documents. * Corresponds to a clarification of the aspect described in the evaluation tool.
Tools for Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment in the social sphere, their validity and reliability determination in Spanish or Portuguese, and their use in technical guidelines (in government documents) in Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Name of Evaluation Tool or Instrument	Objective(s)	Evaluation Dimension(s) or Aspect(s)	Number of Questions or Items	Cutoff Score, Classification and/or Reported Categorization #	Administration Form	Validity and Reliability	Use in Government Document (Country)	 	Characteristics of Analyzed Sample	Analysis of Psychometric Tests Performed/Recommendations	 	Genogram (family diagram, family tree, or human pedigree)	Draw family structure and record information about family members and their relationships over at least three generations, providing a quick overview of complex family relationships.* It is a rich source of hypotheses about how a problem of one of its components may be related to family context and its evolution over time.	Family structure and dynamics Construction stages: 1. Mapping family structure (using symbols).2. Recording important information about family.3. Describing family relationships based on reports from family members (using symbols and lines).* It can be continued to be completed as more knowledge of the family is gained or when it is necessary to deepen the intervention.	At least 3 generations of family members	Interpretation: analysis is based on the understanding of six categories :Category 1: family composition Category 2: Adaptation to life cycle Category 3: Repetition of patterns across generations Category 4: Life events and family functioning Category 5: Bonding patterns and triangles Category 6: Balances and imbalances	Administered by professional to OA	C: Colombia Co: for PHC and community n: not indicated x y R: for different age groups	Documentary review and theoretical reflection, with administration recommendations	Chile Brazil 	 	Ecomap	Draw the individual and the family in their living space, dynamically representing the ecological system surrounding the family: important connections, intrasystemic boundaries, conflicts, resources, and shortages, as well as the nature and intensity of family relationships with external systems, such as their relationships with the suprasystem, society, and/or other systems.This is fundamental, when approaching protective factors, environmental factors that can be a source of stress, and as a tool to facilitate intersectoral work.	Family dynamicsStages of construction:1. Start with the genogram in its simplest form (a graphic with names), in a large central circle or rectangle.2. Around it, draw as many circles or rectangles as there are interactions with external systems that the family as a whole or each of its components has.3. Connections are made through lines that link the family (or one or several members) with the external circles, reflecting the nature of the relationships and their intensity.The relationship symbols of the ecomap are different from those used in the intrafamily relationships of the genogram.* It can be continued to be completed as more knowledge of the family is gained or when it is necessary to deepen the intervention.	The main components are: 1. Educational institutions2. Work3. Community organizations or intersectoral organizations in contact with the family4. Health institutions5. Social support network6. Extended family7. Recreation8. Friends9. ReligionAccording to local reality, other elements may be important, such as: 10. Public transportation, in areas that have difficulty accessing community services.	Interpretation: Indicate the interactions of the family and each of its members with the surrounding systems in a graphical and summarized form:Allows for identifying possible causes of stress or conflict.Suggests resources to mobilize in times of crisis.Indicates if some individuals have good relationships with external elements outside the family.Indicates if the family as a whole or any of its members are isolated from sources of recreation, education, health, social activities, etc.	Administered by professional to OA	C: Colombia Co: for PHC and community n: not indicated x y R: for different age groups	Documentary review and theoretical reflection, with administration recommendations 	Chile Brazil 	 	The Lubben-6 Social Network Scale (LSNS-6)	Evaluate the person’s social, family, and friends relationships (Perceived social support)	(a) Family1. Number of people with whom they have personal or phone contact at least once a month2. Number of people with whom they feel comfortable discussing personal matters that concern them easily3. Number of people with whom they feel close enough to call if they need help(b) Friends: 4. Repeat question 15. Repeat question 26. Repeat question 3	6 questions	Cutoff score: 12 points Classification:Less than 12 points: possible risk of social isolation	Self-administeredAdministered by professional to OA	C: Argentina Co: hospital (outpatient)n: 150 OAx: 76.3 yearsR: no information	Transcultural adaptationConstruct and criterion validity 	Mexico 	 	The Gijon Social-Family Scale	Detect risk situations and social problems in OA’s environment/Assess a person’s social and family system	1. Family situation2. Economic situation3. Housing situation4. Social relationships5. Support from social network/Network of social support	5 items	Classification: 5–9 points: good, adequate or acceptable social situation 10–14 points: existence of social risk 16–25 points: existence of a social problemClassification:5–9 points: normal or low social risk 10–16 points: intermediate social risk. Refer to social work. 18–25 points: elevated social risk (social problem). Refer to social work.	Administered by professional to OA	C: Brazil Co: hospital (outpatient)n: 34 OAx: not indicated R: 60 years and older	Transcultural adaptation Reliability 	Mexico Peru Argentina 	 	The Medical Outcome Study Social Support Survey (MOS-SSS)	Evaluates the frequency with which each type of support or aid is available for patients with chronic illnesses	1. The first item refers to the size of the social network.The remaining 19 items are related to four dimensions of social support:2. Emotional/Informational support: Refers to expressions of affection, empathetic understanding, guidance, advice, and information. Questions: 3, 4, 8, 9, 13, 16, 17, and 193. Instrumental support: Provision of material or tangible help. Questions: 2, 5, 12, and 15.4. Positive social interaction: Availability of other people to meet, have fun, or enjoy themselves. Questions: 7, 11, 14, and 18.5. Affective support: Demonstrations of real love, affection, or empathy. Questions: 6, 10, and 20.	20 items	Spain and Colombia: The higher the score, the higher the level of perceived social supportClassification: Global index of social support Maximum: 94 points/Average: 57 points/Minimum: 19 points* Additionally, maximum, average, and minimum values are specified for: emotional support, material assistance, social relationships for leisure and distraction, and affective support.	Self-administered Administered by professional to OA	C: Spain Co: hospital n: 400 outpatient patients with oncological diseasex: 54.3 (12.1) yearsR: 18–80 yearsC: Colombia Co: community n: 179x: 38.4 (15.2) yearsR: 17–86 years	Transcultural adaptation Construct validation Reliability * In this validation, emotional/informational support and positive social interaction generate a single factor (grouping questions 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18 y 19)Transcultural adaptation Construct validation Reliability * The factorial structure was validated for both four and three components		 	Zarit Caregiver Burden Interview (ZCBI)	Assess caregiver’s burden for dependent patients/Detect the risk of illness, anxiety, and depression in the caregiver	1. How caregiver feels being the primary caregiver. 2. Dependency of the person being cared for.3. Risk of isolation or limitations on their personal life.4. What to do with the person being cared for.	22 questions	Chile:Cutoff score: 56 points, to detect intense caregiver burdenBrazil: Does not specify cutoff score, classification, and/or categorization Classification:22–46 points: absence of overload47–55 points: light burden56–110 points: intense burden* “Light burden” represents a risk factor for generating intense burden; the latter is associated with greater medical, psychiatric, and social morbidity and mortality of the caregiverClassification: High score indicates caregiver stress	Administered by professional to caregiver or family member	C: Chile Co: PHCn: 32 caregivers x: 55.6 yearsR: No information C: Brazil Co: Community n: 285 caregivers of OAx: 52.5 (13.9) yearsR: 18–87 years	Construct and criterion validity Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curveReliabilityConstruct and criterion validity Reliability	Mexico Brazil Chile Argentina 	 	Abbreviated Zarit Caregiver Burden Interview	Assess the burden of caregivers for dependent patients in palliative care	Questions 2, 3, 6, 9, 10, 17 and 22 of the versions of 22 questions	7 questions	Cutoff score: 17 points, to detect intense burden Classification:7–16 points: absence of overload 17–35 points: intense burden* “Intense burden” is associated with greater medical, psychiatric, and social morbidity and mortality of the caregiver	Administered by professional to caregiver or family member	C: Chile Co: PHCn: 32 caregivers x: 55.6 yearsR: No information	Construct and criterion validity Sensibility, specificity, positive and negative predictive value, ROC curveReliability 	Chile
Abbreviations: C: country; Co: context; n: sample size; x: mean age (standard deviation); R: age range; OA: older adults; PHC: primary health care. # In the column “Cutoff score, classification and/or reported categorization”, the reported cutoff point from validation articles is presented first in descending order, followed by the classifications that appear in these validation articles or in any government documents. * Corresponds to a clarification of the aspect described in the evaluation tool.

References
Usefulness of the comprehensive geriatric assessment for evaluating the health of older adults
What is Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA)? An umbrella review
Comprehensive geriatric assessment: Benefits and limitations
Comprehensive geriatric assessment: An update
Description and clinical application of comprehensive geriatric assessment scales: A rapid systematic review of reviews
Comprehensive geriatric assessment
Association between comprehensive geriatric assessment and polypharmacy at discharge in patients with ischaemic stroke: A nationwide, retrospective, cohort study
Comprehensive geriatric assessment-where are we now, where do we need to be in the context of global ageing?
Validation of a screening test for age associated cognitive impairment, in Chile
Validity and Reliability in Dental Research
Reliability, precision or reproducibility of the measurements. Methods of assessment, utility and applications in clinical practice
Psychosocial impact of COVID-19 on older people: Problems and challenges
Telehealth Use Among Older Adults During COVID-19: Associations with Sociodemographic and Health Characteristics, Technology Device Ownership, and Technology Learning
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment in the era of telemedicine
Guía Práctica de Telerehabilitación para Kinesiólogos
Validity and reliability of the Barthel index administered by telephone
A typology of reviews: An analysis of 14 review types and associated methodologies
The Science of Literature Reviews: Searching, Identifying, Selecting, and Synthesising
Effects of physical exercise on quality of life in older people. Literature review
Valoración Gerontológica Integral Ampliada (VGIA): Nuevo paradigma de abordaje para personas mayores inmigrantes
Effects of a Structured Multicomponent Physical Exercise Intervention on Quality of Life and Biopsychosocial Health among Chilean Older Adults from the Community with Controlled Multimorbidity: A Pre-Post Design
Masticatory coefficient and physical functioning in older frail patients admitted for a Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment
RESOL-2023-3315-APN-MS. Minist Salud Argentina 2023
Frailty in primary care: Diagnosis and multidisciplinary management
Comprehensive geriatric assessment
Development and psychometric properties of the Geriatric Mistreatment Scale
Validation of an instrument to measure the effect of oral health on the quality of life of Mexican older adults
Cultural adaptation and validation of the Geriatric Oral Health Assessment Index-GOHAI-Colombian version
Elders Health Empowerment Scale. Spanish adaptation and psychometric analysis
Behavior of falls risk at home of the elderly persons
Proposed evaluation of the elderly with COVID-19 (confirmed or suspected case) based on comprehensive geriatric assessment
Adaptation of the comprehensive geriatric assessment to a virtual delivery format
Telehealth Use in Geriatrics Care during the COVID-19 Pandemic—A Scoping Review and Evidence Synthesis
Sarcopenia: Revised European consensus on definition and diagnosis
Tools for assessing fall risk in the elderly: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Microlearning for surgical residents enhances perioperative comprehensive geriatric assessment
Argentinian/Chilean validation of the Spanish-language version of Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination III for diagnosing dementia
Instrumentos Validados en Argentina. Society for Psychotherpy Research
Fototest
Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment Instruments in Geriatric Services in Spain: Heterogeneous use of our main work tool
Which Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment (CGA) instruments are currently used in Germany: A survey
Development and validation of a Sarcopenia Geriatric Scale (SARCO-GS): A new short scale for the screening of sarcopenia
Introducing GeriatriApp: App in Spanish for a comprehensive geriatric assessment
GeriKit: A novel app for comprehensive geriatric assessment
Atención integrada para las personas mayores (ICOPE)
Frail-VIG index: Design and evaluation of a new frailty index based on the Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment
Review Importance and Generalities of the Comprehensive Geriatric Assessment as a Tool for Eldery Approach in Home Care
Preoperative assessment and preparation for hip surgery in the elderly adult
Geriatric evaluation guided by G8 in the decision to treat older adults with cancer. A pilot study
Proposed development of a geriatric oncology unit. Times of change: Our reality
Comprehensive geriatric assessment in palliative care: Review bibliographic
Inter-University Network for Healthy Aging, Latin America and the Caribbean (RIES-LAC): A university contribution to the Decade of Healthy Aging
Validation and adaptation of the Charlson Comorbidity Index using administrative data from the Colombian health system: Retrospective cohort study
Barthel and Charlson indexes for the prognosis of mortality and institutionalization in hospitalized geriatric patients
Utility of the Charlson Comorbidity Index in older people and concordance with other comorbidity indices
Cross-Cultural Adaptation and Validation of the Spanish-Language Version of the SARC-F to Assess Sarcopenia in Mexican Community-Dwelling Older Adults
Cross-Cultural Adaptation and Validation of the FRAIL Scale to Assess Frailty in Mexican Adults
Psychometric properties of the Tilburg Frailty Indicator in older Spanish people
Validation of a Spanish version of the International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire Short-Form
Validity and Quality indices of Braden and Norton scales
Validity and reliability of the Braden scale to predict pressure ulcer risk in the elderly
Validation (in Spanish) of the Mini Nutritional Assessment survey to assess the nutritional status of patients over 65 years of age
Mini Nutritional Assessment short-form: Validation in five Latin American cities. SABE study
Content validity of Food Quality Survey of Elderly (ECAAM)
Validation of the eat-10 score to detect dysphagia in older people
Validation of the Spanish Version of the Eating Assessment Tool-10 (EAT-10spa) in Colombia. A Blinded Prospective Cohort Study
Translation and validation of the Spanish version of the EAT-10 (Eating Assessment Tool-10) for the screening of dysphagia
Dismobility in Geriatrics: A decade defining a clinical concept
Confusion Assessment Method for diagnosing delirium in ICU patients (CAM-ICU): Cultural adaptation and validation of the Spanish version
Spanish version of the method for evaluation of confusion in intensive cares, pilot study of validation
Cross-cultural adaptation and validation of Pfeiffer’s test (Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire [SPMSQ]) to screen cognitive impairment in general population aged 65 or older
Translation and cross-cultural adaptation of Pfeiffer’s Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire (SPMSQ) for brazilians older adults
Validation of a Modified Version of the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) in Spanish
MoCA and MMSE scores in patients with mild cognitive impairment and dementia in a memory clinic in Bogotá
The “MiniMental State Examination” in Spanish. Norms for Buenos Aires
Suggestions for utilization of the mini-mental state examination in Brazil
Envelhecimento e Saúde da pessoa idosa. Série A. Normas e Manuais Técnicos. Cadernos de Atenção Básica, n. 19
Validation of the Spanish-language version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment test in adults older than 60 years
Validity and Reliability of the Spanish Version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) for the Detection of Cognitive Impairment in Mexico
Validity of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test as a screening tool to detect Mild Cognitive Impairment in the population of Buenos Aires, Argentina
MoCA Test: Normative and diagnostic accuracy data for seniors with heterogeneous educational levels in Brazil
Validation of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment in Ecuadorian older adults
Assessing the diagnostic accuracy (DA) of the spanish version of the informant-based AD8 questionnaire
Usefulness of a Brief Informant Interview to Detect Dementia, translated into Spanish (AD8-Ch)
Validation of the Spanish Version of the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-Revised (ACE-R)
Psychometric properties and diagnostic usefulness of the Addenbrooke’s Cognitive Examination-revised in a Chilean elderly sample
Memory, fluency, and orientation: A five-minute screening test for cognitive decline
Normative and reliability study of fototest
Insomnia Severity Index: Some indicators about its reliability and validity on an older adults sample
Validation of the Epworth Sleepiness Scalein Mexican population
The Spanish version of the Yesavage abbreviated questionnaire (GDS) to screen depressive dysfunctions in patients older than 65 years
Evaluation the spanish version Yesavage abbreviated questionnaire in diagnostic of depression in geriatric population
Validation of the Yesavage Depression Scale (reduced version) in Colombian older adults
Diagnostic usefulness of Anxiety and Depression Scale Goldberg (EAD-G) in Cuban adults
Cross-cultural adaptation and evaluation of the psychometric properties of the Falls Efficacy Scale-International in Brazilian elderly people (FES-I-BRASIL)
Cross-cultural adaptation and validation of the Falls Efficacy Scale International in Spanish postmenopausal women
Fear of falling: Validation of a measurement tool in Chilean elderly living in the community
Rosenberg self-esteem scale: Validation in a representative sample of Chilean adults
Cross-cultural adaptation of the Independence in Activities of Daily Living Index (Katz Index)
Psychometric validation of the Barthel index in Mexican older adults
Validation of the Spanish version of the Lawton IADL Scale for its application in elderly people
Reliability of the Brazilian version of the Scale of Instrumental Activities of Daily Living
Assessment of functional impairment in dementia with the Spanish version of the Activities of Daily Living Questionnaire
The “Technology-Activities of Daily Living Questionnaire”: A version with a technology-related subscale
Accuracy and reliability of the Pfeffer Questionnaire for the Brazilian elderly population
Validity and reliability of the Tinetti Scale for Colombian population
Validity and reproducibility of functional assessment based on performance status
Validation of the BESTest in a population of Colombian older adults
Short Physical Performance Battery reference values for patients 70 years-old and over in primary health care
Validity and reliability of the Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB): A pilot study on mobility in the Colombian Andes
Reference values for the senior fitness test in Chilean older women
Genogram and ecopope: Approach tools for the family doctor
Validation of the Spanish version of the Lubben Social Network Scale-6
Cross-cultural adaptation of the original version of the Older Adults Socio-familial Evaluation Scale to the Brazilian context
Validity of the questionnaire MOS-SSS of social support in neoplastic patients
Validation in Colombia of the MOS social support questionnaire
Original and abbreviated Zarit caregiver burden scales. Validation in Chile
The Zarit Caregiver Burden Interview: Evidence of Validity in a Brazilian Population of Senior Citizen Caregivers
Diagram of the article selection process for the literature review, categorized by type of document and country. Abbreviation: CGA: Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment.
Summary of key aspects to consider as part of clinical reasoning by the interdisciplinary team at the moment of including/using an assessment tool as part of the CGA. Abbreviation: CGA: Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment.
Levels of care, programs, and social-health services for older adults in Latin America and the Caribbean, where a Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment battery is proposed. Abbreviation: CGA: Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment.
Aspects to consider as part of clinical reasoning by the interdisciplinary team at the moment of including/using an assessment tool as part of the CGA.
Aspects	Considerations (Identify/Revise) 	 	OA user type and profile 	Type of family: OA living alone, OA living with a partner, OA with a nuclear family, OA with an extended family, OA with/without a caregiver (formal or informal).Economic resources that allow them to travel to the evaluation site.Presence of geriatric syndromes and/or the need for identification and/or severity assessment.Personal characteristics: education level, cognitive, functional, and sensory abilities.	 	Educational and literacy level of OA	OA who are illiterate, with primary, secondary, or technical/university education.Ability to read and write independently or with assistance.	 	Cognitive level of OA	OA with normal cognitive state, mild, moderate, or severe cognitive impairment.Impairment of one or more higher cognitive functions.Whether they are able to answer the questions asked during the evaluation or if they require assistance.	 	Functional level of OA 	OA who are independent, with mild, moderate, or severe dependence.Whether they walk (alone or with assistance), remain seated, or are bedridden (and their level of mobility).Requirement for assistive mobility and transfer devices (cane, walker, or wheelchair).	 	Sensory alterations of OA and available corrections 	Visual or auditory impairments that OA may present.Correction of impairments, with glasses or hearing aids.	 	Context or level of care where service, center or program is implemented 	General intervention models in gerontology and geriatrics (social, mixed, or health).Levels of health care and their emphasis (primary: promotional and preventive; secondary: diagnosis and treatment; tertiary: care, intervention, and specialized rehabilitation).Specific programs and services for OA (Emergency and General Hospitalization Room, Acute Geriatric Unit, Orthogeriatric Unit, Oncogeriatric Unit, Functional Recovery/Rehabilitation Unit, Day Hospital, Memory Unit, Incontinence Unit, primary health care or clinic and specific programs for OA at this level, community rehabilitation center (in PHC), day centers for OA, community programs, residential care for OA, private outpatient care, home care, among others).	 	Diversity of professions in the interdisciplinary team 	Presence or absence.Wide or limited.Presence and diversity of potential professionals who can apply and analyze the tool(s) (geriatrician, primary health care physician, kinesiologist or physiotherapist, speech therapist, occupational therapist, nutritionist, nurse, midwife, dentist, pharmacist, psychologist, social worker or social assistant, gerontologist, physical education teacher, psychometrician, music therapist, and other professionals working with OA).	 	CGA knowledge and training of the interprofessional team 	Knowledge and familiarity with the tools.Number of interdisciplinary team professionals trained in the CGA tool(s) (one or several).Post-training needs.	 	Cultural context	Urban or rural.Particular geographical areas (coast, valley, mountain range).Particular ethnic contexts.	 	Objective and dimensions that CGA tools evaluate 	Main objective of tool.Secondary objectives.Characteristics of each question (and whether they address cause, symptom, condition, or another geriatric syndrome).	 	Quantity and types of questions (and their alternative replies) 	Administration time.Complexity of understanding by OA.Requirement for detailed explanation by professional.Complexity of administration by professional.	 	Administration form 	Considering different administration alternatives: self-administered, administered by professional to OA, administered by professional to caregiver or family member, observation, administration by phone, administration via telehealth. Some tools allow only one form of administration, while others allow multiple forms.	 	Time needed for administration 	Time in minutes, identifying time required for its completion, whether within a single session (part of the session or the entire session) or over multiple evaluation sessions.	 	Place needed for administration 	Location, identifying space required and necessary implements for its completion.Conditions of privacy and tranquility for OA and/or their caregiver.	 	Score and how to obtain it 	Tool allows for a score to be obtained.Method and/or calculation required to obtain the score (easy or difficult).Cutoff score based on validation.This score allows for classification/categorization.Levels of classification or categorization produced by score.It is recommended that cutoff points be defined based on formal education.	 	Classification provided 	Tool is for screening, diagnosis, or clinical analysis.Feasibility of generating severity categories for analyzed condition.Feasibility of guiding intervention with these severity categories.	 	Validation and reliability 	Construct, content, or criterion validity (concurrent or predictive) of tool, in the language or country (or region).Reliability according to evaluation tool, time, and/or observer; method used and analysis of its results.	 	Usage in the government documents (technical orientations) 	Most commonly used and recommended.Forms and administration recommendations used/provided.
Abbreviations: CGA: Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment; OA: older adults; PHC: primary healthcare.
Compilation and proposals for Comprehensive Gerontological Assessment batteries for different levels of care, programs, and social health services for older adults in the context of Latin America and the Caribbean. Adapted from publications and technical guidelines of countries in the region, and based on authors’ experience.
Level of Care, Service or Program 	Biomedical	Mental(Cognitive and Emotional)	Functional	Social	 	COVID-19 case (suspicious or confirmed case)Adapted from 	Assessment of index pathologyCCIAssessment of comorbidity and risk factors:HypertensionIschemic heart diseaseHeart failureCOPD AsthmaType 2 diabetesImmunosuppressionChronic kidney diseaseLiver diseaseObesityMalnutritionRequested paraclinical tests:ETADI	CAMInvestigate previous diagnosis of dementia or major neurocognitive disorder.Subjective complaint of memory or cognitive declineMMSE (if possible and in case of doubt regarding cognitive diagnosis)	Barthel IndexIADLFRAIL only if Barthel Index > 90	The Gijon social-family scale Semi-structured interview:Housing conditions Room conditionsNumber of bathrooms in housePresence of caregiver	 	Emergency and General Hospital WardAdapted from 	CCIEAT-10MNA-SFNorton ScaleDownton fall risk assessment scaleFalls within previous year. ETADI	CAMMMSEMoCa SPMSQSubjective memory complaintGDSNPI, if applicable	Barthel IndexIADLFRAILSARC-F	LSNS-6Ecomap	 	Acute Geriatric UnitAdapted from 	CCIEAT-10MNA-SFNorton ScaleDownton fall risk assessment scale.ETADI	CAMMMSEMoCASPMSQGDSNPI, if applicable	Barthel IndexIADLTUGTinetti Gait and Balance Assessment ToolPFAQ	GenogramEcomapLSNS-6ZCBI	 	Orthogeriatric Unit (Preoperative, scheduled hip-knee prosthesis)	CCIEAT-10MNA-SFNorton ScaleDownton fall risk assessment scaleETADI	CAMMMSE or SPMSQ (in case of low educational level and/or rurality)GDSGADS (Anxiety Scale) Short FES-I	TFIBarthel IndexIADLTinetti Gait and Balance Assessment ToolSPPB	GenogramEcomapZCBIEQ-5D + EQ-VAS	 	Oncogeriatric UnitAdapted from 	G8 (oncological)(a) G8 ≤ 14 points, coordinated for CGA (within no more than 7 days)(b) G8 > 14 points, continuation with regular care in oncology 	 	CCIMNA-SFDownton fall risk assessment scaleETADI Risk of chemotherapy toxicity (Chemo-Toxicity Calculator)	MMSEMoCASPMSQGDSGADS (Anxiety Scale)	Barthel IndexIADLTinetti Gait and Balance Assessment ToolSPPB	The Gijon social-family scaleMOS-SSSZCBI or abbreviated ZCBIEQ-5D + EQ-VAS	 	Functional Recovery/Rehabilitation UnitAdapted from 	CCIEAT-10MNANorton ScaleDownton fall risk assessment scale Falls withinprevious year ETADIICIQ-SF	CAMMMSEMoCa Subjective memory complaintGDSGADS (Anxiety Scale)FES-I NPI, if applicable	Barthel IndexIADLTADL-QFRAILTFISARC-FDynamometryPFAQTinetti Gait and Balance Assessment ToolBESTest SPPB	GenogramEcomapZCBIMOS-SSSEQ-5D + EQ-VAS	 	Primary Health Care/Clinic (Preventive Evaluation and Primary Health Care Programs)Adapted from 	ICIQ-SFDownton fall risk assessment scaleECAAM	MMSEISI + ESS GDSGADS	Barthel IndexIADLTFISARC-FPFAQEVAOne-Leg Balance test + TUGSFT (Autonomous and Slightly Dependent)SPPB (Fragile, Moderately Dependent, and Disability)	GerogramEcomapMOS-SSSEQ-5D + EQ-VAS	 	Community Rehabilitation Centers (Community-Based Rehabilitation Strategy)	ETADIICIQ-SFMNAECAAMEAT-10Downton fall risk assessment scaleNorton Scale (only if necessary)	MMSE o Pfeiffer (in case of low educational level and/or rurality)MoCAISI + ESS GDSGADSFES-I	Barthel IndexIADLTADL-QOne-Leg Balance test + TUGTinetti Gait and Balance Assessment ToolBESTestEVASFT (Autonomous and Slightly Dependent)SPPB (Fragile, Moderately Dependent, and Disability)	GenogramEcomapMOS-SSSZCBIEQ-5D + EQ-VAS	 	Day Centers for Older AdultsAdapted from 	First 48 h:Admission formMNANorton Scale (only if necessary)	First 48 h:CAM (only in case it is necessary)MMSE or SPMSQ (in case of low educational level and/or rurality)	First 48 h:Barthel IndexTFIOne-Leg Balancetest + TUGEVA	First 48 h:Personal data and contact	 	Complete until first week: ICIQ-SFETADIEAT-10ECAAM	Complete until first week: ISI + ESSGDS GADS (Anxiety Scale) Short FES-I	Complete until first week: IADLTinetti Gait and Balance Assessment ToolSFT (Autonomous and Slightly Dependent)SPPB (Fragile, Moderately Dependent, and Disability)	Complete until first week: EcomapMOS-SSSZCBIEQ-5D + EQ-VAS	 	Elderly Care ResidencesAdapted from 	First 24 h:Admission form Downton fall risk assessment scale Norton Scale	First 24 h:CAMMMSE or SPMSQ (in case of low educational level and/or rurality)Inquiry about mood aspects in the admission form	First 24 h:Barthel IndexPFAQEVA	First 24 h:Update of social background.	 	Complete until second week:ETADIICIQ-SFMNAEAT-10	Complete until second week:ISI + ESSGDSGADS (Anxiety Scale)NPI, if applicable	Complete until second week: IADLTADL-QSix-Minute Walk TestRPEOne-Leg Balance test + TUGTinetti Gait and Balance Assessment ToolBESTestSFT (Autonomous and Slightly Dependent)SPPB (Fragile, Moderately Dependent, and Disability)	Complete until second week:GenogramEcomapMOS-SSSEQ-5D + EQ-VAS	 	Private outpatient consultation (medical and/or professional)Adapted from 	EAT-10MNA-SFDownton fall risk assessment scale Falls within previous year ETADI	CAM, if applicableMMSEMoCASubjective memory complaintGDSFES-IGADS (Anxiety Scale)NPI, if applicable	Barthel IndexIADLFRAILSARC-FSPPB	GenogramEcomapZCBIMOS-SSS	 	Private home care (medical and/or professional)Adapted from 	EAT-10MNA-SFECAAMNorton ScaleDownton fall risk assessment scale ETADI	CAMMMSEMoCa GDSFES-IGADS (Anxiety Scale)NPI, if applicable	Barthel IndexIADLTADL-QFRAILSARC-FOne-Leg Balance test + TUGTinetti Gait and Balance Assessment ToolSPPB	GenogramEcomapZCBIMOS-SSS	 	Telehealth (by phone and/or video)Adapted from 	MNA-SFECAAMEAT-10Downton fall risk assessment scale ETADI (by video)	CAMMMSESPMSQ MoCAGDSGADS (Anxiety Scale)	Barthel IndexIADLStanding up and sitting down from the chair, gait, TUG within the living space (via video)EVA TADL-Q	MOS-SSSZCBI
Abbreviations: CCI: Charlson comorbidity index; COPD: Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease; EAT-10: Eating Assessment Tool-10; MNA: Mini-Nutritional Assessment; MNA-SF: Mini-Nutritional Assessment-Short Form; ETADI: Denmark dismobility stage; CAM: Confusion Assessment Method; MMSE: Mini-Mental State Examination; MoCa: Montreal Cognitive Assessment; SPMSQ: Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire of Pfeiffer; GDS: The Geriatric Depression Scale of Yessavage; IADL: Lawton–Brody Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scale; TUG: Timed up and go; PFAQ: Pfeffer Functional Activities Questionnaire; GADS: Goldberg Anxiety and Depression Scale; FES-I: Falls Efficacy Scale-International; Short FES-I: The short Falls Efficacy Scale-International; TFI: Tilburg Frailty Indicator; SPPB: Short Physical Performance Battery; ZCBI: Zarit Caregiver Burden Interview; NPI: Neuropsychiatric Inventory; LSNS-6: The Lubben-6 Social Network Scale; G8: Geriatric 8; FRAIL: FRAIL Scale (Fatigue, Resistance, Ambulation, Illnesses, Loss of Weight); SARC-F: SARC-F (Strength, Assistance in walking, Rise from chair, Climb stairs—Falls) questionnaire; ICIQ-SF: International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire Short-Form; ECAAM: Food Quality Survey of Elderly; ISI: Insomnia Severity Index; ESS: Epworth Sleepiness Scale; MOS-SSS: The Medical Outcome Study Social Support Survey; SFT: Senior Fitness Test; TADL-Q: The Technology—Activities of Daily Living Questionnaire; BESTest: Balance Evaluation Systems Test; Q-5D: EuroQol-five dimensions; EQ-VAS: EuroQol-visual analogue scale; EVA: Visual Analogue Scale; RPE: Borg Rating of Perceived Exertion Scale.