Refractory septic shock: our updated pragmatic approach
Despite the refinement in guidelines and improving outcomes, a subset of patients with septic shock fails to respond to treatment and progresses into refractory septic shock with an associated high morbidity and mortality. This population remains underrepresented in clinical trials due to their heterogeneity, in addition to time and ethical constraints. As a large specialist referral centre, we propose an updated, pragmatic, and largely inexpensive approach based on our current clinical practice, which focuses on early multimodal therapy, aiming to reduce the detrimental effects associated with high-dose vasopressors.

Introduction
Since the previous version of this paper, there have been some significant advances in septic shock management. These improvements are largely attributable to the updated Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) guidelines from 2021 and refined patient selection in clinical trials. However, despite these innovations, a subgroup of patients continues to exhibit resistance to conventional consensus-based management and can be classified as having refractory septic shock.
Refractory septic shock remains an ill-defined syndrome with heterogeneous definitions but, in general, is characterised by hypotension with a requirement for high-dose vasopressor support in the presence of persistent tissue hypoperfusion and organ dysfunction despite adequate resuscitation. There is increasing recognition of the need for early multimodal therapy for refractory shock to avoid unacceptable toxicity from catecholamine excess, such as tachyarrhythmias and limb or gastrointestinal ischaemia. The traditional paradigm of stepwise addition of shock adjuncts, with escalating doses of catecholamines, may result in increased time to restoration of tissue and organ perfusion, past the point of reversibility, resulting in significant morbidity and mortality. Evolving evidence suggests improved outcomes with a more individualised approach and earlier initiation of multimodal, catecholamine-sparing therapy to avoid such toxicity and rapidly restore tissue perfusion.
As a specialist Severe Respiratory and Cardiac Failure Centre in the UK, between our internal and referred cohorts, we advise on and treat over 50 patients every year with refractory septic shock where SSC recommendations and standard therapy have failed.
The aim of this paper is to describe a comprehensive set of treatment options for clinicians to restore organ perfusion and haemodynamic coherence and to minimise the detrimental effects of high-dose vasopressors and acid–base derangement.

Initial approach

Buffered crystalloid and albumin
Assessment and optimisation of preload are the cornerstone of managing organ hypoperfusion in septic shock. Our practice is to use a combination of invasive cardiac output monitoring, serial echocardiography, and bedside dynamic clinical assessment to assess fluid responsiveness.
In agreement with the SSC guidelines, buffered isotonic crystalloid fluid remains the first choice for initial fluid resuscitation, followed by 20% human albumin solution if further volume replacement is required. Albumin has been associated with reduced mortality in patients with septic shock, more sustained haemodynamic effects, and potential improvement in the microcirculation.

Hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone
Although its survival benefit remains unclear, hydrocortisone has been shown to hasten shock resolution, and the recommendation to use it has been upgraded in the 2021 SSC guidelines. Our practice is to administer hydrocortisone as a continuous infusion (200 mg daily) due to its potential benefits in promoting shock resolution. There remains uncertainty over the role of fludrocortisone in improving shock outcomes with conflicting randomised controlled trials. However, subsequent meta-analysis provide moderate evidence of a mortality benefit. Therefore, our approach is to add fludrocortisone 100 µg daily, until shock resolution, considering the potential for improved outcomes, lack of any safety concerns, low cost, and ease of enteral administration.

Vasopressin
Patients with refractory septic shock commonly exhibit catecholamine resistance with flattening of the noradrenaline dose–response curve. Vasopressin induces V1-receptor-mediated vasoconstriction and allows a reduction in noradrenaline requirement. Vasopressin is considered once noradrenaline base is in the range of 0.2–0.3 mcg/kg/min. In line with the SSC guidelines and the results of the VANISH and VASST trials, we routinely limit vasopressin dose to a maximum of 0.04 IU/min to minimise the risk of ischaemia. Patients with acute or chronic pulmonary hypertension can further benefit due to a relative vasoactive-sparing effect on the pulmonary vasculature.

Femoral arterial access
Septic shock and high-dose vasopressors disrupt normal arterial pressure waveform propagation. This can create a significant discrepancy, of up to 13 mmHg, between radial and femoral mean arterial pressures (MAP), which can lead to unnecessary escalation of vasopressor dosing and toxicity. To mitigate this, we routinely use femoral arterial access for blood pressure monitoring as part of our vasopressor-sparing strategy.

Minimised and targeted sedation
Sedative medications may exacerbate hypotension through myocardial depression and systemic vasodilation. We strictly titrate sedative agents to a target Richmond Agitation–Sedation Scale (RASS) of 0 to −2 or a bispectral index level of 40 to 60 if neuromuscular blockers are required, often allowing significant dose reduction. To reduce propofol requirements and its possible adverse haemodynamic impact, low-dose midazolam infusion may be added while in the rescue phase of shock resuscitation. We acknowledge the prolonged half-life, potential for accumulation, increased risk of delirium, and potential for over-sedation with benzodiazepines, but short duration and daily spontaneous awakening trials limit these adverse effects.

Lower MAP targets
Blood pressure is used as a surrogate for perfusion, but this relationship is not linear and can be heavily disrupted in septic shock and during high endogenous and exogenous catecholamine states. Observational studies in non-septic patients suggest that cerebral and splanchnic perfusion may remain acceptable at MAP values as low as 50–55 mmHg. Additionally, the 65 TRIAL found that in critically ill patients, targeting MAP around 60 mmHg did not worsen outcomes.
While an initial MAP target of 65 mmHg seems a reasonable approach for many patients, the ideal MAP should be individualised and may be lowered to 50–55 mmHg in selected younger patients without pre-existing hypertension or coronary artery disease. This approach requires close monitoring of tissue and organ perfusion, but it may avoid excessive peripheral vasoconstriction that can compromise the microcirculation and increase the risk of ischaemic complications.

Additional supportive measures and therapies

Inotropic support
Low cardiac output states due to septic cardiomyopathy are not uncommon in patients with refractory septic shock. These states can be identified using invasive cardiac output monitoring, serial echocardiography, and physiological surrogates, such as central venous saturation and venous-to-arterial CO2 tension difference. Dobutamine has traditionally been used to increase cardiac contractility, but exacerbation of tachycardia and increased myocardial oxygen consumption may limit its usefulness in this context. Though evidence is limited, milrinone is our preferred approach with typical doses of 0.1–0.3 µg/kg/min to mitigate concomitant vasodilatation, noting the prolonged half-life seen in acute kidney injury.
If macro-circulatory parameters fail to respond to first-line inodilators, or when stress-induced cardiomyopathy is suspected, we initiate levosimendan. This approach enhances myocardial contractility while minimising adrenergic stimulation and limiting myocardial oxygen consumption. In the LeoPARDS study, levosimendan did not reduce organ dysfunction or 28-day mortality but was associated with increased rates of arrhythmia. However, patients were enrolled irrespective of cardiac index, and only a small proportion had cardiac dysfunction.

Enteral nutrition and replacement of thiamine
In patients with overt shock and mesenteric hypoperfusion, early enteral nutrition is either contraindicated or often limited to a ‘trophic’ feeding rate due to high gastric residual volumes. To avoid an increased risk of non-occlusive mesenteric ischaemia, we often rely on parenteral nutrition to reach adequate caloric targets, particularly in patients with multiple days of reduced intake, prior to transfer to our institution.
Thiamine (vitamin B1) supplementation may accelerate shock reversal in deficient patients. Detection of thiamine deficiency using whole blood thiamine is expensive, time-consuming, and affected by the analytical method; additionally, thiamine reserve is easily depleted in critical illness and by renal replacement therapy (RRT). Therefore, thanks to a safe pharmacological profile, a cost-effective way to optimise thiamine levels is to supplement systematically with intravenous multivitamin preparations. Our usual dosing is 500 mg of thiamine three times a day until shock has resolved.

Bicarbonate and renal replacement therapy
Severe acidosis leads to myocardial depression, vasodilatation, pulmonary vasoconstriction, and reduced sensitivity to catecholamines. Sodium bicarbonate administration reduces the requirement for RRT and possibly mortality in non-anion gap metabolic acidosis, but its role in the treatment of lactic acidosis is still a matter of contention.
Correction of macro-haemodynamic parameters and tissue hypoperfusion usually leads to resolution of lactic acidosis. However, in patients with refractory septic shock, vasodilatation and lactic acidosis may combine in a vicious cycle, where bicarbonate can be effective. Any beneficial effects of sodium bicarbonate can be dampened by side effects, such as increased carbon dioxide, with paradoxical acidosis, and hypocalcaemia, and particular attention should be given to prevent them.
Short-term high-dose RRT — up to 40–60 ml/kg/h — can be initiated early to rapidly improve metabolic status. Although large trials investigating prolonged high-dose RRT have been negative, selected patients may benefit from short-term high-dose clearance as improved metabolic status can reduce vasopressor requirements and improve cardiac output. Antimicrobial dosing and vitamin/trace element supplementation should be adjusted to offset excessive clearance.

Epoprostenol and glyceryl trinitrate
Persistent hypoperfusion despite adequate resuscitation often reflects uncoupling between macro- and microcirculation, driven by imbalances between regional vasoconstrictor and vasodilator signalling, both endogenous and exogenous. Intravenous prostacyclins improve microcirculatory flow and are used in patients with Raynaud’s disease or frostbite. Unfortunately, in septic shock, promising preliminary data were not confirmed in subsequent large randomised controlled trials. However, enrolled patients only exhibit moderate signs of peripheral hypoperfusion.
In refractory septic shock with extensive peripheral mottling, we initiate a low-dose epoprostenol infusion (0.5–5 ng/kg/min) to improve microcirculatory flow and reduce thrombotic risk and digital ischaemia. When titrated cautiously and kept within a low-dose range, any haemodynamic compromise can be mitigated, although we acknowledge that this approach should be investigated in further prospective trials. Prostacyclins are potent inhibitors of platelet aggregation, and we avoid their use in patients with severe thrombocytopenia or increased haemorrhagic risk. Where prostacyclins are contraindicated, glyceryl trinitrate infusion or local patches can be used.

Angiotensin II, methylene blue, and hydroxocobalamin
Patients with persistent hypotension and hypoperfusion despite preserved cardiac output and adequate preload optimisation may benefit from other vasopressor therapies that act via alternative pathways to re-establish perfusion pressure and so avoid excessive catecholamine exposure.
Relative deficiency of angiotensin II has been associated with worse outcomes in septic shock. The use of angiotensin II in septic shock increases blood pressure and decreases the need for standard vasopressors. It has shown particular efficacy in patients on renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) inhibitors, although our experience remains limited.
The profound vasoplegia experienced with septic shock is contributed to by excessive production of nitric oxide (NO), which causes vasodilation through the activation of guanylate cyclase. Methylene blue (MB) specifically inhibits soluble guanylate cyclase within the NO pathway. Based on emerging literature in cardiac surgery and in septic shock, MB may be used as a rescue therapy. MB also exhibits antioxidant properties and may reduce sepsis-associated oxidative stress. We administer 1–2 mg/kg as a loading dose, followed by continuous infusion of 0.25–1 mg/kg/h, limiting the cumulative dose to 7 mg/kg, to reduce adverse effects. Particular caution should be used in patients at risk of serotonin syndrome given the monoamine oxidase inhibiting property of MB.
High-dose hydroxocobalamin has also been used as an alternative rescue therapy. It is an inhibitor of NO synthase, guanylate cyclase, and hydrogen sulphide, acting as a NO scavenging agent. Our practice is to administer as a slow 5-g infusion over 3–4 h to prolong the NO scavenging effects, where NO production is likely ongoing, but further studies are required to demonstrate the efficacy, safety, and place in therapy of this novel agent. However, it is infrequently required if the above measures are applied and, in some countries, there are availability issues.
It should be noted that MB and hydroxocobalamin may induce colour changes in plasma that may affect pulse oximetry, blood leak detection in extracorporeal circuits, and interpretation of laboratory tests, such as anti-Xa monitoring.

Toxin-reducing antimicrobial therapy
Toxic shock syndrome frequently results in refractory septic shock through bacterial exotoxin release. Protein synthesis-inhibiting antimicrobials, such as clindamycin and linezolid, reduce toxin production in vitro, though observational studies report a variable impact on mortality. This variability is likely influenced by the timing of administration, with earlier treatment potentially being more effective. In selected patients with rapid deterioration and signs suggestive of toxin-mediated illness, such as cutaneous or gastrointestinal involvement, we initiate protein synthesis-inhibiting antimicrobials prior to microbiological confirmation.

Intravenous immunoglobulin
The 2021 SSC guidelines acknowledge the potential mortality benefit of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), supported by multiple meta-analyses, but recommend against the routine use of IVIG in septic shock given the cost, equity concerns, and feasibility in middle- and low-income settings. However, IVIG’s anti-inflammatory and immunomodulation properties may benefit individual patients with a hyperinflammatory phenotype. As a result, we may consider IVIG (1–2 g/kg) in selected refractory septic shock patients where there is confirmed microbiology, clinical features, and/or a history highly suggestive of toxin-producing organisms.

Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support
Pharmacological management of vasodilatory shock — adapted from local guidance
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) can provide an effective temporising measure to achieve adequate oxygen delivery and acid–base correction in patients with refractory septic shock and septic cardiomyopathy with reduced ejection fraction. ECMO eases the burden of conventional support by reducing mechanical ventilation power and vasoactive drug requirements. However, careful patient selection is absolutely essential (Figure 1).

Conclusion
Although many clinical trials in sepsis and septic shock have been negative, over the recent decades, mortality has declined, likely due to the gradual cumulative benefit of earlier initiation of multiple interventions and marginal gains. We propose a similar individualised and dynamic approach (Fig. 1) for patients with refractory septic shock, tailored to the patient’s context. While the effect size of each individual intervention may be small, our local experience suggests that when applied in combination, this approach may be associated with improved shock outcomes.
This population remains underrepresented in clinical trials, and we recognise that some of our clinical approach is guided by expert opinion and local experience. Much uncertainty remains, but we hope to stimulate discussion and offer practical guidance, particularly since many of these strategies are low cost and broadly implementable.

Abbreviations
SSC
Surviving Sepsis Campaign
MAP
Mean arterial pressure
RASS
Richmond Agitation-Sedation Scale
BIS
Bispectral index
RRT
Renal replacement therapy
RAAS
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
NO
Nitric oxide
MB
Methylene blue
IVIG
Intravenous immunoglobulin
ECMO
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
MCS
Mechanical circulatory support
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
DW, CM and NI conceived the idea. FP and AWB drafted the initial manuscript. FH and SK formulated the figure. DW, CM, NI, MO, FH and SK edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding
This article was not supported by any sponsor or funder.

Data availability
Not applicable.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Refractory septic shock: our pragmatic approach
Surviving sepsis campaign: international guidelines for management of sepsis and septic shock 2021
Refractory septic shock and alternative wordings: a systematic review of literature
Multimodal strategy to counteract vasodilation in septic shock
Is it time to reconsider the concept of “salvage therapy” in refractory shock?
Initiating angiotensin II at lower vasopressor doses in vasodilatory shock: an exploratory post-hoc analysis of the ATHOS-3 clinical trial
Optimal vasopressin initiation in septic shock: the OVISS reinforcement learning study
Albumin replacement in patients with severe sepsis or septic shock
Haemodynamic response to crystalloids or colloids in shock: an exploratory subgroup analysis of a randomised controlled trial
Albumin infusion improves endothelial function in septic shock patients: a pilot study
Comparative efficacy and prognostic impact of continuous versus intermittent hydrocortisone administration in septic shock patients
Hydrocortisone plus fludrocortisone for adults with septic shock
Fludrocortisone dose–response relationship in septic shock: a randomised phase II trial
Corticosteroids for sepsis and septic shock: a meta-analysis of 18 RCTs with dose-stratified and fludrocortisone subgroup evaluation
Vasopressin: mechanisms of action on the vasculature in health and in septic shock
Effect of early vasopressin vs norepinephrine on kidney failure in patients with septic shock: the VANISH randomized clinical trial
Russell JA, Hébert PC, Granton JT, Ayers D (2008) Vasopressin versus norepinephrine infusion in patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med 358(9):877–887. 10.1056/NEJMoa067373
1096: effect of norepinephrine versus vasopressin on pulmonary artery pressure
Vascular decoupling in septic shock: the combined role of autonomic nervous system, arterial stiffness, and peripheral vascular tone
Agreements between mean arterial pressure from radial and femoral artery measurements in refractory shock patients
Hemodynamic characteristics of midazolam, propofol, and dexmedetomidine in healthy volunteers
Heterogeneous impact of hypotension on organ perfusion and outcomes: a narrative review
Effect of controlled hypotension on regional cerebral oxygen saturation during rhinoplasty: a prospective study
The influence of deliberate hypotension on splanchnic perfusion balance with use of either isoflurane or esmolol and nitroglycerin
Effect of reduced exposure to vasopressors on 90-day mortality in older critically ill patients with vasodilatory hypotension: a randomized clinical trial
A plea for personalization of the hemodynamic management of septic shock
Systemic and microcirculatory effects of dobutamine in patients with septic shock
Milrinone as compared with dobutamine in the treatment of cardiogenic shock
Effects of adjunctive milrinone versus placebo on hemodynamics in patients with septic shock: a randomized controlled trial
Levosimendan for sepsis-induced myocardial dysfunction: friend or foe?
Levosimendan for the prevention of acute organ dysfunction in sepsis
Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of thiamine as a metabolic resuscitator in septic shock: a pilot study
Vitamin C and thiamine in critical illness
<article-title update="added">Micronutrients in critically ill patients with severe acute kidney injury – a prospective study
Hemodynamic consequences of severe lactic acidosis in shock states: from bench to bedside
Sodium bicarbonate for severe metabolic acidemia and acute kidney injury: the BICARICU-2 randomized clinical trial
Early sodium bicarbonate therapy for critically ill patients with septic shock and acute moderate metabolic acidosis
Efficient extra- and intracellular alkalinization improves cardiovascular functions in severe lactic acidosis induced by hemorrhagic shock
High-dose versus conventional-dose continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration and patient and kidney survival and cytokine removal in sepsis-associated acute kidney injury: a randomized controlled trial
High-volume versus standard-volume haemofiltration for septic shock patients with acute kidney injury (IVOIRE study): a multicentre randomized controlled trial
Clinical outcomes of severe sepsis and septic shock patients with left ventricular dysfunction undergoing continuous renal replacement therapy
Challenges in the management of septic shock: a narrative review
A multiclinic, placebo-controlled, double-blind study of prostaglandin E1 in Raynaud's syndrome.
Iloprost for the treatment of frostbite: a scoping review
Co-administration of iloprost and eptifibatide in septic shock (CO-ILEPSS)—a randomised, controlled, double-blind investigator-initiated trial investigating safety and efficacy
Iloprost and organ dysfunction in adults with septic shock and endotheliopathy: a randomized clinical trial
Iloprost for the treatment of severe septic shock with persistent hypoperfusion: a double-blind, randomized controlled trial
The effects of vasodilation with prostacyclin on oxygen delivery and uptake in critically ill patients
Nitroglycerin reverts clinical manifestations of poor peripheral perfusion in patients with circulatory shock
The renin–angiotensin–aldosterone-system in sepsis and its clinical modulation with exogenous angiotensin II
Angiotensin II for the treatment of vasodilatory shock
Methylene blue reduces mortality in critically ill and perioperative patients: a meta-analysis of randomized trials
Methylene blue in septic shock: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Methylene blue improves mitochondrial respiration and decreases oxidative stress in a substrate-dependent manner in diabetic rat hearts
Methylene blue: revisited
High-dose IV hydroxocobalamin (vitamin B12) in septic shock
Haemodynamic management of septic shock
Seeing red: hydroxocobalamin and result interference
Influences of linezolid, penicillin, and clindamycin, alone and in combination, on streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin A release
Effectiveness of adjunctive clindamycin in β-lactam antibiotic-treated patients with invasive β-haemolytic streptococcal infections in US hospitals: a retrospective multicentre cohort study
Campbell AJ, Dotel R, Blyth CC, Davis JS, Tong SYC, Bowen AC. Adjunctive protein synthesis inhibitor antibiotics for toxin suppression in Staphylococcus aureus infections: a systematic appraisal. J Antimicrob Chemother. Published online October 10, 2018. 10.1093/jac/dky387
Minimizing the release of proinflammatory and toxic bacterial products within the host: a promising approach to improve outcome in life-threatening infections
Polyspecific intravenous immunoglobulin in clindamycin-treated patients with streptococcal toxic shock syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Efficacy of IVIG therapy for patients with sepsis: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Use of intravenous immunoglobulins in patients with suspected toxin-mediated shock requiring extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation to rescue sepsis-induced cardiogenic shock: a retrospective, multicentre, international cohort study
Two decades of mortality trends among patients with severe sepsis: a comparative meta-analysis*
Veno-arterio-venous ECMO for septic cardiomyopathy: a single-centre experience