The End of Life With Dementia in Asian Countries: Barriers, Facilitators and a Research Agenda for Advancing a Palliative Approach
ABSTRACT
Background
Dementia—the seventh leading cause of death globally—is most prevalent in Asia, home to over half of those affected. Yet, palliative approaches to dementia, endorsed by the World Health Organization (WHO) Global Action Plan on the Public Health Response to Dementia, and focused on improving quality of life through a holistic and person‐centered approach, are largely absent in the region.
Methods
We reviewed the available literature related to end‐of‐life experiences with advanced dementia from countries in the WHO South‐east Asian and Western Pacific regions. We used the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research to synthesize barriers and facilitators to implementing a palliative approach to dementia and propose a research agenda.
Results
Broad barriers identified in the outer setting of the implementation framework include sociocultural values and a lack of supportive policies, guidelines, and financing. Within the inner setting of the healthcare system, challenges stem from underdeveloped long‐term care infrastructure, limited professional training, and gaps in equity and person‐centeredness. At the individual level, barriers include low dementia literacy and limited uptake of advance care planning. Potential facilitators were growing digital fluency and established community norms around caring for older adults at home.
Conclusions
Based on our review, we propose a research agenda prioritizing partnering with individuals with dementia and their caregivers, especially in low‐ and middle‐income countries, de‐implementing low‐value interventions and implementing community‐level palliative care models, leveraging technological innovations, and developing core evaluation metrics to advance WHO's action plan and foster culturally relevant and effective interventions tailored to the region's unique needs.
Summary
Asia is expected to be home to more than half of individuals living with dementia by 2050, yet a palliative approach focused on improving quality of life is largely absent in the region.
This review identifies barriers and facilitators to a palliative approach to dementia in Asia, which are most apparent in the literature related to end‐of‐life care.
We propose a research agenda centered on partnering with individuals with dementia and their family/informal caregivers, particularly in low‐ and middle‐income countries, de‐implementing low‐value practices alongside implementation of community‐level palliative care and advance care planning interventions, leveraging technological solutions, and establishing core end‐of‐life dementia care metrics.
Key points
The published Asian literature underscores the absence of a palliative approach in dementia care and a paucity of research stemming from low and middle‐income countries where dementia‐related indignities and reduced quality of life are most acute. We propose a research agenda to further WHO objectives for a public health response to dementia and ensure a palliative approach is central to dementia EOL care.
Why does this paper matter?

Introduction
Mr. C, an 88‐year‐old widower with advanced dementia, was cared for at home in Singapore by his daughter, E. When Mr. C began having difficulty eating, his doctor suggested nasogastric tube feeding. Trusting the medical advice and unfamiliar with its implications, E promptly agreed. Mr. C frequently became agitated and pulled out the tube. On the recommendation of a home nurse, E reluctantly resorted to using wrist restraints to prevent him from removing the tube. Over time, Mr. C's health worsened. He became prone to infections, necessitating multiple courses of antibiotics and frequent hospitalizations. Caring for Mr. C took a heavy toll on E. The decisions she made—especially around invasive treatments—caused her significant stress and led to ongoing conflicts with her brothers. Mr. C developed a severe leg infection leading to a final hospitalization, in which he died, surrounded by medical equipment.
This vignette based on a prior qualitative study exemplifies end‐of‐life (EOL) experiences for individuals with severe dementia in Asia who most often die in hospital settings, with decisions largely shaped by filial obligations, family dynamics and a distinct absence of palliative approaches. The Asia‐Pacific region is anticipated to be home to more than half of people living with dementia by 2050–2071 million of 135 million worldwide —underscoring the urgency of a regionally tailored response. The World Health Organization (WHO) Global Action Plan on the Public Health Response to Dementia (2017–2025) emphasizes palliative care as a core component of dementia care. In this context, primary palliative care extends beyond specialist teams, with its principles embedded across the health and social care systems and delivered as part of usual care by all healthcare professionals and informal caregivers. Integrating such a palliative approach to care from diagnosis—and especially in advanced stages—is essential to preserve dignity and quality of life among individuals with dementia.
Yet, existing research suggests palliative approaches remain largely underutilized in dementia care in Asia as evidenced by widespread low‐value care at the EOL. Low‐value care practices refer to complex or resource‐intensive interventions or procedures that may marginally extend life but often come with significant costs both financially and for quality of life. Research from Asia is mostly drawn from high‐income countries and thus limited in its representation of the vast cultural diversity across Asian contexts. However, the available literature on EOL dementia care suggests norms of hospital deaths, reliance on artificial nutrition and hydration, use of physical restraints, polypharmacy, prescriptions for unnecessary antibiotics, psychotropic and other “potentially inappropriate” drugs, and a lack of pain management, inconsistent with a palliative approach.
Implementing a palliative approach to dementia in Asia requires a nuanced understanding of its unique sociocultural landscape, shaped by a complex interplay of family structures, attitudes toward aging and death, national policies, evolving long‐term care (LTC) services, and the growing influence of technology. Existing initiatives have provided few detailed research recommendations contextualized to the unique challenges of advancing a palliative approach in Asian settings. We aimed to bridge this gap through a narrative review of the available literature on dying with dementia from countries in the WHO South‐east Asian and Western Pacific regions, synthesizing barriers and facilitators to adopting a palliative approach to dementia.

Methods

Conceptual Framework
To organize our review, we apply the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR) 2.0, widely used for analysing multi‐level healthcare system challenges. CFIR provides a structured set of domains and constructs to explain barriers and facilitators to implementation effectiveness. Domains include “outer setting” (broader context, including local attitudes and conditions, policies, laws and financing), “inner setting” (where the innovation takes place, including structural characteristics and culture), and “individuals” (persons involved in the innovation). For this review, we defined the “innovation” as a palliative approach to dementia.

Search Strategy
We searched PubMed for published studies on EOL dementia care from Asian countries in the WHO South‐east Asian and Western Pacific regions. Our search strategy and complete list of full‐text articles reviewed are provided in Text S1 and S2, respectively. The three authors reviewed and summarized all included studies. We identified and mapped CFIR determinants—potential barriers and facilitators—through repeated readings and comparison across studies. Then, through iterative discussions, we refined our interpretations, reconciled differences, and reached consensus on the final set of determinants. Cited articles aim to illustrate the broader review. Based on the final determinants, we propose research recommendations to advance a palliative approach to dementia. Our interpretation of the literature is grounded in our experience as palliative care researchers in Asia, offering a regionally relevant perspective.

Results
Our review yielded 212 eligible studies of older adults' EOL dementia care experiences from 11 of 24 countries in the WHO South‐east Asian and Western Pacific regions. No eligible studies were identified from 13 countries included in the search, and more than half of the studies were from Japan (n = 119) (Figure 1). Based on this literature, we synthesize potential barriers and facilitators to a palliative approach according to the outer setting, inner setting, and individuals CFIR 2.0 domains (Figure 2).
Distribution of included articles by country.
Barriers and facilitators to a palliative approach to dementia care and proposed research agenda based on the consolidated framework for implementation research.

Outer Setting

Barrier: Sociocultural Values and Beliefs Shaping EOL Preferences
Filial piety, family‐led decision making, and high‐context cultural norms often favor life‐prolonging interventions over palliative approaches. Surveys from Japan, Taiwan and Singapore show both providers and families frequently prefer tube feeding and artificial hydration, perceiving these interventions as providing comfort and aligning with their primary goal for comfort care Safety concerns contribute to the use of physical restraints. Other factors including social taboos, lack of death education, inadequate medical support, and fear of property devaluation if death occurs at home further shape care preferences. Higher‐educated people, for example in Taiwan, were less likely to prefer life‐prolonging interventions like CPR due to greater awareness of their futility.

Facilitator: Digital Fluency and Innovation
High digital readiness in many Asian countries supports technology‐enabled palliative approaches in dementia care. Studies in Japan and Hong Kong show robotic interventions (e.g., Paro, Kabochan) improve social participation and interactions among residents in LTC and daycare settings, reduce behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSDs) and alleviate staff distress. These innovations demonstrate potential to complement traditional care approaches and support engagement of individuals with dementia.

Barrier: Lack of Supportive Policies and Guidelines and Their Inconsistent Implementation
Although the WHO Global Dementia Action Plan set a target for 75% of member states to develop or update national dementia policies or strategies by 2025, only 26% had done so as of 2021, including 10 in Asia (Brunei, China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Maldives, Singapore, South Korea, Thailand), and most strategies did not include guidance on palliative care. Professional society recommendations supporting palliative approaches, such as Japan Geriatrics Society's advice to consider withholding or withdrawing feeding tubes in advanced dementia, are not consistently implemented, leaving clinicians and caregivers uncertain about best practices. This is despite research from several Asian countries (Singapore, Japan, Taiwan, and Hong Kong) showing that tube feeding reduces quality of life, does not lower mortality or hospitalization, and may increase pneumonia risk, caregiver burden, and distress. This implementation gap perpetuates continued use of low‐value interventions.

Barrier: Inadequate and Inequitable Financing for Palliative Dementia Care
Despite WHO recognition of palliative care as an essential component of the human right to health, health care financing is rarely discussed in the literature. Most palliative care services are likely paid for out‐of‐pocket in much of Asia. Healthcare insurance is not dominant, however where available, it has been touted as integral for facilitating a palliative approach. For example, in Korea, insurance coverage for hospice has increased dementia‐related home deaths. In Japan, government incentives for nursing homes providing EOL care under Japan's national LTC insurance plan have led to more nursing home deaths and fewer hospital deaths, aligning with national dementia policies.

Inner Setting

Barrier: Underdevelopment of LTC and Home Care Services
The predominance of hospital deaths in Asia reflects the underdevelopment of out‐of‐hospital EOL care physical infrastructure, such as LTC and community resources to support a palliative approach. When available, palliative care remains largely focused on cancer. Studies from Malaysia, Japan, and Taiwan highlight limited use of hospice and home care services among individuals with dementia. As demographics change, projections from Singapore suggest fewer people with dementia will be able to remain at home with family caregivers, underscoring the urgent need for LTC infrastructure investment.

Barrier: Limited Professional Training and Expertise in Dementia EOL Care
Healthcare professionals frequently lack the expertise to provide EOL dementia care consistent with a palliative approach. In Singapore, providers were involved in 44% of decisions to physically restrain and often recommended tube feeding. In Japan and Hong Kong, where some EOL care is available in LTC settings, insufficient staff training leads to a staff preference for patients to die elsewhere. For example, Japanese LTC managers often referred residents with severe BPSDs to inpatient psychiatric care, with stays averaging 2 years. Similarly, Chinese residential care staff were found to have limited knowledge of dementia, undermining person‐centered care. Efforts in Japan to educate staff and establish palliative protocols have improved knowledge and attitudes, but practices such as physical restraints and antipsychotic prescriptions persist, suggesting that education alone is insufficient for implementing palliative approaches.

Barrier: Gendered Care Patterns
EOL care in Asia shows clear gender differences in the application of palliative approaches. Men typically receive more aggressive treatments than women. Younger men with severe BPSDs are often hospitalized in psychiatric hospitals and later discharged home, while women, generally older, have longer hospital stays and are more likely to be placed in LTC facilities. Likewise, differences in place of death show women cared for by children are more likely to die in LTC facilities, while men cared for by spouses are more likely to die in hospitals.

Barrier and Facilitator: Familial Obligation, Caregiving Burden, and Norms of Home Care
Familial obligation and religious beliefs are often intertwined in Asian contexts, positioning caregiving as a duty. Home caregiving is the norm, with informal caregivers, particularly family members, often facing economic and emotional burdens, absenteeism, burnout, sleep disruptions, financial stress, poor mental health, and bereavement outcomes, especially among spouses. In Singapore, caregivers reported an average of two absenteeism days per month, with many eventually leaving employment to care for their loved one. Caregiving burden is also linked with pre‐death grief in China and Singapore, and some caregivers from Singapore, Japan, and China have expressed a wish for hastened death for their loved one with dementia or for themselves. High burden diminishes caregivers' capacity to provide palliative‐aligned care, increases use of physical restraints, and raises the risk of caregiver abusive behaviors.
Conversely, strong social support and caregiver preparedness can facilitate palliative approaches. Studies show robust social networks are associated with improved caregiver mental well‐being, reduce the risk of harmful practices, and enable community‐based palliative care.

Barrier: Lack of Recipient‐Centredness
The dementia literature is primarily focused on medical aspects of care, including physical symptoms, functional decline, and related issues such as falls, sarcopenia, dysphagia, and malnutrition. This emphasis on medical aspects of EOL care diverts attention from consideration of the person receiving care. A broader conceptualization, reflecting the psycho‐social impacts of dementia, including loss of agency, engagement, and personhood, has been underexplored. Similarly, the common focus on managing BPSDs could overshadow crucial consideration of how BPSDs reflect care recipients' unmet needs. Moreover, the idealized “good death” in dementia may inadvertently limit the scope of a palliative approach to dementia, supporting only the final stages rather than throughout the often‐prolonged disease process.

Individuals

Barrier: Limited Understanding of Dementia as a Terminal Illness
Limited understanding of dementia disease progression and palliative needs undermines a palliative approach. Dementia remains largely underdiagnosed in many Asian countries, often dismissed as a normal part of aging or obscured by social stigma. However, growing evidence from Asian countries emphasizes the life‐limiting effect of dementia with a median survival of 1.5 years in severe cases . Yet, understanding dementia as terminal—critical for ensuring a palliative approach guiding treatment and care decisions—is lacking. A study from Singapore found less than half of family caregivers of individuals with severe dementia understood dementia as terminal. Likewise, the common practice of family caregivers and providers withholding dementia diagnoses and prognoses from individuals with dementia limits early opportunities for advance care planning (ACP) discussions. However, gradual shifts in disclosure preferences are reported in Japan, urban China, and Korea.

Barrier: Lack of Opportunity and Motivation to Engage in ACP
ACP, a key facilitator of a palliative approach, remains underutilized and rarely discussed, with most individuals with dementia lacking the opportunity and motivation to participate. Awareness and engagement efforts are generally limited to contexts such as nursing home placement and LTC insurance provider reimbursement, as seen in Japan and Hong Kong. EOL decisions are typically made by family members with guidance from healthcare providers. Without ACP discussions, individuals' values, goals, and preferences often remain unknown, leading to default use of aggressive interventions. Cultural taboos around discussing death and diverse religious perspectives further discourage ACP. In Japan, family hesitancy limits ACP initiation, though willingness to know dementia diagnosis in Korea and Japan increases engagement. However, in Asian LMICs ACP and EOL discussions remain uncommon.

Discussion

Research Agenda for Advancing a Palliative Approach to Dementia EOL Care
Existing research highlights the frequent reliance on acute and potentially low‐value interventions at the EOL such as hospitalizations, feeding tubes, artificial hydration, physical restraints, and unnecessary or “potentially inappropriate” prescriptions. This underscores the urgent need for de‐implementation of such interventions, alongside implementation of a palliative approach to dementia EOL care. Notably, few facilitators of a palliative approach were identified in the existing research available from Asian countries. Hence, a fundamental shift in perspective is required to ensure individuals with dementia can live with dignity and caregivers can offer compassionate EOL care. Based on our findings in the outer, inner and individual domains, we propose targeted research recommendations to advance a palliative approach to dementia EOL care (Table 1).
Research agenda to advance a palliative approach to dementia in Asia mapped to identified barriers and facilitators within the consolidated framework for implementation research (CFIR) domains.
CFIR domain	Barriers (X)/facilitators (✓)	Research recommendations to advance a palliative approach to dementia EOL care	 	Outer setting	X Sociocultural values and beliefs shaping end‐of‐life preferences (e.g., filial piety, religion)✓ Digital fluency and innovationX Lack of supportive policies and guidelines and their inconsistent implementationX Inadequate and inequitable financing for palliative dementia care	Establish standardized metrics for evaluating EOL dementia care that acknowledge cultural and contextual differencesLeverage technological strategiesEvaluate policy and financing models to support community dementia care	 	Inner setting	X Underdevelopment of long‐term care and home care servicesX Limited professional training and expertise in dementia end‐of‐life careX Gendered care pattensX/✓ Familial obligation, caregiving burden and norms of home careX Lack of recipient‐centeredness	Implement and evaluate culturally sensitive, sustainable and person‐ and family‐centered models of care in community and formal care settingsDevelop and sustain dementia care competenciesImplement interventions to mitigate gendered inequitiesPartner with individuals with dementia and family caregivers	 	Individual	X Limited understanding of dementia as a terminal illnessX Lack of opportunity and motivation to engage in ACP	Improve illness understanding and reframe ACP to align with Asian family values

Outer Setting

Establish Standardized Metrics for Evaluating EOL Dementia Care That Acknowledge Cultural and Contextual Differences
The American Geriatrics Society identified 10 Choosing Wisely care practices to avoid or consider with caution due to concerns about efficacy and harm, including several related to advanced dementia, such as not recommending tube feeding, antipsychotics, or restraints. Such guidance can serve as a foundation for efforts in Asia to establish standardized metrics for assessing the quality of dying with dementia, recognizing the need for cultural adaptation and validation in different care settings. To enable meaningful cross‐country comparisons, foster the exchange of best practices, and guide enhancements in care delivery, these metrics must comprehensively capture the structures, processes, and outcomes of care and prioritize items germane to Asian contexts, such as family‐centered decision making.

Leverage Technological Strategies
Research is required to design technological interventions to address identified needs and barriers. In Asian contexts, examples include low‐cost platforms, such as Aikomi in Japan and the CareBuddy mobile ecosystem in Singapore for managing BPSDs and supporting caregivers, as well as My Voice in Singapore to facilitate ACP conversations. Digitally savvy Asian countries are uniquely positioned to integrate these tools into existing care systems, enhancing person‐centered care and caregiver support.

Evaluate Policy and Financing Models to Support Community Dementia Care
Further research should examine how policy and financing models—such as Japan's national dementia plan and long‐term care insurance —shape care trajectories. Comparative and pilot studies can test bundled or capitation payments that incentivize continuity and home‐based support, potentially reducing avoidable hospitalizations and promoting a palliative approach.

Inner Setting

Implement and Evaluate Culturally Sensitive, Sustainable and Person‐ and Family‐Centered Models of Care in Community and Formal Care Settings
De‐implementation should be paired with implementation of culturally sensitive, cost‐effective, and person‐ and family‐centered models of care. Current evidence for such interventions is limited, highlighting the urgent need for high‐quality research. Promising examples in Asia include community‐based home care in Japan, careful hand feeding programs in Hong Kong, and a hospital‐community care partnership in Singapore.

Develop and Sustain Dementia Care Competencies
Research should define core dementia care competencies for supporting person‐centered care and evaluate professional and informal caregiver training models. Implementation research should further explore strategies (e.g., leveraging local cultural and religious networks to support caregiver education; using champions or peer‐supporters to provide targeted feedback to providers) for sustaining and integrating these frameworks to improve care quality and workforce capacity.

Implement Interventions to Mitigate Gendered Inequities
Alongside evaluating system‐ and policy‐level measures, such as subsidized home care and flexible workplace support for female caregivers, provider‐focused interventions should include gender‐sensitivity training, and service utilization and outcomes should be systematically monitored for gender disparities.

Partner With Individuals Living With Dementia and Family Caregivers
Engaging individuals with dementia and caregivers in research ensures that interventions are person‐centered. Much of what is reported in the literature comes from a handful of high‐income Asian countries. This is disproportionate to the burden of dementia, which is concentrated in LMICs, and thus has limited generalizability. Consequently, the proposed research agenda may be most directly applicable to regions with available evidence. In LMICs and countries without existing evidence, initial observational studies conducted in partnership with individuals with dementia and informal caregivers are required to understand context‐specific barriers to a palliative approach, guide policy development, enhance service delivery, and improve equity.

Individuals

Improve Illness Understanding and Reframe ACP to Align With Asian Family Values
Studies highlight the potential value of investing in ACP research to improve family caregiver understanding of dementia's terminal nature and support decision‐making. ACP interventions conducted in Japan, including an inventory for persons with advanced dementia residing in group homes and a provider communication toolkit, have shown improvements in quality of dying, dying in place, reduced hospital transfers, and increased confidence in ACP communication. Drawing on existing ACP efforts, strategies can be tailored to address salient concerns in other Asian contexts, such as family‐centric ACP and tube feeding decisions.
Our review has strengths and limitations. We employed a widely recognized framework to assess barriers and facilitators to advancing a palliative approach to dementia care across Asia. Using this theory‐driven approach, we synthesize a detailed research agenda to guide researchers and clinicians in Asian countries, prioritize understudied areas and contexts, unify researchers in common objectives, and galvanize research collaboration. We acknowledge the potential for subjective bias in our identification of determinants, which we sought to minimize through discussion and consensus. We also note the limitations of the existing literature available in English, which is most representative of high‐income Asian countries.

Conclusion
The published Asian literature underscores the absence of a palliative approach in dementia care and a paucity of research stemming from LMICs where dementia‐related indignities and reduced quality of life are most acute. Key barriers to implementing a palliative approach include sociocultural values, limited understanding of dementia as terminal, poor ACP engagement, caregiver burden, and insufficient supportive national policies, financing, and infrastructure, including professional expertise and training. Potential facilitators include digital fluency and cultural norms around caring for older adults at home, suggesting the potential feasibility of a community‐based palliative approach. We propose a research agenda focused on partnering with individuals with dementia and family/informal caregivers, particularly in LMICs, de‐implementing low‐value interventions while developing and implementing community‐level palliative interventions and ACP, leveraging technological solutions, and establishing core metrics for dementia EOL care. This research agenda will further WHO objectives for a public health response to dementia and ensure a palliative approach is central to dementia EOL care.

Author Contributions
Study concept and design: Chetna Malhotra, Ellie Andres. Acquisition of data: All authors. Analysis and interpretation of data: All authors. Drafting of the manuscript: Ellie Andres. Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Chetna Malhotra, Chandrika Ramakrishnan. Final approval of the manuscript submitted to the journal: All authors.

Funding
The authors have nothing to report.

Disclosure
No funding agency was involved in the conduct of the study, analyses, interpretation of the data or preparation or approval of the manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

References
A Prospective Longitudinal Study of Caregivers of Community Dwelling Persons With Severe Dementia (PISCES): Study Protocol
“Dementia in the Asia Pacific Region,”
“Action Area 4: Dementia Diagnosis, Treatment, Care and Support 2017: 22–24,”
Three Distinct Symptom Profiles Among Older Adults With Severe Dementia: A Latent Class Analysis
Caregiver‐Reported Use of Physical Restraints Among Community‐Dwelling Older Adults With Severe Dementia in Singapore
Breaking With the Status Quo in End‐Of‐Life Care Through De‐Implementation
Medication Appropriateness for Patients With Dementia Approaching the End of Their Life
Use of Psychotropic Drugs and Drugs With Anticholinergic Properties Among Residents With Dementia in Intermediate Care Facilities for Older Adults in Japan: A Cohort Study
Trends in Use of Psychotropic Medications Among Patients Treated With Cholinesterase Inhibitors in Japan From 2002 to 2010
Navigating Dementia Feeding Decisions in Asia: A Mixed Methods Study of Caregivers
Long‐Term Survival of Patients Receiving Artificial Nutrition in Japanese Psychiatric Hospitals
Processes of Decision Making and End‐Of‐Life Care for Patients With Dementia in Group Homes in Japan
Quality of Care for People With Dementia and Professional Caregivers' Perspectives Regarding Palliative Care in Japanese Community Care Settings
International Variation in Place of Death of Older People Who Died From Dementia in 14 European and Non‐European Countries
Nursing Homes and End‐Of‐Life Care in Japan
Japanese Care Location and Medical Procedures for People With Dementia in the Last Month of Life
The Final Year for Community‐Dwelling Older Adults With Dementia in an Asian Setting: Admissions, Interventions and Caregiver Burden
“A Blueprint for Dementia Research,”
Future Policy and Research for Advance Care Planning in Dementia: Consensus Recommendations From an International Delphi Panel of the European Association for Palliative Care
The Updated Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research Based on User Feedback
Caregiver Preference for Tube Feeding in Community‐Dwelling Persons With Severe Dementia
Recognition of and Intent to Use Gastrostomy or Ventilator Treatments in Older Patients With Advanced Dementia: Differences Between Laypeople and Healthcare Professionals in Japan
The Clinical Issues of Age‐Related Dementia
Medical Professionals' Attitudes Toward Tube Feeding for Themselves or Their Families: A Multicenter Survey in Japan
Depression of Family Caregivers Is Associated With Disagreements on Life‐Sustaining Preferences for Treating Patients With Dementia
Perceptions of Reducing Tube Feeding for Persons With Advanced Dementia Among Various Professions in a Teaching Hospital
Use of Artificial Hydration in Patients Diagnosed With Senility as the Cause of Death by Home Care Physicians: A Cross‐Sectional Study
End‐Of‐Life Care for Advanced Dementia Patients in Residential Care Home—A Hong Kong Perspective
Which Level of Care Is Preferred for End‐Stage Dementia? Survey of Taiwanese Caregivers
Measuring the Impact of Age, Gender and Dementia on Communication‐Robot Interventions in Residential Care Homes
Robot Therapy: A New Approach for Mental Healthcare of the Elderly—A Mini‐Review
Effects of a Humanoid Companion Robot on Dementia Symptoms and Caregiver Distress for Residents in Long‐Term Care
“Global Status Report on the: Public Health Response to Dementia,”
Palliative Care in Advanced Dementia: Comparison of Strategies in Three Countries
Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy (PEG) Tubes Are Placed in Elderly Adults in Japan With Advanced Dementia Regardless of Expectation of Improvement in Quality of Life
Nasogastric Tube Feeding Versus Assisted Hand Feeding In‐Home Healthcare Older Adults With Severe Dementia in Taiwan: A Prognosis Comparison
Tube Feeding Decreases Pneumonia Rate in Patients With Severe Dementia: Comparison Between Pre‐ and Post‐Intervention
Changes in the Place of Death of Patients With Cancer After the Introduction of Insurance‐Covered, Home‐Based Hospice Care in Korea
International Reflections on Caring for People With Advanced Dementia
Duration of Referral‐To‐Death and Its Associated Factors Among Cancer and Noncancer Patients: Retrospective Cohort Study of a Community Palliative Care Setting in Malaysia
Characteristics of First‐Time Users of the Nursing Small‐Scale Multifunctional Home Care Service: A Pooled Cross‐Sectional Study Using Japanese Long‐Term Care Insurance Claims Data From 2012 to 2019
Trends of Do‐Not‐Resuscitate Consent and Hospice Care Utilization Among Noncancer Decedents in a Tertiary Hospital in Taiwan Between 2010 and 2014: A Hospital‐Based Observational Study
Future Living Arrangements of Singaporeans With Age‐Related Dementia
Survey for Management of BPSD in Care Managers and Special Psychiatric Wards for People With Severe Dementia
Caregivers' Dementia Knowledge and Care Approach in Residential Aged Care Facilities in China
Gender Differences in the Intention to Withhold Life‐Sustaining Treatments Involving Severe Dementia for Self and on Behalf of Parent or Spouse
A Comparative Analysis of Dementia Inpatient Characteristics: Results From a Nationwide Survey of Different Care Facilities in Japan
What Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia Affect Caregiver Burnout?
Care Burden on Family Caregivers of Patients With Dementia and Affecting Factors in China: A Systematic Review
Practitioners' Identification of Informal Caregivers' Difficulties With Activities of Daily Living Interventions for Older People With Dementia in Japan
Effect of Perceived Stress on Health‐Related Quality of Life Among Primary Caregiving Spouses of Patients With Severe Dementia: The Mediating Role of Depression and Sleep Quality
Caregivers' Absenteeism and Its Association With Health Shocks and Functional Impairment Among Persons With Severe Dementia
The Mediating Role of Coping Strategies Between Caregiving Burden and Pre‐Death Grief Among Chinese Adult‐Child Caregivers of Dementia Patients
Influence of Behavioral and Psychological Symptoms of Dementia (BPSD) and Environment of Care on Caregivers' Burden
Living With Dementia: Why I Am Thinking of Death
Prevalence and Risk Factors of Abusive Behaviors in the Caregivers of People With Dementia in Korea
Experiences and Concerns of Family Caregivers Providing Support to People With Dementia: A Cross‐Cultural Perspective
Mental States in Caregivers Toward People With Alzheimer's Disease at Different Stages
Influences of Mutuality, Preparedness, and Balance on Caregivers of Patients With Dementia
Nutritional Status, Dietary Quality and Eating Disturbance Issues Among People With Dementia in Vietnam: Evidence of a Cross‐Sectional Study
Family Caregiver Perspectives on Suffering of Persons With Severe Dementia: A Qualitative Study
Good Death for People Living With Dementia: A Qualitative Study
Conceptualization of a Good End‐Of‐Life Experience With Dementia in Japan: A Qualitative Study
A Five‐Year Community‐Based Longitudinal Survival Study of Dementia in Beijing, China: A 10/66 Dementia Research Group Population‐Based Study
Instability in Caregivers' Perception of Dementia as a Terminal Disease
Consensus Definition of Advance Care Planning in Dementia: A 33‐Country Delphi Study
The Attitudes of Physicians and the General Public Toward Prognostic Disclosure of Different Serious Illnesses: A Korean Nationwide Study
Caregivers' Attitude Toward Disclosure of Alzheimer's Disease Diagnosis in Urban China
Association Between Advance Care Planning and Depressive Symptoms Among Community‐Dwelling People With Dementia: An Observational Cross‐Sectional Study During the COVID‐19 Pandemic in Japan
Factors Associated With Advance Directives Documentation: A Nationwide Cross‐Sectional Survey of Older Adults in Korea
A Cross Cultural Review of the Ethical Issues in Dementia Care in Kerala, India and the Netherlands
American Geriatrics Society Identifies Another Five Things That Healthcare Providers and Patients Should Question
Psychogeritechnology in Japan: Exemplars From a Super‐Aged Society
The Use of Smart Technologies for Enhancing Palliative Care: A Systematic Review
Development and Usability of an Advance Care Planning Website (My Voice) to Empower Patients With Heart Failure and Their Caregivers: Mixed Methods Study
Digital Advance Care Planning for Dialysis Patients—Usability and Acceptability
Supporting Dementia Caregiving: Development and Pilot of a Mobile Care Ecosystem
What Is the True Definition of a Do‐Not‐Resuscitate Order? A Japanese Perspective
Long‐Term Care Policy: Singapore's Experience
Palliative Care Interventions in Advanced Dementia
Careful Hand Feeding Program in a Geriatric Step‐Down Hospital in Hong Kong — Is This Feasible?
Evaluating the Outcomes of a Hospital‐To‐Community Model of Integrated Care for Dementia
Pre‐Post‐Evaluation of a Dementia‐Specific Advance Care Planning Toolkit for Japanese Primary Care Clinicians