A multi-omics strategy to understand PASC through the RECOVER cohorts: a paradigm for a systems biology approach to the study of chronic conditions
Post-Acute Sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC or “Long COVID”), includes numerous chronic conditions associated with widespread morbidity and rising healthcare costs. PASC has highly variable clinical presentations, and likely includes multiple molecular subtypes, but it remains poorly understood from a molecular and mechanistic standpoint. This hampers the development of rationally targeted therapeutic strategies. The NIH-sponsored “Researching COVID to Enhance Recovery” (RECOVER) initiative includes several retrospective/prospective observational cohort studies enrolling adult, pregnant adult and pediatric patients respectively. RECOVER formed an “OMICS” multidisciplinary task force, including clinicians, pathologists, laboratory scientists and data scientists, charged with developing recommendations to apply cutting-edge system biology technologies to achieve the goals of RECOVER. The task force met biweekly over 14 months, to evaluate published evidence, examine the possible contribution of each “omics” technique to the study of PASC and develop study design recommendations. The OMICS task force recommended an integrated, longitudinal, simultaneous systems biology study of participant biospecimens on the entire RECOVER cohorts through centralized laboratories, as opposed to multiple smaller studies using one or few analytical techniques. The resulting multi-dimensional molecular dataset should be correlated with the deep clinical phenotyping performed through RECOVER, as well as with information on demographics, comorbidities, social determinants of health, the exposome and lifestyle factors that may contribute to the clinical presentations of PASC. This approach will minimize lab-to-lab technical variability, maximize sample size for class discovery, and enable the incorporation of as many relevant variables as possible into statistical models. Many of our recommendations have already been considered by the NIH through the peer-review process, resulting in the creation of a systems biology panel that is currently designing the studies we proposed. This system biology strategy, coupled with modern data science approaches, will dramatically improve our prospects for accurate disease subtype identification, biomarker discovery and therapeutic target identification for precision treatment. The resulting dataset should be made available to the scientific community for secondary analyses. Analogous system biology approaches should be built into the study designs of large observational studies whenever possible.

1 Introduction
The term Post-Acute Sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC), also known as “Long COVID”, refers to numerous conditions associated with widespread morbidity and rising healthcare costs. PASC has highly variable clinical presentations, and likely includes multiple molecular subtypes. The NIH-sponsored “Researching COVID to Enhance Recovery” (RECOVER) initiative includes retrospective/prospective cohort studies including an adult cohort, a cohort of pregnant adults and a pediatric cohort. These studies aim to enroll a total of 12,580 adult non-pregnant patients, 2,300 adult pregnant patients and 19,300 pediatric patients to rapidly improve our understanding of and ability to predict, treat, and prevent Post-Acute Sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC, or “Long COVID”) through deep clinical phenotyping and laboratory studies. THE RECOVER “OMICS” Task Force was charged with developing recommendations based on published evidence and the experiences of its members, to incorporate multi-omics into the analysis of RECOVER results.

2 Methods

2.1 Objectives
The “OMICS” task force of the RECOVER study, a multi-disciplinary committee including clinicians, pathologists, laboratory scientists and data scientists, was charged with developing recommendations to apply cutting-edge system biology technologies to achieve the goals of RECOVER. The task force met biweekly over 14 months, to evaluate published evidence, examine the possible contribution of each “omics” technique to the study of PASC, as well as the potential limitations of each technique, and develop a consensus recommendation. The work was divided into two stages. During the first stage, sub-committees with specific expertise on an “omics” technique examined evidence supporting the use of that technique to study PASC, the type of data it could generate and the mechanistic questions it could answer, based on published evidence and the experiences of its members, to incorporate multi-omics into the analysis of RECOVER results. Each sub-committee presented to the entire task force. During the second stage, the task force combined the findings of each sub-committee into a comprehensive study design recommendation.

3 Results and discussion
The OMICS task force recommended that integrated, longitudinal, simultaneous multi-omics studies of participant biospecimens be performed on the entire RECOVER cohort through centralized laboratories, as opposed to multiple smaller studies using one or few analytical techniques.
The RECOVER adult protocol includes multiple biospecimen collections: nasopharyngeal or nasal swab, 2 8.5 mL aliquots of blood in serum separation tubes, 4 × 8 ml aliquots of blood in cell preparation tubes, 2 × 2.7 mL aliquots of blood in sodium citrate tubes for plasma proteomics, 1 × 10 ml aliquot of blood in EDTA tube, 1 2.5 mL aliquot of blood in PAXgene RNA tube, 1 × 10 ml urine (no additives), 1 × 2mL aliquot of saliva in Oragene OGR 600 and 1 25 mL aliquot of stool. Of these, stool is sent by participants while the other samples are processed locally as per protocol specifications and shipped in batches to the central tissue bank. Participants who consent to biospecimen donation for future research are asked to provide blood and nasopharyngeal/nasal swab biospecimens at enrollment, 90 and 180 days after the index date (date of first infection or negative COVID test), and then annually. Saliva is collected upon enrollment for genetic analysis. Urine and stool are collected biannually. Additionally, a battery of clinical laboratory tests is performed in CLIA-certified laboratories at enrollment, 90 and 189 days after the index date, and thereafter, abnormal tests are repeated annually. Specific symptoms or abnormal study results trigger “Tier 2” or “Tier 3” assessments (see for details). A SARS-CoV-2 PCR test is performed at enrollment for all “uninfected” participants, who are also tested for SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid antibodies spike protein antibodies for unvaccinated participants.
In addition to study visits, imaging and laboratory tests, participants complete multiple surveys, using validated survey instruments whenever possible, at 90-day intervals throughout the study. At enrollment, data are collected on demographics, social determinants of health (SDOH), disability, characteristics of the initial SARS-CoV-2 infection (if applicable), pregnancy (if applicable), vaccination status, comorbidities, medications, and PASC symptoms. Subsequently, at 90-day intervals, data are collected on interim infections, time-varying social determinants, vaccinations, comorbidities, medications and symptoms. The PASC symptom survey was developed for RECOVER and includes an overall quality of life instrument (PROMIS-10) and screening for core symptoms (43 for biological males and 46 for biological females) drawn from existing literature plus input from patient representatives and investigators. Questions about depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and grief are also included. Report of a symptom may trigger additional questions about that symptom. Details of survey instruments are in the original reference.
The pregnancy study follows a similar design to the non-pregnant adult study, enrolling participants with suspected, probable or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection during pregnancy, or documented lack of exposure to SARS-CoV-2 during pregnancy. Study procedures and biospecimen collections are analogous to those in the non-pregnant adult study, with modifications for breastfeeding or postpartum participants, and additional health and developmental assessments for babies exposed in utero to SARS-CoV-2.
The RECOVER pediatric study has a similar design, with limitations due to the age range of participants. All pediatric participants complete a single Tier 1 visit including PROMIS global health measures and symptom screening. This visit includes a donation of saliva and capillary blood. Depending on infection status, clinical history, symptoms and probability of PASC, pediatric participants are promoted to Tier 2 or Tier 3, which include additional biospecimen donations during the acute and post-acute phase of PASC, as well as additional clinical assessments and surveys. The types, aliquot numbers, and cadence of biospecimen collections are described in detail in.
In summary, each RECOVER study will generate vast longitudinal datasets including clinical, demographic, medication, SDOH and lifestyle data for each participant, as well as sufficient types and numbers of biospecimen aliquots to permit a comprehensive, longitudinal multi-omics investigation. Potential environmental exposures can furthermore be estimated from census tract or ZIP code data.
The multi-dimensional molecular dataset generated by the multi-omics investigation should be correlated with the deep clinical phenotyping performed through RECOVER, as well as with information on demographics, comorbidities, social determinants of health, the exposome and lifestyle factors collected through RECOVER surveys, that may contribute to the clinical presentations of PASC. Data generation and analytical strategies should leverage integrative bioinformatics and machine learning.
A major advantage, and a potential challenge, of multi-omics approaches is that datasets derived from different analytical techniques and measured using different scales must be integrated. Approaches including multi-omics integration paired with ML have been gaining popularity in clinical and biomedical research (see), though this field is rapidly evolving. An important advantage inherent in multi-dimensional measurements is that the extent to which different measurements agree with each other or not is potentially informative. For instance, transcriptomic data may or may not be reflected in the relative abundance of protein products, or quantitative differences in non-coding RNA expression may or may not translate into relative abundance of potential target mRNAs, the proteins they encode or the metabolites that these proteins may process. System biology approaches based on multi-omics have been used successfully in the study of cardiovascular disease.
With respect to PASC, strategies similar to what we propose have been used on a smaller scale. ML has been used in the context of a multi-step analytical strategy to combine proteomic and metabolomic data to generate a multi-omics biomarker predictive of the risk of PASC and give insights on the metabolic pathways altered during PASC. Dimensionality reduction was achieved through unsupervised cluster analysis followed by autoencoder (AE), using a three-layer neural network. Supervised ML was then used to identify the minimal number of molecules predictive of adverse clinical outcomes. This study, though very promising, was limited by small sample size (117, of whom 105 were used as a training cohort for model development and 10% as a validation cohort), the severity of acute COVIDs in the patients enrolled and the absence of a vaccinated group. Despite these limitations, these results indicate that similar analytical strategies can be used successfully on a much larger sample with broader phenotyping, to discover predictive biomarkers, therapeutic targets and risk factors and to generate mechanistic hypotheses.
Within the RECOVER study, an unsupervised ML approach has been used to identify clinical subtypes of PASC, after symptoms differentiating infected from uninfected patients were identified using LASSO (least absolute shrinkage and selection operator).
Highly multiplexed “omics” approaches measure common clinical analytes and many more parameters (Table 1) at a fraction of the cost of traditional clinical tests, oftentimes using similar quantities of specimens (Table 2). In a multi-omics approach, analytes within each category (e.g., proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, metabolites, and microbes) are all measured simultaneously, generating high-content data that is more than the sum of its parts. This approach allows the discovery of new molecular signatures to enhance our understanding of complex disease pathophysiology. These signatures may occur within a single analyte category, but more likely cover more complex patterns that span multiple molecular layers, e.g., genomics, epigenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, lipidomics, metabolomics, and microbiomics (Figure 1). Deep multi-omics profiling will allow us to explore a broad spectrum of pathophysiological mechanisms (Table 3), define gene-environment interactions involved in the pathogenesis of PASC, identify molecular subtypes and candidate biomarkers and propose mechanism-based therapeutic strategies. The relative contributions of each “omics” we evaluated and considerations on data generation and analysis are described below.
Complementary data types captured by multi-omics assays.
Data type	Assays	 		SNP NGS	Epigenome	Bulk RNASeq	scRNASeq	Proteome	CyTOF	Metabolome	Microbiome	 	Genetic risk factors	+								 	Epigenetic modifications		+	+						 	mRNA/splice variants			+						 	ncRNA			+						 	Viral RNA			+						 	Immune phenotyping			+	+	+	+		+	 	Antibodies					+				 	Cytokines, chemokines					+				 	Peptide hormones					+				 	Coagulation factors					+				 	Viral proteins					+				 	Post-translational modifications					+	+			 	Human Metabolites							+		 	Bacterial metabolites							+		 	Toxins/drugs							+		 	Vitamins/hormones							+		 	Bacterial diversity								+
Approximate sample requirements for multi-omics assays.
Approximate amount of material	Assays	 	SNP NGS, GWAS	Methylome	Bulk RNASeq	scRNASeq	Proteome	CyTOF	Metabolome	Microbiome	 		300–400 ng DNA (50 µL blood)	50–100 ng DNA	PBMC in 1 mL blood (250 ng RNA)	100,000 PBMC (20–30 µL blood)	400–500 µL EDTA plasma	106 cells (200–300 µL blood)	50–100 µL plasma	<500 mg stool
A comprehensive multi-omics approach to the mechanism(s) of PASC. From left to right: PASC is a consequence of infection with SARS-CoV-2. Different viral variants or sub-variants (represented in different colors) may have different probability of causing PASC or be associated with different presentations (e.g., due to different ability to cause persistent infection, to trigger pathogenic antibody responses, or to damage vascular endothelium). Vaccines and anti-viral agents can decrease the risk of PASC by interfering with viral persistence and replication. Multiple exposures, including diet, medications, tobacco, alcohol, environmental pollutants and co-morbidities, socioeconomic and psychosocial exposures, as well as sex hormones, can potentially affect the risk and clinical presentations of PASC. The combined effect of these factors results into evolving clinical phenotypes ranging from acute COVID-19 resolution to PASC through a number of mechanisms that can be best understood by simultaneously interrogating the multi-omics landscape of patients, including individual genomics, epigenomics, bulk and single-cell transcriptomics, plasma and cellular proteomics, metabolomics, and microbiome/virome. These different dimensions functionally interact with one another to determine pathogenetic mechanisms (e.g., persistent viral infection, modulated by individual genetics, triggers immune, inflammatory and metabolic changes that are in turn modulated by the intestinal and respiratory microbiomes and potentially by reactivation of other viruses). Insights generated by an integrated multi-omics investigation of patients with well-characterized clinical phenotypes are likely to identify actionable biomarkers (which may discriminate between PASC molecular subtypes), as well as therapeutic targets and prevention strategies. Orthogonal multi-omics tests repeated over time are the most informative approach to capture the pathogenesis of the different clinical presentations of PASC and their evolution over time.
Multi-omics assays generate information relevant to testing multiple mechanistic hypotheses for PASC.
Pathogenetic hypothesis	Assays	 	SNP lp-NGS, GWAS	Epigenome	Bulk RNASeq	scRNASeq	Proteome	CyTOF	Metabolome	Microbiome	 	Genetic predisposition	+								 	Viral persistence			+		+				 	Intra-patient viral evolution			+						 	Non-SARS-CoV2 viral reactivation (EBV, others)			+		+				 	Autoimmunity	+	+	+	+		+		+	 	Chronic inflammation		+	+	+	+	+	+	+	 	Endothelial damage					+	+			 	Coagulation abnormalities					+				 	Dysbiosis							+	+	 	Chronic stress		+	+	+	+		+		 	Endocrine dysfunction					+		+		 	Toxic exposures		+			+		+

3.1 Evidence supporting multi-omics technologies used in COVID-19 and PASC studies

3.1.1 Genomics
Genomics is an invaluable asset to understand disease risk, mechanism and etiology, and to serve as a backbone to allow for better modeling of multi-omics profiles in patient populations. Several genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified reproducible associations between specific loci and risk and outcomes of acute COVID-19 with the most reproducible being with LZTFL1 and contiguous regions on 3q21.31 and ABO on 9q34.2. A recent GWAS study, currently in pre-print, detected an association between a locus near the FOXP4 gene and risk of developing PASC. That study analyzed data from 24 studies conducted in 16 countries, totaling 6,450 PASC cases and 1,093,995 controls. However, most of the patients were of European ancestry, and this study should be replicated in a more diverse cohort. In GWAS studies, sample size and composition of study population (e.g., case/control ratio, ancestry, genetic admixture, etc.) are critical. FOXP4 is a broadly expressed transcription factor. Lammi et al. analyzed single-cell RNASeq data to confirm the expression of FOXP4 in surfactant-producing Type II alveolar cells and granulocytes. This correlation supports a possible mechanistic link, and demonstrates the importance of integrative multi-omics approaches. A recent computational study analyzed the evolution of predicted CD8 T-cell epitopes in SARS-CoV-2 variants and its correlation with clinical outcomes of acute COVID-19 in patients with different HLA genotypes, illustrating the importance of integrated analysis of viral and patient genomic data with clinical data. A similar approach could be used with PASC, and/or PASC clinical subtype, as an outcome. Beyond GWAS or other genetic analyses, genotyping data can be used in conjunction with other multi-omics profiles to increase the likelihood of discovery. Identification of molecular quantitative trait loci (QTL) can be used to identify possible pathogenetic pathways. Different technologies can be used to obtain genotyping information in PASC cases: high-density SNP-chips or low-pass sequencing are established platforms. Emerging technologies, such as nanopore long-read sequencing, may also reduce the cost of whole-genome and whole-transcriptome sequencing.

3.1.2 Epigenomics
Epigenomics measure molecular events that regulate chromatin accessibility and expression, which can reflect long-term physiological states. Using methods such as chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq), CUT&RUN, or assay for transposase-accessible chromatin using sequencing (ATAC-seq), which can also be used in single-cell applications, many epigenetic processes have been identified and associated with complex traits. One of the best characterized is DNA methylation (5 methyl-cytosine), which is altered in numerous human diseases. There is compelling evidence that changes in DNA methylation profiles are detectable in viral infections such as HIV and MERS. In an epigenome-wide association study (EWAS), DNA methylation differences associated with a phenotype can be assessed at hundreds of thousands of cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites across the epigenome. Several EWAS of COVID-19 in the literature found distinct patterns of DNA methylation associated with disease severity early in the disease course. EWAS in the ongoing Norwegian Corona Cohort Study also assessed whether there were differentially methylated CpGs between those with PASC (N = 41) compared to a remission group (N = 63), but did not find significant differences. However, the study was not longitudinal, and the authors point out that their sample size for PASC was small. The same study identified 3 differentially methylated sites associated with acute COVID-19 severity, including hypomethylation of IFI44L, an interferon response gene also associated with COVID-19 severity.

3.1.3 Transcriptomics
a) Bulk Transcriptomics: RNA transcripts act as intermediary components between genetic information and protein synthesis, and carry specific functions themselves. Transcripts are a regulation hub that responds to both environmental and genetic control, thus playing a major role in the molecular characterization of diseases. Non-coding RNAs fine-tune the expression levels of coding RNAs and their protein products, providing an additional level of regulation. Given its role as an ‘integration hub’ between genetic variation and environmental exposures, the transcriptome dataset is a key layer in multi-omics approaches. Bulk RNA sequencing (RNASeq) can measure the relative abundance of individual transcripts, and determine differences in mRNA splicing isoforms and RNA editing. Whole blood transcriptome analysis can accurately measure the expression levels of >16,000-20,000 RNA species, both protein-coding and non-coding, thus providing one of the most high-quality and high-content multi-omics datasets. Bulk transcriptomics integrates the effects of multiple key variables that can dynamically affect gene expression in blood cells (e.g., metabolic state, epigenetic variation, exposure to medications, stress etc.). Transcriptional signatures in the blood or cells of COVID-19 patients can help identify causal factors for acute or chronic complications as well as potential therapeutic targets. Recently, a long non-coding RNA-based ML model has been used to identify an RNA (LEF1-AS1) predictive of acute COVID-19 mortality in a ML-driven study of 1,286 patients in 15 institutions. Additionally, a candidate signature of acute COVID-19 including 3 long non-coding RNA, 2 cytokines and 2 proteins in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PMBCs) has been identified using a ML approach. This study had a fairly small sample size (28 COVID-19 patients and 17 controls), but it illustrates the promise of multi-analyte biomarkers including RNAs in COVID-19. Current bioinformatics deconvolution approaches enable effective estimation of cell-type fraction and cell type specific gene expression in the peripheral immune system from bulk transcriptome data, offering a powerful tool for immune-phenotyping that is complementary to plasma and cellular proteomics. Bulk samples employed for RNAseq can also be used for in-depth immune repertoire analyses. These data also allow prediction of physiological states, such as PANoptosis or innate immunity activation, and upstream regulators of these states (e.g., transcription factors, protein kinases, hormones), thus enabling the identification of potential therapeutic targets. Critically, transcriptomic data can also allow for the identification of circulating SARS-CoV-2 viral load from whole blood (including viral variant calling and, given sufficient sequence coverage, detection of intra-patient viral evolution), thus constituting an important tool to assess persistent viremia from sources such as vascular beds. Further virome/microbiome analyses of these data can capture other viruses/bacteria that may contribute to PASC pathophysiology (e.g., EBV). Several such transcriptome analyses have been completed for acute COVID-19 and PASC, but without integration with other omics. This supports the need for further transcriptome analyses in the RECOVER cohort in the context of a multi-omics approach.
b) Single-cell transcriptomics: Bulk transcriptomics measures RNA expression as an average of all cell types present in a sample. This can potentially mask the contribution of rare cell types or cellular states to the transcriptome. Single cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) can add further detail to immune phenotyping by measuring the transcriptomes of up to 20,000 individual cells simultaneously. This can provide highly detailed information, albeit at higher cost than bulk transcriptomics. scRNAseq protocols relevant to PASC can include Cellular Indexing of Transcriptomes and Epitopes by Sequencing (CITE-seq) and single cell VDJ sequencing (scVDJ) analyses, which can provide advanced immune phenotyping and T cell receptor/B cell receptor (TCR/BCR) repertoire data, respectively, on the same cell.

3.1.4 Proteomics
a) Soluble proteins: Protein-based biomarkers are commonly used for the diagnosis and management of myriad medical conditions and are likely to be useful for the prediction, diagnosis, prognosis and clinical management of PASC. Cytokines, chemokines, antibodies, coagulation factors, growth factors, complement cascade components, peptide hormones, and viral proteins can all be measured by high-content proteomic methods in plasma. Multiple technologies are now available to identify hundreds to thousands of individual proteins from very small volumes of serum, plasma, tissues, or cells, including peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). These include mass spectrometry, SOMAscan® assays, Olink® proteomics, and PhIP-seq (phage immunoprecipitation sequencing), to name a few. Furthermore, some of these technologies (e.g., mass spectrometry conjugated with the newest search algorithms such as MSFragger) enable the identification of protein isoforms and post-translational modifications, including novel ones. For example, while still under development, the latest SOMAscan® platform measures >7,000 proteins from a mere 125 μL of plasma or serum. Of critical importance for the study of autoimmunity in PASC, the PhIP-seq technology enables the identification of virtually all auto-antibodies produced by an individual. A recent PhIP-seq study in a relatively small cohort identified a common autoreactive pattern in PASC patients and patients who had recovered from acute COVID-19, raising important questions about the possible role of autoantibodies in PASC.
Plasma proteomic biosignatures can inform on multiple pathophysiological processes at once, including but not restricted to various forms of inflammation (e.g., systemic, organ-specific, vascular), organ injury, vascular disorders, neurodegeneration, dysregulation of coagulation and fibrinolysis, and remote organ crosstalk via the blood. A wealth of proteomics data are already available for acute COVID-19, as well as myriad auto-inflammatory conditions. In the context of an integrated multi-omics strategy, proteomics data could maximize the opportunities to discover mechanisms underlying PASC pathophysiology as well as molecular subtypes, clinically actionable biomarkers and treatment targets.
b) Cellular proteomics-based immunophenotyping: Immunophenotyping, which allows for the precise detection of membrane and intracellular proteins using antibodies, has identified signatures that are predictive of subsequent PASC. Cellular proteomics-based immunophenotyping technologies can simultaneously quantify, at the single-cell level, expression levels of 40–50 surface and intracellular proteins of immune cells. These include high-parameter flow cytometry (e.g., BD X50), spectral flow cytometry (e.g., Cytek Aurora), and CyTOF (cytometry by time-of-flight, a.k.a. mass cytometry). CyTOF, the most common of these approaches, is a powerful high-dimensional immunophenotyping method that can, in a single specimen, quantify all major subsets of cells using its ∼40 available channels. Alternatively, it can be used to deeply characterize one immune subset of interest (e.g., to interrogate phenotypes, homing properties, effector functions, and self-renewal capacities of T cells). Phospho-CyTOF also enable analyses of signaling states of individual cells. It can also be used to characterize the glycan features of immune cells at the single-cell level, informing on immune functions which are very much modulated by cell-surface glycosylation. As PASC is multifactorial and heterogeneous, approaches such as CyTOF which allow for broad and specific studies of immune subsets, will be key. Studies can, for example, examine how the global immune landscape is altered during PASC, as well as whether specific subsets implicated in COVID-19 disease progression or PASC (e.g., T cells, myeloid cells, neutrophils) exhibit subset-specific changes that can inform on mechanism of action. Studies that have begun to use CyTOF to explore immunological differences between fully recovered vs individuals with PASC have revealed a dysregulated adaptive immune response in the latter, e.g., global differences in T-cell subsets, sex-specific differences in cytolytic T-cells, increased frequency of T-cells migrating to inflamed tissues but also exhausted T-cells, as well as increased frequency of exhausted T-cells. Further studies using larger cohorts are warranted. From a practical standpoint, for the amount of data generated CyTOF is cost-effective and requires relatively few cells relative to if samples were to be analyzed using multiple low-parameter panels implemented in conventional flow cytometry.

3.1.5 Metabolomics
Metabolites are the end products of multiple pathways and often indicate the major phenotype(s) of metabolic and genetic disorders. From diabetes to inborn errors of metabolism, metabolites can often define the key pathways underlying complex diseases and serve as potential biomarkers. Metabolites may also mediate the downstream effects of genomic, epigenomic and transcriptomic processes, and in turn influence these processes to modify PASC phenotypes. As a measure of the status of hundreds of metabolic pathways, the overall metabolome and the lipidome represent biologically and mechanistically informative data streams. The endogenous metabolome captures a broad range of inflammatory processes, energy production, microbial metabolites, organ-specific biomarkers, lipids, carbohydrates, steroids, and amino acids, among other relevant information on physiologic processes. Furthermore, exogenous metabolites capture environmental exposures, including but not restricted to food and supplement intake, toxins (e.g., per-and polyfluoroalkylic substances, also known as PFAS, tobacco byproducts, illicit drugs), and medications (e.g., statins, ibuprofen, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), all of which may be important in the development or modification of PASC phenotypes, and cannot be easily predicted by other omics but can potentially impact the results of other omics tests. Importantly, these exogenous metabolites are not measurable by any other mechanisms. Microbial metabolites, also measured by metabolomics assays, may serve as important connectors to microbiome data. The interconnections between the metabolome and other multi-omics profiling illustrates an important aspect of multi-omics strategies: while metabolomics can provide crucial information as a single platform, it acts synergistically with other omics data in elucidating important functional relationships to PASC. Several small studies have demonstrated strong dysregulation of endogenous metabolites associated with particular PASC phenotypes. For example, tryptophan metabolism was found to be dysregulated by several groups using metabolomic analyses in blood and urine studies, but the pathogenesis of this phenomenon is unclear. We believe that a comprehensive, longitudinal metabolomics investigation of PASC in the context of a multi-omics strategy in a sufficiently large cohort of patients with deep clinical phenotypes will help define and prioritize functional pathways.

3.1.6 Microbiome
The microbiome has multiple physiological roles in human health, including: i) extracting indigestible ingredients from food and synthesizing nutritional factors; ii) affecting host metabolism; iii) developing systemic and intestinal immunity; vi) providing signals for epithelial renewal and maintaining gut integrity; and iv) secreting anti-microbial products. Alterations of the microbiome may often be an initial disturbance with far-reaching ramifications on disease progression. The gut microbiomes of hospitalized COVID-19 patients were enriched with opportunistic pathogens such as Clostridium hathewayi, Bacteroides nordii, and Actinomyces viscosus. In acute COVID-19, the gut microbiome is associated with immune responses and disease severity and also interacts with the lung microbiome. Changes in the gut microbiome could influence respiratory tract infections through the common mucosal immune system. Conversely, respiratory tract dysbiosis and functional disorders due to COVID-19 also affect the digestive tract. Studies have demonstrated SARS-CoV-2 interactions with host microbiome/virome communities, clotting/coagulation issues, dysfunctional brainstem/vagus nerve signaling, and immune cells (reviewed in). There is observational evidence of gut microbiome compositional alterations in patients with long-term complications of COVID-19. However, the current studies have sample sizes varying from 8 to 130 patients and few studies followed patients beyond 6 months post-infection (reviewed in). A recent study using multi-omics of microbiome-host interactions identified phenotypic, intestinal microbial, and metabolic biomarkers for short-and long-term myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome. Large amounts of microbiome data can be easily generated at low-cost in the RECOVER adult and pediatric cohorts. These data, when integrated with other multi-omics data, will allow for a better understanding of the virus-microbiome-host interactions and identifying microbial and metabolic biomarkers for PASC. Further studies are also needed to investigate whether microbiota modulation can prevent or facilitate the recovery from PASC.

3.2 Considerations on data generation and analysis

3.2.1 Data generation and randomization
Multi-omics data integration can generate valuable knowledge to understand disease pathogenesis. However, multi-omics data can often be burdened by large confounding signals that can prevent accurate modeling and successful discovery. It is therefore essential to appropriately design data collection and generation processes to ensure that such confounders are minimized, and that multi-omics data are amenable to address a large array of important biological questions aiming to characterize, understand and treat PASC. For example, it is usually better to reduce batch effects with a good study design that accurately accounts for them rather than attempting to correct for batch effects after the fact. One successful approach to minimize batch effects involves adequate randomization schemes that minimize risk of contamination of true signals by unwanted variation. Such an approach is powerful when biological questions are defined before data are collected, but often maximizes a distance metric between a measure of interest and the drivers of this unwanted variation at the cost of other potentially meaningful traits. In hypothesis-generating situations, other approaches, such as the inclusion of data generation controls (e.g., reference samples), profiled repeatedly within and across different multi-omics assays, have proven to be an important tool to control for unwanted variation, including confounding from technical variation. However, data generation controls can be complex to define, must contain enough material to be assayed repeatedly, need to capture the full range of biological variation in the multi-omics assessed, and depending on the number needed, can substantially increase data generation cost. These considerations are essential to design a successful multi-omics discovery effort, and it is therefore essential to include data generation experts as well as data scientists who know the biases of each multi-omics profiling technology in teams tasked with designing data generation strategies.

3.2.2 A multi-omics systems-biology approach to data analysis
Each of the omics assays generates vast datasets that require powerful analytical strategies. Integrating data from multiple omics over time and with clinical, demographic and exposome data is the next level of analytical complexity. A multi-omics approach allows for the integration of multiple layers of information into systems biology models that capture the dynamic interplay between biological processes, allowing not only the study of the functional relationships between the molecular components of PASC, but the elucidation of their causal relationships. This approach is critical to understanding the pathogenesis of the clinical manifestations of PASC (Table 3). Integrating multi-omics data with the deep clinical and demographic phenotyping available via RECOVER will capture the most complete picture of disease pathophysiology, leading to more accurate identification and characterization of PASC subtypes as compared to individual omics studies of individual patient cohorts (Figure 1).
Multi-omics data are also important in substantiating and validating findings across individual omics platforms (e.g., a genetic polymorphism leading to transcriptomic, proteomic and metabolomics effects). Critical to this is the longitudinal capture of multi-omics data as the clinical presentations of PASC emerge and progress. Given the high-content nature of omics datasets, they support the development of machine learning (ML) class discovery approaches for identification of clinically relevant biosignatures. The rich datasets that will be produced as part of this effort will enable predictive and diagnostic algorithms to identify candidate biomarkers linked to disease outcomes. The thorough integration of these data into meaningful, queryable, and informative models is critical to understand the biological mechanisms, disease subtypes, progression and prognosis of PASC, to investigate the impact of modifiable risk factors and identify potential precision therapeutic approaches to PASC. Inherent in this, is the measure of these data at multiple time points throughout the disease process.
An example of the power of multi-omics approaches is the study of multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), a serious complication of pediatric COVID-19. Longitudinal plasma bulk transcriptomics, combined with whole blood transcriptomics and plasma DNA epigenomics was recently used to develop multi-organ damage signatures indicative of MIS-C. This study complements previous genomic, proteomic and immunophenotyping investigations of MIS-C to delineate a clearer picture of its pathogenesis. We posit that a single comprehensive, integrated, longitudinal multi-omics approach would have reached similar conclusions as multiple consecutive studies focusing on 1-2 omics each. Such a comprehensive study, performed through centralized labs, would reduce lab-to-lab variability and pre-analytical variability, leveraging a large sample size with rich, highly standardized clinical phenotypes. Furthermore, it is difficult to predict ahead of time which omics would be the most consistent and/or most clinically informative, and which omics data are consistent with each other (e.g., a clinically informative RNA may predict the abundance of an enzyme that produces a metabolite, but if the protein abundance or the metabolite levels are not consistent with RNA abundance, perhaps because of short half-life of the protein or instability of the metabolite, that protein or its metabolite product would not be potential biomarkers or therapeutic targets).Another example of the importance of capturing multi-omics data across demographics and time points is the importance of sex and steroid hormones in the PASC population. Innate and adaptive, humoral and cell-mediated immune responses are impacted by hormones, and their dysregulation contributes to immune-mediated diseases including autoimmunity, a hallmark of PASC. Ovarian steroids recruit mast cells and T-regs to the uterus during pregnancy. Estradiol causes inflammasome activation in mast cells. Estradiol deficiency due to menopause and/or hypogonadism contributes to overactivity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS), while estrogen can contribute to mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS), which may contribute to the pathogenesis of PASC. The SARS-CoV2 spike protein binds to and modulates both ACE2 and ERα receptors, and as sex hormones regulate the expression of ACE2, the asymmetry in PASC development and clinical presentations between sexes - as well as across menstruation status and menstrual cycle time points - indicates that hormone measurements, which can be performed by metabolomics for non-peptide hormones and by proteomics for peptide hormones, are critical components of a multi-omics strategy.

3.2.3 Task force recommendations
We recommended the following strategy: germline whole genome sequencing (WGS) be performed on every RECOVER participant consented for genetic analysis to be used for GWAS studies. Epigenomics, bulk PBMC transcriptomics, plasma proteomics, plasma targeted metabolomics and stool proteomics should be performed on biospecimens from at least 2 time points per participant (baseline, 90 days and 180 days, or at a minimum baseline and 180 days) on biospecimens from as many participants as possible. Samples taken at later time points during the planned 4-year follow-up period may be analyzed as well in the future, particularly to investigate cases that persist long-term. However, the initial focus should be on the first 180 days post-enrollment, as the number of participants dropping out of the study or being lost to follow-up is likely to increase at later time points. This time window is likely to be long enough to compare COVID-19 cases that do result in PASC to cases that do not, which is one of the primary endpoints of the RECOVER studies, as well as PASC cases that resolve clinically within 180 days from cases that persist beyond that time, while maximizing sample size. Single-cell transcriptomics and/or single-cell immunophenotyping may be performed on subsets of participants from each arm of each cohort, to limit costs. Bioinformatics deconvolution of cellular populations based on bulk transcriptomics should be performed on all available PBMC biospecimens.
It must be pointed out that the adult and pregnant adult RECOVER cohorts include different arms: “acute infected” participants, who enroll within 30 days of a SARS-CoV-2 infection, “post-acute infected”, who enroll after 30 days post-infection, “acute uninfected” enrolled within 30 days of a negative COVID-19 test and “post-acute uninfected”, enrolled after 30 days post-negative test. This implies that baseline samples taken at enrollment are likely to reflect different pathobiological stages of disease in acute infected versus post-acute infected participants. It is also possible that a fraction of the “uninfected” participants will have experienced subclinical infections with SARS-CoV-2. Multi-omics analyses have the potential to identify these cases, particularly through proteomics-based identification of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies not detected by conventional tests. As there are significant differences in study design for the adult and pediatric cohorts, longitudinal biospecimens will only be available for Tier 2 pediatric participants, while baseline biospecimens will be available for all participants. Also, the amounts of blood/plasma available for the pediatric cohort will depend on the age of participants. With these considerations in mind, maximizing sample size should be the underlying principle. The main objective of this proposed multi-omics analysis is to generate a rich, multidimensional molecular profiling database to match the clinical, pathophysiological and socioeconomics data elements generated by the RECOVER studies. This data should be made available to the scientific community for secondary analyses.

4 Conclusion
Based on its analysis of the available evidence, the OMICS Task Force advocated an integrated “big data and systems biology” approach, using multi-omics to analyze biospecimens from the largest possible sample sizes in the RECOVER adult and pediatric cohorts, as opposed to single analyte assays or individual omics in multiple separate studies. This approach will maximize our ability to understand pathogenetic mechanisms in clinically defined patient subgroups, discover PASC molecular subtypes and guide precision therapeutic strategies. Centralized, streamlined omics analyses will limit potential inconsistencies associated with laboratory-to-laboratory and batch variations. In addition, multi-omics assays can capture most clinically assayed biomarkers at cheaper costs. Data generation on this scale can only be accomplished through highly multiplexed approaches, which will maximize opportunities to discover mechanisms underlying PASC pathophysiology.
PASC joins the number of poorly understood, chronic diseases that have been the bane of patients, healthcare providers and clinical researchers. While different clinical presentations of PASC have been described, traditional molecular approaches have thus far failed to produce a deep mechanistic understanding of the etiology, pathogenesis and molecular subtypes of PASC. Many of our recommendations have already been considered by the NIH through the peer-review process, resulting in the creation of a systems biology panel that is currently designing the studies we proposed. Currently, this panel is hammering down the details of the analytical strategies. The NIH RECOVER initiative offers an ideal opportunity to understand PASC in diverse populations, and can serve as a paradigm for the study of other complex, poorly-understood chronic diseases.

Author contributions
JS: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft, Writing–review and editing. MA: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. HA: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. NB: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Writing–original draft. ME: Project administration, Writing–original draft. JE: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. XG: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. BH: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. PK: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. JL-S: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. RL: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. CM: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. MM: Conceptualization, Project administration, Writing–original draft. LN: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. NR: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. MR: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. JR: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. GS: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. KS: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. SS: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing–original draft. ST: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. SY: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft. LM: Conceptualization, Visualization, Writing–original draft, Writing–review and editing.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The author(s) declared that they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

References
MOFA+: a statistical framework for comprehensive integration of multi-modal single-cell data
Mast cell activation syndrome and the link with long COVID
In silico drug screening approach using l1000-based connectivity map and its application to COVID-19
Blood DNA methylation and COVID-19 outcomes
Multiscale causal networks identify VGF as a key regulator of Alzheimer's disease
Inactivation of the HIV LTR by DNA CpG methylation: evidence for a role in latency
Single-cell mass cytometry of differential immune and drug responses across a human hematopoietic continuum
Glucocorticoids, sex hormones, and immunity
Data analysis of DNA methylation epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS): a guide to the principles of best practice
Tryptophan metabolism 'hub' gene expression associates with increased inflammation and severe disease outcomes in COVID-19 infection and inflammatory bowel disease
Longitudinal CITE-Seq profiling of chronic lymphocytic leukemia during ibrutinib treatment: evolution of leukemic and immune cells at relapse
Peripheral immunophenotypes in children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection
Epigenome-wide association study of COVID-19 severity with respiratory failure
Profiling tumor infiltrating immune cells with CIBERSORT
Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling of peripheral blood reveals an epigenetic signature associated with severe COVID-19
Implementation of whole-genome and transcriptome sequencing into clinical cancer care
Integrated analysis of single-cell RNA-seq and chipset data unravels PANoptosis-related genes in sepsis
Serum proteomics in COVID-19 patients: altered coagulation and complement status as a function of IL-6 level
Genetic gateways to COVID-19 infection: implications for risk, severity, and outcomes
Development of a long noncoding RNA-based machine learning model to predict COVID-19 in-hospital mortality
Urine metabolomics links dysregulation of the tryptophan-kynurenine pathway to inflammation and severity of COVID-19
Spatial-CITE-seq: spatially resolved high-plex protein and whole transcriptome co-mapping
Genome-wide association studies of COVID-19: connecting the dots
Multimodal pooled Perturb-CITE-seq screens in patient models define mechanisms of cancer immune evasion
Specialized interferon action in COVID-19
Seroconversion stages COVID19 into distinct pathophysiological states
Deep sequencing of B cell receptor repertoires from COVID-19 patients reveals strong convergent immune signatures
Advances in human proteomics at high scale with the SOMAscan proteomics platform
Researching COVID to enhance recovery (RECOVER) pediatric study protocol: rationale, objectives and design
Mapping systemic inflammation and antibody responses in multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C)
Artificial intelligence-assisted transcriptomic analysis to advance cancer immunotherapy
NLRP3 inflammasome activation of mast cells by estrogen via the nuclear-initiated signaling pathway contributes to the development of endometriosis
Impaired type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in severe COVID-19 patients
Single-cell RNA-seq reveals clonal diversity and prognostic genes of relapsed multiple myeloma
Long non-coding RNAs in biomarking COVID-19: a machine learning-based approach
Researching COVID to Enhance Recovery (RECOVER) adult study protocol: rationale, objectives, and design
Gene expression profiling reveals the shared and distinct transcriptional signatures in human lung epithelial cells infected with SARS-CoV-2, MERS-CoV, or SARS-CoV: potential implications in cardiovascular complications of COVID-19
Systems biology in cardiovascular disease: a multiomics approach
Innate immunity, cytokine storm, and inflammatory cell death in COVID-19
Single-cell sequencing techniques from individual to multiomics analyses
A bioinformatic analysis of T-cell epitope diversity in SARS-CoV-2 variants: association with COVID-19 clinical severity in the United States population
CiteFuse enables multi-modal analysis of CITE-seq data
MSFragger: ultrafast and comprehensive peptide identification in mass spectrometry-based proteomics
Estimating sample-specific regulatory networks
XINA: a workflow for the integration of multiplexed proteomics kinetics data with network analysis
EWAS of post-COVID-19 patients shows methylation differences in the immune-response associated gene, IFI44L, three months after COVID-19 infection
Artificial-cell-type aware cell-type classification in CITE-seq
Gut microbiota dynamics in a prospective cohort of patients with post-acute COVID-19 syndrome
Nucleic acid biomarkers of immune response and cell and tissue damage in children with COVID-19 and MIS-C
Longitudinal analyses reveal immunological misfiring in severe COVID-19
Single-cell glycomics analysis by CyTOF-Lec reveals glycan features defining cells differentially susceptible to HIV
Protracted yet coordinated differentiation of long-lived SARS-CoV-2-specific CD8(+) T cells during convalescence
Longitudinal alterations of the gut mycobiota and microbiota on COVID-19 severity
PACOM: a versatile tool for integrating, filtering, visualizing, and comparing multiple large mass spectrometry proteomics data sets
MERS-CoV and H5N1 influenza virus antagonize antigen presentation by altering the epigenetic landscape
The transcriptome of SH-SY5Y at single-cell resolution: a CITE-seq data analysis workflow
Researching COVID to enhance recovery (RECOVER) pregnancy study: rationale, objectives and design
Using artificial intelligence to better predict and develop biomarkers
PhIP-Seq characterization of serum antibodies using oligonucleotide-encoded peptidomes
Sex hormones in acquired immunity and autoimmune disease
SARS-CoV-2-Specific T cells exhibit phenotypic features of helper function, lack of terminal differentiation, and high proliferation potential
Distinctive features of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells predict recovery from severe COVID-19
mRNA vaccine-induced T cells respond identically to SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern but differ in longevity and homing properties depending on prior infection status
A machine learning-based approach using multi-omics data to predict metabolic pathways
Estrogen status and the renin angiotensin aldosterone system
Long-term SARS-CoV-2-specific immune and inflammatory responses in individuals recovering from COVID-19 with and without post-acute symptoms
A comprehensive review of performance of next-generation sequencing platforms
The autoimmune signature of hyperinflammatory multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
Long COVID or post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC): an overview of biological factors that may contribute to persistent symptoms
Using machine learning approaches for multi-omics data analysis: a review
Acquisition of murine splenic myeloid cells for protein and gene expression profiling by advanced flow cytometry and CITE-seq
Autoimmunity is a hallmark of post-COVID syndrome
Immunopathological signatures in multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children and pediatric COVID-19
CITE-seq hits vascular medicine
Endocrine factors modulating immune responses in pregnancy
Pathogenic mechanisms of post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC)
Co-staining human PBMCs with fluorescent antibodies and antibody-oligonucleotide conjugates for cell sorting prior to single-cell CITE-Seq
The SARS-CoV-2 spike protein binds and modulates estrogen receptors
Connections for matters of the heart: network medicine in cardiovascular diseases
Microbiome-transcriptome interactions related to severity of respiratory syncytial virus infection
The interferon landscape along the respiratory tract impacts the severity of COVID-19
The COVIDome Explorer researcher portal
Detect accessible chromatin using ATAC-sequencing, from principle to applications
Mast cell activation syndrome in COVID-19 and female reproductive function: theoretical background vs. Accumulating clinical evidence
Development of a definition of postacute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection
Molecular states during acute COVID-19 reveal distinct etiologies of long-term sequelae
Metabolomics study of COVID-19 patients in four different clinical stages
Estrogen receptors are linked to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), ADAM metallopeptidase domain 17 (ADAM-17), and transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) expression in the human atrium: insights into COVID-19
Sequential multi-omics analysis identifies clinical phenotypes and predictive biomarkers for long COVID
Transformative network modeling of multi-omics data reveals detailed circuits, key regulators, and potential therapeutics for alzheimer's disease
Multi-‘omics of gut microbiome-host interactions in short-and long-term myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients
Comprehensive benchmarking of CITE-seq versus DOGMA-seq single cell multimodal omics
From reads to insight: a hitchhiker's guide to ATAC-seq data analysis
PANoptosis, an indicator of COVID-19 severity and outcomes
Long COVID manifests with T cell dysregulation, inflammation and an uncoordinated adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2
Long COVID manifests with T cell dysregulation, inflammation, and an uncoordinated adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2
Gastrointestinal symptoms, pathophysiology, and treatment in COVID-19
Microbiome and intestinal pathophysiology in post-acute sequelae of COVID-19
Epigenome-wide differential DNA methylation between HIV-infected and uninfected individuals
An epigenome-wide DNA methylation study of patients with COVID-19
The impact of infection with COVID-19 on the respiratory microbiome: a narrative review
Impaired local intrinsic immunity to SARS-CoV-2 infection in severe COVID-19
Gut microbiome alterations in COVID-19
Alterations in gut microbiota of patients with COVID-19 during time of hospitalization