Evaluation of accuracy between extraoral Gothic arch tracing and various other methods assessing horizontal condylar guidance angle in completely edentulous patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Aim:
The aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to determine the accuracy of different methods of measuring horizontal condylar guidance (HCG) angle in comparison with extraoral Gothic arch tracing for completely edentulous patients.
Settings and Design:
This was a systematic review and meta-analysis following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines.
Materials and Methods:
Two reviewers searched the EBSCOhost, Cochrane Library, and PubMed/MEDLINE databases and the Google Scholar search engine for in vivo studies, randomized controlled trials, cross-sectional studies, and quasi-experimental studies published from January 2005 to December 2022 on various other methods of determining HCG angle in completely edentulous patients compared with extraoral Gothic arch tracing method.
Statistical Analysis Used:
Meta-analysis was conducted from the reported quantitative data.
Results:
A total of 513 articles were obtained from different electronic databases, of which 22 studies were included for qualitative synthesis and 20 studies were included for meta-analysis. For the right side, a statistically significant difference was observed for panoramic radiograph (P < 0.05, pooled mean difference = 5.08 [2.17, 7]) and cephalogram (P < 0.05, pooled mean difference = 10.65 [8.81, 12.49]), whereas no statistically significant difference was observed for cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) (P = 0.41, pooled mean difference = 4.39 [−6.10, 14.87]) and protrusive interocclusal wax record (P = 0.92, pooled mean difference = −0.45 [−9.62, 8.72]) as compared with extraoral Gothic arch tracing method. For the left side, a statistically significant difference was observed for panoramic radiograph (P < 0.05, pooled mean difference = 5.07 [1.95, 8.18]) and cephalogram (P < 0.05, pooled mean difference = 10.24 [8.65, 11.83]), whereas no statistically significant difference was observed for CBCT (P = 0.31, pooled mean difference = 4.05 [−3.74, 11.84]) and protrusive interocclusal wax record (P = 0.72, pooled mean difference = −1.21 [−7.86, 5.43]) as compared with extraoral Gothic arch tracing method.
Conclusion:
The cephalogram and panoramic radiograph obtained higher HCG angles in completely edentulous patients than extraoral Gothic arch tracing.

INTRODUCTION
Complete edentulism due to local, systemic, and physiological factors results in a continuous resorption process leading to loss of vertical dimension, loss of functional efficiency, and disturbance in stomatognathic structures. Harmonious coordination between the condylar path, mandibular movement, and occlusal morphology of teeth determines the longevity of a complete denture prosthesis. The mandibular guidance generated by the condyle and articular disc traversing the contour of the glenoid fossa represents the condylar guidance. Condylar guidance, the determinant of the occlusion obtained directly from the patient, is the most accurate reference point. Inaccurate transfer of condylar guidance values on the articulator causes occlusal interferences during mandibular movements. Horizontal condylar guidance (HCG) is obtained from the protrusive movements, and lateral condylar guidance is obtained from lateral movements.
Extraoral tracers or intraoral tracers are widely used for Gothic arch tracing or arrowhead tracing to obtain HCG angle through set protrusive interocclusal record (IOR) on semi-adjustable articulators. It is one of the oldest methods and provides a reproducible mandibular border movement in horizontal plane and so has been used as a comparison group. However, few studies reported higher HCG values obtained from Gothic arch tracing and stated that it aids to develop precise occlusion without any interference, whereas few studies reported lesser accuracy due to lack of neuromuscular coordination, instability of denture bases, and higher complexity with Gothic arch tracing. Few studies reported that interocclusal recording medium can affect the accuracy due to differences in composition, properties, compressibility, hardness, dimensional stability, accuracy, fine reproduction of details, and elastic recovery.
Radiographic methods such as panoramic radiographs, cephalogram, and cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) have been used for determining HCG angle. The condylar guidance angle was determined by the intersection of two reference lines, first Frankfort horizontal plane (orbitale to porion) and second from the most superior point on an articular eminence to the most inferior point on an articular tubercle determining the mean condylar path inclination. These bony reference points are identified and traced on two-dimensional and three-dimensional radiographs to measure HCG angle. However, differences were obtained between cephalogram, CBCT, and panoramic radiograph due to variations in resolution, contrast ratio, method of calculation, and clarity.
Digital methods such as electronic facebow, digital tracers, kinesiography, and axiography use ultrasonic sensors to measure HCG angle in three dimensions displayed on the computer. Luke et al. carried out a systematic review on radiographic techniques and protrusive IOR and reported the occurrence of some clinical variability among both methods. No clear evidence has been reported on which method is accurate to determine the HCG angle in completely edentulous patients.
Therefore, the aim of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to determine the accuracy between extraoral Gothic arch tracing and other different methods used for measuring HCG angle in completely edentulous patients. This will give clinicians a choice of simplified, accurate, and convenient methods to determine the HCG angle from the patient for obtaining balanced occlusion without occlusal interferences for prosthetic rehabilitation in completely edentulous patients. The null hypothesis was that no statistically significant difference will be observed in the accuracy of measuring HCG angle between extraoral Gothic arch tracing and various other methods that are used in completely edentulous patients.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Protocol registration
According to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) 2020 guidelines, this systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted and registered at the Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews database under the code CRD42022283974.

Review question
The following focused review question was formulated according to Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome, and Study design (PICOS) framework: “Is there a difference in the accuracy of other different methods as compared with extraoral Gothic arch tracing used for measuring the HCG angle in completely edentulous patients?” The population was completely edentulous patients with healthy ridges above 35 years of age. The intervention was studies determining HCG angle using panoramic radiograph, cephalogram, CBCT, CT scan, digital methods, intraoral tracing, and interocclusal wax record in completely edentulous patients. The comparison was studies determining HCG angle using extraoral Gothic arch tracing through set protrusive IOR in completely edentulous patients. The outcome was HCG angle in completely edentulous patients. The study design included was in vivo studies, cross-sectional studies, randomized controlled trials, and quasi-experimental studies.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria included in vivo studies, cross-sectional studies, randomized controlled trials, and quasi-experimental studies that evaluated the accuracy of other different methods compared with extraoral Gothic arch tracing used for measuring HCG angles in completely edentulous patients. Full-text studies published in English between January 2005 and December 2022 were included. Human studies were included. Case reports, case series, reviews, questionnaires, surveys, and in vitro studies not in English published before 2005 were excluded.

Search strategy
An advanced search of articles was conducted according to PICOS selection criteria. Two reviewers (S. P. and J. I.) conducted the search independently with the opinion of a third reviewer (J. N.) for any disagreements. The Cohen kappa statistics was used to check the reliability and rate of agreement between the two authors. The Cohen kappa score of 0.90 indicates a perfect agreement between the two authors. The following keywords, Mesh terms, and phrases coupled with Boolean operators (AND, OR, and NOT), as shown in Table 1, were used to conduct the advanced articles search in the following electronic databases: EBSCOhost, Cochrane Library, PubMed/MEDLINE, and Google Scholar. Article search was carried out in different databases using the following search strategy, as mentioned in Table 2. The search terms used in Google Scholar were accuracy, method, condylar guidance, edentulous patient, HCG, sagittal condylar guidance, Gothic arch tracer, panoramic radiograph, cephalogram, and CBCT.
Terms used in search strategy as per Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome, and Study design framework
Population	Intervention	Control	Outcome	Study design	 	Adult, completely edentulous patient, complete denture wearers	OPG, cephalogram, CBCT, interocclusal wax record	Extraoral Gothic arch tracing, GT, protrusive IOR, extraoral tracing, hight tracers	Accuracy, HCG angle, horizontal condylar guidance angle, horizontal condylar guidance, condylar guidance	In vivo studies, cross-sectional studies, randomized control trials, clinical studies, nonrandomized trials
CBCT: Cone-beam computed tomography, HCG: Horizontal condylar guidance, GT: Gothic arch tracer, IOR: Interocclusal record, OPG: Panoramic radiograph
Search strategy used in different databases
Name of the database	Search strategy	 	PubMed	((((Accuracy) AND Method) AND “Condylar guidance” OR “Horizontal condylar guidance”) AND edentulous patient)	 	Cochrane	((((Accuracy) AND Method) AND “Condylar guidance” OR “Horizontal condylar guidance”) AND edentulous patient)	 	EBSCO	((((Accuracy) AND Method) AND “Condylar guidance” OR “Horizontal condylar guidance”) AND edentulous patient)

Study selection and data extraction
Two reviewers (S. P. and J. I.) independently reviewed and assessed the titles and abstracts of each study with the opinion of a third reviewer (J. N.) to solve any disagreement, and duplicates were removed. After the removal of duplicates, the title and abstract were examined and irrelevant articles were excluded. Full-text articles that met the eligibility criteria were assessed and the irrelevant articles were excluded. The references and citations of relevant articles were also assessed. After narrowing it down to 22 included articles, the data extraction was done independently by two reviewers (S. P. and J. I.). The following characteristics of the included studies were tabulated in the evidence table in the spreadsheet (Excel; Microsoft Corp.) for all outcomes: Study identification, country, sample size, comparison group, interventional group, articulator model used, condylar guidance values right and left side, and conclusion.

Risk of bias assessment
The 22 included studies were in vivo studies. The Newcastle–Ottawa tool, a modified version of the case–control study scale, was used by two reviewers (S. P. and J. I.) for the quality assessment of included studies. The assessment criteria include eight items from three domains. Selection (first domain) includes representativeness of the cases, sample size, nonrespondent, and ascertainment of risk factors. Comparability (second domain) includes study controls for the most important factor and study controls for any additional factor. Outcome (third domain) includes ascertainment of method and statistical test. For each domain, the scores were given and the quality of studies was graded as poor, fair, and high.

Meta-analysis
The statistical analysis of the systematic review was done using Review Manager (RevMan) Version 5.4. The Cochrane Collaboration, 2020. The forest plot was obtained using measured effects of mean, standard deviation, and total at a 95% confidence interval (CI), with P < 0.05 as statistically significant. The I2 test was used to measure the heterogeneity. If the I2 > 50%, random effect model was applied. If the I2 < 50%, fixed effect model was applied. To detect the publication bias, funnel plot was used.

RESULTS

Literature search
A total of 513 articles were obtained from an electronic database search, of which 22 were duplicates. A total of 491 abstracts were screened and 422 not relevant to the topic were excluded. Sixty-nine articles were eligible for full-text assessment. After the screening of full-text articles as per the selection criteria, 47 articles were excluded (31 due to inappropriate study groups, 12 due to data provided on dentulous patients, 2 studies due to data on intraoral tracing technique, and 2 studies due to data provided on lateral condylar guidance). For qualitative synthesis, 22 studies were included. For the meta-analysis, 20 studies were included. The articles’ search result in the PRISMA flowchart is depicted in Figure 1.
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses flow diagram

Characteristics of included studies
The detailed characteristic data of 22 included in vivo studies are mentioned in Table 3. In this review, 325 participants with an average age of 45–60 years were included. Among 22 included studies, 2 studies were conducted in Egypt, 1 in Nepal, and 19 in India. Twenty-one studies have reported the use of Hanau Wide Vue semi-adjustable articulator, and one study each reported the use of Hanau H2 semi-adjustable articulator, Girrbach Dental articulator, and Bio Art articulator. Fifteen studies measured HCG angle using panoramic radiograph, six studies measured HCG angle using CBCT,[- three studies measured HCG angle using cephalogram, six studies measured HCG angle using IOR, one study measured HCG angle using axiograph, and one study measured HCG angle using functiograph and intraoral tracer techniques. The right and left HCG angles were reported for all included studies.
Characteristic data extraction table of included studies
Study ID	Country	Age of the patient	Sample size	Comparison group	Interventional group	Articulator used	Condylar guidance value right side, mean (SD)	Condylar guidance value left side, mean (SD)	Conclusion	 	Verma et al., 2022	India	Above 40	20	Protrusive plaster IOR using hight extraoral Gothic arch tracing	CBCT, lateral cephalogram, OPG	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 27.75 (8.19) Cephalogram: 37.40 (4.63) OPG: 35.05 (4.96) CBCT: 33.95 (5.06)	GT: 27.25 (7.34) Cephalogram: 37.40 (4.63) OPG: 33.35 (5.12) CBCT: 33.85 (6.04)	R/G method gave higher values than clinical. Method cephalogram more than OPG than CBCT than tracer	 	EL-Ghiaty et al., 2022	Egypt	50–60	12	Protrusive IOR using extraoral Gothic arch tracing method	CBCT, protrusive interocclusal wax record	Bio Art, Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 36.14 (4.98) IOR: 26.57 (3.95) CBCT: 26.57 (3.95)	GT: 30.71 (2.81) IOR: 21.63 (4.14) CBCT: 18.74 (3.78)	Wax protrusive record can give more practical values than other methods	 	Sharma et al., 2022	India	50–70	15	Bite registration material for IOR using extraoral tracer	CBCT, protrusive interocclusal wax record	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 22.33 (3.77) CBCT: 44.60 (3.97) IOR: 35.87 (4.749)	GT: 25.67 (5.67) CBCT: 44.47 (5.59) IOR: 36.33 (5.192)	CBCT gave more value than other two methods	 	Kumar et al., 2022	India	50–70	30	Protrusive plaster IOR using hight extraoral Gothic arch tracing	CBCT panoramic view, CBCT cross-sectional view	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 26.67 (2.58) CBCT P: 29.33 (3.65) CBCT Cephalogram: 31.24 (2.90)	GT: 27 (2.64) CBCT P: 29.52 (3.51) CBCT Cephalogram: 31.63 (3.28)	CBCT viable alternative method than Gothic arch method	 	Abdeen et al., 2022	Egypt	60–70	12	Printed tracing with protractor using Gothic arch tracing	CBCT, protrusive interocclusal wax record	Hanau Wide Vue	NR	NR	Protrusive wax record with semi-adjustable articulator and Hanau equation is more practical than other methods	 	Ambata, 2021	India	55–75	50	Protrusive plaster IOR using hight extraoral Gothic arch tracing	OPG, lateral cephalogram	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 23.46 (6.59) OPG: 30.90 (2.99) Cephalogram: 34.36 (3.39)	GT: 24.02 (5.220) OPG: 31.66 (2.93)	Lateral cephalogram gave more value than wax than OPG. Lateral cephalogram can be used as an alternative	 	Shetty et al., 2021	India		20	Protrusive plaster IOR using hight extraoral Gothic arch tracing	Axiograph, OPG	Girrbach Dental	GT: 33 (7.50) OPG: 36.50 (7.72) A: 25.65 (2.03)	GT: 27.75 (9.52) OPG: 32.50 (9.45) A: 25.55 (2.06)	Axiographic technique also can be used as an alternative technique to panoramic radiographic and Gothic arch tracing	 	Keerthi et al., 2020	India		22	Protrusive plaster IOR using hight extraoral Gothic arch tracing	OPG	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 17.04 (6.61) OPG: 22.12 (7.2)	GT: 19.18 (8.12) OPG: 23.17 (7.66)	OPG gave higher value than clinical method	 	Mittal et al., 2020	India	45–65	15	Protrusive IOR using extraoral Gothic arch tracing method	OPG	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 35 (4.98) OPG: 33.27 (5.43)	GT: 30.07 (5.13) OPG: 30.93 (4.90)	OPG can be a reliable aid to measure horizontal condylar guidance for programming of articulator	 	Jerath et al., 2019	India		15	Protrusive plaster IOR using hight extraoral GT	CBCT, interocclusal wax record	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 31.31 (2.83) IOR: 26.80 (2.14) CBCT: 33.09 (4.65)	GT: 31.10 (2.49) IOR: 27.8 (2.30) CBCT: 33.81 (3.45)	CBCT gave highest value than tracer than wax records	 	Bhandari et al., 2018	Nepal		25	Protrusive IOR with ZOE paste using hight extraoral GT	OPG	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 21.32 (5.31) OPG: 24 (6.24)	GT: 21.08 (5.55) OPG: 24.48 (4.96)	OPG higher than IOR values. OPG can be used to calculate the condylar guidance value	 	Amin et al., 2018	India	40–60	30	Protrusive plaster IOR using hight extraoral Gothic arch tracing	OPG	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 24.20 (7.06) OPG: 29.10 (9.13)	GT: 24.20 (7.06) OPG: 29.10 (9.13)	OPG higher than IOR values	 	Khalikar et al., 2017	India	50–60	10	Protrusive IOR using extraoral Gothic arch tracing method	OPG	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 29.5 (4.7) OPG: 25.8 (4.26)	GT: 31.03 (3.29) OPG: 26 (4)	OPG and protrusive records may be used as a reliable guide to measure horizontal condylar guidance angle	 	Kumari et al., 2016	India		10	Protrusive silicone IOR using hight extraoral Gothic arch tracing	OPG	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 25.70 (3.40) OPG: 37.10 (8.26)	GT: 25.40 (3.59) OPG: 38 (9.56)	OPG not reliable tool for measuring condylar slopes	 	Patil et al., 2015	India		10	Protrusive IOR using extraoral Gothic arch tracing method	OPG	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 18.50 (4.11) OPG: 17 (3.43)	GT: 20 (4.08) OPG: 17.30 (4.73)	Gothic arch tracing gave similar readings as shown by the radiographic landmarks and can be used as a successful clinical method	 	Acharya et al., 2015	India		20	Protrusive IOR using extraoral Gothic arch tracing method	OPGs	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 26.50 OPG: 30.35	GT: 26.75 OPG: 29.50	OPG gave higher values than IOR	 	Godavarthi et al., 2015	India	40–65	20	Protrusive IOR using extraoral Gothic arch tracing method	OPGs	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 38.62 OPG: 36.6	GT: 38.05 OPG: 34.17	IOR gave higher values than OPG method. OPG can be used as an alternative method to determine CG	 	Shah et al., 2014	India		24	Protrusive IOR by jetbite using extraoral Gothic arch tracing	OPGs	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 30.42 (6.06) OPG: 38.54 (4.18)	GT: 32.38 (8.55) OPG: 41.88 (1.16)	R/G higher value than tracing. No correlation was obtained between both techniques	 	Shetty et al., 2013	India		15	Protrusive IOR with bite registration material at JR stage using hight extraoral Gothic arch tracing, IOR at try-in stage	OPGs	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 12.73 (11.08) OPG: 37.13 (5.40) IOR: 24 (11.83)	GT: 13.47 (9.87) OPG: 35.13 (4.79) IOR: 21.67 (10.63)	OPG higher than other method	 	Shah et al., 2013	India		20	Protrusive interocclusal plaster record using extraoral Gothic arch tracing	OPGs	Hanau H2 and Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 35.45 (4.69) OPG: 37.9 (3.89)	GT: 37.35 (5.17) OPG: 38.9 (5.22)	OPG gave higher value than Hanau Wide Vue than Hanau H2	 	Thakur et al., 2012	India	45–65	28	Protrusive interocclusal plaster record using extraoral Gothic arch tracing	Interocclusal wax record	Hanau Wide Vue	GT: 22.93 (7.15) IOR: 21.64 (6.24)	GT: 23.93 (6.9) IOR: 21.28 (7.02)	Gothic arch tracing gave a higher value than interocclusal wax record	 	Nandini et al., 2005	India		10	Protrusive IOR using extraoral Gothic arch tracing method	Cephalometrics, Chandra tracer, intraoral tracer, functiograph, checkbite	Hanau articulator	NR	NR	Articulator values were higher than cephalometric value. Intraoral tracer than functiograph than Chandra tracer than checkbite than hight tracer
CBCT: Cone-beam computed tomography, GT: Gothic arch tracer, IOR: Interocclusal record, NR: Not reported, OPG: Panoramic radiograph, SD: Standard deviation

Risk of bias assessment
The Newcastle–Ottawa assessment tool, a modified version of the case–control study scale, was used for the quality assessment of the analytical cross-sectional study. The study quality of 20 studies was good and 2 studies was fair, as shown in Table 4.
Quality assessment using Newcastle–Ottawa tool for cross-sectional studies
Study ID	Selection	Comparability	Outcome	Total score	Quality	 				 	Representativeness of case	Sample size	Nonresponders	Ascertainment of risk factor	Main factor	Additional factor	Assessment of outcome	Statistical test	 	Verma et al., 2022	*	-	*	**	*	-	*	*	7	Good	 	EL-Ghiaty et al., 2022	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Sharma et al., 2022	*	-	*	**	*	-	*	*	7	Good	 	Kumar et al., 2022	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Abdeen et al., 2022	*	*	-	**	*	-	*	*	7	Good	 	Ambata, 2021	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Shetty et al., 2021	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Keerthi et al., 2020	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Mittal et al., 2020	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Jerath et al., 2019	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Bhandari et al., 2018	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Amin et al., 2018	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Khalikar et al., 2017	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Kumari et al., 2016	*	-	*	**	*	-	*	*	7	Good	 	Patil et al., 2015	*	-	-	**	*	-	*	*	6	Good	 	Acharya et al., 2015	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Godavarthi et al., 2015	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Shah et al., 2014	*	*	-	**	*	-	*	*	7	Good	 	Shetty et al., 2013	*	-	-	*	*	-	*	*	5	Fair	 	Shah et al., 2013	*	*	*	**	*	-	*	*	8	Good	 	Thakur et al., 2012	*	-	*	**	*	-	*	*	7	Good	 	Nandini et al., 2005	*	-	-	*	*	-	*	*	5	Fair
*Indicates positive finding and scored one. **Indicates positive finding and scored two

Meta-analysis
Twenty studies were included for meta-analysis. The quantitative data which were obtained for right and left side HCG angles from four methods – panoramic radiograph, CBCT, cephalogram, and the interocclusal wax record – were compared with extraoral Gothic arch tracing for meta-analysis. A total of 15 studies were included for panoramic radiograph, 2 studies for cephalogram, 5 studies for CBCT, and 4 studies for interocclusal wax record.

Meta-analysis for right side horizontal condylar guidance angle
For the panoramic radiograph, the random effect model was applied as the I2 value was 89%. A statistically significant difference was observed between the two methods (P < 0.05, pooled mean difference = 5.08 [2.17,7], CI = 95%), as stated in the forest plot [Figure 2]. HCG angle obtained from the panoramic radiograph was higher than extraoral Gothic arch tracing. For the cephalogram, the I2 value obtained was 0%, so the fixed effect model was applied. A statistically significant difference was observed between the two methods (P < 0.05, pooled mean difference = 10.65 [8.81, 12.49], CI = 95%), as stated in the forest plot [Figure 2]. HCG angle obtained from the cephalogram was higher than extraoral Gothic arch tracing. For CBCT, the I2 value obtained was 99%, so the random effect model was applied. No statistically significant difference was observed between the two methods (P = 0.41, pooled mean difference = 4.39 [−6.10, 14.87], CI = 95%), as stated in the forest plot [Figure 2]. For the protrusive interocclusal wax record, the I2 value obtained was 98%, so the random effect model was applied. No statistically significant difference was observed between the two methods (P = 0.92, pooled mean difference = −0.45 [−9.62, 8.72], CI = 95%), as stated in the forest plot [Figure 2].
Forest plot comparing protrusive interocclusal record using extraoral Gothic arch tracing and intervention groups of panoramic radiograph, cephalogram, cone-beam computed tomography, and interocclusal wax record for right side horizontal condylar guidance angle

Meta-analysis for left side horizontal condylar guidance angle
For the panoramic radiograph, the I2 value obtained was 90%, so the random effect model was applied. A statistically significant difference was observed between the two methods (P < 0.05, pooled mean difference = 5.07 [1.95, 8.18], CI = 95%), as stated in the forest plot [Figure 3]. HCG angle obtained from the panoramic radiograph was higher than extraoral Gothic arch tracing. For the cephalogram, the I2 value obtained was 0%, so the fixed effect model was applied. A statistically significant difference was observed between the two methods (P < 0.001, pooled mean difference = 10.24 [8.65, 11.83], CI = 95%), as stated in the forest plot [Figure 3]. HCG angle obtained from the cephalogram was higher than extraoral Gothic arch tracing. For CBCT, the I2 value obtained was 98%, so the random effect model was applied. No statistically significant difference was observed between the two methods (P = 0.31, pooled mean difference = 4.05 [−3.74, 11.84], CI = 95%), as stated in the forest plot [Figure 3]. For the protrusive interocclusal wax record, the I2 value obtained was 95%, so the random effect model was applied. No statistically significant difference was observed between the two methods (P = 0.72, pooled mean difference = −1.21 [−7.86, 5.43], CI = 95%), as stated in the forest plot [Figure 3].
Forest plot comparing protrusive interocclusal record using extraoral Gothic arch tracing and intervention groups of panoramic radiograph, cephalogram, cone-beam computed tomography, and interocclusal wax record for left side horizontal condylar guidance angle

DISCUSSION
Accurate determination of condylar guidance angle is a necessity for coordinated and harmonious mandibular movements within the envelope of motion which is a unique entity for every individual. Hight extraoral Gothic arch tracer consists of a central bearing point and central bearing plate. The protrusive mandibular movements are recorded with an interocclusal recording medium and transferred to an articulator to measure the HCG angle obtained from the patient. This systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted to compare the extraoral Gothic arch tracing with CBCT, cephalogram, panoramic radiograph, and interocclusal wax record used for measuring HCG angle in completely edentulous patients.
The null hypothesis was accepted for the intervention group of CBCT and interocclusal wax record. No statistically significant difference was observed for both right and left HCG angles obtained from CBCT and interocclusal wax record compared with extraoral Gothic arch tracing. This result was in accordance with the study done by Kumar et al. showing no statistically significant difference between CBCT and extraoral Gothic arch tracing and the study done by Sharma et al. showing no statistically significant difference between extraoral Gothic arch tracing and interocclusal wax record. However, studies done by Verma et al. and Jerath et al. reported higher values from CBCT than clinical methods. The study done by Jerath et al. reported lesser values for the interocclusal wax record than extraoral Gothic arch tracing. However, a study done by Thakur et al. reported higher values from extraoral Gothic arch tracing than interocclusal wax record.
The null hypothesis for the intervention group cephalogram and panoramic radiograph was rejected. Cephalogram and panoramic radiograph showed comparatively higher statistically significant values than extraoral Gothic arch tracing. This result was in accordance with studies done by Verma et al. and Ambata showing significant differences between cephalogram and extraoral Gothic arch tracing. However, a study done by Nandini et al. reported no statistically significant difference between cephalogram and extraoral Gothic arch tracing. Studies done by Kumari et al., Shah et al., and Shetty et al. reported statistically higher values from panoramic radiograph than extraoral Gothic arch tracing.
The overall results obtained were due to the different methodologies used for measuring HCG angle. The accuracy of extraoral Gothic arch tracing varied due to the complex arrangement of hight extraoral tracer, the compressibility of the underlying tissues, the stability of the temporary record bases, the precision of the patient to perform various mandibular movements on the tracing plate, and differences in elasticity, rigidity, flow, accuracy, compressibility, setting time, thickness, and dimensional stability of interocclusal recording medium. The interocclusal wax record obtained using Aluwax is an easy method to record protrusive mandibular movements for patients. However, errors can occur during the laboratory transfer to the articulator, distortion of wax, uncoordinated mandibular movements of the patient, and inappropriate recording methods by the clinician. For the radiographic determination of the HCG angle, the angle was obtained by the intersection of two reference lines and was measured with a protractor. However, errors in measurement can occur due to improper identification of bony landmarks and inappropriate measurement by clinicians. The differences in the HCG angles obtained can be due to the limitations reported by the studies such as the use of smaller sample size, the influence of condylar pathway by the overlapping structures, the use of two-dimensional lateral cephalometric image, errors due to manual tracing method, errors based on individual judgment, radiographic distortion, distortion due to head position and reference plane orientation, magnification errors, and projection errors.
For measuring the HCG angle in a completely edentulous patient, the clinician can opt for a cephalogram and panoramic radiograph as an alternative, convenient, accurate method to record, measure, and transfer the HCG angle for programming the semi-adjustable articulator to obtain balanced occlusion devoid of occlusal interferences during mandibular movements in a complete denture. Limitations of this review included the inclusion of only analytical cross-sectional studies, and studies published in English only. The quantitative analysis results were obtained from different studies with different comparison groups resulting in a smaller number of included studies for cephalogram, CBCT, and interocclusal wax record. For more specific results, studies comparing only two methods should be included. To overcome these limitations, new clinical trials should be conducted on the present topic and should be included to obtain higher validated results. Further reviews can be conducted between any two methods to get comparative results.

CONCLUSION
The conclusions that can be drawn from the findings of this systematic review and meta-analysis are as follows:
Higher HCG angles were obtained from cephalogram and panoramic radiograph when compared with extraoral Gothic arch tracing in completely edentulous patients with statistically significant difference for both right and left HCG angles
Based on the mean difference and number of studies included for meta-analysis, it can be concluded that the panoramic radiograph is the best method to obtain higher and more accurate HCG angle in completely edentulous patients as compared with extraoral Gothic arch tracing.

Financial support and sponsorship
Nil.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
Safety of increasing vertical dimension of occlusion: A systematic review
Cranio-mandibular relations, mandibular movements and its significance in complete denture prosthodontics
Digital fixed complete-arch rehabilitation: From virtual articulator mounting to clinical delivery
The effect of musculoskeletal facial pain on registration of maxillomandibular relationships and treatment planning: A synthesis of the literature
Comparative analysis of sagittal condylar guidance by protrusive interocclusal records with panoramic and lateral cephalogram radiographs in dentulous population: A clinico-radiographic study
Assessment of sagittal condylar guidance with protrusive inter-occlusal method, panoramic radiographs, and lateral cephalogram: A comparative study
Correlation of condylar guidance determined by panoramic radiographs to one determined by conventional methods
Evaluation of sagittal condylar guidance angles using computerized pantographic tracings, protrusive interocclusal records, and 3D-CBCT imaging techniques for oral rehabilitation
The principles of obtaining occlusion in occlusal rehabilitation
Evaluation of Hanau's formula in determination of lateral condylar guidance: A clinical research study
Comparative study of condylar settings of three semiadjustable articulators
Comparison of condylar guidance setting obtained from a wax record versus an extraoral tracing: A pilot study
An insight into Gothic arch tracing
The use of a Gothic arch tracing to record centric relation in the construction of complete dentures
Complete denture rehabilitation of edentulous patient with severe alveolar bone resorption and condyle fracture using Gothic arch tracing and closed mouth impression technique: A case report
How to overcome the trouble shooting problems in complete denture: An overview
Electromyography of masticatory muscles after denture relining with soft and hard denture liners
3D-printed custom trays with a Gothic arch for centric relation recording and definitive impression making for complete dentures: A dental technique
Evaluation of dimensional stability, accuracy and surface hardness of interocclusal recording materials at various time intervals: An in vitro study
A comparative evaluation of dimensional stability of three types of interocclusal recording materials-an in-vitro multi-centre study
Accuracy of cone-beam computed tomography imaging of the temporomandibular joint: Comparisons with panoramic radiology and linear tomography
Accuracy of linear temporomandibular joint measurements with cone beam computed tomography and digital cephalometric radiography
An in vitro study to evaluate the accuracy of orthopantomograph as an aid to determine condylar guidance
Assessment and comparison of the condylar guidance by protrusive interocclusal records and panoramic radiographic imaging in edentulous and dentulous individuals
A comparison of two-dimensional radiography and three-dimensional computed tomography in angular cephalometric measurements
The reliability of two- and three-dimensional cephalometric measurements: A CBCT study
Accuracy of recording horizontal condylar inclination and Bennett angle with the Cadiax compact
Impact of mounting methods in computerized axiography on assessment of condylar inclination
Revising average condylar inclinations using electronic pantograph assessment: A cross-sectional study
Accuracy of radiographic and protrusive occlusal record methods in determining condylar guidance angles: A systematic review and meta-analysis
The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA statement
Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 6.3
PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): Checklist and explanation
Scoping reviews: Reinforcing and advancing the methodology and application
Relationship between alcohol intolerance and aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease (AERD): Systematic review
PROSPERO: An international register of systematic review protocols
Registration of systematic reviews in PROSPERO:30,000 records and counting
Formulating a researchable question: A critical step for facilitating good clinical research
PICO, PICOS and SPIDER: A comparison study of specificity and sensitivity in three search tools for qualitative systematic reviews
Defining the process to literature searching in systematic reviews: A literature review of guidance and supporting studies
Evaluation of implant stability and increase in bone height in indirect sinus lift done with the osseodensification and osteotome technique: A systematic review and meta analysis
Reliability of self-reported health risk factors and chronic conditions questions collected using the telephone in South Australia, Australia
Identifying and removing duplicate records from systematic review searches
Find duplicates among the PubMed, EMBASE, and Cochrane library databases in systematic review
Newcastle-Ottawa scale: Comparing reviewers'to authors'assessments
No clear choice between Newcastle-Ottawa scale and appraisal tool for cross-sectional studies to assess methodological quality in cross-sectional studies of health-related quality of life and breast cancer
Association between circulating adipocytokine concentrations and microvascular complications in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled cross-sectional studies
QUADAS-2: A revised tool for the quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies
Statistical tests, P values, confidence intervals, and power: A guide to misinterpretations
Seeing the forest by looking at the trees: How to interpret a meta-analysis forest plot
Fixed-effect versus random-effects models for meta-analysis:3 points to consider
In an empirical evaluation of the funnel plot, researchers could not visually identify publication bias
Efficacy of multicomponent treatment in fibromyalgia syndrome: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials
Comparative analysis of condylar guidance angle obtained by protrusive interocclusal records and radiographic methods in edentulous patients: An in vivo study
Effect of different horizontal condylar guidance registration methods and articulators on bilateral balanced occlusion of complete denture
A clinical study to compare the condylar guidance measured by the conventional method and CBCT
Clinicoradiographic comparison of sagittal condylar guidance angle determined by dynamic and radiographic methods
Effect of different condylar guidance registration records on balanced occlusion of complete denture
A comparative clinico radiographic analysis of horizontal condylar guidance determined by radiographic method to interocclusal protrusive records
Axiograph and the panoramic radiographic imaging technique, an alternative to conventional technique to record condylar guidance
An in vivo study to determine a mathematical formula to relate horizontal condylar guidance angle derived clinically and radiographically
Correlation of condylar guidance using panoramic radiographic and protrusive interocclusal registration in edentulous patients –An in vitro study
Clinico-radiographic comparative evaluation of horizontal condylar guidance angle by interocclusal wax record, CBCT and gothic arch tracing method-an in vivo study
A comparative study to measure the horizontal condylar guidance obtained by protrusive interocclusal records and panoramic radiographic images in completely edentulous patients
Comparison of condylar guidance angulations obtained from protrusive records and orthopantomogram in edentulous subjects –An in vivo study
An in vivo study to compare and correlate sagittal condylar guidance obtained by radiographic and extraoral Gothic arch tracing method in edentulous patients
Correlation between sagittal condylar guidance obtained by gothic arch tracing an interocclusal record and by panoramic radiographic tracing in edentulous subjects: A clinicoradiographic analysis
A comparative study of condylar guidance setting obtained from interocclusal records and panoramic radiographs in both dentulous and edentulous subjects
Correlation of the condylar guidance obtained by protrusive interocclusal record and panoramic radiographs in completely edentulous patients: An in vivo study
A comparative evaluation of condylar guidance value from radiograph with interocclusal records made during jaw relation and try-in: A pilot study
A comparative analysis of sagittal condylar guidance determined by two articulator systems and orthopantomographs (OPG) in completely edentulous patients
A comparative evaluation of static and functional methods for recording centric relation and condylar guidance: A clinical study
Comparative evaluation of hight tracer, Chandra tracer, intraoral tracer, functiograph and checkbite: A clinical study