Evaluation of the methods for determining accuracy of fit and precision of RPD framework in Digital (3D printed, milled) and conventional RPDs - a systematic review
Background
The advent of digital technologies has introduced novel methods for RPD fabrication, potentially enhancing the fit compared to the conventional approaches. This systematic review aimed to evaluate the methods to assess the accuracy of fit and precision of the RPD framework fabricated using conventional and digital (3D printed and milled) methods.
Methods
A comprehensive literature search (Registration Number CRD42023459566) was conducted across different electronic databases like PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar. Studies investigating RPD fit and precision assessment using various techniques (Visual inspection and pressing test using silicone impression material, 3D digital analyses using a software, light microscopy, digital microscope at 50x, superimposition method /surface matching software program, µCT on silicone specimens and direct measurements) in in-vitro studies were included. Data extraction and quality assessment were performed to evaluate the methodological rigour of the selected studies. A narrative synthesis of the findings was carried out to evaluate the methods to assess the accuracy of fit and precision of the RPD framework fabricated through conventional and digital methods due to heterogeneity in study variables.
Results
Out of 413 records, a total of 8 in-vitro studies were included in this review. The key findings of the review suggest that RPD fit accuracy varies across fabrication processes including conventional techniques, resin milling, selective laser melting (SLM), and digital superimposition. Resin milling with polyether ether ketone (PEEK) offers the best accuracy. Among the different methods used in assessing the fit accuracy of the RPD framework silicone-based fit evaluation and superimposition techniques/ surface matching are commonly used methods.
Conclusion
Both traditional (non-computerized) and computerized methods for the assessment of fit and precision of conventional and digital RPD frameworks are used commonly. But still, formulation of a standard method for fit assessment of RPDs is warranted. In future with further refinements, digital methods would completely outperform the traditional methods.

Introduction
Development in the field of clinical dentistry, with the help of advanced digital dentistry techniques, has resulted in enhanced treatment options for edentulous and partially edentulous patients. Removable partial dentures (RPDs) serve as an essential treatment modality in the rehabilitation of patients with partial edentulism. RPDs’ clinical effectiveness is greatly dependent on the precision of their framework fit, which has a direct impact on patient comfort, retention, and overall prosthesis performance. RPD frameworks were traditionally fabricated employing conventional methods such as lost wax technique, and casting and technique-sensitive, time-demanding laboratory procedures. Although effective, these traditional technologies had significant limits, such as long fabrication periods and the tendency for misfit issues, which often cause unstable dentures and plaque accumulation. This resulted in further oral health issues such as tooth mobility, masticatory discomfort, dental caries, gingival diseases, and halitosis which ultimately led to patient discomfort and dissatisfaction.
Meanwhile, the prosthodontics field has undergone a fundamental transformation towards digital technology, particularly computer-aided design and computer-aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM). The manufacturing process can be subtractive or additive type- Milling and 3-D Printing respectively. These digital approaches have transformed RPD fabrication and have demonstrated potential benefits such as shorter processing times, increased precision, and improved patient experiences. Scanning, planning, and integrating with conventional methods is a component of this digital approach. Milling is the process in which an object is produced by removing the material from solid blocks of resin, metals etc. and all steps are under the pre-guided computer program. But still, this subtractive method has inherent limitations of machining tools and the material properties from which the restoration is fabricated. Higher material hardness involves lower machinability and probably structural defects within the final milled material. The additive process, which is 3D printing, divides the 3D model data (CAD design) into several slices. The final shape is then created by applying a basic layering technique, often applying 5 to 20 layers per millimetre of material. Furthermore, compared to milling, 3-D printing technology uses a very small amount of material. It could also be cost-effective because there is essentially no material loss, leftover material can be handled later, and numerous materials can be printed at once with accurate reproduction of fine detail. Various 3D printing technologies are available such as stereolithography (SLA), selective laser melting (SLM), selective laser sintering (SLS), direct metal laser-sintering (DMLS), fused deposition modelling (FDM), selective electron beam melting (SEBM) and inkjet printingStereolithography, direct metal laser-sintering and selective laser melting are commonly used additive 3D printing processes that can be used to produce RPD frameworks. Cobalt-chromium alloy is the preferred material for RPDs manufactured via selective laser melting due to its ideal physical properties. The physical properties of Co-Cr alloys fabricated by SLM for RPDs have higher hardness, better wear resistance, higher density and can withstand higher functional loads. Also, selective laser melting produces equal or better physical properties compared to conventional casting but has the advantage of producing more complicated designs and saving material.
This paradigm shift, however, has highlighted significant concerns about the relative accuracy and efficacy of RPD frameworks generated through traditional compared to digital techniques. In this regard, many studies have shown the effectiveness of these technologies as compared to conventional methods. A variety of materials with specific fabrication techniques are used in the creation of RPD. Utilizing titanium and cobalt chromium is among them. Castable patterns can be made by milling, selective laser sintering (SLS), selective laser melting (SLM), and conventional lost wax process. Acetal is made by milling and injection molding. Polyamide makes use of 3D printing and injection molding. PEEK and PAEK (AKP) are made via milling. Numerous studies have reported the accuracy of fit of digitally manufactured RPD, with varying degrees of success, including few suggesting the use of conventional methods. The implementation of digital technology in the treatment of tooth-tissue-supported RPD represents more than just an upgrade in technology; it also signifies a new exploration of clinical principles. This approach has the potential to improve the fit, comfort, and function for patients from a clinical perspective. There is significant automation available for planning the prosthesis using facial and dental scans of the patient. 3D Extraoral facial scan could be applied in future for a better treatment approach for the fabrication of RPD. Researchers and clinicians have used various methods viz. visual inspection, silicone-based fit evaluation, stability analysis, digital microscopic analysis, and light microscopy, to assess the fit accuracy of RPDs fabricated by conventional or digital methods and presented their rationale for the method. Nevertheless, there is disagreement over their clinical relevance and uses. For evidence-based decision-making in prosthodontic practice, it is crucial to comprehend the relative fit outcomes between traditional and digital RPD frameworks and the method to assess it. Therefore, by a synthesis of pertinent in-vitro investigations, this systematic review aimed to evaluate the methods to assess the accuracy of fit and precision of the RPD framework fabricated using conventional and digital (3D printed and milled) methods. The findings of the present systematic review will not only add to the body of literature on prosthodontics but also assist clinicians and researchers in making informed choices about choosing fabrication techniques and assessment of the fit of the fabricated RPD, based on empirical pieces of evidence of the previously conducted studies.

Materials and methods

Review protocol registration
The systematic review was registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews on 11 September 2023, which was by the guidelines. (Registration Number CRD42023459566). This review followed the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) procedure.
The research question formulated was “What are the different methods of assessment of the fit and precision of the RPD fabricated by conventional or digital (3D printing/ milling) techniques?” and related additional information gathered was a comparison of fit or precision of conventional or digital RPDs. The answer to the formulated research question was generated using the following PICOS strategy -.
P (Population): Various RPD frameworks. I (Intervention): Different Digital ( milling and 3-D printing) RPD fabrication techniques, C (Comparator): Traditional methods for fabrication of RPD. O (Outcome): Evaluation of the fit and precision of RPD frameworks made by conventional and digital techniques. S (Studies): In-vitro studies.

Search strategy
This systematic review included searches from electronic databases, namely PubMed/MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus, and Web of Science. Additional sources included Google Scholar, OpenGray, and conference proceedings. Filter for type of study design (in vitro studies) was maintained throughout the search. A detailed manual search for relevant articles in journals allied to prosthodontics was also performed to ensure a thorough screening process. Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms, keywords, and other free terms combined with Boolean operators (OR, AND) were used to search articles. Identical keywords such as “Denture, Partial, Removable” OR “Dental Prosthesis Design” AND Computer-Aided Design” AND Dental Models” were used for all the search platforms following the syntax rules of each database. A detailed search. A detailed search strategy is given in Table 1. Cross references of the included studies were also explored to find relevant studies.
Search strings utilized across the different databases
Database	Search String	 	PubMed/MEDLINE	(“Denture, Partial, Removable” OR “Dental Prosthesis Design” OR “Dental Prosthesis Fitting”) AND (“Computer-Aided Design” OR “Computer-Aided Manufacturing” OR “Three-Dimensional Printing”) AND (“Dental Models” OR “Accuracy” OR “Reproducibility of Results”)	 	Embase	(‘denture, partial, removable’/exp OR ‘dental prosthesis design’/exp OR ‘dental prosthesis fitting’/exp) AND (‘computer aided design’/exp OR ‘computer aided manufacturing’/exp OR ‘three dimensional printing’/exp) AND (‘dental model’/exp OR ‘accuracy’/exp OR ‘reproducibility’/exp)	 	Scopus	TITLE-ABS-KEY ((“Denture, Partial, Removable” OR “Dental Prosthesis Design” OR “Dental Prosthesis Fitting”) AND (“Computer-Aided Design” OR “Computer-Aided Manufacturing” OR “Three-Dimensional Printing”) AND (“Dental Models” OR “Accuracy” OR “Reproducibility of Results”))	 	Web of Science	TS=(“Denture, Partial, Removable” OR “Dental Prosthesis Design” OR “Dental Prosthesis Fitting”) AND TS=(“Computer-Aided Design” OR “Computer-Aided Manufacturing” OR “Three-Dimensional Printing”) AND TS=(“Dental Models” OR “Accuracy” OR “Reproducibility of Results”)

Eligibility criteria
In-vitro studies that examined the fit and precision of RPD frameworks and employed either digital or traditional methods for RPD manufacturing were included. There were no constraints on the material or source of the framework. Only English-language articles published in peer-reviewed journals were included. Studies that used fixed prostheses, studies that didn’t provide enough information about the manufacturing process, or studies that didn’t use a digital or traditional technique as a comparator were all omitted. Additionally, papers like editorials, comments, conference proceedings, narrative reviews, systematic reviews, and grey literature were not considered appropriate for inclusion. Thus, from a total of 413 records, initially identified through systematic searches across multiple databases, eight studies were included finally based on decided criteria.

Study selection process
Two reviewers performed an extensive search through the databases and all results were imported into Rayyan software (http://rayyan.qcri.org) to aid with duplication removal and title and abstract screening process. The check for duplicates was used to identify and eliminate duplicates. Each article that was detected as a duplicate by the software was checked meticulously. Also, the articles were independently scanned by two reviewers. After reading the titles and abstracts of all retrieved results, any ineligible studies were eliminated. The level of agreement between the two reviewers, calculated by Cohen’s kappa (k) index, was 0.92 for titles and abstracts and 0.90 for full texts. The full texts of the potentially relevant titles were reviewed to determine eligibility for inclusion. Disagreements between the two reviewers were resolved through discussions A third reviewer was consulted at each stage of any disagreement between the two investigators to reach a consensus.

Data extraction
Two reviewers independently extracted data using specially designed data extraction forms utilizing Microsoft Excel software. Any disagreement was resolved by discussion between the authors. The following parameters were taken into consideration: author/year of publication, country, study population, sample size, model used, fabrication method, comparison, assessment method, outcome and recommendations.

Data synthesis
As there was a wide heterogeneity across studies in terms of intervention and comparator, results were synthesized using a narrative approach.

Quality assessment
This systematic review employed the quality assessment instrument for in-vitro studies (QUIN) for assessing bias in in-vitro studies. The QUIN Tool has 12 points for rating and grading the quality of in vitro investigations. Each study obtains a total quality rating based on the range of points it received where study scoring (1–4) is considered a high risk of bias (ROB), (5–8) = medium ROB, and (9–12) = low ROB. Two review authors independently evaluated each chosen paper by the predetermined parameters. Any disagreements were settled through discussion and agreement or by engaging a third reviewer.

Results
A total of 413 records were initially identified through systematic searches across multiple databases. Among these, 68 duplicate records were promptly removed, and 56 records were flagged as ineligible by automated screening tools. All 289 records were evaluated for eligibility during the screening phase, with a total of 242 reports being appraised for inclusion in the review. Subsequently, the eligibility assessment resulted in the exclusion of various records, including in-vitro investigations unrelated to the study purpose (n = 88), literature reviews (n = 65), case reports (n = 38), and dissertation entries (n = 43). Finally, eight studies met the inclusion criteria and were approved for inclusion in the systematic review. A PRISMA flowchart (Fig. 1) was developed to summarize the selection of included studies.
Flow chart of the method of data selection (PRISMA 2009 Flow Diagram)

Study characteristics
Table 2 presents an overview of the information extracted from the included studies. The included in-vitro studies were published between the year 2008 to 2023. The studies were conducted by authors from China (n = 2), Germany(n = 2), Portugal (n = 1), India(n = 1), Canada(n = 1) and Saudi Arabia (n = 1). The study population encompassed a broad spectrum of dental prosthetic components which included Indirect and Direct Milled RPDs, Removable partial denture frameworks, Maxillary partial edentulous resin models, cobalt-chromium removable partial denture, one-piece RPDs, (RPD) metal frameworks produced using digital manufacturing technologies and maxillary metal framework. The overall sample size included in this review was 143 cases, with a sample size in individual studies ranging from 4 to 40. However, Arnold et al.‘s study didn’t specify or reveal the sample size they used for their research. None of the studies mentioned the follow-up period. In five of the investigations, standard RPD frameworks were employed as a point of comparison. In contrast, one study used micro-computed tomography (µCT) tests. Another study documented the use of refractory casts replicated from resin models, which were afterwards utilised to build prosthesis frames using the lost-wax casting technique. In addition, one study used the selective laser melting (SLM) approach as a comparison group.

Quality assessment findings
Out of eight, seven studies scored between 50 and 70% and thus were considered as having a medium risk of bias. Whereas the remaining one scored < 50%, and thus was considered as having a high risk of bias. All studies clearly stated their aims and objectives for conducting research and adequately explained the method of measurement of outcome. Only one study provided the details of sample size calculation and one study provided details on sampling technique. The details of the comparison group and, methodology fared well across the studies, with seven studies meeting the criteria for adequacy and one for inadequacy. Operator details and outcome assessor details showed more variability, with some studies providing adequate information and others falling short. Notably, statistical analysis and the presentation of results were strong points, with almost all studies scoring well in these categories. Randomization was reported in only one study whereas none of the studies reported blinding in their study. (Fig. 2; Table 3)

Fabrication methods, models used and reported outcome
The studies incorporated both digital and traditional models, such as CAD-CAM(n = 2) and conventional lost-wax techniques (n = 2), SLM printer for 3D printing using cobalt-chromium (Co-Cr) alloys(n = 1) and Milled and conventional RPDs (n = 2). However, in Soltandazeh et al.‘s 2019 study, five techniques were included viz. conventional lost-wax (CLW), CAD printing, CAD printing from stone casts, and lost-wax using models produced through resin-based 3D printing, demonstrating a range of approaches and materials.

Fit and precision assessment methods-
The various methods used in the included studies for assessment of RPD fit are presented in Table 2. The 2 studies used microscope method, Arnold et al. used light microscopy; while Muehlemann et al. 2022 and Agarwal et al. used digital microscope. Three studies used software-based assessment. Ye et al. and Soltandazeh et al. used Geomagic software while Chen et al. used NX image software. The Silicone registration replicas was used by five studies. µCT on silicone specimens and direct measurements was used by Conceição et al., 2023. A well-fitting RPD can be inspected clinically by mirror and explored when rest seats are correctly seated, the metallic parts adapt properly on the teeth, and the soft tissues are not impinged on by any part of the RPD.
.

Comparison of fit and precision between conventional and digitally fabricated RPDs
An examination of removable partial denture (RPD) fabrication processes yields significant results. RPD fit accuracy varies by process, including resin milling, selective laser melting (SLM), and conventional cast frameworks. Resin milling, particularly utilizing polyetheretherketone (PEEK), exhibited the best accuracy and lowest distortion, while SLM produced results comparable to cast frameworks, except for complicated designs. However, while SLM improved accuracy over the traditional lost-wax (CLW) method, the difference was not statistically significant. Digital technology, such as CAD-CAM and 3D printing, were efficient and therapeutically acceptable, yet conventional approaches, particularly when employing cast frameworks, consistently gave greater fit and precision. Despite this, digital technologies have proven effective in producing one-piece RPDs, especially those made of PEEK. Lastly, for measuring RPD framework fit, digital superimposition was found to be as successful as high-resolution microcomputed tomography, with gap widths lying within clinically acceptable ranges. Overall, the choice of RPD fabrication technology is critical to fit correctness, with digital approaches showing promise but still requiring improvement in multiple domains.
Quality assessment of the included studies
Characteristics of included studies
Author/ Year	Study Population	Sample size	Model used	Fabrication method	Comparison/Control Group	Assessment Method	Sites of measurements	Outcome	Recommendations	 	Arnold et al. 2018 [17]	Milled RPDs	12	CAD-CAM techniques.	Indirect rapid prototyping Direct rapid prototyping	Conventionally cast RPDs	Light microscopy.	Clasps	Direct and indirect milled RPDs fit better than conventionally produced LWT RPDs.	Fitting RPDs with clasp assemblies can be made accurately with CAD-CAM.	 	Ye et al. 2018 [25]	One piece RPDs	15	CAD-CAM techniques.	Dental CADCAM and reverse engineering software	Traditional RPDs	Visual inspection and pressing test using silicone impression material and 3D digital analyses using a dedicated software (Geomagic Qualify 2012, Geomagic).	Whole RPD (including the occlusal rest, the major connector, and the denture base.)	PEEK one-piece RPDs had less gaps than standard RPDs.	CAD/CAM onepiece RPDs fit better than traditional ones.	 	Bajunaid et al. 2019 [18]	Removable partial denture frameworks	30	CLW technique.	CLW	SLM technique.	Polyvinyl siloxane impression material and digital microscope at 50x.	Intaglio surface of the rests of each framework	While the SLM technique yielded more accurate RPD frameworks than the CLW technique, the difference was not statistically significant.	SLM manufactured metal frameworks fit better than CLW ones.	 	Chen et al. 2019 [19]	Maxillary partial edentulous resin models	4	SLM printer for 3D printing	Lost-wax casting denture frameworks from resin model refractory casts was a control.	Lost-wax casting.	Silicone impression material and geomagic and NX image software	Fit in complete framework area.	Production methods, design types, and their interactions significantly affected average gaps.	SLM-printed frameworks adapted well.	 	Soltandazeh et al., 2019 [27]	Maxillary metal framework for Kennedy class III Modification I arch	40	Lost-wax technique, CAD-printing,	RPD frameworks from cobalt-chromium alloy.	Conventional RPDs	Surface matching software program (Geomagic Control)	Rest seats, major connectors, proximal plates, reciprocation plates or clasps, and the origin of the retentive arms.	Conventional cast frameworks fabricated using dental stone or printed resin models revealed significantly better fit particularly in the major connectors and guide plates.	The conventional cast RPD groups revealed better overall fit and accuracy.	 	Muehlemann et al. 2022 [26]	RPD metal frameworks	15	Conventional RPDs	CLW, C-M, C-P, SLM, or DMLS technologies.	Conventional RPDs	Fabricating silicone registration material replicas measured with digital microscope	Whole RPD	C-M technique fit accuracy was superior to C-LW and SLM methods and comparable to C-P and DMLS methods.	Digital technologies had equivalent RPD accuracy to conventional production methods except for minor and major connector areas	 	Agarwal et al., 2022 [20]	maxillary RPD metal frameworks	5	milled RPD patterns and a conventional printed RPD patterns	combined analog-digital technique with a physical definitive impression	conventional casting of printed RPD patterns	Silicone registration replicas measured under a digital microscope	Denture base, major connector, occlusal rest of the RPD,	Before finishing and polishing, C-M fit accuracy was better.	Digital approaches were efficient	 	Conceição et al., 2023 [24]	removable partial denture	34	Traditional lost-wax casting or additive manufacturing	digital superimposition.	µCT analysis	µCT on silicone specimens and direct measurements	Whole RPD, occlusal rests	The thicknesses measured by µCT and digital superimposition did not differ significantly.	The frameworks had median gap thicknesses below clinical acceptable limit.
NA: Not Available; µCT: micro-computed tomography; CLWT: conventional lost-wax casting technique; RPD: Removal partial denture; SLM: Selective laser melting; CAD/CAM: Computer-aided design (CAD) and Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM); PEEK: Polyether ether ketone; DMLS: Direct metal laser sintering; Milled sacrificial pattern casting (C-M); Printed sacrificial pattern casting (C-P); LWT: Lost-wax casting technique
Risk of bias of included studies
Author	Clearly stated aims/objectives	Detailed explanation of sample size calculation	Detailed explanation of sampling technique	Details of comparison group	Detailed explanation of methodology	Operator details	Randomization	Method of measurement of outcome	Outcome assessor details	Blinding	Statistical analysis	Presentation of results	Total score	Total Score in %	Risk of Bias	 	Arnold et al. 2018 [17]	2	0	0	2	2	1	0	2	2	0	2	2	15	62.5	medium	 	Ye et al. 2018 [25]	2	0	0	2	2	2	2	2	0	0	2	2	16	66.7	medium	 	Bajunaid et al. 2019 [18]	2	0	0	2	2	2	0	2	2	0	2	2	16	66.7	medium	 	Chen et al. 2019 [19]	2	0	0	2	2	0	0	2	0	0	2	2	12	50	medium	 	Soltandazeh et al., 2019 [27]	2	0	0	2	2	0	0	2	0	0	2	2	12	50	medium	 	Muehlemann et al. 2022 [26]	2	0	0	2	2	0	0	2	2	0	2	2	14	58.3	medium	 	Agarwal et al., 2022 [20]	2	0	1	1	1	2	0	2	0	0	0	2	11	45.8	high	 	Conceição et al., 2023[24]	2	2	0	2	2	2	0	2	0	0	2	2	16	66.7	medium

Discuss
The present systematic review emphasizes various methods used in the determination of fit and precision of RPDs made by conventional and digital methods. The fabrication of RPD requires many steps, which may result in some discrepancies in the fit thus the methods of fit determination play a major role in correcting the discrepancies and providing a successful prosthesis to the patients. There are various methods for assessment of fit but their accuracy should be validated. The difference in technique of assessment act as potential source of variability and differences. Alabdullah et al. documented that various registration techniques are probably the reason for the differences in gap distance values between the framework of RPD and the tissue surfaces. Practically there is no full proof method to evaluate the fit accuracy of RPD either clinically or in the laboratory. A few techniques for evaluating the fit of RPDs are visual inspection, silicone-based fit evaluation, superimposition techniques, stability analysis, digital microscopic analysis, and light microscopy. When it concerns the stability and functionality of RPD, the occlusal rests are the most assessed part. Qualitative techniques, such as pressing tests on occlusal rests or direct visual evaluation, are subjective and yield little data. According to a study by Arafa KA et al., the most popular technique for evaluating the fit of RPDs was the visual and tactile evaluation in the cast or clinically in the patient’s mouth. Although it is a more objective qualitative procedure, an inspection with a calibrated wire still yields limited information. The fit accuracy assessment methods might be direct or indirect in the way that data is gathered. While a direct quantitative assessment may yield greater trueness, it may not be appropriate for use in a clinical evaluation (e.g., gap measurement by microscopy following the cutting of the structures). It may also involve radiation exposure to patients like digital measurement following the digitization of structures using computed tomography techniques or the computer algorithm-based matching of various scanners like digital measurement following the digitization of structures using an intra-oral scanner. The sample size varies in such studies. In our review, while some studies, such as Arnold et al. and Bajunaid et al., used larger cohorts, while others, such as Chen et al. and Agarwal et al. used smaller samples.
Two methods for quantitative assessment of fit accuracy for RPDs are silicone-based fit evaluation and superimposition techniques. In the silicone-based fit evaluation, the surfaces of the secondary cast and the silicone material registration between the framework and the secondary cast are assessed. On the other hand, in the superimposition techniques, the tissue surface of the framework and the surface of the secondary cast are superimposed using different surface matching software e.g. geomatic software using STL files. The utilization of silicone moulds to measure the distance between the occlusal rest and the corresponding rest seats allowed for an indirect evaluation of the fit accuracy of RPD metal frameworks, which maintained structural integrity and was previously regarded as a dependable method in the literature. The silicone additive has better radio-opacity, resilience, flexibility, and taste tolerance when compared to other substrates like acrylic.
In our review, Arnold et al. 2018 observed that direct and indirect milled RPDs fit better than conventionally produced LWT RPDs. Ye et al. 2018 concluded that PEEK one-piece RPDs had fewer gaps than standard RPDs. Bajunaid et al. 2019 explained that while the SLM technique yielded more accurate RPD frameworks than the CLW technique, the difference was not statistically significant. Another study by Chen et al. 2019 confirmed that production methods, design types, and their interactions significantly affected average gaps. Soltandazeh et al., 2019 found that conventional cast frameworks fabricated using dental stone or printed resin models revealed significantly better fit, particularly in the major connectors and guide plates. The method of fabrication did not affect the adaptation of the rests or reciprocation plates. Muehlemann et al. 2022 observed that C-M technique fit accuracy was superior to C-LW and SLM methods and comparable to C-P and DMLS methods. Agarwal et al., 2022 found that before finishing and polishing, C-M fit accuracy was better. After finishing and polishing, C-M fit accuracy was comparable to C-P which was a detailed analysis. Lastly, Conceição et al., 2023 noticed that the thicknesses measured by µCT and digital superimposition did not differ significantly and thus, a positive correlation was found between the two fit assessment methods.
The techniques for evaluating the fit of RPD are influenced by multiple factors, including cost, time, manpower, material requirements, digital process, feasibility, availability, and practicality. The literature cites various studies on factors affecting the methods of assessment of fit of RPD. Eggbeer and colleagues compared 4 rapid prototyping (stereolithography) processes and 2 resins for pattern production. However, both resin-based techniques created acceptable patterns. The investigators concluded that the fit was adequate. Kibi et al. investigated the feasibility and efficacy of a CAD system integrated with finite element analysis for the positioning of molar teeth in unilateral distal extension base RPDs. Williams and associates listed the system’s cost and the initial learning curve for designing using the software as drawbacks.
We acknowledge the consistency of findings with existing research. Arnold et al.‘s study indicated that resin milling, particularly with PEEK, offered the best accuracy and lowest distortion. This aligns with previous research on the precision of CAD-CAM and PEEK materials in dental applications. PEEK is a semi-crystalline thermoplastic polymer, gaining popularity in dentistry as an alternative to metal-free frameworks. It has several advantages, including excellent wear resistance, low plaque retention, and good binding qualities with veneering materials and luting cement. The low modulus of elasticity of PEEK, which is comparable to that of bone, contributes to a cushioning effect, minimizing stress transmission to abutment teeth. PEEK outperforms other CAD/CAM composite resin, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) materials and Zirconia in wear testing, according to comparative studies. In vitro testing of PEEK molar crowns on various abutments revealed good fracture strength qualities and thus can be used in load-bearing areas. However, despite these promising characteristics, clinical trials proving PEEK’s effectiveness in dental applications are scarce, making its clinical use difficult. Furthermore, concerns have been raised about its compatibility with dentin and enamel as compared to alternative materials. Clinical trials will be required to confirm its applicability and durability in real-world dental practice. Pereira AL et in a systematic review of 2021 determined that PEEK showed better fit than traditional metal cast RPDs. Co-Cr alloy RPDs produced by rapid prototyping exhibited the highest discrepancies when produced by sintering laser melting.
Selective Laser Melting (SLM) results are comparable to cast frameworks in most circumstances. Chen et al.‘s findings support the idea that SLM is a practical alternative for making dental prostheses, thus bringing attention to the possible benefits of SLM in terms of fit correctness. However, Bajunaid et al. and Muehlemann et al. did not discover a statistically significant improvement when contrasting SLM with conventional casting techniques. Thus, our review implies that while SLM may have advantages in certain situations, its superiority to conventional casting may be context-specific, influenced by aspects like the intricacy of the prosthesis design, the materials employed, and the clinical requirements. Clinicians may choose the comfort and cost-effectiveness of traditional procedures. However, due to its accuracy and adaptability, SLM might be a more appealing choice in situations requiring complex designs or unusual material properties. Therefore, the choice of using SLM or traditional casting should be made individually, considering both the clinical needs and the available resources. Clear criteria for the best application of SLM in prosthodontics must be established through additional studies and clinical trials.
Digital workflows have attracted a lot of attention recently and have been thoroughly investigated for their possible merits in terms of accuracy, effectiveness, and comfort for patients. The argument made by Agarwal et al. on the effectiveness and therapeutic acceptance of CAD-CAM and 3D printing in prosthodontics is in line with a general trend in the dentistry sector. Lastly, digital superimposition produces outcomes like high-resolution microcomputed tomography. These results highlight the potential of digital techniques for effortless fit accuracy evaluation. The various comparisons between the conventional and digital techniques for RPD fabrication showed that digital technologies may not always produce accurate RPDs. It may be possible that accuracy might be better than conventional method but not fully accurate. Thus, to improve the dependability and accuracy of digital RPD fabrication, recommendations include further research into optimizing digital operations, enhancing material characteristics, and standardizing assessment procedures. In addition, when choosing between digital and conventional treatments for RPDs, clinicians should carefully assess the unique clinical scenario and patient demands. Digital RPD technology is still incipient. The advanced sensor-based Digital RPD could be developed in future for detecting the fit accuracy and precision of fabrication.
Validation of fit assessment methods.
The validation of methods for assessing the accuracy of fit in removable partial dentures (RPDs) is crucial for ensuring the effectiveness and comfort of the RPDs. With the advent of digital fabrication techniques, such as 3D printing and milling, alongside conventional methods, it’s essential to establish reliable validation protocols. The fit assessment method can be grouped into two categories- non-computerized and computerized/digital. Non-computerized methods include - Visual inspection and pressing test using, the use of a material (silicone rubber base material) to fill to determine the space between the RPD parts and cast and assessment by using a clipper, digital photographs, and microscopes. Computerized methods involve 3D digital analyses, Surface matching software (Geomagic Qualify 2012, Geomagic), micro-ct and colour mapping by superimposition techniques. It has been determined in the review that the methods of assessing the accuracy of fit of RPDs either conventional or digital are used interchangeably. Different researchers have used the same method for fit assessment in conventional and digital RPDs. The most used method that has come up in the review in in-vitro studies is silicone-based fit evaluation and recently with the development of technologies superimposition techniques are becoming common as quantitative methods. The non-computerized methods have the disadvantages of being biased or informal arbitration (Visual inspection and pressing test); flexible material, distortion during the process of setting or removal and even tearing or perforation while measuring thickness (filling of silicone rubber base material). The microscopy and photograph methods do not assure that the component assessed for fit determination on the RPD cast is indenting over the cast surface or not. On the other hand, the computerized methods involve technology-based assessments like micro-ct and 3D-based analysis, these methods assess the gaps without distorting or damaging the models however the difference in opacities is to be taken into consideration. The advanced surface matching techniques or superimposition techniques use STL files to determine the best fit of the RPD with the cast and display the results either in coloured graphs or numbers. However, these colour chart techniques had given varied results based on several points selected for matching to be used. Questions are raised against it. The study of Soltanzadeh et al. (2019) reported that the traditional metal RPD groups showed better overall fit and accuracy where 8 points were used for surface matching. These are contrary to various studies showing better fit and accuracy of digitally fabricated RPDs compared to conventional ones. Thus, it can be ascertained with this review that formulation of a standard method for fit assessment of RPDs is still warranted. In future with further refinements surely digital methods would completely outperform the traditional methods.

Limitations
The review revealed useful insights; nonetheless, numerous notable limitations should be considered, offering critical context for understanding the findings and indicating future research options. Notably, sample sizes in our included studies varied significantly across the selected research. This change may introduce bias and affect the results’ generalizability and statistical power. Most of the research assessed framework fit using subjective methods such as visual examination and silicone fit checkers. While these procedures are common in clinical practice, they necessarily entail subjectivity and measurement bias. Furthermore, we only considered in vitro trials, which are useful for controlled experiments but may fail to reproduce the intricacy of RPD delivery and adaption in real-world patient circumstances. To bridge the gap between laboratory results and realistic clinical outcomes, future research should prioritize more detailed clinical investigations.
The key findings of the review suggested that RPD fit accuracy varies across fabrication processes with resin milling, particularly using PEEK, offering the best accuracy. Thus, digital technologies, though efficient, may not yet outperform the precision of traditional methods which warrants further refinement. The various methods used for fit assessment in the laboratory provided adequate results for deciding the clinical success of RPDs, but clinical assessment and patient adaptability are other factors determining the success of the RPD. To improve the accuracy and rigour of fit assessment, future studies should consider using more objective and quantitative metrics, such as digital scanning and finite element analysis. This systematic review even though evaluated the fit and precision assessment in the in-vitro studies, but it has clinical implication during clinical assessment of fit as the RPDs assessed for fit and precision in laboratory with adequate method the chair side time for adjustment is reduced and further the patient satisfaction and comfort with the RPD will be enhanced.

Conclusion
This systematic review highlights the importance of different methods used in assessing the fit accuracy of the RPD framework. The silicone-based fit evaluation and superimposition techniques are commonly used quantitative methods for the fit assessment of RPDs. But still, formulation of a standard method for fit assessment of RPDs in laboratory and clinical practice is warranted. CAD/CAM technology, SLM techniques, and innovative materials like PEEK have shown promise in improving fit accuracy. However, the relatively small number of samples that were investigated in the included papers demands further investigation in this field. Moreover, the choice between conventional and digital methods should be guided by factors such as the size and complexity of the denture, patient-specific considerations, and available resources.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
S.C , N.M.A., M.A.A.Q., S.M.A., M.C. performed conceptualization, meth-odology, software, validation, formal analysis, writing—original draft prep-aration, writing—review and editing, supervision and funding acquisition. G.S., A.Y., A.E.E., M.A.Q. were involved in conceptualization, methodology, software, validation, formal analysis, writing—review and editing, and funding acquisition. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.”

Funding
The authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Research and Graduate Studies at King Khalid University for funding this work through small group Research Project under grant number RGP1/82/45.

Data availability
The datasets used and/or analysed during the current study are available from the Primary author upon reasonable request.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
N/A no human participants involved. The study was registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (Registration Number CRD42023459566).

Consent for publication
N/A.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Abbreviations
RPD
Removable partial denture
PRISMA
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
PICO
Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcome
QUIN
Quality assessment instrument for in-vitro studies
ROB
Risk of bias
Co-Cr
Cobalt-chromium
SLA
Stereolithography
SLM
Selective laser melting
SLS
Selective laser sintering
DMLS
Direct metal laser-sintering
FDM
Fused deposition modelling
SEBM
Selective electron beam melting
µCT
Micro-computed tomography
CLWT
Conventional lost-wax casting technique
CAD/CAM
Computer-aided design and Computer-aided manufacturing
PEEK
Polyether ether ketone
DMLS
Direct metal laser sintering
C-M
Milled sacrificial pattern casting
C-P
Printed sacrificial pattern casting
LWT
Lost-wax casting technique
PMMA
Polymethyl methacrylate

References
Alharbi N, Alharbi S, Cuijpers VMJI, Osman RB, Wismeijer D. Three-dimensional evaluation of marginal and internal fit of 3D-printed interim restorations fabricated on different finish line designs. J Prosthodont Res. 2018;62. 10.1016/j.jpor.2017.09.002.
Dureja I, Yadav B, Malhotra P, Dabas N, Bhargava A, Pahwa R. A comparative evaluation of vertical marginal fit of provisional crowns fabricated by computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing technique and direct (intraoral technique) and flexural strength of the materials: an in vitro study. J Indian Prosthodontist Soc. 2018;18. 10.4103/jips.jips_306_17.
Barraclough O, Gray D, Ali Z, Nattress B. Modern partial dentures - part 1: novel manufacturing techniques. Br Dent J. 2021;230. 10.1038/s41415-021-3070-4.
Zhang Y, Li K, Yu H, Wu J, Gao B. Digital fabrication of removable partial dentures made of titanium alloy and zirconium silicate micro-ceramic using a combination of additive and subtractive manufacturing technologies. Rapid Prototyp J. 2021;27. 10.1108/RPJ-02-2020-0040.
Heboyan A, Manrikyan M, Zafar MS, Rokaya D, Nushikyan R, Vardanyan I, et al. Bacteriological evaluation of gingival crevicular fluid in teeth restored using fixed dental prostheses: an in vivo study. Int J Mol Sci. 2021;22. 10.3390/ijms22115463.
Scribante A, Gallo S, Pascadopoli M, Canzi P, Marconi S, Montasser MA, et al. Properties of CAD/CAM 3D Printing Dental materials and their clinical applications in Orthodontics: where are we now? Appl Sci (Switzerland). 2022;12. 10.3390/app12020551.
Villias A, Karkazis H, Yannikakis S, Theocharopoulos A, Sykaras N, Polyzois G. Current status of Digital Complete Dentures Technology. Prosthesis. 2021;3. 10.3390/prosthesis3030023.
Chaturvedi S, Addas MK, Alqahtani NM, Al Ahmari NM, Alfarsi MA. Clinical analysis of CAD-CAM milled and printed complete dentures using computerized occlusal force analyser. Technol Health Care. 2021;29. 10.3233/THC-202766.
Chaturvedi S, Addas MK, Alqahtani NM, Al Ahmari NM, Alfarsi MA. Computerized occlusal forces analysis in complete dentures fabricated by additive and subtractive techniques. Technol Health Care. 2021;29. 10.3233/THC-202736.
Alqahtani NM, Chaturvedi S, Tomar SS, Kumari L, Gill S, Nayan K, et al. Fracture toughness of 3D printed denture teeth. Technol Health Care. 2023;31. 10.3233/THC-220288.
Chaturvedi S, Alqahtani T, Alsolami S, Alqahtani A, Das G, Alsubaiy E. Fracture resistance of CAD-CAM all-ceramic surveyed crowns with different occlusal rest seat designs. J Adv Prosthodont. 2021;13. 10.4047/jap.2021.13.1.36.
Peng PW, Hsu CY, Huang HY, Chao JC, Lee WF. Trueness of removable partial denture frameworks additively manufactured with selective laser melting. J Prosthet Dent. 2022;127. 10.1016/j.prosdent.2020.06.035.
Ahmed N, Abbasi MS, Haider S, Ahmed N, Habib SR, Altamash S et al. Fit accuracy of removable partial denture frameworks fabricated with CAD/CAM, Rapid Prototyping, and conventional techniques: a systematic review. Biomed Res Int 2021;2021. 10.1155/2021/3194433
Wang JH, Ren J, Liu W, Wu XY, Gao MX, Bai PK. Effect of selective laser melting process parameters on microstructure and properties of co-cr alloy. Materials. 2018;11. 10.3390/ma11091546.
Pereira JC, Aranzabe J, Taboada MC, Ruiz N, Rodriguez PP. Analysis of microstructure and mechanical properties in as-built/as-cast and heat-treated conditions for in718 alloy obtained by selective laser melting and investment casting processes. Cryst (Basel). 2021;11. 10.3390/cryst11101196.
Effects of heat treatment on the microstructure, residual stress, and mechanical properties of co-cr alloy fabricated by selective laser melting
Arnold C, Hey J, Schweyen R, Setz JM. Accuracy of CAD-CAM-fabricated removable partial dentures. J Prosthet Dent. 2018;119. 10.1016/j.prosdent.2017.04.017.
Bajunaid SO, Altwaim B, Alhassan M, Alammari R. The fit accuracy of removable partial denture metal frameworks using conventional and 3D printed techniques: an in vitro study. J Contemp Dent Pract. 2019;20. 10.5005/jp-journals-10024-2542.
Chen H, Li H, Zhao Y, Zhang X, Wang Y, Lyu P. Adaptation of removable partial denture frameworks fabricated by selective laser melting. J Prosthet Dent 2019;122. 10.1016/j.prosdent.2018.11.010
Removable partial denture - accuracy in digital workflow
Torii M, Nakata T, Takahashi K, Kawamura N, Shimpo H, Ohkubo C. Fitness and retentive force of cobalt-chromium alloy clasps fabricated with repeated laser sintering and milling. J Prosthodont Res. 2018;62. 10.1016/j.jpor.2018.01.001.
Nakata T, Shimpo H, Ohkubo C. Clasp fabrication using one-process molding by repeated laser sintering and high-speed milling. J Prosthodont Res. 2017;61. 10.1016/j.jpor.2016.10.002.
Oh KC, Jeon J, Kim JH. Fabrication of a removable partial denture combining conventional and digital techniques. J Prosthet Dent. 2021;125. 10.1016/j.prosdent.2020.01.046.
Comparison between digital superimposition and microcomputed tomography methods of fit assessment of removable partial denture frameworks
Ye H, Li X, Wang G, Kang J, Liu Y, Sun Y, et al. A Novel computer-aided Design/Computer-Assisted manufacture method for one-piece removable partial denture and evaluation of fit. Int J Prosthodont. 2018;31. 10.11607/ijp.5508.
Muehlemann E, Özcan M. Accuracy of removable partial denture frameworks fabricated using Conventional and Digital Technologies. Eur J Prosthodont Restor Dentistry 2022;30. 10.1922/EJPRD_2285Muehlemann11
Soltanzadeh P, Suprono MS, Kattadiyil MT, Goodacre C, Gregorius W. An in Vitro Investigation of Accuracy and Fit of Conventional and CAD/CAM removable partial denture frameworks. J Prosthodont. 2019;28. 10.1111/jopr.12997.
Adaptation of removable partial denture rest seats in prostheses made with selective laser sintering or casting techniques: a randomized clinical trial
Patient-reported outcomes and framework fit accuracy of removable partial dentures fabricated using digital techniques: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Applications and performance of artificial intelligence models in removable prosthodontics: a literature review
A digital workflow for designing and manufacturing metal frameworks and removable partial dentures: a novel dental technique
Rexhepi I, Santilli M, D’Addazio G, Tafuri G, Manciocchi E, Caputi S, et al. Clinical applications and mechanical properties of CAD-CAM materials in Restorative and Prosthetic Dentistry: a systematic review. J Funct Biomater. 2023;14. 10.3390/jfb14080431.
Dunham D, Brudvik JS, Morris WJ, Plummer KD, Cameron SM. A clinical investigation of the fit of removable partial dental prosthesis clasp assemblies. J Prosthet Dent 2006;95. 10.1016/j.prosdent.2006.02.001
Tregerman I, Renne W, Kelly A, Wilson D. Evaluation of removable partial denture frameworks fabricated using 3 different techniques. J Prosthet Dent 2019;122. 10.1016/j.prosdent.2018.10.013
Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ. 2021;372. 10.1136/bmj.n71.
Development and validation of a risk-of-bias tool for assessing in vitro studies conducted in dentistry: the QUIN
Relationship between the standards of removable partial denture construction, clinical acceptability, and patient satisfaction
Bilgin MS, Baytaroğlu EN, Erdem A, Dilber E. A review of computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacture techniques for removable denture fabrication. Eur J Dent 2016;10. 10.4103/1305-7456.178304
Alabdullah SA, Hannam AG, Wyatt CC, McCullagh APG, Aleksejuniene J, Mostafa NZ. Comparison of digital and conventional methods of fit evaluation of partial removable dental prosthesis frameworks fabricated by selective laser melting. J Prosthet Dent 2022;127. 10.1016/j.prosdent.2021.09.033
Arafa KAO. Assessment of the fit of removable partial denture fabricated by computer-aided designing/computer aided manufacturing technology. Saudi Med J 2018;39. 10.15537/smj.2018.1.20796
Keltjens HMAM, Mulder J, Käyser AF, Creugers NHJ. Fit of direct retainers in removable partial dentures after 8 years of use. J Oral Rehabil. 1997;24. 10.1111/j.1365-2842.1997.tb00306.x.
Oh KC, Yun BS, Kim JH. Accuracy of metal 3D printed frameworks for removable partial dentures evaluated by digital superimposition. Dent Mater. 2022;38. 10.1016/j.dental.2021.12.012.
Marinello CP, Brugger R. Digital Removable Complete denture—an overview. Curr Oral Health Rep. 2021;8. 10.1007/s40496-021-00299-1.
Eggbeer D, Bibb R, Williams R. The computer-aided design and rapid prototyping fabrication of removable partial denture frameworks. Proc Inst Mech Eng H 2005;219. 10.1243/095441105X9372
Kibi M, Ono T, Dong J, Mitta K, Gonda T, Maeda Y. Development of an RPD CAD system with finite element stress analysis. J Oral Rehabil. 2009;36. 10.1111/j.1365-2842.2009.01949.x.
Williams RJ, Bibb R, Eggbeer D, Collis J. Use of CAD/CAM technology to fabricate a removable partial denture framework. J Prosthet Dent 2006;96. 10.1016/j.prosdent.2006.05.029
Carneiro Pereira AL, Bezerra de Medeiros AK, de Sousa Santos K, de Oliveira É. Seabra Barbosa GA, Da Fonte Porto Carreiro A. Accuracy of CAD-CAM systems for removable partial denture framework fabrication: a systematic review. J Prosthet Dent 2021;125. 10.1016/j.prosdent.2020.01.003
Abhay SS, Ganapathy D, Veeraiyan DN, Ariga P, Heboyan A, Amornvit P, et al. Wear resistance, color stability and displacement resistance of milled peek crowns compared to zirconia crowns under stimulated chewing and high-performance aging. Polym (Basel). 2021;13. 10.3390/polym13213761.
Papathanasiou I, Kamposiora P, Papavasiliou G, Ferrari M. The use of PEEK in digital prosthodontics: a narrative review. BMC Oral Health. 2020;20. 10.1186/s12903-020-01202-7.
Gan N, Xiong Y, Jiao T. Accuracy of intraoral digital impressions for whole upper jaws, including full dentitions and palatal soft tissues. PLoS ONE. 2016;11. 10.1371/journal.pone.0158800.
Najeeb S, Zafar MS, Khurshid Z, Siddiqui F. Applications of polyetheretherketone (PEEK) in oral implantology and prosthodontics. J Prosthodont Res. 2016;60. 10.1016/j.jpor.2015.10.001.
Hong JK, Kim SK, Heo SJ, Koak JY. Mechanical properties and metal-ceramic bond strength of co-cr alloy manufactured by selective laser melting. Materials 2020;13. 10.3390/ma13245745
AlMangour B, Kim YK, Grzesiak D, Lee KA. Novel TiB2-reinforced 316L stainless steel nanocomposites with excellent room- and high-temperature yield strength developed by additive manufacturing. Compos B Eng. 2019;156. 10.1016/j.compositesb.2018.07.050.