Targeting tau in Alzheimer’s Disease: rationale, approach and challenges
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder and the leading cause of dementia characterised by the accumulation of beta amyloid (Aβ) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT). Several monoclonal antibodies against amyloid in early AD have shown the utility of reducing brain amyloid in large phase 3 studies, resulting in modest clinical benefit. To further slow, or even halt disease progression, targeting additional pathobiological pathways is likely to be necessary. In this review, we aim to appraise the scientific rationale for targeting tau in AD. The burden of tau pathology is correlated with disease severity and its role in AD progression is complex, involving synapse dysfunction, neuronal loss, neuroinflammation and autophagy impairment. Evidence suggests that hypersecretion, post-translational modifications and aggregation propensity, dependent and independent of amyloid, are also linked to neurodegeneration. We review the therapeutic agents in development including tau synthesis modifiers, active and passive immunotherapies, post-translational modifiers and aggregation inhibitors. Finally, we consider the available biomarker tools for patient selection and drug effectiveness evaluation, and we identify key knowledge gaps that future novel biomarkers might address to make clinical trials of tau therapies more likely to succeed.

Background
Brain accumulation of tau in the form of intracellular phosphorylated tangles is a pathological hallmark of Alzheimer’s Disease (AD). The cortical burden of tau pathology correlates with severity and progression of cognitive decline in AD so targeting tau pathophysiology would be expected to ameliorate the clinical decline seen in AD. In this review, we appraise the scientific rationale for targeting tau. We consider the different therapeutic approaches and available biomarker tools, and what additional advances in biomarkers can support clinical development.

Tau in human physiology
To understand the potential therapeutic effect of modulating tau, we start by considering the physiological role of tau – what is known about its function and whether we can safely modulate its biology.
Tau is encoded by the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene on chromosome 17. MAPT is highly expressed in neurons and alternative splicing yields 6 isoforms that differ by lacking or containing exons 2, 3 and 10. Isoforms containing exon 10 result in 4 microtubule binding region (MTBR) (4R) tau, and isoforms lacking exon 10 generate 3 MTBR (3R). Tau has multiple domains – N-terminus (1–165); proline-rich tau (166–242); MTBR tau (243–367) and C-terminus (368–441). We focus on 3R and 4R isoforms of tau as their function is well described in neurodegenerative disease and their alterations lead to different tauopathies and clinical phenotypes.
Intracellularly, tau promotes new microtubule formation by lowering the critical concentration of tubulin polymerisation, therefore making it not only a stabiliser but also an inducer for microtubule formation. Hence, tau supports the microtubules in adult neurons and suppresses microtubule shortening, which retains the structural integrity of axons required for sustaining several neuronal functions, such as mitochondria transport for localised energy production and synaptic health.
Tau knockdown or modification in humans has so far shown no serious safety concerns, supporting the view that therapies targeting tau would be well tolerated. By contrast, tau knockdown in cells and animal models has been associated with negative effects on mitochondria, nuclei, synapses, motor system, myelination, iron and glucose metabolism and tumour suppression and mild behavioural phenotypes. However human and murine tau differ substantially in splicing (mice express mostly 4R tau, as opposed to a balanced expression of 3R and 4R isoforms in humans) and show great variability at the N-terminal sequence (11 amino acids in human tau are missing in mice). The significance of these differences is not fully understood.

Tau pathophysiology in AD
Next, we examine the rationale for therapeutically targeting tau by considering its biological role in neurodegeneration.

Tau hyperphosphorylation is a pathological hallmark of AD
Unmodified tau protein shows no intrinsic tendency for aggregation, however, post-translational modifications (PTM) change this characteristic. Tau is a natively unfolded protein due to its low hydrophobicity and charge distribution. It self-assembles into filamentous structures of aggregated and hyperphosphorylated tau with the help of kinases and phosphatases. Hyperphosphorylation is thought to destabilize the association of tau with microtubules, leading to its relocation from axons to the soma and dendritic compartments.
It is still debatable whether phosphorylation or aggregation are the cause of tau toxicity. A recent paper, building on work from in vitro studies, shows that phosphorylation is sufficient to cause synapse loss and cognitive decline in a tau mouse model. Furthermore, certain forms of tau phosphorylated at serine 231 and 217 are early indicators of pathogenic tau formation, and their levels are known to correlate well with disease progression. Since these soluble forms of tau may be more toxic than fibrils as seen in in vitro studies, these and other phosphorylation sites may be therapeutic targets as well as biomarkers of early disease that precede tangle formation.
Interestingly, tau hyperphosphorylation is not always pathological – for example, p-tau217 levels were shown to be significantly higher in healthy newborns compared to patients with AD and longitudinal analysis of preterm infants demonstrated gradual drop in p-tau217 levels over the first months of life, approaching the levels found in young adults. Furthermore, phosphorylation is also known to occur in mammalian hibernation and is fully reversed upon arousal. The hibernation-related hyperphosphorylation involves some of the phosphosites affected in AD, however without MTBR tau aggregation. Clearance of phosphorylated tau without any pathological sequelae indicates that there is a distinct regulatory mechanism that prevents tau aggregation.

Other post-translational modifications of tau
Other PTM also contribute to misfolding and aggregation of tau. These include acetylation which has been shown to preclude tau degradation and contribute to pathology. Ubiquitination targets the protein for degradation, which could overwhelm the system and promote tau aggregation in a negative feedback loop. Some of these markers such as Ub-K311, Ub-K317, Ub-K267 were found to be AD-specific. The same study showed these ubiquitinated isoforms were able to discriminate between 4R and 3R tauopathies. This shows that these AD-specific ubiquitination sites may be useful for developing AD-specific assays in fluid samples, akin to the current use of phosphorylation sites.
Exploring the potential specificity/sensitivity of other PTM might be a fruitful avenue of research. For example, the 4R isoform is known to be predisposed to aggregation with initial phosphorylation, but cleavage of the C-terminus enables further fibrilization followed by increased phosphorylation in the proline rich region with acetylation and ubiquitination in MTBR. This demonstrates that post-translational markers can inform diagnostic as well as therapeutic criteria for choosing the correct therapeutic target depending on the stage of AD pathophysiology.
Another PTM is glycosylation. O-GlcNAcylation promotes microtubule binding and prevents phosphorylation and aggregation; conversely N-glycosylation, which is increased in AD, is found to promote impaired microtubule binding, tau phosphorylation and misfolding.
Finally, cleavage of tau by several proteases adds complexity by producing neo-epitopes that could be targeted with antibody-based therapies. Caspases such as Caspase-2 cleave tau at specific residues creating truncated species that are prone to further modifications, neurotoxicity and memory impairment. Calpains, which are activated due to calcium dysregulation, cleave tau at non-caspase sites producing small fragments which are also neurotoxic. Several other proteases such as HtrA1 and Cathepsins are also implicated in tau breakdown with unclear relevance.
Taken together these data suggest that tau PTM, beyond phosphorylation, play important roles in AD progression, and relevant biomarkers are likely to play an important role in stratifying disease stage and selecting the correct therapeutic target.

Tau aggregation and deposition
Tau aggregation plays an important role in AD pathogenesis. Tau forms small soluble aggregates, paired helical filaments (PHFs), straight filaments and twisted ribbons. The MTBR component of tau is a major constituent of insoluble tau aggregates in the brain and it is an important region for seeding and spreading of pathology. Tau misfolding and aggregation is propagated by tau seeding via a prion-like mechanism which can recruit unfolded monomeric tau into aggregates. This prion-like behaviour was supported by an experiment in mice where tau fibril inoculation in non-transgenic mice induced tau inclusion in anatomically connected regions. In a similar study in macaques AD-derived tau seeds were injected into the entorhinal cortex and they spread to hippocampus and cingulate cortex following Braak stages. Furthermore, seed competent tau which precedes tau pathology along the Braak stages is enriched in synapses which highlights the mechanism of disease progression. Therefore, identifying and targeting the seed competent PTM would be therapeutically important in the future.

Tau is implicated in synapse dysfunction and loss
The goal of disease modification in AD is to slow down or stop the progression of cognitive impairment. Synaptic degeneration is the best neuropathological correlate of cognitive decline in AD and therefore it is theoretically a promising therapeutic target.
There is evidence that tau oligomers are specifically toxic to synapses preceding cell death. Tau is also known to play an important role in synaptic functions such as long-term depression and long-term potentiation. Furthermore, studies in mice show that effects of tau in synapses can be reversed by reducing the levels of the protein, making a strong rationale to target tau to protect synaptic function in AD.
The mechanism of tau interaction with synapses is not completely clear but it seems that tau can promote calcium influx via synaptic interaction which is toxic for synapses. This is different from beta amyloid (Aβ) synaptotoxicity which is thought to involve interaction with cell membrane receptors. Recent post-mortem studies in humans also showed that oligomeric tau was present in pre and post synaptic terminals even in areas with little fibrillar tau deposition suggesting that oligomeric tau accumulation in synapses occurs relatively early in AD.

Role of tau in neuronal dysfunction and loss
Severe neuronal loss is a characteristic feature of AD in which tau is thought to play an important role. Necroptosis is a biological pathway resulting in neuronal death in AD. It is executed by mixed lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL) protein, which is triggered by receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 and 3 (RIPK1 and RIPK3). Necroptosis positively correlates with Braak staging and is inversely correlated with brain weight and cognitive scores making it an important neurodegeneration biomarker. Phosphorylated tau (p-tau) stimulates neuronal death and intriguingly, necroptosis inhibitors (targeting RIPK1) negatively affect this process. Furthermore, necroptosis inhibitor (targeting MLKL) reduced the load of p-tau in the hippocampus and improved spatial learning and memory deficits in rats, showing a link between tau and neuronal death.
A more controversial perspective is that tangles and other insoluble forms of tau are not that toxic and do not cause critical neuronal loss; it is argued that soluble forms of tau are neurotoxic instead. This is supported by pre-clinical models showing that tangles do not directly cause neuronal loss and cognitive decline. In contrast, oligomeric tau which traditionally was not detectable by classic stains, was found to be most propagated in the clinically fastest progressing phenotype suggesting that oligomeric tau species drive neurodegeneration, and they were just previously not seen by traditional staining methods.
Opinions on which forms of tau are toxic are divided, however it is crucial to further identify them as targeting the neurotoxic forms of tau will increase the likelihood of future therapeutic success.

Tau induces neuroinflammation
Neuroinflammatory response is an acute and essential part of central nervous system protection and likely plays an important role in AD.
Experimental models support a direct role of disease-associated microglia in tau pathology propagation. It is hypothesized that there are two microglial activation peaks. The first peak may reflect the protective response of microglia in pre-clinical stages of AD and the pro-inflammatory response contributing to AD is the second peak. While the initial neuroinflammatory response may alleviate the tau pathology in early stages (by activating microglia promoting the clearance of tau), sustained and increased inflammatory response to tau pathology exacerbates the pathology by overwhelming the phagocytic capacity and therefore promoting tau accumulation.
Microglial activation in response to tau is associated with pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1B, IL-6, TNF-alpha) and they form a vicious cycle of tau pathology triggering further inflammation which in turn exacerbates tau pathology via direct pathways (by degrading pathological tau which promotes its accumulation) and indirect pathways (by activating tau kinases that increase tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation). Several neuron-microglia signalling pathways have already been implicated in modulating tau pathology. CX3CR1 which is expressed in microglia and is responsible for regulating the efficiency of extracellular tau internalization and clearance, can cause excessive tau spread with genetic disruption. Likewise, TREM2 (which forms the microglial response to amyloid and tau pathology) knockdown facilitates seeding and spreading of tau aggregates.
Furthermore, microglia may be the missing intermediary component in Aβ-tau synergy and therefore an important part of therapeutic pathways. Soluble Aβ activates microglia, and the activated microglia act as vehicles for trans-synaptic tau transfer. They internalise the pathological tau, pack it into extracellular vesicles (EV) and release it, which can then be taken up by a neighbouring ‘healthy’ neuron. This is a pathway that might contribute to tau spread in AD but not in other tauopathies.

Tau overwhelms intracellular proteostasis mechanisms
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) and the autophagy-lysosome system are two major protein quality control mechanisms. Pre-clinical data suggests that tau proteostasis is controlled by these two mechanisms. Likewise, tau pathology may have a negative effect on these systems.
The first proposed pathway involves the impairment of the UPS leading to accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins including tau as an early response to neuronal damage, and once cells are unable to clear the accumulated proteins, apoptosis starts and triggers caspase activation which leads to tau cleavage and overall blockage of protein degradation promoting tau pathology spread.
The second pathway involves chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA) which is responsible for clearance of multiple intracellular proteins with a specific motif including tau. Acetylated tau, which could contribute to neurodegeneration by driving tau polymerisation into neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), is cleared by macroautophagy (a type of non-selective autophagy) but it has been shown to inhibit CMA, which consequently decreases tau degradation. Accumulation of tau upon inhibition of CMA favours rerouting of oligomers of acetylated tau towards extracellular release, resulting in cell-to-cell propagation. Furthermore, p62 which is a cargo protein that binds to autophagy proteins, co-localises with tau in AD. Accumulation of p62 is therefore a sign that various proteins that were destined to be cleared, were insufficiently degraded. Therefore, stimulating this pathway could be another therapeutic target in the future.
Once the above systems fail, tau accumulates and inhibits these systems even further. EV release can help to reduce intracellular tau accumulation, and they have been shown to slow down the disease by facilitating clearance of intracellular proteins into the extracellular space. However, the release of tau-containing EV can expedite the disease process by facilitating the dissemination of pathological proteins, triggering inflammatory response, angiogenesis and cell death.

Tau hypersecretion is observed in the presence of amyloid plaques
The appearance of newly translated tau in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was shown to be increased in the presence of amyloid plaques. In stable isotope labelling studies in individuals with and without amyloid pathology, tau translation did not correlate with the burden of brain tau pathology measured using Positron Emission Tomography (PET), but increase in secretion was observed in the presence of amyloid plaques. The reasons for this hypersecretory state are unknown, but it may represent a compensatory mechanism to overcome the structural connectivity disruption caused by amyloid.

Current approaches for targeting tau
The earliest AD therapeutics were traditionally focused on amyloid plaques in the 1980s and 1990s due to the prominence of the amyloid cascade hypothesis and relative ease of targeting extracellular amyloid pathology compared to other targets such as intracellular tau. The end of 1990s saw the first therapeutic targets focused on tau pathology and specifically tau hyperphosphorylation and aggregation. Since then, there has been an exponential increase in AD clinical trials focusing on various targets related to tau. Various therapeutic modalities such as novel gene silencing and immunotherapies targeting immune cells have only been tried in cell/animal models which is beyond the scope of our review. We will be discussing tau therapeutic targets which have already made the translational move to human trials (Fig. 1).
There are 15 agents targeting tau in various phases in 2025. These trials have different targets which include targeting gene expression and reduction in production rate; antibody-mediated tau clearance; targeting post-translational pathological modifications or microtubule stabilisation and preventing tau seeding or aggregation.

Modifiers of tau synthesis
A promising approach to addressing AD tauopathy is to address tau production by interfering with tau translation, effectively ‘turning down the tap’ and stopping possible overproduction as well as reducing the supply of tau into the aggregation process. There are two major approaches in achieving this.

Messenger RNA (mRNA) therapy
Antisense oligonucleotides (ASO) are single-stranded oligodeoxynucleotides that can alter RNA and reduce or modify protein production via various mechanisms. ASO therapy became even more popular in the field of neurodegeneration after it demonstrated target engagement and clinical benefit in Spinal Muscular Atrophy.
Animal studies have shown that ASO therapy targeting overexpression of human tau gene result in multiple positive outcomes such as reduction of p-tau and tau seeding activity, attenuation of brain volume loss compared to controls, and overall survival. Furthermore, social behaviour, cognitive and motor abilities were also improved. In non-human primates a reduction in mRNA and protein in the brain, spinal cord and CSF is observed. However, one concern with mRNA therapy that targets tau production is that it targets all forms of tau indiscriminately and reduced physiological tau could negatively impact normal physiology. Therefore, selectively modulating specific pathogenic isoforms, but preserving overall MAPT (tau) expression, may be a safer therapeutic approach. Otherwise, a balance would need to be struck to reduce the pathological isoforms of tau sufficiently to cause the desired therapeutic effect without inhibiting the production of physiological tau excessively. The use of Stable Isotope Labelling Kinetics (SILK) has helped quantify the amount and timing of tau knockdown achieved in rats that received tau ASO therapy, by labelling new tau translation. This showed lowering of newly produced human tau earlier than levels of total tau, which suggested that the desired therapeutic effect (i.e. lowering of tau production) is achieved much earlier than anticipated.
Biogen’s tau ASO BIIB080, a MAPT-targeting ASO, is now in a phase 2 clinical trial in AD with no serious side effects seen so far, expected to finish the placebo-controlled phase in May 2026. BIIB080 reduced CSF tau concentrations in a dose dependent manner confirming target engagement, and early cognitive data suggested possible cognitive benefit. Furthermore, tau PET showed NFT reduction across all brain regions; further supported by reduction in CSF MTBR-tau243. Novartis’ NIO752 is another MAPT ASO therapy, for which the phase 2 trial is scheduled to complete in 2025. NIO752 is also being investigated in a phase 1b study aiming to measure its effect on tau synthesis using SILK. This study will help to quantify the amount of tau knockdown achieved with a MAPT ASO in real time and provide valuable information about how intracellular tau knockdown relates to more accessible peripheral and CSF tau biomarkers. This sort of novel approach may have important implications for dose selection in later phase studies.

Tau small interfering RNA (siRNA)
An alternative strategy for interfering with tau translation is siRNA. These have shown considerable promise in reducing amyloid precursor protein (APP) as a strategy for addressing amyloid production in AD and a similar approach is likely to be possible for tau. SiRNA has a long duration of effect due to catalytic recycling of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). This may be advantageous for low frequency of intrathecal (IT) dosing. The effects of sustained and profound tau knockdown are not yet known, and safety signals may emerge late owing to the long half-life of tau in humans, making it particularly important to quantify the effects on intracellular tau translation.
In animal models, siRNA treatment durably reduced MAPT mRNA and protein in both in vitro and in vivo model systems. In non-human primate studies, there was an observed reduction of MAPT transcription and tau protein in brain tissue and CSF.

Modifiers of tau spread

Tau immunotherapy
Immunotherapy can be active or passive. Active immunotherapy delivers tau immunogen as a vaccine. Its advantages include low cost and long-lasting effect. However, since tau is an endogenous protein, there is the potential for an irreversible autoimmune response.
Passive immunotherapy delivers premade antibodies that target specific tau epitopes. The main advantage of passive immunotherapy is its flexibility - antibody subclasses can be easily changed, and they can be tailored to the disease stage. They are also relatively reversible. Disadvantages are high cost and the need for long-term administration.

Active immunotherapy: Tau vaccination
This strategy is based on stimulating the immune system to produce antibodies that target tau. Tau vaccines are easily administered and can have long-lasting effects, targeting mainly the mid-region, MTBR and C-terminus. There are various candidate antibodies.
In animals, vaccines that specifically mimic various phospho-epitopes of tau protein (out of 45 identified in AD brain) have been found to be safe in mice and they led to reduced tauopathy in the brain. However, targeting a limited number of phosphorylated domains results in insufficient coverage and therefore limited therapeutic effect. Furthermore, some epitopes are also known to have a physiological function therefore the most effective vaccination options should avoid physiological epitopes and target pathological ones aiming to prevent tau prion-like seeding as well as tau aggregation and tangle formation. Vaccinations are likely to be most beneficial in patients in pre-clinical stages of AD as immune responses are more likely to help stop the spread of tau pathology that is not yet extensive. This potentially makes them tools for primary prevention.
A concern with any vaccination is the autoimmune response which may be irreversible. Animal-based studies followed by early phase human studies have shown a benign safety profile to date. Consideration also needs to be given to the variable immune response of the host immune system, leading to heterogenous antibody responses across patients; this may lead to difficulties when choosing the dose and vaccination regimen.
Currently two most advanced tau vaccinations in AD are AADvac1 and JNJ-64042056.
AADvac1 actively targets N-terminally truncated tau fragments and was shown to be safe in animal models. AADvac1 showed no major safety concerns in participants with AD in phase 1 and showed lower hippocampal atrophy and better cognitive performance on participants with higher IgG responses. A phase 2 study also showed no major safety concerns (injection site reactions and transient confusion being main adverse events) but no significant changes were found in cognitive or functional tests. It was later found that one-third of participants in this study were negative for tau biomarkers and post-hoc analysis of the subgroup with positive biomarkers showed that higher antibody titres correlated with clinical response and reduction in brain atrophy rate. The company is planning a larger phase 2b study of the vaccine.
JNJ-64042056 is a liposome-based vaccine designed to target pathological conformers of p-tau. Animal models showed reduction in both soluble and insoluble tau as well as improved clinical parameters such as body weight retention, delayed motor phenotypes and extended lifespan with significant inflammatory response. In human trials the original vaccine showed a weak immune response which led to a vaccine redesign. Early phase studies showed good safety profile and titres for p-tau antibodies sustained for over a year. The company announced its phase 2/3 registration called Retain which will enrol participants with pre-clinical AD. The outcomes will be assessed by decline on the Pre-clinical AD Cognitive Composite 5 (PACC-5) with tau PET scans as secondary endpoint.

Passive immunotherapy: monoclonal antibodies
Tau is thought to spread from cell to cell through the extracellular space and propagate pathological forms in a prion-like fashion. Monoclonal antibodies are designed to block pathological extracellular tau spread from cell to cell and enhance tau microglial clearance thereby interrupting AD progression. Many monoclonal antibodies, targeting a range of epitopes from the N-terminus through to C-terminus of tau, have been developed over the past decade. As a class they have shown a favourable side effect profile. There were no signs of Amyloid-Related Imaging Abnormalities (ARIA) which is an important advantage compared with amyloid-targeting monoclonal antibodies. However most (especially those targeting N-terminus have not survived phase 1/2 clinical trials, due to lack of efficacy/target engagement, indicating that targeting the correct epitope and toxic species of the protein is likely to be important to prevent tau misfolding and spread.
Two promising tau antibodies target different epitopes within the R1-4 region on tau. One of the most promising tau monoclonal antibodies is Etalanetug, developed by Eisai, which is a monoclonal IgG1 antibody targeting HVPGG epitope in the MTBR. Pre-clinical data showed reduced tau aggregation. A first in human phase 1 study showed adequate safety profile and target engagement and in a recent phase 1b/2 study to assess safety and tolerability in Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Disease (DIAD), a 30–70% decline in CSF MTBR-tau243 levels was observed albeit in a small sample size. A phase 2/3 is running currently in patients with DIAD with the primary endpoint of tau spread measured by tau PET and other secondary outcomes such as the cognitive composite.
Similarly, bepranemab which is a full-length IgG4 monoclonal antibody developed by UCB Biopharma, showed a good side effect profile in its phase 1 trial. Although it failed its primary outcome in phase 2, subgroup analysis of individuals with low baseline tau levels and no APOE4 (and therefore earlier tau pathology), showed that bepranemab slowed the cognitive decline by 50% on the Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale (ADAS-Cog) compared to placebo. Importantly, this was the first drug to show slowing of tangle accumulation by 58% measured by PET ([18F]-GTP1). These subgroup analysis results warrant further investigation. The study also shows the importance of an individualised therapeutic approach taking into account factors such as APOE status.

Tau accumulation modifiers

Phosphatase modification
Tau hyperphosphorylation partially results from reduced protein phosphatase 2 A (PP2A) activity. Sodium selenate has been tested as a potential disease modifying therapy in AD as it reduces the hyperphosphorylated tau via activation of PP2A enzyme in mice models. A study in humans showed a good safety profile and slowing of disease progression but it was not placebo-controlled and phase 2 study showed only modest benefits on diffusion MRI.

Kinase inhibition
Lithium chloride has been shown to inhibit glycogen synthase kinase 3B (GSK3B) which is known to phosphorylate tau. In the first human studies there were no safety concerns, however phase 2 trial produced no clinical benefit, but the non-linear dose response suggested further dose finding studies and longer follow-up duration.

Acetylation inhibition
Acetylation can impair microtubule binding, decrease solubility, promote cleavage and protein degradation impairment. In this category salsalate has been shown to inhibit tau acetylation. In mouse models, salsalate reduced total tau and acetylated tau levels, prevented hippocampal atrophy and reduced decline in memory deficits. Phase 1 study in humans showed positive safety profile in patients with Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP), however the phase 1b trial in patients with AD is currently registered as active but not recruiting.

Caspase inhibitors
As mentioned, caspase is known to promote tau cleavage. Certain inhibitors such as minocycline and VX-765 were promising in animal models and showed reduced levels of tau phosphorylation and insoluble tau aggregates, however minocycline was trialled in humans with mild AD and failed to slow cognitive decline with higher doses associated with adverse effects.

Microtubule stabilizers
TPI-287 which is used in oncology trials was associated with reduced cognitive decline compared to placebo in AD in humans, however this was attributed to the above expected cognitive decline in the placebo group. Further studies are needed to clarify its potential therapeutic benefits in AD.

Tau aggregation prevention
The rationale for targeting O-GlycNAcase (OGA) comes from previous studies showing that addition of O-linked N-acetylglucosamine (N-GlcNAc) to tau reduces its propensity to form aggregates. The therapeutic strategy is therefore to use inhibitors of OGA – the enzyme that removes N-GlcNAc from proteins. Attractively, these therapies can be given orally. Multiple pre-clinical studies looked promising showing decreased neuronal loss and NFT which eventually led to phase 1 human trials in healthy adults which showed no significant side effects. However, phase 2 study of ceperognastat (OGA inhibitor) in early symptomatic AD showed that those on active treatment declined more rapidly on almost all cognitive scales compared to placebo, and both dose groups had more serious adverse events. Interestingly, the treated groups lost less hippocampal volume compared to placebo, and tau PET showed statistically significant slowing of tau accumulation highlighting discrepancy between biomarkers and clinical response. Subsequently, it was announced in 2025 that Lilly had ended its development.
Hydromethylthionine mesylate is a tau aggregation inhibitor derived from methylene blue and it was shown to reduce tau pathology and behavioural impairment in spatial problem-solving in tau transgenic mouse models. It inhibits tau aggregation and disaggregates pathological tau oligomers and filaments in pre-clinical models.
Phase 3 trials in humans showed no safety concerns and although the initial results were reported to show no overall differences in the clinical or neuroimaging outcomes, it was later suggested that the lack of clinical difference was due to combination activity of hydromethylthionine in the majority of patients receiving 8 mg/day (low dose cohort) dose combined with lack of additional activity at higher doses. Post-hoc analysis of MCI group showed slowing of progression from CDR 0.5 to 1 in the treatment group. Drug development is still ongoing despite primary outcomes of three phase 3 studies showing a lack of efficacy.

Amyloid therapies indirectly targeting tau
Anti-amyloid therapies such as lecanemab, aducanumab and donanemab demonstrated that reducing amyloid pathology leads to the reduction of tau biomarkers in plasma and CSF. However, the results on tau tangle pathology as measured by PET were inconsistent - for example, the donanemab phase 3 trial showed no difference in tau PET between the treatment and placebo groups, where lecanemab demonstrates a slowing of tau PET accumulation in phase 3. Whether differences in outcomes between soluble tau biomarkers and tau PET is a consequence of the stage of disease or because the two pathologies are independent remains to be determined.

In vivo biomarkers for tau pathophysiology
As AD therapeutic development advances, tau remains a central component of both its underlying pathophysiology and emerging treatment strategies, it is critically important that the field has access to tau biomarkers that capture and quantitate target engagement/therapeutic response and safety. We critically review which tau biomarkers are accessible for clinical research. We consider what forms of tau they measure and whether we really have access to the cellular and subcellular compartments where tau pathology forms. Finally, we consider timing – in terms of disease stage and sampling strategy. We consider how biomarkers can help with patient selection (by staging the disease), as well as how they can serve in assessing the target engagement of tau therapies (Fig. 1).

Neuroimaging-based biomarkers
Tau PET is the first non-invasive in vivo biomarker which directly assesses tau spatiotemporal spread in the brain – the closest alternative to reference post-mortem examination. Tau PET predicts group level changes in cognition and spatial cortical atrophy patterns over time across the clinical AD spectrum in contrast to amyloid PET which does not correlate well with the cognitive deficit. It is also able to discriminate AD from other neurodegenerative diseases.
Early tau radioligands used in PET (such as the hitherto only FDA- and EMA-approved [18F]flortaucipir (FTP), previously also known as AV1451 or T807) were shown to be elevated in patients with AD compared to controls. They bind to mixed 3R and 4R tau isoforms in PHF with higher affinity (compared to binding to 3R (pathology seen in Pick’s Disease and Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism-17) or 4R (pathology seen in Corticobasal Degeneration and PSP), which makes them a good biomarker candidate for AD-related tauopathy. Other recent radioligands such as [18F]PI2620 have also demonstrated affinity for 4R which makes them potentially useful in 4R tauopathies mentioned above.
Early tau PET studies attempted to recreate the spatiotemporal Braak staging of tau NFT pathology in vivo, however, research over the past decade has highlighted the diversity of tau PET patterns as carrying diagnostic potential. Quantification of tau burden approaches based on the extraction of tau PET signal of predefined anatomical brain regions might miss meaningful signal which is why one of the largest tau PET studies thus far employed the FDA-approved visual tau PET scan assessment to establish that NFT pathology occurs in nearly 10% of cognitively normal people, 45% of people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and 87% of those with dementia. The study also reported that for those with normal cognition, an abnormal tau PET scan signalled a nearly 60% risk of developing MCI or dementia within the next five years. Traditionally the concept of topographic spreading of tau has been prioritised over the importance of tau burden assessment, even though lessons learned from imaging-neuropathology correlation studies indicate that the former reflects a rather incomplete picture of disease. These studies also demonstrated that there likely is a temporal gap between actual tau aggregation in the brain and the in vivo tau PET signal.
While all radioligands mentioned above bind strongly to intracellular insoluble mature tangles making them good tools for accurately assessing tau load, they all show different patterns of so-called off-target binding to non-tau targets (e.g., iron, neuromelanin and monoamine oxidase B and others). However, newer generation ligands (such as [18F]PI-2620, [18F]GTP1, [18F]RO948, [18F]-MK-6240, etc.) show promise with regards to greater sensitivity or less inference from off-target binding. Building on large-scale head-to-head comparisons of tau ligands to create a harmonised framework models such as CenTauR allows conversion of tracer-specific values onto a common, tracer-independent metric system. This is already being implemented into automated pipelines such as petBrain.
Tau PET remains the only modality which directly assesses the topography of tau accumulation in vivo which is extremely useful in trials and is already used in multiple studies to monitor response in terms of tau reduction.
Potential limitations of PET as a tau biomarker modality include its limited ability to detect soluble tau species that are not yet incorporated into pathological inclusions. It may not be capable of detecting successful depletion of toxic tau outside of tangles. Its sensitivity to accurately detect early successful target engagement in clinical trials remains unresolved. Practical limitations include poor access in clinical routine diagnostics, relatively high costs and the need of ligand production facilities in a vicinity that allows transport of ligands considering their half-life (20–120 min). These challenges show the importance of fluid biomarker development.

Fluid biomarkers
Tau imaging has provided important spatial resolution, providing invaluable information about where and how much tau is present in the brain. Similar to PET findings – tau is also an excellent dynamic fluid biomarker which correlates well with cognitive decline and AD progression, therefore is a biomarker of great interest for both diagnostic and monitoring purposes.
We critically appraise what additional information fluid biomarkers provide, and their potential practical advantages in later phase clinical trials and clinical practice. In particular, we focus on CSF and plasma tau’s ability to characterise tau and to monitor tau kinetics in vivo. The advantage of fluid biomarker over radiological biomarker is that it can measure isotopes that are potentially more specific for the clinical purpose (i.e. diagnosis, response to therapy and/or prognosis) and it should become positive earlier than radiological biomarkers and once in pipeline should be less expensive.
Tau is an intracellular protein, but it can be measured in the extracellular space, CSF and plasma. As it undergoes truncation and phosphorylation, different species are found in different physiological compartments which provides both challenges and opportunities (Fig. 2). The mechanism by which tau exits into the extracellular space remains unclear. The methods of tau release could include vesicle and non-vesicle mediated pathways, lysosomal and tunnelling nanotubes. The mechanism of tau release into plasma is even more complex. There are likely breakdown pathways including filtration via blood-brain barrier, breakdown by liver and kidneys, binding to other proteins which explain the significantly low concentrations of tau. Furthermore, we know that there is also peripherally produced tau which are much bigger (110 kDa) earning the name of ‘Big’ tau compared to brain tau which is 45-65 kDa making its interpretation as a biomarker more challenging.
Total tau which is actually a mid-domain tau epitope targeted by various antibodies in clinical practice, was used separately as a ‘Neurodegeneration’ biomarker in AD Amyloid/Tau/Neurodegeneration (ATN) classification. There is some evidence to suggest that elevation in CSF tau is due to axonal loss (i.e. neurodegeneration) and neuronal death leading to the release of the intracellular protein. Studies so far show that it is not a marker of disease clinical severity however it does seem to reflect the disease intensity. The lack of specificity meant it had limited value in distinguishing neurodegenerative diseases from one another except for cases of catastrophic neuronal loss such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD). Interestingly, CSF tau levels do not increase in other forms of tauopathy which suggests that cell death is not the only mechanism responsible for CSF tau elevation in AD and tau is not just a marker of general neurodegeneration. Furthermore, studies suggest that tau can be secreted into the extracellular space from neurons independently from cell death. This discrepancy could be simply because we have not identified other species of tau causing primary tauopathies or perhaps the rise in tau is not primarily due to tau pathology but secondary to amyloid pathology in AD.
The field of fluid biomarkers has moved forward significantly over the past decade, owing to the development of highly sensitive immunoassays and highly specific targeted mass spectrometry assays which have revolutionised how we quantitate and characterise tau in human biofluids.
Currently, CSF p-tau markers (mainly p-tau181 and p-tau217) together with Aβ 42/40 ratio are clinically accepted to be gold standard fluid biomarkers that support the diagnosis of AD with previous studies showing p-tau217 being able to distinguish patients with AD from patients with other forms of dementia and healthy controls, and being generally a more superior marker for diagnostic purposes determined by correlation with cognitive performance, brain MRI and tau PET. However, various other phosphosites also cluster together - relevant hypophosphorylation sites (which have been shown to inversely correlate with tau and amyloid PET scans) and hyperphosphorylation sites can be used together to stage the progression of AD.
Other studies showed CSF p-tau231 to be a more specific marker in AD correlating with post-mortem tau pathology. Interestingly, studies showed that some p-tau levels correlate better with amyloid PET which led to suggestion that secretion of p-tau217, p-tau181 and p-tau231 may represent an early reaction to amyloid plaques. In contrast other tau analytes such as MTBR-tau243 become abnormal later in disease and correlate better with tau PET and cognition This raised the question on whether p-tau levels are actually part of ‘Amyloid’ or ‘Tau’ on ATN classification, which led to splitting T category into two subcategories on ATN classifications: T1 as soluble tau fragment analyte which reacts to amyloid plaques or soluble Aβ species and T2 which signals the presence of AD tau aggregates.
Tau seed amplification assays (SAA) are also showing utility for early tau aggregation detection and discrimination between AD and other forms of dementia. There are also efforts in using SAA as a monitoring and target engagement marker to show tau aggregation inhibition in drug trials.
Recent years have seen various studies showing that plasma tau markers could be as accurate as CSF in diagnostics with multiple studies showing that plasma p-tau is able to discriminate between AD and other neurodegenerative diseases. Multiple studies showed that plasma tau tests are similar or even superior to their CSF counterparts. Specifically, plasma p-tau181 was shown to correlate well with amyloid and tau PET scans, however some recent data showed that plasma p-tau217 is an earlier and stronger marker associated with AD pathology having strong association with both plaques and tangles. Furthermore, p-tau217 and Aβ42/40 ratio showed improvement in quantitating AD pathology and there is some evidence to suggest that plasma p-tau217 levels change with early amyloid accumulation before widespread tau aggregation and therefore before tau PET becomes positive making it even an earlier AD marker than tau PET. Plasma MTBR-tau243 is a recent biomarker breakthrough which was shown to be an accurate diagnostic and monitoring tool known to be strongly associated with AD tau tangle pathology and AD symptoms. It has an endogenous peptide form (amino acids 243–256) compared to its CSF tryptic-digest counterpart which has a tryptic peptide form (amino acids 243–254) which gives a slightly different cross-sectional profile.
Most health systems will likely struggle to cope with expected workload of administering disease modifying therapies to patients with AD when they become widely available. Blood biomarkers can potentially help detect AD changes much earlier than imaging modalities which can make the process of screening, diagnosing and identifying the appropriate patients in the AD continuum much faster and potentially helping prioritise those patients who need to be seen sooner. Blood biomarkers also minimise the use of human resources (compared to other common investigations such as CSF sampling, MRI or PET scans). In support of this, simulations have shown that using blood biomarkers can also be very cost effective.
The obvious disadvantage of plasma biomarkers to imaging modalities is that they do not provide spatial information on the disease and may be confounded by various factors such as medical comorbidities, between-assay variability and sampling methods that can affect the results. Also, there is evidence that tau protein is expressed in other peripheral tissues such as renal podocytes and muscle cells with uncertain significance to how much they affect the plasma tau results. However, combining various fluid biomarkers and creating a ‘staging model’ mitigates this problem reasonably well. Furthermore, immunoassays designed to selectively measure brain-derived tau (BD-tau) in plasma by targeting tau isoforms that originate from the brain have shown promising results in differentiating AD from non-AD dementia and unaffected controls. Another paper by the same group showed that BD-tau reflects the combination of pathological amyloid and neurodegeneration which is detrimental to cognitive decline in AD. They also suggested that plasma BD-tau can act as a marker of neurodegeneration and paired together with plasma p-tau (which acts as a marker of amyloid) they can function as a tool to screen amyloid positive population that should be prioritised for anti-amyloid therapies.
Finally, the field is yet to determine whether blood biomarkers have utility and sufficient sensitivity in monitoring response to successful tau modifying therapies; incorporating plasma biomarker discovery into clinical trial design will be important for addressing this problem. Plasma tau biomarkers tend to increase after anti-tau antibody administration which makes it challenging to confirm central target engagement or decide on dose selection and therefore CSF biomarkers are still needed.
However, CSF biomarkers are also not ideal. For example, the individual turnover of the proteome in CSF is likely to be dictated by a number of individual factors such as CSF production rate, clearance rate and the delivery of the drug itself may result in altered CSF dynamic. Other factors may play a part: for example, therapies such as ASO have been reported to cause ventricular volume changes which may be due to changes in CSF production/clearance discrepancy. Blood-brain/CSF barrier integrity is also likely to affect the measurement of biomarkers that reflect therapeutic response to tau therapies.
Gaining confidence on how reliable CSF biomarkers are for monitoring therapy response is critical for interpreting their use in clinical trials. Measuring rates of production/clearance using SILK technique may partially address the challenges of using CSF biomarkers. SILK uses non-radioactive isotopes (normally 13C6) that are found in very low natural abundance and so can be used in human studies to label and track protein translation and movement around or from the CNS. By calculating the ratio of the infused isotopes and natural isotopes in tryptic peptides unique to proteins of interest, we can infer the production and clearance rates of these proteins including amyloid, tau, NfL and others. This is especially important in drug trials as it has already been shown in mice that the absolute biomarker concentrations can be misleading in therapeutic interventions which could lead to overtreating and complications. For example, in humans, tau is synthesised within neurons almost immediately and released into the extracellular space in a controlled manner on day 3 after translation. Since the half-life of tau in the CSF is long (around 23 days), the pool of CSF tau may not be a good representation of the large pool of newly synthesized intracellular tau. Although labour intensive, SILK is likely to be a valuable tool for early-phase clinical trials for quickly and accurately quantitating the effect on tau metabolism and ensuring that therapies are not dosed to the point of complete tau knockdown, which is likely to cause complications. This approach is currently being used in an early phase clinical trial of a tau ASO therapy where target engagement can be demonstrated acutely enabling faster decisions on dosing which can be excellent in ASO and siRNA drug classes. In immunotherapy it is important to develop target engagement tests and IP-MS are especially helpful by offering more specific ways to detect specific peptide profiles targeted by the drug.

Knowledge gaps in tau biomarkers and trial design
Having considered the current mechanistic approaches to targeting tau in humans and reviewing the available therapeutic strategies, we appraise the current biomarker tools, highlight gaps and propose potential solutions. As illustrated in Table 1, it is clear that for therapeutic strategies to work effectively, they need to be backed up by reliable screening, diagnostic, staging, prognostic, target engagement and/or monitoring biomarkers. While certain biomarkers are suitable for specific applications, others remain insufficient or absent.
The field also faces significant hurdles in trial design of tau therapies. Adequately powering trials is challenging when the sensitivity of available biomarker tools to detect biological change is not known, nor is the effect size we are expecting to measure. Furthermore, linking the biomarker changes to the clinical response is also a major challenge. Another major question is whether tau trials should focus on monotherapy with a tau therapy, or whether dual therapy with amyloid targeting drug will provide synergy. The timing of amyloid therapy co-administration is also an important consideration. SILK data suggesting that tau translation and secretion into CSF is increased by 200% in the presence of amyloid pathology would on one hand imply that addressing the effects of amyloid pathophysiology before targeting tau may be valuable, however on the other hand, leaving tau accumulation beyond very early stages while reducing amyloid may cause preventable damage therefore simultaneous amyloid and tau therapy may be beneficial.

Conclusion
Treatments targeting amyloid pathology in AD have demonstrated the ability to slow progression in early AD. However, evidence suggests heterogeneity in response and due to multiple factors and pathways involved in the pathogenesis of AD we are very likely to need multiple therapies for the ‘right time for the right drug’ approach to treatment. Presymptomatic patients are theoretically more likely to benefit from Aβ therapy, but tau therapies have a chance of altering disease course, with a substantial effect size, in the symptomatic stages of the disease.
Drawing parallels to other disciplines where therapeutic options are more advanced such as oncology and haematology, we are very likely to eventually need a multi-therapy approach simultaneously covering multiple targets. Etalanetug is the first tau-targeted drug that is being used in combination therapy with lecanemab in a phase 2/3 study in DIAD with tau PET outcome as primary endpoint and cognitive, radiological and fluid biomarker changes as secondary endpoints.
The coming decade will see a range of therapies targeting tau translation and spread through various mechanisms including the use of ASO, siRNA, active and passive immunization. Overcoming the blood-brain barrier and facilitating peripheral delivery of tau therapies to the CNS without causing off-target unwanted peripheral side effects will be one of the major logistical challenges. However, there are already some significant advances using tau ASO and transport vesicles for delivery of the drug in pre-clinical models. Well planned early phase trials of tau therapies that permit the development of sensitive, accessible biomarkers of target engagement of tau therapies, which are capable of differentiating regression of tau pathological inclusions and tau spread are still needed.
Safety concerns in tau-targeting therapies so far remain low. Careful long-term follow-up of clinical trial subjects undergoing tau modification will be needed owing to its physiological role and long half-life in the CNS. Tau is also expressed peripherally in muscles and kidneys, which may bring unwanted complications. Biomarkers that accurately quantify the amount of tau reduction in the intracellular space, such as the use of SILK, will be important for dose determination and avoiding these unwanted safety signals.
Unlocking success in targeting tau biology should be a strategic priority for the entire field of neurodegeneration for academic and pharmaceutical stakeholders. Multi-national cross-disciplinary efforts will be key for accelerated success and patient benefit.
Gaps in AD biomarkers and proposed solutions
Problems interrogating tau biology in human clinical trials in AD	Issues	Proposed solutions	Rationale/ potential utility	Relevance to drug class	 	Tempo related	 	Quantitation of rate of tau translation	- Quantitation of tau knockdown (safety/pharmacokinetics)- Hypersecretion of neuronal tau in AD	- Direct tau mRNA quantification- SILK- Identification of tau PTM that reflects protein age	- Quantitate tau expression at transcriptomal level where the problem arises- Quantitate tau synthesisLabel-free method to quantify tau synthesis	- MAPT tau ASO- siRNA	 	Quantitation of rate of tau clearance	- Individual / disease specific variability in tau clearance- Clearance may be compromised by IT administration	- SILK- Autophagy biomarkers	Quantitate tau knockdown	- MAPT tau ASO- siRNA- Immunotherapy	 	Compartment related	 	No direct access to intracellular tau pool	- Mismatch between intracellular and extracellular tau- Unknown relationship between existing fluid biomarkers and brain tau in vivo	- Sample brain, brain interstitial fluid with matched CSF and plasma ex vivo- Develop exosome-based biomarker	- Compare biomarkers in various compartments- Exosomes get released from cells and can travel to plasma which then can be measured	- PTM- Immunotherapy	 	Contribution of tau biomarkers from peripheral and central sources	Plasma tau has contributions from peripheral and central tau	- Specific fragmentation and phosphorylation profiles (e.g. p-tau subtypes, ubiquitination markers)- ‘Big’ tau	- Profiles that are known to be derived centrally- Expressed by peripheral and not cortical neurons	- PTM- Immunotherapy	 	Spread related	 	Lack of clinical tools for capturing spread via extracellular vesicles	Tau spread by aggregation	Exosomal surface markers	Selective isolation of tau carrying vesicles	- Aggregation inhibitors- Immunotherapy	 	Lack of clinical tools for capturing spread via synaptic transmission	Prion-like tau spread	In vivo imaging paired with synaptic markers (e.g. SV2A)	Shows tau spread along synaptic pathways	- Aggregation inhibitors- Immunotherapy	 	Structure related	 	Existing assays may miss PTM	Lack of biomarkers that easily identify various PTM	Comprehensive ‘signature’ marker reflecting the specific PTM	Tracks how modification changes with ongoing therapy	- PTM- Immunotherapy	 	Existing immunoassays may miss tau aggregation	Lack of biomarkers that easily identify levels of tau aggregation	Biomarker differentiating between monomeric, oligomeric and fibrillary tau species	Oligomeric tau are considered toxic prior to becoming fibrillary tau species therefore differentiating these would be useful	- Aggregation inhibitors- Immunotherapy	 	Downstream biology	 	Paucity of biomarkers for capturing downstream effects of tau modification	Tau knockdown	Microtubule-associated proteins	Measures the protein responsible for microtubule stability	- Microtubule stabilisers- PTM- Immunotherapy	 	Pathological specificity	 	Lack of direct markers of tau tangle pathology	Lack of biomarkers to differentiate soluble tau from insoluble tau inclusions	MTBR-tau243	MTBR-tau243 is specifically enriched in insoluble tau	- Aggregation inhibitors- Immunotherapy
Current and hypothetical tau therapeutic targets and biomarkers. Schematic overview of tau-targeting therapeutic strategies (red) alongside potential biomarkers (green) for each mechanism (created with Biorender.com). Abbreviations: ASO, antisense oligonucleotide; mRNA, messenger RNA; SILK, Stable Isotope Labelling Kinetics; siRNA, small interfering RNA
Tau biomarker spatial and temporal challenges and proposed solutions. The figure outlines how biomarkers vary in their ability to reflect tau pathology across various compartments (spatial challenge) and disease stage (temporal challenge) and proposed approaches to address the challenges (created with Biorender.com). Abbreviations: BD-tau, brain-derived tau; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EV, extracellular vesicle; MTBR, microtubule-binding region; PET, positron emission tomography; p-tau, phosphorylated tau; SILK, Stable Isotope Labelling Kinetics
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
Conceptualisation – AA, MSF, TAG, RWP. Writing – original draft – AA. Writing – review and editing – AA, MSF, TAG, EM, KED, CJM, MS, KRW, RWP. Supervision – RWP. Final approval – AA, MSF, TAG, EM, KED, CJM, MS, KRW, RWP.

Funding
MSF is funded by Alzheimer’s Research UK Research Fellowship (ARUK-RF2023B-015). TAG was supported by the Alzheimer’s Association (23AARFD-1029918) and research funding from The Neurofilament Light Consortium. EM is supported by funding from the National Institute on Aging (K23AG046363; U01AG059798), the Anonymous Foundation, GHR, the Alzheimer’s Association, and institutional support. Additional research support (to the institution) was provided by Eli Lilly, Eisai, Hoffmann-La Roche, and the DIAN-TU Pharma Consortium. KED is funded by UK Dementia Research Institute, through UK DRI Ltd, principally funded by the Medical Research Council. CJM is supported by funding from NIHR UCLH Biomedical Research Centre and from NIHR UK Dementia Trials Network. MS receives funding from the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation (Wallenberg Centre for Molecular and Translational Medicine; KAW2014.0363 and KAW2023.0371), the Swedish Research Council (2017–02869, 2021–02678, 2021–06545 and 2023–06188), the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation program under grant agreement no 101132933 (AD-RIDDLE) and 101112145 (PROMINENT), the National Institute of Health (R01 AG081394-01), Gates Ventures, the National Research Foundation of Korea (RS-2023-00263612), the Swedish state under the agreement between the Swedish government and the County Councils, the ALF-agreement (ALFGBG-813971 and ALFGBG-965326), the Swedish Brain Foundation (FO2021-0311 and FO2024-0372), the Swedish Alzheimer Foundation (AF-1011738), Familjen Rönström’s Foundation, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, the Västra Götaland Region R&D (VGFOUREG-995510) and Innovation platforms, Sahlgrenska Science Park and the National Institute for Health and Care Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre. RWP and AA are supported by an Alzheimer’s Association Part the Cloud award (PTC-22-982162) and the Sigrid Rausing Trust Neurogenetics Therapies Programme (NgTP). RWP is also supported by an Alzheimer’s Association Clinician Scientist Fellowship (AACSF-20-685780), the UCLH Queen Square Biomedical Research Centre, the UK Dementia Research Institute and a Race Against Dementia Rosetrees Team award supported by the Q Charitable Trust.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
EM has participated in speaker engagements for Eisai, Neurology Live, and Projects in Knowledge-Kaplan. Advisory board roles, consulting, and Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) participation have included relationships with Eli Lilly, Alnylam, Alector, Alzamend, Sanofi, AstraZeneca, Hoffmann-La Roche, Grifols, Johnson and Johnson, Vigil Neuroscience and Merck. There are several inventions that have been filed by Washington University for patents, including “Methods of diagnosing AD with phosphorylation changes” and “Methods to detect MTBR-tau isoforms and use”. These intellectual properties owned by Washington University can be or are licensed and some licensing income may be distributed to EM and other inventors. These intellectual properties being licensed by Washington University from C2N and currently being utilized in research have been reviewed by the Washington University COI and ICOI committees. All co-inventors, including some lab members, the University, and EM could receive part of the profits from any sales of these tests by C2N, which is in the process of licensing or has licensed some IP from the University. These activities have been reviewed by Washington University’s (WU) Conflicts of Interest Review Committee in accordance with WU’s Research Conflicts of Interest Policy and WU’s Institutional Conflict of Interest Review Committee in accordance with WU’s Institutional Conflict of Interest Policy. CJM has provided consultancy to Alector, Biogen, Eisai, Ionis, Lilly, MSD, Neurimmune, Novartis, Prevail, Roche/Genentech, Wave. She is an advisor to the Drug Delivery Foundation. She has received honoraria for teaching and education from Biogen, Eisai and Lilly, and received academic funding award from Biogen. MS has served/serves on advisory boards for Arvakor, Eli Lilly and Company, Novo Nordisk and Roche, received honoraria for presentations or educational material from Bioarctic, Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly and Company, Roche and Triolabs, and receives research support (to the institution) from Beckman Coulter, Bioarctic, Novo Nordisk and Roche. He is co-founder and shareholder of Centile Bioscience and serves as Associate Editor with Alzheimer’s Research & Therapy. KRW is a full-time employee of Eisai, Inc. RWP has received honoraria from GE Healthcare for academic talks and co-leads the Neurofilament light consortium which receives funding from Abbvie, Biogen, Bristol Myers Squibb and Roche. RWP holds shares in and has consulted for Guilford street laboratories limited.

Abbreviations
Aβ
Beta amyloid
AD
Alzheimer’s Disease
ADAS-Cog
Alzheimer’s Disease Assessment Scale-Cognitive Subscale
APP
Amyloid precursor protein
ARIA
Amyloid-Related Imaging Abnormalities
ASO
Antisense oligonucleotide
ATN
Amyloid/Tau/Neurodegeneration
BD-tau
Brain-derived tau
CDR
Clinical dementia rating
CJD
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
CNS
Central nervous system
CSF
Cerebrospinal fluid
DIAD
Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Disease
EV
Extracellular vesicle
IT
Intrathecal
MAPT
Microtubule-associated protein tau
MCI
Mild cognitive impairment
mRNA
Messenger RNA
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
MTBR
Microtubule binding region
NfL
Neurofilament light
NFT
Neurofibrillary tangles
p-tau
Phosphorylated tau
PACC-5
Pre-clinical AD Cognitive Composite 5
PET
Positron Emission Tomography
PHF
Paired helical filaments
PSP
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy
PTM
Post-translational modification
SILK
Stable Isotope Labelling Kinetics
siRNA
Small interfering RNA

References
Ossenkoppele R, Smith R, Mattsson-Carlgren N, Groot C, Leuzy A, Strandberg O, et al. Accuracy of tau positron emission tomography as a prognostic marker in preclinical and prodromal Alzheimer disease: a head-to-head comparison against amyloid positron emission tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. JAMA Neurol. 2021;78(8):961–971.
Biel D, Brendel M, Rubinski A, Buerger K, Janowitz D, Dichgans M, et al. Tau-PET and in vivo Braak staging as prognostic markers of future cognitive decline in cognitively normal to demented individuals. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2021;13(1)
Young PNE, Estarellas M, Coomans E, Srikrishna M, Beaumont H, Maass A, et al. Imaging biomarkers in neurodegeneration: current and future practices. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2020;12.
The physiological roles of Tau and Aβ: implications for alzheimer’s disease pathology and therapeutics
Avila J, Jiménez JS, Sayas CL, Bolós M, Zabala JC, Rivas G, et al. Tau structures. Front Aging Neurosci. 2016;8
Tau exon 10 alternative splicing and tauopathies
Tau stabilizes microtubules by binding at the interface between tubulin heterodimers
Weingarten MD, Lockwood AH, Hwo S-Y, Kirschner MW. A protein factor essential for microtubule assembly. Proc Nat Acad Sci USA. 1975;72(5):1858–62.
Physical and chemical properties of purified Tau factor and the role of Tau in microtubule assembly
Tau induces ring and microtubule formation from αβ-tubulin dimers under nonassembly conditions
Regulation of microtubule assembly by Tau and not by Pin1
Kinetic stabilization of microtubule dynamics at steady state by Tau and microtubule-Binding domains of Tau
Axonal transport deficits and neurodegenerative diseases
Alzforum. Mivelsiran. [Internet]. 2025 [cited 2025 Mar 5]. Available from: https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/mivelsiran
Alzforum. E2814. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/e2814. 2025.
ADAMANT: a placebo-controlled randomized phase 2 study of AADvac1, an active immunotherapy against pathological Tau in alzheimer’s disease
Exploratory Tau biomarker results from a multiple Ascending-Dose study of BIIB080 in alzheimer disease: A randomized clinical trial
Tau-targeting antisense oligonucleotide MAPTRx in mild alzheimer’s disease: a phase 1b, randomized, placebo-controlled trial
Alzforum. NIO752. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/nio752. 2023.
Velazquez R, Ferreira E, Tran A, Turner EC, Belfiore R, Branca C, et al. Acute tau knockdown in the hippocampus of adult mice causes learning and memory deficits. Aging Cell. 2018;17(4).
Knock-out and Transgenic mouse models of tauopathies
Hernández F, Merchán-Rubira J, Vallés-Saiz L, Rodríguez-Matellán A, Avila J. Differences between human and murine Tau at the N-terminal end. Front Aging Neurosci. 2020;12.
Wang Y, Mandelkow E. Tau in physiology and pathology. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2016.
Pérez M, Cuadros R, Medina M. Tau Assembly into Filaments. 2018; 447–61.
Hyperphosphorylated Tau (p-tau) and drug discovery in the context of alzheimer’s disease and related Tauopathies
The natively unfolded character of Tau and its aggregation to Alzheimer-like paired helical filaments
Yarza R, Vela S, Solas M, Ramirez MJ. c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling as a therapeutic target for alzheimer’s disease. Front Pharmacol. 2016;6.
Truncation and activation of GSK-3β by Calpain I: a molecular mechanism links to Tau hyperphosphorylation in alzheimer’s disease
Conversion of p35 to p25 deregulates Cdk5 activity and promotes neurodegeneration
Xia D, Li C, Götz J. Pseudophosphorylation of tau at distinct epitopes or the presence of the P301L mutation targets the microtubule-associated protein tau to dendritic spines. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2015;1852(5):913–924
Tau mislocalization to dendritic spines mediates synaptic dysfunction independently of neurodegeneration
In vivo hyperphosphorylation of Tau is associated with synaptic loss and behavioral abnormalities in the absence of Tau seeds
The potential clinical value of plasma biomarkers in alzheimer’s disease
The validation status of blood biomarkers of amyloid and phospho-tau assessed with the 5-phase development framework for AD biomarkers
Phospho-tau serine-262 and serine-356 as biomarkers of pre-tangle soluble Tau assemblies in alzheimer’s disease
Gonzalez-Ortiz F, Vávra J, Payne E, Kirsebom B-E, Sjöbom U, Santos C, et al. The potential dual role of Tau phosphorylation: plasma phosphorylated-tau217 in newborns and alzheimer’s disease. Brain Commun. 2025;7(3).
Reversible Tau hyperphosphorylation in hibernation: a blood biomarker and brain tissue study
Acetylation of Tau inhibits its degradation and contributes to tauopathy
Tau-driven 26S proteasome impairment and cognitive dysfunction can be prevented early in disease by activating cAMP-PKA signaling
Lysine 63-linked ubiquitination of Tau oligomers contributes to the pathogenesis of alzheimer’s disease
Specific post-translational modifications of soluble Tau protein distinguishes alzheimer’s disease and primary Tauopathies
Barthélemy NR, Mallipeddi N, Moiseyev P, Sato C, Bateman RJ. Tau phosphorylation rates measured by mass spectrometry differ in the intracellular brain vs. Extracellular cerebrospinal fluid compartments and are differentially affected by alzheimer’s disease. Front Aging Neurosci. 2019;11.
Barthélemy NR, Horie K, Sato C, Bateman RJ. Blood plasma phosphorylated-tau isoforms track CNS change in Alzheimer’s disease. J Exp Med. 2020;217(11).
Plasma p-tau231 and p-tau217 as state markers of amyloid-β pathology in preclinical alzheimer’s disease
Tau PTM profiles identify patient heterogeneity and stages of alzheimer’s disease
Cryo-EM structures of Tau filaments from alzheimer’s disease
Tau-targeting therapies for alzheimer disease: current status and future directions
Alquezar C, Arya S, Kao AW. Tau post-translational modifications: dynamic transformers of tau function, degradation, and aggregation. Front Neurol. 2021;11.
Phosphorylation and O-GlcNAcylation of the PHF-1 epitope of Tau protein induce local conformational changes of the C-Terminus and modulate Tau Self-Assembly into fibrillar aggregates
Caspase-2 cleavage of Tau reversibly impairs memory
Tau cleavage and dephosphorylation in cerebellar granule neurons undergoing apoptosis
The generation of a 17 kDa neurotoxic fragment: an alternative mechanism by which Tau mediates β-Amyloid-Induced neurodegeneration
Human high temperature requirement Serine protease A1 (HTRA1) degrades Tau protein aggregates
Cytosolic proteolysis of τ by cathepsin D in hippocampus following suppression of cathepsins B and L
CryoET of β-amyloid and Tau within postmortem alzheimer’s disease brain
CSF MTBR-tau243 is a specific biomarker of Tau tangle pathology in alzheimer’s disease
Plasma MTBR-tau243 biomarker identifies Tau tangle pathology in alzheimer’s disease
Pre-clinical characterisation of E2814, a high-affinity antibody targeting the microtubule-binding repeat domain of Tau for passive immunotherapy in alzheimer’s disease
Biochemical classification of Tauopathies by immunoblot, protein sequence and mass spectrometric analyses of sarkosyl-insoluble and trypsin-resistant Tau
Structure-based classification of tauopathies
Lathuiliere A, Hyman BT. Quantitative methods for the detection of Tau seeding activity in human biofluids. Front Neurosci. 2021;15.
Transmission and spreading of tauopathy in Transgenic mouse brain
Synthetic Tau fibrils mediate transmission of neurofibrillary tangles in a Transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer’s-Like tauopathy
Unique pathological Tau conformers from alzheimer’s brains transmit Tau pathology in nontransgenic mice
Tau seeds from alzheimer’s disease brains trigger Tau spread in macaques while oligomeric-Aβ mediates pathology maturation
DeVos SL, Corjuc BT, Oakley DH, Nobuhara CK, Bannon RN, Chase A, et al. Synaptic tau seeding precedes tau pathology in human alzheimer’s disease brain. Front Neurosci. 2018;12.
Synaptic degeneration in alzheimer disease
Physical basis of cognitive alterations in alzheimer’s disease: synapse loss is the major correlate of cognitive impairment
Synapse loss in frontal cortex biopsies in alzheimer’s disease: correlation with cognitive severity
Extracellular low-n oligomers of Tau cause selective synaptotoxicity without affecting cell viability
Robbins M, Clayton E, Kaminski Schierle GS. Synaptic tau: a pathological or physiological phenomenon? Acta Neuropathol Commun BioMed Cent Ltd. 2021;9(1).
Tau protein is required for amyloid β-induced impairment of hippocampal long-term potentiation
Tau-induced defects in synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory are reversible in Transgenic mice after switching off the toxic Tau mutant
Schindowski K, Bretteville A, Leroy K, Bégard S, Brion JP, Hamdane M et al. Alzheimer’s disease-like tau neuropathology leads to memory deficits and loss of functional synapses in a novel mutated tau transgenic mouse without any motor deficits. Am J Pathol. 2006;169(2):599–616.
Regan P, Whitcomb DJ, Cho K. Physiological and pathophysiological implications of synaptic tau. Neuroscientist. 2017;23(2):137–151.
Age-dependent neurofibrillary tangle formation, neuron loss, and memory impairment in a mouse model of human tauopathy (P301L)
Synaptogyrin-3 mediates presynaptic dysfunction induced by Tau
Extracellular Tau promotes intracellular calcium increase through M1 and M3 muscarinic receptors in neuronal cells
Zhou L, McInnes J, Wierda K, Holt M, Herrmann AG, Jackson RJ, et al. Tau association with synaptic vesicles causes presynaptic dysfunction. Nat Commun. 2017;8:15295
Colom-Cadena M, Davies C, Sirisi S, Lee JE, Simzer E, Tzioras M, et al. Synaptic oligomeric tau in Alzheimer’s disease—a potential culprit in the spread of tau pathology through the brain. Neuron. 2023;111(14):2170–83 Available from: 10.1101/2023.03.15.23287268
Necroptosis activation in alzheimer’s disease
Balusu S, Horré K, Thrupp N, Craessaerts K, Snellinx A, Serneels L, et al. MEG3 activates necroptosis in human neuron xenografts modeling Alzheimer’s disease. Science. 2023;381:1176–82. Available from: https://www.science.org
Dong Y, Yu H, Li X, Bian K, Zheng Y, Dai M, et al. Hyperphosphorylated tau mediates neuronal death by inducing necroptosis and inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. J Neuroinflammation. 2022;19(1):1–15.
Ameliorative effect of necrosulfonamide in a rat model of alzheimer’s disease: targeting mixed lineage kinase Domain-like Protein-Mediated necroptosis
Zhang R, Song Y, Su X. Necroptosis and Alzheimer’s disease: pathogenic mechanisms and therapeutic opportunities. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;94(S1):S367–86.
All the Tau we cannot see
Neuronal loss correlates with but exceeds neurofibrillary tangles in alzheimer’s disease
Dissecting phenotypic traits linked to human resilience to alzheimer’s pathology
Seed-competent high‐molecular‐weight Tau species accumulates in the cerebrospinal fluid of alzheimer’s disease mouse model and human patients
Kim C, Haldiman T, Kang SG, Hromadkova L, Han ZZ, Chen W, et al. Distinct populations of highly potent TAU seed conformers in rapidly progressing Alzheimer’s disease. Sci Transl Med. 2022;14(626):eabn1118.
A multifactorial model of pathology for age of onset heterogeneity in Familial alzheimer’s disease
Kinney JW, Bemiller SM, Murtishaw AS, Leisgang AM, Salazar AM, Lamb BT. Inflammation as a central mechanism in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement (N Y). 2018;4:575–90.
Chen Y, Yu Y. Tau and neuroinflammation in alzheimer’s disease: interplay mechanisms and clinical translation. J Neuroinflammation BioMed Cent Ltd. 2023;20(165).
A unique microglia type associated with restricting development of alzheimer’s disease
Fan Z, Brooks DJ, Okello A, Edison P. An early and late peak in microglial activation in Alzheimer’s disease trajectory. Brain. 2017;140:aww349
Distinct dynamic profiles of microglial activation are associated with progression of alzheimer’s disease
Early and protective microglial activation in alzheimer’s disease: a prospective study using F-DPA-714 PET imaging
Dani M, Wood M, Mizoguchi R, Fan Z, Walker Z, Morgan R, et al. Microglial activation correlates in vivo with both Tau and amyloid in alzheimer’s disease. Brain. 2018.
Feng W, Zhang Y, Wang Z, Xu H, Wu T, Marshall C, et al. Microglia prevent beta-Amyloid plaque formation in the early stage of an alzheimer’s disease mouse model with suppression of glymphatic clearance. Alzheimers Res Ther BioMed Cent Ltd. 2020;12(1).
Brelstaff JH, Mason M, Katsinelos T, Mcewan WA, Ghetti B, Tolkovsky AM, et al. Microglia become hypofunctional and release metalloproteases and tau seeds when phagocytosing live neurons with P301S tau aggregates. Sci. Adv [Internet]. 2021;7. Available from: https://www.science.org
Neuroinflammation and microglial activation in alzheimer disease: where do we go from here?
Expression of Tau40 induces activation of cultured rat microglial cells
Wang W-Y, Tan M-S, Yu J-T, Tan L. Role of pro-inflammatory cytokines released from microglia in alzheimer’s disease. Ann Transl Med. 2015;3(10).
Regulation of Tau pathology by the microglial fractalkine receptor
Absence of CX3CR1 impairs the internalization of Tau by microglia
Reactive microglia drive Tau pathology and contribute to the spreading of pathological Tau in the brain
TREM2 function impedes Tau seeding in neuritic plaques
Synergy between amyloid-β and Tau in alzheimer’s disease
LRP1 is a master regulator of Tau uptake and spread
Depletion of microglia and Inhibition of exosome synthesis halt Tau propagation
Plaque associated microglia hyper-secrete extracellular vesicles and accelerate Tau propagation in a humanized APP mouse model
Caballero B, Bourdenx M, Luengo E, Diaz A, Sohn PD, Chen X, et al. Acetylated Tau inhibits chaperone-mediated autophagy and promotes Tau pathology propagation in mice. Nat Commun Nat Res. 2021;12(1).
Chaperone-mediated autophagy: molecular mechanisms and physiological relevance
Tau degradation: the ubiquitin–proteasome system versus the autophagy-lysosome system
The ubiquitin proteasome system in neurodegenerative diseases: Culprit, accomplice or victim?
Proteasome-caspase-cathepsin sequence leading to Tau pathology induced by prostaglandin J2 in neuronal cells
Relationship between Tau pathology and neuroinflammation in alzheimer’s disease
The coming of age of chaperone-mediated autophagy
Tau fragmentation, aggregation and clearance: the dual role of lysosomal processing
Acetylated Tau neuropathology in sporadic and hereditary Tauopathies
Critical role of acetylation in tau-mediated neurodegeneration and cognitive deficits
P62 accumulates through neuroanatomical circuits in response to tauopathy propagation
Homeostatic levels of p62 control cytoplasmic inclusion body formation in Autophagy-Deficient mice
Generation and characterization of novel monoclonal antibodies targeting p62/sequestosome-1 across human neurodegenerative diseases
Monitoring and measuring autophagy
Sun M, Chen Z. Unveiling the complex role of exosomes in alzheimer’s disease. J Inflamm Res. 2024;17:3921–48.
Sato C, Barthélemy NR, Mawuenyega KG, Patterson BW, Gordon BA, Jockel-Balsarotti J, et al. Tau kinetics in neurons and the human central nervous system. Neuron Cell. 2018;97(6):1284–e12987.
Alzheimer’s disease: the amyloid cascade hypothesis
The molecular pathology of alzheimer’s disease
Wischik CM, Edwards PC, Lai RY, Roth M, Harrington CR. Selective inhibition of Alzheimer disease-like tau aggregation by phenothiazines. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996;93(20):11213–8.
Mukadam AS, Miller LVC, Smith AE, Vaysburd M, Sakya SA, Sanford S, et al. Cytosolic antibody receptor TRIM21 is required for effective tau immunotherapy in mouse models. Science (1979). 2023;379(6639):1336–41.
Farley J, Haines JD, Gannon S, Nguyen T, Abbott S, Darcy J, et al. An investigational RNAi therapeutic for tau lowering. Alzheimer’s & Dementia. 2023;19:S21.
Cummings JL, Zhou Y, Lee G, Zhong K, Fonseca J, Leisgang-Osse AM et al. Alzheimer’s disease drug development pipeline: 2025. Alzheimer’s & Dementia: Translational Research & Clinical Interventions. 2025; 11(2).
VandeVrede L, Boxer AL, Polydoro M. Targeting tau: clinical trials and novel therapeutic approaches. Neurosci Lett. 2020;731:134993.
Antisense oligonucleotides: the next frontier for treatment of neurological disorders
Nusinersen versus Sham control in Infantile-Onset spinal muscular atrophy
DeVos SL, Miller RL, Schoch KM, Holmes BB, Kebodeaux CS, Wegener AJ, et al. Tau reduction prevents neuronal loss and reverses pathological tau deposition and seeding in mice with tauopathy. Sci Transl Med. 2017;9(374):eaal5065.
Tau suppression in a neurodegenerative mouse model improves memory function
Correcting Tau isoform ratios with a long-acting antisense oligonucleotide alleviates 4R-tauopathy phenotypes
SILK studies — capturing the turnover of proteins linked to neurodegenerative diseases
Self WK, Schoch KM, Alex J, Barthélemy N, Bollinger JG, Sato C, et al. Protein production is an early biomarker for RNA-targeted therapies. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2018;5(12):1492–504.
Alzforum. BIIB080. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/biib080. 2024.
Bullain S. Tau-targeting therapeutics: the next frontier in disease-modifying treatments for Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Association International Conference. 2025.
A walk through Tau therapeutic strategies
First-in-man Tau vaccine targeting structural determinants essential for pathological Tau–tau interaction reduces Tau oligomerisation and neurofibrillary degeneration in an alzheimer’s disease model
Theunis C, Crespo-Biel N, Gafner V, Pihlgren M, López-Deber MP, Reis P et al. Efficacy and safety of a liposome-based vaccine against protein Tau, assessed in Tau.P301L mice that model tauopathy. PLoS One Public Libr Sci. 2013;8(8).
Immune AC. AC immune’s targeted anti-PTau active immunotherapy for alzheimer’s disease advances into phase 2b trial [Internet]. 2023 [cited 2025 Dec 10]. Available from: https://ir.acimmune.com/news-releases/news-release-details/ac-immunes-targeted-anti-ptau-active-immunotherapy-alzheimers
Development of an anti-tauopathy mucosal vaccine specifically targeting pathologic conformers
Efficacy and safety of immunization with phosphorylated Tau against neurofibrillary tangles in mice
Alzforum. Two new stabs at vaccinating people against pathologic tau. 2022.https://www.alzforum.org/news/conference-coverage/two-new-stabs-vaccinating-people-against-pathologic-tau.
Gu H, Dodel R, Farlow M, Du Y. Advances in the development of antibody-based immunotherapy against prion disease. Antib Technol J. 2014;45.
Active immunotherapy options for alzheimer’s disease
Safety and immunogenicity of the Tau vaccine AADvac1 in patients with alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1 trial
FUNDAMANT: an interventional 72-week phase 1 follow-up study of AADvac1, an active immunotherapy against Tau protein pathology in alzheimer’s disease
Cullen NC, Novak P, Tosun D, Kovacech B, Hanes J, Kontsekova E, et al. Efficacy assessment of an active tau immunotherapy in alzheimer’s disease patients with amyloid and Tau pathology: a post hoc analysis of the ADAMANT randomised, placebo-controlled, double-blind, multi-centre, phase 2 clinical trial. EBioMedicine. 2024;99.
Alzforum. AADvac1 [Internet]. 2023 [cited 2025 Jul 31]. Available from: https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/aadvac1
Sequence-independent control of peptide conformation in liposomal vaccines for targeting protein misfolding diseases
Alzforum, ACI-35. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/aci-35. 2024.
clinicaltrials.gov. A Study of JNJ-64042056 in Participants With Preclinical Alzheimer’s Disease (Reτain) [Internet]. 2025 [cited 2025 Jul 31]. Available from: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06544616
Safety and efficacy of semorinemab in individuals with prodromal to mild alzheimer disease: A randomized clinical trial
Mechanisms of Cell-to-Cell transmission of pathological Tau
Alzforum, JNJ-63733657. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/jnj-63733657 [Internet]. 2022. Available from: https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/jnj-63733657
Alzforum. Bepranemab. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/bepranemab [Internet]. 2025. Available from: https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/bepranemab
Alzforum. Semorinemab. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/semorinemab [Internet]. 2024. Available from: https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/semorinemab
Alzforum, Finally. Therapeutic Antibodies Start to Reduce Tangles. 2024.https://www.alzforum.org/news/conference-coverage/finally-therapeutic-antibodies-start-reduce-tangles.
Alzforum, Bapineuzumab. 2023.https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/bapineuzumab.
Alzforum, Solanezumab. 2024.https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/solanezumab.
Alzforum, Crenezumab. 2023.https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/crenezumab.
Rawal S, Wildsmith KR, Aluri J, Yagi T, Chang M-K, Niu H, et al. An anti-tau therapeutic antibody Etalanetug (E2814). Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2025.
Alzforum. CSF MTBR-tau-243 Tracks Tangles, Plummets in Response to Antibody. 2023.https://www.alzforum.org/news/conference-coverage/csf-mtbr-tau-243-tracks-tangles-plummets-response-antibody#debut.
clinicaltrials.gov. A Study to Assess Safety and Target Engagement of E2814 in Participants With Mild to Moderate Cognitive Impairment Due to Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer’s Disease [Internet]. 2025 [cited 2025 Jul 31]. Available from: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04971733?intr=E2814&rank=2
clinicaltrials.gov. Dominantly Inherited Alzheimer Network Trial: An Opportunity to Prevent Dementia. A Study of Potential Disease Modifying Treatments in Individuals With a Type of Early Onset Alzheimer’s Disease Caused by a Genetic Mutation (DIAN-TU) (DIAN-TU) [Internet]. 2025 [cited 2025 Jul 31]. Available from: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT05269394
Sontag J-M, Sontag E. Protein phosphatase 2A dysfunction in alzheimer’s disease. Front Mol Neurosci. 2014;7.
Protein phosphatase 2A and tau: an orchestrated ‘Pas de deux’
Sodium selenate as a disease-modifying treatment for mild–moderate alzheimer’s disease: an open-label extension study
A phase IIa randomized control trial of VEL015 (Sodium Selenate) in Mild-Moderate alzheimer’s disease
Sodium selenate specifically activates PP2A phosphatase, dephosphorylates Tau and reverses memory deficits in an alzheimer’s disease model
van Eersel J, Ke YD, Liu X, Delerue F, Kril JJ, Götz J, et al. Sodium selenate mitigates tau pathology, neurodegeneration, and functional deficits in Alzheimer’s disease models. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2010;107(31):13888–93.
LiCl attenuates Thapsigargin-Induced Tau hyperphosphorylation by inhibiting GSK-3β in vivo and in vitro
Duthie A, van Aalten L, MacDonald C, McNeilly A, Gallagher J, Geddes J, et al. Recruitment, Retainment, and biomarkers of Response; A pilot trial of lithium in humans with mild cognitive impairment. Front Mol Neurosci. 2019; 12.
A phase II trial of Tideglusib in alzheimer’s disease
Reducing acetylated Tau is neuroprotective in brain injury
Open-Label phase 1 futility studies of Salsalate and young plasma in progressive supranuclear palsy
ClinicalTrials.gov. Salsalate in Patients Mild to Moderate Alzheimer’s Disease (SAL-AD). https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT03277573. 2021.
University of California San Francisco. Alzheimer’s Disease Trial of Salsalate. https://memory.ucsf.edu/research-trials/clinical-trials/alzheimer-disease-trial-salsalate [Internet]. [cited 2025 Dec 10]. Available from: https://memory.ucsf.edu/research-trials/clinical-trials/alzheimer-disease-trial-salsalate
Minocycline reduces the development of abnormal Tau species in models of alzheimer’s disease
Pre-symptomatic Caspase-1 inhibitor delays cognitive decline in a mouse model of alzheimer disease and aging
Caspase-1 Inhibition alleviates cognitive impairment and neuropathology in an alzheimer’s disease mouse model
Minocycline at 2 different dosages vs placebo for patients with mild alzheimer disease
TPI-287, a new taxane family Member, reduces the brain metastatic colonization of breast cancer cells
Reactions to multiple ascending doses of the microtubule stabilizer TPI-287 in patients with alzheimer Disease, progressive supranuclear Palsy, and corticobasal syndrome
O-GlcNAcylation regulates phosphorylation of tau: A mechanism involved in alzheimer’s disease
Alzforum, ASN51. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/asn51 [Internet]. 2023. Available from: https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/asn51
Alzforum. LY3372689. https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/ly3372689. 2022.
Increasing O-GlcNAc slows neurodegeneration and stabilizes Tau against aggregation
Increased O-GlcNAcylation reduces pathological Tau without affecting its normal phosphorylation in a mouse model of Tauopathy
Inhibition of O-GlcNAcase leads to elevation of O-GlcNAc Tau and reduction of Tauopathy and cerebrospinal fluid Tau in rTg4510 mice
Melis V, Magbagbeolu M, Rickard JE, Horsley D, Davidson K, Harrington KA, et al. Effects of oxidized and reduced forms of methylthioninium in two Transgenic mouse tauopathy models. Behavioural Pharmacology. Lippincott Williams and Wilkins; 2015;26(4):353–68.
Wischik CM, Bentham P, Gauthier S, Miller S, Kook K, Schelter BO. Oral tau aggregation inhibitor for Alzheimer’s disease: design, progress and basis for selection of the 16 mg/day dose in a phase 3, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of hydromethylthionine mesylate. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2022;9:780–90
Cysteine-Independent Inhibition of alzheimer’s Disease-like paired helical filament assembly by Leuco-Methylthioninium (LMT)
Harrington CR, Storey JMD, Clunas S, Harrington KA, Horsley D, Ishaq A, et al. Cellular models of aggregation-dependent template-directed proteolysis to characterize tau aggregation inhibitors for treatment of Alzheimer disease. J Biol Chem. 2015;290(17):10862–75.
Efficacy and safety of tau-aggregation inhibitor therapy in patients with mild or moderate alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, controlled, double-blind, parallel-arm, phase 3 trial. The lancet
Wilcock GK, Gauthier S, Frisoni GB, Jia J, Hardlund JH, Moebius HJ, et al. Potential of low dose leuco-methylthioninium bis(hydromethanesulphonate) (LMTM) monotherapy for treatment of mild Alzheimer’s disease: cohort analysis as modified primary outcome in a phase III clinical trial. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;61:435–57.
Concentration-Dependent activity of hydromethylthionine on cognitive decline and brain atrophy in mild to moderate alzheimer’s disease
Clinical Trials Arena. TauRx reports prespecified analysis results from AD therapy trial. https://www.clinicaltrialsarena.com/news/taurx-prespecified-analysis-ad-therapy/ [Internet]. 2023 [cited 2025 Dec 10]. Available from: https://www.clinicaltrialsarena.com/news/taurx-prespecified-analysis-ad-therapy/
Alzforum. HMTM [Internet]. 2024 [cited 2025 Jul 3]. Available from: https://www.alzforum.org/therapeutics/hmtm
Aducanumab and its effects on Tau pathology: is this the turning point of amyloid hypothesis?
Association of amyloid reduction after Donanemab treatment with Tau pathology and clinical outcomes
Lecanemab in early alzheimer’s disease
Charil A, Cao Y, Willis BA, Hersch S, Irizarry MC, Reyderman L. Lecanemab Slows Tau PET Accumulation. Alzheimer’s & Dementia. 2024; 20(S6).
Charil ADSIMKLRL. Treatment with lecanemab disrupts tau accumulation across brain regions in early Alzheimer’s disease. AD/PD International Conference. Lisbon; 2024.
Cummings JL, Teunissen CE, Fiske BK, Ber I, Le, Wildsmith KR, Schöll M, et al. Biomarker-guided decision making in clinical drug development for neurodegenerative disorders. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2025.
Adams JN, Lockhart SN, Li L, Jagust WJ. Relationships between tau and glucose metabolism reflect Alzheimer’s disease pathology in cognitively normal older adults. Cereb Cortex. 2019;29:1997–2009.
Entorhinal Tau pathology, episodic memory decline, and neurodegeneration in aging
Hanseeuw BJ, Betensky RA, Schultz AP, Papp KV, Mormino EC, Sepulcre J, et al. Fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism associated with tau-amyloid interaction predicts memory decline. Ann Neurol. 2017;81(4):583–96.
Ossenkoppele R, Smith R, Ohlsson T, Strandberg O, Mattsson N, Insel PS, et al. Associations between tau, Aβ, and cortical thickness with cognition in Alzheimer disease. Neurology. 2019;92:e601–12.
Aschenbrenner AJ, Gordon BA, Benzinger TLS, Morris JC, Hassenstab JJ. Influence of tau PET, amyloid PET, and hippocampal volume on cognition in Alzheimer disease. Neurology. 2018;91:e859–66.
Discriminative accuracy of [F]flortaucipir positron emission tomography for alzheimer disease vs other neurodegenerative disorders
Vogels T, Leuzy A, Cicognola C, Ashton NJ, Smolek T, Novak M, et al. Propagation of tau pathology: integrating insights from postmortem and in vivo studies. Biol Psychiatry. 2020.
Chien DT, Bahri S, Szardenings AK, Walsh JC, Mu F, Su MY, et al. Early clinical PET imaging results with the novel PHF-tau radioligand [F-18]-T807. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;34:457–68.
Imaging in-vivo Tau pathology in alzheimer’s disease with THK5317 PET in a multimodal paradigm
Lockhart SN, Baker SL, Okamura N, Furukawa K, Ishiki A, Furumoto S et al. Dynamic PET measures of tau accumulation in cognitively normal older adults and alzheimer’s disease patients measured using [18F] THK-5351. PLoS One Public Libr Sci. 2016;11(6).
Bischof GN, Endepols H, van Eimeren T, Drzezga A. Tau-imaging in neurodegeneration. Methods. 2017;130:114–23.
Marquié M, Normandin MD, Vanderburg CR, Costantino IM, Bien EA, Rycyna LG, et al. Validating novel tau positron emission tomography tracer [F-18]-AV-1451 (T807) on postmortem brain tissue. Ann Neurol. 2015;78(5):787–800.
18F-PI-2620 Tau PET improves the imaging diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy
Binding characteristics of [18F]PI-2620 distinguish the clinically predicted Tau isoform in different Tauopathies by PET
Tau PET in alzheimer disease and mild cognitive impairment
PET imaging of Tau deposition in the aging human brain
Frequency and clinical outcomes associated with Tau positron emission tomography positivity
Imaging Tau pathology in alzheimer’s disease with positron emission tomography: lessons learned from imaging-neuropathology validation studies
Positron emission tomography imaging with [F]flortaucipir and postmortem assessment of alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes
Harada R, Okamura N, Furumoto S, Tago T, Yanai K, Arai H, et al. Characteristics of tau and its ligands in PET imaging. Biomolecules. 2016;6:2–15.
Lowe VJ, Curran G, Fang P, Liesinger AM, Josephs KA, Parisi JE, et al. An autoradiographic evaluation of AV-1451 Tau PET in dementia. Acta Neuropathol Commun BioMed Cent Ltd. 2016;4(1).
Biomarkers for Tau pathology
In vivo characterization and quantification of neurofibrillary Tau PET radioligand 18 F-MK-6240 in humans from alzheimer disease dementia to young controls
Preclinical evaluation of 18F-RO6958948, 11 C-RO6931643, and 11 C-RO6924963 as novel PET radiotracers for imaging Tau aggregates in alzheimer disease
Mueller A, Bullich S, Barret O, Madonia J, Berndt M, Papin C, et al. Tau PET imaging with 18-F-PI-2620 in patients with Alzheimer disease and healthy controls: a first-in-humans study. J Nucl Med. 2020;61(6):911–9. Available from: http://jnm.snmjournals.org/lookup/doi/10.2967/jnumed.119.236224
Baseline [18F]GTP1 Tau PET imaging is associated with subsequent cognitive decline in alzheimer’s disease
Lussier FZ, Povala G, Bauer-Negrini G, Amaral L, Cehula J, Fine DJ, et al. Longitudinal multicenter head‐to‐head harmonization of tau‐PET tracers: an overview of the HEAD study cohort. Alzheimer’s Dement. 2024;20(S9).
Harmonizing Tau positron emission tomography in alzheimer’s disease: the centaur scale and the joint propagation model
PetBrain: a new pipeline for amyloid, Tau tangles and neurodegeneration quantification using PET and MRI
Mielke MM, Hagen CE, Xu J, Chai X, Vemuri P, Lowe VJ, et al. Plasma phospho-tau181 increases with Alzheimer’s disease clinical severity and is associated with tau-PET and amyloid-PET. Alzheimers Dement. 2018;14:989–97.
Longitudinal change in CSF Tau and Aβ biomarkers for up to 48 months in ADNI
Longitudinal cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers over four years in mild cognitive impairment
CSF and blood biomarkers for the diagnosis of alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Head‐to‐head comparison of clinical performance of CSF phospho‐tau T181 and T217 biomarkers for alzheimer’s disease diagnosis
Cerebrospinal fluid biomarker signature in alzheimer’s disease neuroimaging initiative subjects
Anoop A, Singh PK, Jacob RS, Maji SK. CSF Biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease diagnosis. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;2010:1–12.
Plasma phospho-tau in alzheimer’s disease: towards diagnostic and therapeutic trial applications
CSF biomarkers and plasma p‐tau181 as predictors of longitudinal Tau accumulation: implications for clinical trial design
Mattsson-Carlgren N, Janelidze S, Bateman RJ, Smith R, Stomrud E, Serrano GE, et al. Soluble P‐tau217 reflects amyloid and Tau pathology and mediates the association of amyloid with Tau. EMBO Mol Med. 2021;13(6).
Interneuronal transfer of human Tau between lamprey central neurons in situ
Constitutive secretion of Tau protein by an unconventional mechanism
Mechanisms of regulated unconventional protein secretion
Zhang H, Cao Y, Ma L, Wei Y, Li H. Possible mechanisms of tau spread and toxicity in Alzheimer’s disease. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2021;9.
Tau proteins of alzheimer paired helical filaments: abnormal phosphorylation of all six brain isoforms
Tau protein isoforms, phosphorylation and role in neurodegenerative disorders11These authors contributed equally to this work
The presence of select Tau species in human peripheral tissues and their relation to alzheimer’s disease
Distribution of big Tau in the central nervous system of the adult and developing rat
N-terminal and mid-region Tau fragments as fluid biomarkers in neurological diseases
Elecsys® Total-Tau and Phospho-Tau (181P) CSF assays: analytical performance of the novel, fully automated immunoassays for quantification of Tau proteins in human cerebrospinal fluid
Clinical validation of the lumipulse G cerebrospinal fluid assays for routine diagnosis of alzheimer’s disease
A/T/N: an unbiased descriptive classification scheme for alzheimer disease biomarkers
Bjorkli C, Sandvig A, Sandvig I. Bridging the gap between fluid biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease, model systems, and patients. Front Aging Neurosci. 2020;12.
CSF markers for incipient alzheimer’s disease
Total and phosphorylated Tau protein as biological markers of alzheimer’s disease
Cerebrospinal fluid Tau and amyloid-β1–42 in patients with dementia
Four subgroups based on Tau levels in alzheimer’s disease observed in two independent cohorts
CSF biomarkers for alzheimer’s disease: levels of β-Amyloid, Tau, phosphorylated Tau relate to clinical symptoms and survival
Revised criteria for diagnosis and staging of alzheimer’s disease: alzheimer’s association workgroup
Cerebrospinal fluid profile in frontotemporal dementia and alzheimer’s disease
CSF biomarkers in frontotemporal Lobar degeneration with known pathology
Hypothetical model of dynamic biomarkers of the alzheimer’s pathological cascade
Extracellular Tau levels are influenced by variability in Tau that is associated with Tauopathies
Neuronal activity regulates extracellular Tau in vivo
Janelidze S, Stomrud E, Smith R, Palmqvist S, Mattsson N, Airey DC, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid p-tau217 performs better than p-tau181 as a biomarker of alzheimer’s disease. Nat Commun Nat Res. 2020;11(1).
Zetterberg H, Review. Tau in biofluids – relation to pathology, imaging and clinical features. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2017;43:194–9.
Radanovic M, Oshiro CA, Freitas TQ, Talib LL, Forlenza OV. Correlation between CSF biomarkers of Alzheimer’s disease and global cognition in a psychogeriatric clinic cohort. Brazilian Journal of Psychiatry [Internet]. 2019;41(6):479–84. Available from: 10.1590/1516-
Hanes J, Kovac A, Kvartsberg H, Kontsekova E, Fialova L, Katina S, et al. Evaluation of a novel immunoassay to detect p-tau Thr217 in the CSF to distinguish Alzheimer disease from other dementias. Neurology. 2020;95(22).
Leuzy A, Janelidze S, Mattsson-Carlgren N, Palmqvist S, Jacobs D, Cicognola C, et al. Comparing the clinical utility and diagnostic performance of CSF P-Tau181, P-Tau217, and P-Tau231 assays. Neurology. 2021;97(17).
Site-Specific cerebrospinal fluid Tau hyperphosphorylation in response to alzheimer’s disease brain pathology: not all Tau Phospho-Sites are hyperphosphorylated
CSF phosphorylated Tau protein correlates with neocortical neurofibrillary pathology in alzheimer’s disease
Salvadó G, Ossenkoppele R, Ashton NJ, Beach TG, Serrano GE, Reiman EM, et al. Specific associations between plasma biomarkers and postmortem amyloid plaque and Tau tangle loads. EMBO Mol Med. 2023;15(5).
Plasma brain-derived Tau is an amyloid-associated neurodegeneration biomarker in alzheimer’s disease
Seeding selectivity and ultrasensitive detection of Tau aggregate conformers of alzheimer disease
Metrick MA, Ferreira N do, Saijo C, Kraus E, Newell A, Zanusso K. A single ultrasensitive assay for detection and discrimination of Tau aggregates of alzheimer and pick diseases. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2020;8(1):22.
The AD Tau core spontaneously self-assembles and recruits full-length Tau to filaments
RT-QuIC detection of Tauopathies using full-length Tau substrates
Tau seeds occur before earliest alzheimer’s changes and are prevalent across neurodegenerative diseases
Design and application of a Tau seed amplification assay for screening inhibitors of Tau seeding
Hansson O, Edelmayer RM, Boxer AL, Carrillo MC, Mielke MM, Rabinovici GD, et al. The Alzheimer’s Association appropriate use recommendations for blood biomarkers in Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimers Dement. 2022;18:2669–86.
Blood phosphorylated Tau 181 as a biomarker for alzheimer’s disease: a diagnostic performance and prediction modelling study using data from four prospective cohorts
Highly accurate blood test for alzheimer’s disease is similar or superior to clinical cerebrospinal fluid tests
Comparison of plasma and CSF biomarkers in predicting cognitive decline
Plasma and CSF biomarkers in a memory clinic: Head‐to‐head comparison of phosphorylated Tau immunoassays
Zetterberg H, Blennow K. Moving fluid biomarkers for alzheimer’s disease from research tools to routine clinical diagnostics. Mol Neurodegener BioMed Cent Ltd. 2021;16(1).
Palmqvist S, Insel PS, Stomrud E, Janelidze S, Zetterberg H, Brix B, et al. Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma biomarker trajectories with increasing amyloid deposition in alzheimer’s disease. EMBO Mol Med Springer Sci Bus Media LLC. 2019;11(12).
Palmqvist S, Janelidze S, Quiroz YT, Zetterberg H, Lopera F, Stomrud E, et al. Discriminative accuracy of plasma phospho-tau217 for Alzheimer disease vs other neurodegenerative disorders. JAMA. 2020;324(8):772–81.
Plasma phosphorylated Tau 217 and phosphorylated Tau 181 as biomarkers in alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal Lobar degeneration: a retrospective diagnostic performance study
Diagnostic value of plasma phosphorylated tau181 in alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal Lobar degeneration
Angioni D, Delrieu J, Hansson O, Fillit H, Aisen P, Cummings J, et al. Blood biomarkers from research use to clinical practice: what must be done? A report from the EU/US CTAD task force. J Prev Alzheimers Dis. 2022.
Blood phospho-tau in alzheimer disease: analysis, interpretation, and clinical utility
Disease staging of alzheimer’s disease using a CSF-based biomarker model
The accuracy and robustness of plasma biomarker models for amyloid PET positivity
Performance of plasma phosphorylated Tau 181 and 217 in the community
Alzheimer blood biomarkers: practical guidelines for study design, sample collection, processing, biobanking, measurement and result reporting
Microtubule-associated protein Tau in murine kidney: role in podocyte architecture
Tau protein in lung smooth muscle cells
Brain-derived tau: a novel blood-based biomarker for alzheimer’s disease-type neurodegeneration
Yanamandra K, Patel TK, Jiang H, Schindler S, Ulrich JD, Boxer AL, et al. Anti-tau antibody administration increases plasma Tau in transgenic mice and patients with Tauopathy. Sci Transl Med. 2017;9(386).
Quantifying CNS protein production and clearance rates in humans using in vivo stable isotope labeling, immunoprecipitation, and tandem mass spectrometry
Aslanyan A, Mukherjee S, Dulewicz M, Coyle R, He Y, Sato C, et al. In vivo amyloid and Tau metabolism in human brain tissue. Alzheimer’s Dement. 2025;3(20 (1)).
ClinicalTrials.gov. A trial evaluating the effect of NIO752 on Tau synthesis measured by a process known as SILK (NIO-SILK). https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06372821. 2024.
Golde TE, DeKosky ST, Galasko D. Alzheimer’s disease: the right drug, the right time. Science. 2018;362(6420):1250–1.
Sims JR, Zimmer JA, Evans CD, Lu M, Ardayfio P, Sparks JD, et al. Donanemab in early symptomatic Alzheimer disease: the TRAILBLAZER-ALZ 2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2023;330:512–27.
Giovannini J, Smeralda W, Jouanne M, Sopkova-de Oliveira Santos J, Catto M, Voisin-Chiret AS. Tau protein aggregation: key features to improve drug discovery screening. Drug Discovery Today. Elsevier Ltd. 2022.
Safety and efficacy of long-term gantenerumab treatment in dominantly inherited alzheimer’s disease: an open-label extension of the phase 2/3 multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled platform DIAN-TU trial
Eisai. First subject enrolled in phase II/III study of Eisai’s anti-MTBR tau antibody E2814 for dominantly inherited Alzheimer’s disease (DIAD), conducted by DIAN-TU. 2022.
clinicaltrials.gov. A Study of E2814 With Concurrent Lecanemab Treatment in Participants With Early Alzheimer’s Disease [Internet]. 2025 [cited 2025 Jul 31]. Available from: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06602258?intr=E2814&rank=4
Barker SJ, Thayer MB, Kim C, Tatarakis D, Simon MJ, Dial R, et al. Targeting the transferrin receptor to transport antisense oligonucleotides across the mammalian blood-brain barrier. Sci Transl Med. 2024;16(760).
Sandusky-Beltran LA, Sigurdsson EM. Tau immunotherapies: lessons learned, current status and future considerations. Neuropharmacology. Elsevier Ltd. 2020.