Nanocarrier-mediated CRISPR-Cas delivery: a novel approach against antibiotic-resistant superbugs
Antibiotic resistance (ABR) is a leading cause of death and a major public health threat globally. Without appropriate interventions, annual ABR-associated deaths have been projected to reach 10 million by 2050 worldwide. Hence, it is critical to develop novel therapeutic interventions that would be able to tackle ABR by targeting mainly the pathogenic microbes, while lessening harm to beneficial microbes. There is an increasing research interest in CRISPR-Cas (CC) systems owing to their potential in controlling and preventing horizontal gene transfer and spread of antibiotic resistance. In addition, CC systems offer several advantages, including high efficiency, rapid turnaround time, low cost, and easy design, which allow these systems to effectively and precisely target antibiotic-resistant bacteria. CRISPR-based gene therapy offers numerous benefits; however, the major limitation in clinical translation is the safe and effective delivery of CRISPR components to target organs or cells, thus hindering its potential in therapeutic interventions. Nanocarriers (NCs) can help the CC systems to overcome their off-target effects by precisely delivering the systems to the target cells. NCs can also be engineered for target site release, payload protection, and high specificity, which can further ensure delivery of the components of CC in the target cells or regions without harming surrounding tissues. This review summarizes the principles and mechanisms of CC systems, highlights their applications against antibiotic-resistant bacteria, and discusses emerging nanocarrier-based delivery strategies that may enhance the clinical utility of CRISPR-Cas technologies in managing ABR.

Introduction
Antibiotics are widely used in the treatment and prevention of a wide range of bacterial infections (Basheera). The twentieth century has witnessed the discovery and widespread use of antibiotics, which are regarded as a breakthrough in the field of medicine (Annunziato). Nonetheless, a significant portion of antibiotics are either excreted unchanged through urine and feces or as primary metabolites, which then enter the environment via wastewater. Indeed, this contamination is a major concern because of the potential for mediating antibiotic resistance (ABR). Both unintentional and intentional misuse of antibiotics are contributing to the development of ABR. ABR refers to the capacity of bacteria and other microorganisms to withstand the impact of antibiotics that were once effective against them (Richardson). ABR can develop progressively through natural selection due to the misuse or excessive use of antibiotics, which can further result in the development of multidrug-resistant (MDR) microorganisms. MDR microorganisms show resistance against multiple antimicrobials; thus, these antimicrobials fail to treat infections (Basheera).
The World Health Organization (WHO) has recognized ABR as one of the leading public health threats (Walsh et al.). In addition, ABR ranks as the third major cause of death after cardiovascular diseases (Murray et al.). In 2016, the United Nations General Assembly officially recognized the importance of ABR in the high-level meeting, where the member countries committed to developing their national action plans against ABR (Heinzel and Koenig-Archibugi). Unfortunately, despite such efforts, ABR was responsible for 4.95 million deaths worldwide in 2019 alone, where increased levels of clinical burden were reported in low- and middle-income countries (Murray et al.). The global ABR-associated mortality rate is significantly higher than the mortality rate associated with HIV/AIDS (864,000), malaria (643,000), and tuberculosis (1.5 million). It has been projected that annual ABR-associated deaths can reach 10 million globally by 2050 without proper interventions (Tang et al.; Walsh et al.).
Therefore, it is urgent to develop novel therapeutic interventions that would be able to tackle ABR by mainly targeting the pathogenic microbes, while minimizing harm to beneficial microbes. Over the past few decades, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-CRISPR-associated (Cas) system has emerged as a promising technology that offers numerous potential applications (Bikard and Barrangou; Gholamian et al.). The CRISPR-Cas (CC) system is a heritable and adaptive immune system in prokaryotes, where this system mediates immunity to prokaryotes against attacking genetic elements (including plasmids and viruses) by destroying DNA/RNA (Duan et al.). So far, CRISPR-Cas is the only known adaptive immune system in prokaryotes. CRISPR and their associated proteins (Cas) display an adaptive immune system in prokaryotes that memorizes previous infections via integrating short sequences of invading genomes, known as spacers, into the locus (Hille and Charpentier). There is an increasing interest regarding the CRISPR-Cas9 (CC9) system because of its outstanding adaptability and precision, which has revolutionized genome editing. Two fundamental components of CC9 system include the guide RNA (gRNA) and Cas9 protein. Cas9 functions as a molecular scissor and cleave the DNA at predetermined target areas, guided by the gRNA, which subsequently aligns with the target DNA sequence (Aljabali et al.).
CC involves 3 main stages, including adaptation, biogenesis of CRISPR RNA (crRNA), and target interference (Nussenzweig and Marraffini). Depending on their differences in the complexity of effecter modules, the CC system can be grouped into two different classes (class 1 and class 2) (Makarova et al.). Class 1 system (type-I, -III, and -IV) involves systems with multi-subunit effector complexes accompanied by an extra Cas nuclease to exterminate the target nucleic acids, where the class 2 system (type-II, -V, and -VI) utilizes single multi-domain effectors to abolish targets. Indeed, the CC system has revolutionized gene editing as it offers great programmability, which allows detection, manipulation, destruction, and annotation of specific nucleic acid sequences in various living organisms (Pickar-Oliver and Gersbach).
CRISPR-based gene therapy offers numerous benefits; however, the major limitation in clinical translation is the safe as well as effective delivery of CRISPR components to target organs or cells, thus hindering its potential in therapeutic interventions (Sioson et al.; Lohia et al.; Taha et al.). In terms of CC system delivery, the potential of various delivery approaches, including viral vectors, physical delivery, and non-viral nanocarriers (NCs), is currently being studied (Gholamian et al.). Physical delivery approaches, including microinjection and electroporation, are highly effective in delivering components of CRISPR into target cells. Nevertheless, physical delivery methods are invasive and necessitate direct manipulation of tissues or cells, which might give rise to damage or trigger immune responses (Lei et al.). Viral delivery approaches, including adeno-associated viruses and lentiviral vectors, can offer stable and effective gene delivery; however, these delivery approaches suffer from several weaknesses, including host genome integration, limited cargo capacity, and potential immune responses (Duan et al.). In contrast, because of the unique physicochemical features of NCs, they can provide protection to genetic materials against degradation, ameliorate cellular uptake, and mediate targeted delivery (Fletcher et al.). Hence, various NC types, including polymeric NCs, metallic NCs, and lipid-based NCs, are currently being studied. In addition, the surface of these NCs can be engineered to ensure effective penetration and delivery of CC9 components directly into the bacteria (Saffari Natanzi et al.). This review discusses various concepts, principles, and mechanisms of CC systems and potential applications of CC against antibiotic-resistant bacteria. In addition, applications of NCs as carriers of CC systems in controlling ABR have also been discussed.

The global challenge of antibiotic resistance
ABR is a global threat to public health and food security. Indeed, the rapid spread and emergence of resistant bacteria have a huge negative impact on the efficiency of antibiotics. WHO reported that ABR results in 700,000 annual deaths and the death rate is estimated to dramatically rise without proper interventions (Saffari Natanzi et al.). ABR can be caused by genetic mutations, or horizontal gene transfer (HGT) can result in the acquisition of ABR genes. The primary ABR mechanism comprises enzymatic modification or degradation, wherein bacteria generate enzymes, including beta-lactamases, that are responsible for deactivating antibiotics, efflux pumps in bacteria that transport antibiotics out of the cell before reaching their therapeutic concentrations, modification of target sites via mutations in bacterial proteins that avert antibiotic binding, and decreased permeability resulting from alterations in the bacterial cell membrane that reduce antibiotic uptake (Hay et al.). A range of factors are responsible for inducing the development and spread of ABR, such as self-medication, misuse as well as overuse of antibiotics, and agricultural usage of antibiotics in livestock for growth promotion and prevention of diseases. ABR is associated with an enormous economic burden because of higher healthcare costs owing to expensive treatments, additional tests, and prolonged hospital stays. Lack of effective antibiotics can further threaten other clinical managements and procedures, including organ transplants, cancer chemotherapy, and surgeries (Dadgostar; Saffari Natanzi et al.).

CRISPR-Cas system
Gene editing is a promising approach that precisely modifies sequences in genomic DNA at a specific target site in numerous organisms and cell types through base deletions, insertions, or substitutions (Li et al.). Gene editing has been revolutionized by the CC system, which is transforming the development of various novel therapies (Gholamian et al.). CC is composed of the genomic locus CRISPR that contains an array of short repetitive elements (repeats) separated by unique sequences (spacers). CRISPR spacers are derived from various foreign invading mobile genetic elements, including plasmids and bacteriophages that had previously presented themselves in the host bacteria (Sen and Mukhopadhyay).

Types of CRISPR-Cas System
Classification of CRISPR-Cas System
The CC system can be categorized into 2 classes and 6 types. Class 1 system includes type-I, -III, and -IV, while the class 2 system involves type-II, -V, and -VI (Shmakov et al.; Liu and Doudna). Both class 1 and class 2 systems involve multi-domain crRNA-binding proteins essential for interference function. The major component of the type II system is Cas9, which cleaves DNA and has a wide range of uses. On the other hand, the type V system is smaller than the type II and comprises both Cas 12 (Cpf1) and Cas14 (Cas12f), while the RNA-targeting type VI system comprises Cas 13a (Zetsche et al.; Fonfara et al.; Savage). The CC system can be divided into 3 main stages, including spacer acquisition or adaptation, biogenesis of crRNA, and target interference (Karneyeva et al.). The classification of CC System has been provided in Fig. 1.

Mechanism of action of the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing system
Mechanism of action of the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing system. This figure is reproduced from (Zhang et al.), available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
The three main stages of CC9-mediated gene editing include recognition, cleavage, and repair (Liao et al.). The designed single guide RNA (sgRNA) recognizes the target sequence in the gene of interest and directs Cas9 for editing (Asmamaw and Zawdie). The protospacer adjacent motif (PAM), a critical recognition element in DNA sequences, mediates precise targeting, which is essential for Cas9 recognition (Kadkhoda et al.; Al-Ouqaili et al.; Saeed et al.). Cas9 proteins remain inactive if the sgRNA is absent (Karimi et al.). Cas9 nuclease efficiently and precisely generates double-stranded breaks (DSBs) at a region near the PAM sequence at its 3′ position (Ceasar et al.; Longo et al.). PAM is a short, conserved DNA sequence of 2–5 base pairs long, flanking the protospacer sequence in the invading genome (Bourgeois et al.). Cas9 protein, the extensively utilized nuclease in gene-editing, recognizes the PAM sequence at 5ʹ-NGG-3ʹ (where N can be any nucleotide base) (Asmamaw and Zawdie; Collias and Beisel). Once Cas9 nuclease detects a target site through PAM, it triggers local DNA melting followed by the RNA–DNA hybrid formation. Subsequently, Cas9 becomes activated for DNA cleavage. His-Asn-His endonuclease domain then causes complementary strand cleavage, while the RuvC domain is responsible for non-complementary strand cleavage of target DNA to generate mainly blunt-ended DSBs. After the generation of DSBs, the cells repair DNA either by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) or through homology-directed repair (HDR) (Mei et al.; Jiang and Doudna; Asmamaw and Zawdie) (Fig. 2).

Challenges in delivering CRISPR-Cas9 system
It is essential to deliver both gRNA and Cas9 for CC9 gene editing system. Various approaches have been developed to deliver CC9 System, including predesigned Cas9-gRNA complex, mRNA for Cas9 and gRNA, two separate plasmids encoding gRNA and Cas9, and a single plasmid encoding both gRNA and Cas9 (Chen et al.). It has been observed that, as compared to mRNA-based delivery methods, a single plasmid encoding both gRNA and Cas9 can be cost-effective and stable in comparison with the mRNA forms of gRNA and Cas9. Nonetheless, a CRISPR-delivered DNA plasmid can face problems in entering the nuclear and cellular membranes and exerting its functions. Moreover, the larger plasmid size makes it more difficult to be encapsulated within NCs. On the other hand, constitutive expression of nucleases may result in increased off-target mutations as well as a higher risk of insertion mutagenesis because of the random plasmid DNA integration into the host genome (Herai).
Interestingly, these problems can be solved by delivering Cas9 mRNA encoded directly in the cytoplasm, which removes the need for nuclear entry. This approach reduces the risk of off-target activities and Cas9 gene integration into the host genome. Nonetheless, mRNAs are unstable and prone to degradation through RNases, especially when used in vivo or during synthesis. In contrast, a more rapid and straightforward delivery method is Cas9-gRNA ribonucleoprotein complex, which exhibits less off-target activity and lower immunogenicity (Behr et al.; Kaupbayeva et al.). Nevertheless, this approach also has several drawbacks owing to susceptibility to denaturation and degradation of ribonucleoproteins, negative charge of gRNA, and the larger size of Cas9 protein (Wei et al.; Hołubowicz et al.). Various other CC9 delivery methods have also been developed, including plasmids, viral vectors (like adeno-associated viruses) and species-specific phages (Wang et al.). Unfortunately, these delivery methods also suffer from various issues like immunogenicity, risk of carcinogenesis, narrow host range, and low packaging, as well as loading efficiency (Asmamaw Mengstie; Severi and Akbari).

Applications of CRISPR-Cas system against antibiotic-resistant bacteria
ABR is primarily transmitted through HGT, which can result in the spread of ABR (Tao et al.; Vinayamohan et al.). Because of the role of CC system in the adaptive immune system, it can provide protection against invading exogenous genetic material (Wang et al.; Hryhorowicz et al.). In addition, CC can avert the dissemination of phages and plasmids harboring ABR genes, which can further block the HGT of ABR genes (Serajian et al.; Tao et al.). CC can be potentially utilized in prokaryotes to control and prevent the dissemination of ABR (Herencias et al.; Pursey et al.). In a study, it was revealed that the type I CRISPR system interfered the drug-resistant plasmid acquisition by Escherichia coli (E. coli), hence maintaining the sensitivity of this bacterium (Aydin et al.). In a different study with the mouse intestinal colonization model, Price et al. revealed that CC system from mammalian intestinal flora prevented the dissemination of plasmids harbouring ABR genes. Wang et al. revealed a negative link between the acquisition of ABR genes and CC system. Furthermore, pathogens containing CC system were less prone to transmission of ABR genes as compared to those deficient of CC system (Pursey et al.).
Mechanism of CRISPR-Cas system against the antibiotic resistance in bacteria. This figure is reproduced from (Javed et al.), available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
Nonetheless, the CRISPR system is not an absolute barrier against the spread of ABR and plasmids, since sometimes this system is lost or inactivated by bacteria (Gophna et al.). Thus, studies involving exploration of the link between ABR and CC system will mediate a better understanding of the mechanisms of ABR and offer novel directions for the treatment as well as prevention of bacterial resistance (Tao et al.). Cas protein can target and cleave specific DNA by acting as a molecular scissor, while PAM helps the CC system to detect the target (Fig. 3) (Javed et al.). The CC system is guided by RNA to cleave specific DNA sequences in living organisms. Indeed, the CC system can target and inactivate ABR genes, which can result in the eradication of ABR gene-harbouring bacteria (Javed et al.).
The Cas nuclease in the CC system is largely responsible for the efficient killing of bacteria. The delivery of self-targeting type Ⅰ system resulted in rapid cell death and DNA degradation away from the targeted sequence, where Cas3 nuclease possessed both 3′−5′ helicase and single-strand DNA exonuclease activity (Caliando and Voigt). The IncP-type conjugative plasmid RK2 was engineered to deliver the CC system from E. coli to Salmonella enterica (S. enterica) with a high conjugation frequency to effectively eradicate S. enterica (Hamilton et al.). Interestingly, by introducing the origin of transfer and CC system, pTA-Mob-based cis-conjugative plasmid was constructed to deliver larger DNAs to a broad range of bacterial strains as donors (Wan et al.). The constructed plasmid showed high conjugative efficiency as transconjugants turned into new donors for subsequent reconjugants. CC system based on such kinds of plasmids can effectively eradicate S. enterica. An endogenous Type III-A system showed antimicrobial properties in Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis), via inserting a recombinant phagemid containing spacer-targeted essential genes into M. tuberculosis (Li et al.). Furthermore, inhalation devices can also be used to deliver anti-tuberculosis bacteriophage, which suggests innovative approaches of CC system-based drug delivery to combat ABR exhibiting bacteria (Carrigy et al.).
Gram-negative bacteria contain a formidable outer membrane that plays a role as a restrictive permeability barrier, substantially contributing to their resistance against numerous antibiotics (Farrag et al.). Globally, infections caused by extensively drug-resistant and MDR Gram-negative bacteria are causing numerous challenges to public health (Hawkey et al.). The emergence and occurrence of various ABR genes including blaVIM, mcr-1, blaNDM, and blaKPC indicate that novel therapies are urgently needed for the treatment of infections caused by MDR Gram-negative bacteria (Liang et al.; Wang et al.). Indeed, CC can be utilized to hinder the dissemination of Gram-negative bacteria that show ABR. Carbapenems, a class of broad-spectrum and powerful antibiotics, are the preferred antibiotics to treat severe infections caused by extensively drug-resistant and MDR Gram-negative bacteria (Sheu et al.). Alarmingly, there is a growing occurrence of drug-resistant strains in Gram-negative bacteria, for example carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae and extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) (Choi et al.). CC9 can efficiently eradicate carbapenem-resistant plasmids in bacteria to restore their sensitivity to carbapenems (Tao et al.). Similarly, CC9 also eliminated resistance plasmids in ESBL-producing E. coli to restore sensitivity to antibiotics (Kim et al.).
CC9-mediated plasmid-curing system efficiently eliminated carbapenemase genes (including blaNDM, blaKPC, and blaOXA-48) and plasmids (blaNDM-encoding IncX3 plasmid and blaKPC-encoding IncFIIK pKpQIL plasmid) in Enterobacteriaceae isolates, which restored sensitivity of the isolates to carbapenems (Hao et al.; Tao et al.). In a study, it was revealed that the CC9 system can abolish ESBL resistance plasmids from E. coli to restore sensitivity to antibiotics (Kim et al.). In another study, it was demonstrated that CC9 system can knock out mcr-1 gene found in plasmids (Wan et al.). In a different study, a golden gate assembly of the CRISPR gRNA array was developed to simultaneously target 10 genomic loci and suppress a range of endogenous genes (Vad-Nielsen et al.). In addition, the CC system can also simultaneously knock out several beta-lactamases in E. coli, which can provide a partial solution to the high diversity of beta-lactamases (Tao et al.;. CC9 system can also concurrently target and eliminate both carbapenem resistance blaNDM-1 and colistin resistance mcr-1 genes (Başaran and Öksüz).
Gram-positive bacteria, unlike Gram-negative bacteria, comprise a thicker peptidoglycan cell wall and are responsible for causing various clinical infections (Garde et al.). Infections caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria, including vancomycin-resistant Enterococci, penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), are raising health concerns globally (De Oliveira Santos et al.). The Gram-positive opportunistic pathogen, Enterococcus faecalis, is a leading cause of nosocomial infections (Gao et al.). Enterococcal infections pose a substantial threat to public health and it is hard to treat these infections because of the increased occurrence of ABR (Sangiorgio et al.). It has been reported that CC can serve as a potential barrier to HGT of ABR genes in E. faecalis (Pursey et al.). An inverse relationship has also been observed between ABR in E. faecalis and type II CC system (Jwair et al.). Typically, E. faecalis isolates solely contain the orphan CRISPR2 locus (Soltani et al.). On the other hand, functional CRISPR3-Cas or CRISPR1-Cas loci is typically not found in most of the MDR E. faecalis strains (Cabral et al.). It has been observed that the occurrence of CC locus is linked with the absence of virulence features and antibiotic sensitivity (Myintzaw et al.).
Applications of CRISPR-Cas systems against antimicrobial resistance in bacteria
CRISPR-Cas Systems	Target bacteria	Antibiotic resistance gene(s) targets	Applications	References	 	CRISPR-Cas9	Escherichia coli	Colistin resistance gene (mcr-1)	Reduce mcr-1 propagation among bacterial pathogens	(Wan et al.)	 	CRISPR-Cas9 and CRISPR-Cas12a	Francisella novicida	Mobile genetic elements	Antimicrobial and antivirulence tools	(Ratner and Weiss)	 	CRISPR-Cas9	Staphylococcus aureus	Gentamicin (aacA), methicillin (mecA), and ciprofloxacin (grlA, grlB) resistance genes	Restoration of antibiotic sensitivity in methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)	(De Oliveira et al.)	 	CRISPR-Cas9	Serratia marcescens, Enterobacter xiangfangensis, Enterobacter hormaechei, Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae	Carbapenem-restance genes (blaOXA-48, blaNDM, blaKPC)	Resensitized the pathogens to carbapenems	(Hao et al.)	 	CRISPR-Cas9	Escherichia coli	Beta-lactam resistance genes (blaTEM and blaCTX-M)	Resensitized the pathogens to antibiotics	(Kim et al.)	 	CRISPR-Cas13a	Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus	Carbapenem (blaVIM-2, blaIMP-1, blaNDM-1, blaOXA-48, blaKPC-2) and colistin (mcr-1 and mcr-2) resistance genes	Shows strong bacterial killing properties	(Kiga et al.)
Furthermore, a negative correlation was observed between the presence of CRISPR3 and a lower rate of ABR in Enterococcus faecalis (Gholizadeh et al.). Interestingly, the occurrence of CRISPR1 locus can vary among E. faecalis species, which might lead to variable CRISPR function against ABR genes (Leite et al.). In a study, it was revealed that conjugative CC9 system delivery can decrease the incidence of ABR in the Enterococcal species in a sequence-specific manner (Rodrigues et al.). In a different study, it was demonstrated that the orphan CRISPR2 locus needs the presence of CRISPR1-Cas derived from Enterococcus faecalis for genomic defense against mobile genetic elements (Price et al.). In another study, it was demonstrated that CC can avert the acquisition of some corresponding pathogenic factors by acting as a barrier against HGT in some Enterococcus faecalis isolates (Gholizadeh et al.). CC9 system was also found to decrease ABR in E. faecalis in vivo and in vitro by targeting erythromycin and tetracycline resistance genes, respectively (Wu et al.). Collectively, these results indicate that CC system can limit the spread of ABR in Gram-positive bacteria (Tao et al.). Table 1 summarizes the applications of various CC systems against ABR in bacteria.

Nanocarriers for antimicrobials
NCs have numerous applications in a diverse range of fields, including the food industry and biomedical research, against pathogens. NCs can be categorized according to their shape, composition, and size, for example, gold, polymeric, liposomes, and albumin NCs (Wang and Wang). The sizes of NCs can range from 1 to 100 nm, and they typically possess high reactivity and a high surface-to-volume ratio (de la Fuente Tagarro et al.).
In terms of antimicrobial therapy, the delivery of antimicrobials is a significant feature of nanotechnology. There are numerous advantages of using NC-based drug delivery systems, such as reduction of antimicrobial-associated side effects through targeted drug delivery and prevention/reduction of bacterial resistance mechanisms like biofilm formation and efflux pumps. Surface functionalization with molecules that are designed to bind with the specific targets or with the local microenvironment can mediate the specific delivery of NCs to the infection site, which can further enhance therapeutic effectiveness and decrease side effects of antimicrobials (Seidu et al.; Huang et al.; Caselli and Malmsten). Other advantages of NC-mediated delivery of antibiotics include controlled release of antibiotics, increased circulation time in blood as well as enhanced half-life, and increase hydrophobic drug solubility, which can eventually decrease frequency of administrations and systemic side effects (Egwu et al.; Prieložná et al.). In addition, NCs can enhance drug loading efficiency of hydrophilic and lipophilic drugs, which can increase their efficacy (Seo et al.). Interactions of NCs with different types of tissues and proteins are influenced by the zeta potentials and surface charges of NCs, which can influence cellular uptake and tissue distribution of NCs (Chou and Lin).
It has been observed that host cells with anionic features, for example, macrophages, are more likely to absorb positively charged NCs in comparison with the uncharged or negatively charged NCs (Hetta et al.). The hydrophobicity of NCs also determines the nature of interaction with the bacterial membrane phospholipid bilayers, thus dictates targeted secretion of antibiotics (Tyagi and Mishra; Bhattacharjee et al.). Hydrophilic NCs tend to have a prolonged blood circulation time as compared to hydrophobic NCs because of less interaction with opsonizing agents (Aflakian et al.). Thus, multiple factors related to NCs can lead to enhance their effects as carriers of antibiotics, such as the increased oxidation capacity and ROS generation, enhanced buildup of NCs near the cytoplasm, electrostatic interaction of NCs with bacterial cell membranes, and the protection of antibiotics (Joshi and Patil). Furthermore, in order to enhance the efficacy of antibiotics, NCs can conquer various ABR mechanisms including bacterial cell wall thickening, antibiotic degradation by beta-lactamase, and efflux pumps (Carnero Canales et al.; Vivekanandan et al.). In this regard, various types of NCs including polymeric, liposomes, gold, and solid lipid NCs have already been developed (Parveen et al.).
Mechanisms of antibiotic resistance and nanocarrier-mediated antimicrobial activity. This figure is reproduced from (Lee et al.), available under a Creative Commons Attribution License
NCs can be developed to avoid physical and chemical components of bacterial drug resistance (Aflakian et al.). NCs can be loaded or functionalized with molecules to interfere with the structure of biofilms or quorum sensing (Lahiri et al.). NCs can also provide protection to antibiotics against degrading enzymes in the biofilm (Saffari Natanzi et al.). Moreover, NCs containing combinations of drugs are more effective than free-drug combinations (Aflakian et al.). It has been reported that the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria including Pseudomonas aeruginosa and E. coli can act as a permeability barrier that lowers sensitivity to certain hydrophobic drugs including beta-lactams and macrolides (Maher and Hassan; Saxena et al.). Multidrug resistance can be developed in bacteria through enhanced efflux because of the overexpression of several transmembrane pumps, which was found to be associated with resistance to chloramphenicol, fluoroquinolones, and macrolides (Huang et al.). NC-based delivery approaches were found to deteriorate various bacterial defense mechanisms (Sharma et al.). It has been reported that fusogenic liposomes containing certain lipids might rapidly fuse with the microbial plasma membrane and secrete increased levels of drugs into the cytoplasm to saturate the transmembrane pumps (Balenzano et al.). Figure 4 illustrates the mechanisms of ABR and nanocarrier-mediated antimicrobial activity.

Role of nanocarriers in combating bacterial infections
It is difficult to treat bacterial infections, particularly intracellular infections, as bacteria can hide in host cells. Intracellular antibiotic delivery is a potential strategy to improve treatment of intracellular infections caused by bacteria. Because of greater penetration and protection of antibiotics against enzymes, NCs, including liposomes, polymeric NCs, and lipid NCs, can significantly improve the efficiency of antibiotics against biofilm-forming bacteria (Ahsan et al.). Various lipids, including phosphatidylinositol and stearylamine, can selectively target biofilms and enhance liposome adherence to biofilms (Aflakian et al.). Smaller sizes of NCs make it possible for them to penetrate host cells through phagocytic as well as endocytic pathways, and secrete antibiotic cargo at the sites of intracellular infections. Essential components of the mononuclear phagocyte system include macrophages and monocytes, which also contain numerous intracellular bacteria and remove delivered NCs from the body (Gustafson et al.). In a study, Clemens et al. (Clemens et al.) reported that mesoporous silica NCs loaded with the antibiotic rifampicin and coated with polyethylenimine can be effectively phagocytized by human macrophages. The researchers also revealed that these NCs were effective against Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected macrophages as compared to free rifampicin (Aflakian et al.).
Various studies have already reported that the usage of NCs to destroy biofilms and prevent intracellular infections can be beneficial. Metal organic framework-based NCs possess various unique properties, including ease of surface modification, loading of a range of drugs, and enhanced biocompatibility. In a study, Sava Gallis et al. encapsulated a third-generation cephalosporin antibiotic, ceftazidime, within the zeolitic imidazolate framework NCs. The researchers also highlighted the potential of the NCs in terms of delivering antibiotic cargo intracellularly (Sava Gallis et al.).

Applications of nanocarriers as carriers of CRISPR-Cas systems in controlling antibiotic resistance
Nanocarrier mediated delivery of CRISPR-Cas9
In order to overcome the limitations associated with viral vectors, nonviral vectors including gold, polymeric, and lipid NCs can be potentially used to deliver CC systems (Fig. 5). Chemical modification of NCs can provide protection to Cas9 mRNA via enhancing its stability (Glass et al.). Among NCs, lipid NCs have already been widely studied for CC delivery. In addition, multiple lipid-based NCs for gene therapy were also taken to clinical trials (Patel et al.). Lipid NCs are amphiphilic in nature; thus, negatively charged CRISPR plasmid DNA and mRNA can be encapsulated in these NCs, guiding as well as providing protection to RNA from penetrating cell membranes. Nonetheless, targeting selective tissues through NCs for gene delivery can be challenging. In order to address this issue, Cheng et al. designed a method known as selective organ targeting to alter lipid NCs with a wide proportion of selective organ targeting molecules to selectively co-deliver Cas9 ribonucleoprotein and Cas9 mRNA/sgRNA to the spleen, lung, and liver. In order to improve cell-selective capacity and genome editing efficiency, liposome-templated hydrogel NCs were developed to deliver CC9 system to knock out PLK1 gene in a mouse flank tumor model, where the NCs suppressed tumor growth much more effectively compared to the commercially available Lipofectamine 2000 transfection reagent (Chen et al.; Wan et al.).
Polymeric NC also serve as a potential carrier for CC9 system because of their high biocompatibility and low immunogenicity. In addition, cell-penetrating peptides can be combined with polymeric NCs for rapid cellular uptake and drug delivery. In a study, Rui et al. reported that carboxylated branched poly (β-amino ester) NCs can effectively deliver Cas9 ribonucleoproteins for improved hydrophobic effects and hydrogen bonding. Furthermore, at relatively low ribonucleoprotein doses, the Cas9 ribonucleoprotein delivery NCs mediated enhanced gene editing in vitro and in vivo (Li et al.; Tashima). The researchers also observed that other than Cas9 ribonucleoproteins, the NCs can be used to transfer various CC9 plasmids (Wei et al.). In a different study, a novel system was developed by combining polymeric NCs with a modified homology-directed repair template (Nguyen et al.). It has also been revealed that polymeric NCs composed of anionic poly-L-glutamic acid can result in stabilization of ribonucleoproteins via protecting Cas9 protein’s excess positively charged residues, which improved cell viability, gene editing efficacy as well as reduced off-target effects (Zhang et al.). It has been proposed that macrophage-specific gene editing by utilizing CC9 components delivered through cationic lipid-assisted PEG-b-PLGA NCs and PEGylation can be effectively used to avert non-specific interactions and evade immune recognition (Luo et al.; Ashok et al.). In a study, a polymer-derivatized CRISPR nanocomplex was developed to address the emergence and spread of MDR bacteria by targeting the mecA gene (Kang et al.). The mecA gene mediates resistance to methicillin by target alteration, a mechanism that alters the typical binding site of methicillin, which subsequently makes the antibiotic less effective (Kang et al.). The researchers used polymer-derivatized Cas9 through direct covalent modification of the protein with cationic polymer to form a complex with sgRNA targeting ABR (Kang et al.). It was observed that the developed nanocomplex targeted mecA gene and effectively delivered into MRSA (Kang et al.). Following the delivery of CRISPR system, it targeted the mecA gene and successfully altered the bacteria's DNA, which further prevented the bacteria from producing a functional resistance protein (penicillin binding protein-2a) (Kang et al.).
Even though fewer studies exist that simultaneously used NC-CRISPR systems against bacteria, above-mentioned targeting or delivery approaches can be adopted to suppress bacterial infections through the elimination of ABR genes or direct eradication of pathogens (Mayorga-Ramos et al.; de la Fuente Tagarro et al.). Nanosized CRISPR complex composed of a sgRNA and a polymer-derivatized Cas9 endonuclease was also developed to target mecA, the gene responsible for methicillin resistance, in S. aureus (Bhattacharjee et al.; Mayorga-Ramos et al. ). In addition, the covalent modification with branched polyethyleneimine was used to generate polymer-derivatized Cas9 endonuclease (Nicolle et al.). The developed NC-based CRISPR complex can be delivered into MRSA, where it can effectively edit the bacterial genome and reduce MRSA growth (Rabaan et al.).
Gold NCs also have the potential to deliver CRISPR ribonucleoprotein complex because of their precise modification, relative safety, and unique tunable features in comparison with the polymeric and lipid NCs (Eker et al.; Du et al.). As compared to polymeric and lipid NCs, the size and distribution of gold NCs can be better controlled, and gold NCs do not generate immune responses (Aljabali et al.; Vignesh et al.). In a study, a CRISPR nanoformulation was developed based on gold NC, wherein CRISPR ribonucleoprotein complex was conjugated on the surface of AuNCs (Shahbazi et al.). Without causing any adverse events, the developed nanoformulation was found to be efficient in penetrating difficult-to-transfect CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and edited γ-globin promoter and CCR5 gene loci (Cruz et al.; El-Kharrag et al.). The researchers also demonstrated that this nanoformulation can edit genes of interest in other blood cell types (Krishnan et al.). In a different study, gold nanoclusters were developed by using a highly pH-dependent assembly for the transport of Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9 endonuclease (SpCas9) into the nucleus for gene editing, where SpCas9-gold nanocluster disassembles at lower pH, but is stable at higher pH (Ju et al.).
In terms of delivery, an important feature of stimuli-responsive NCs is their responsiveness to various stimuli, such as specific enzyme concentrations, pH levels, and chemical signals associated with disease conditions including inflammation and infection (Srivastava; Yang et al.). Furthermore, NCs can be customized to meet the need for specific purposes, which improves the success and efficiency of CC system delivery to target cells (Raheem et al.). In a study, cell-penetrating, pH-responsive magnetite/silver NCs functionalized with a pH-sensitive polymer (pDMAEMA) and conjugated with buforin-II (Buf-pH-MSNCs) were developed, where the developed NCs delivered the plasmid and considerably transformed bacterial cells, which further indicates the potential of NCs to control the spread of ABR (Ramírez-Acosta et al.). In recent years, there is a growing interest in carbon-based nanomaterials because of their unique physicochemical and structural features and the nanomaterials have a larger multifunctional surface area and optical activity, which results in lower immunogenicity, improved biocompatibility, and higher drug-loading capacity (Parveen et al.). Researchers developed modified single-wall carbon nanotubes and delivered CC9 systems in order to target mcr-1 to suppress the conjugation of mcr-1 plasmids, which resulted in cured colistin resistance (Yu et al.). These findings suggest the potential of single-wall carbon nanotubes to eradicate ABR through CC9 systems (Yu et al.).
Nanocarrier-based CRISPR-Cas system delivery to control antibiotic resistance
Nanocarrier-based delivery system	Crispr-Cas system	In vitro/in vivo	Study outcome	References	 	Lipid nanocarriers (LNCs)	Cas13a/gRNA (plasmid DNA)	Both in vitro and in vivo	In combination with polymyxin B, LNC-encapsulated Cas13a/gRNA expression vector controlled infection caused by Escherichia coli BW25113	(Kim et al.)	 	Gold-coated magnetic nanocarriers (Au MNCs)	CRISPR-Cas9 endonuclease dead (dCas9)/single-stranded guide RNA (sgRNA) complex	Both in vitro and in vivo	Rapid and precise detection of various MDR bacteria, including	(Kim et al.)	 	Polymer-derivatized CRISPR nanocomplex	sgRNA and polymer-derivatized SpCas9 protein	In vitro	The nanocomplex targeted mecA gene and effectively delivered Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA)	(Kang et al.)	 	Magnetite/silver nanocarriers functionalized with a pH-sensitive polymer (pDMAEMA) and conjugated with buforin-II (Buf-pH-MSNCs)	CRISPR-Cas9 (plasmid DNA)	In vitro	Buf-pH-MSNCs effectively delivered the plasmid and significantly transformed bacterial cells, which showed its potential to control the spread of antibiotic resistance (ABR)	(Moreno De la Hoz et al.)	 	Nitrogen-doped carbon dots (NCDs)	Cas9/multi sgRNAs	Both in vitro and in vivo	NCDs successfully delivered Cas9/sgRNAs to Escherichia coli, which resulted in sustained elimination of target ABR genes	(Chen et al.)
Nitrogen-doped carbon dots (NCDs) were developed to deliver CRISPR-Cas9/sgRNAs in order to specifically target various multiple high-risk ABR genes (including aph(3′)-Ia, cat, and tet) that are often found in the environment (Chen et al.). The NCDs effectively delivered Cas9/sgRNAs to Escherichia coli, which led to sustained elimination of target ABR genes. Moreover, the NCDs mediated the delivery of Cas9/multi sgRNAs to resensitize antibiotic-resistant bacteria in soil, while Cas9/multi sgRNAs alone were found to be inactivated in the complex environment (Chen et al.). Table 2 summarizes various studies that explored the potential of NC-based CC system delivery to control antibiotic resistance.

Challenges and future perspectives
Over the past few decades, CC systems have been increasingly gaining a lot of interest in the gene editing field. In addition, the CC system has many applications ranging from genome editing in agriculture to curing/managing genetic diseases through gene editing. The CC system has already demonstrated its potential in solving enormous problems associated with ABR in bacteria, without affecting the surrounding microbiota. However, there are certain limitations associated with this CC system including CC system inactivation via anti-CRISPR proteins and a lack of sufficient data to support its safety and efficacy in natural microbial communities (Ahmed et al.). Moreover, CC systems have mainly been tested in laboratory settings against clonal bacterial populations or animal models. However, their performance has yet to be demonstrated in real-world scenarios. There are unknown risks and possible consequences associated with the elimination of ABR genes from microbial communities, which require further concrete studies. There is also a risk of resistance development against CRISPR systems. For instance, certain mutations can inactivate CC loci, which can lead to the evolution of resistance.
Activations of certain anti-CRISPR proteins can also inactivate important CC components. In a study, Uribe et al. revealed that E. coli can develop ABR through chromosomal mutations against antimicrobials based on CC systems. Nonetheless, researchers also developed a solution to this problem by introducing another copy of the SpCas9 protein, since a lower SpCas9 protein level can result in a non-lethal resistant state (Uribe et al.).
CC system involves conventional dual-use research of concern characteristics. This system involves the risk of misuse, including enhancing drug resistance, transmissibility, or pathogen virulence, and even reconstructing or synthesizing extinct or novel pathogens, which can pose serious biosafety threats (Getz and Dellaire). Some ethical concerns are also linked with the usage of CC systems in eliminating antimicrobial resistance. A major ethical concern is the possibility of potential germline editing, which can cause possible heritable alterations to an individual's DNA that can be passed down to future generations. Therefore, it is essential to carefully consider the ethical and responsible use of CRISPR systems because of the potential long-term impacts for future generations. Proper guidelines are also needed to ensure responsible and ethical use of CC systems (Kolanu).
Despite the potential in translational medicine, CC system-associated off-target effect is a major challenge and these effects are observed when Cas9 acts on not-directed genomic regions and generates cleavages that might result in adverse events (Guo et al.; Kanazhevskaya et al.). Therefore, in silico tools might prove beneficial in searching for potential off-target regions in the whole genome and estimate the probability of an off-target activity (Naeem et al.; Kalter et al.). Studies also demonstrated that sgRNA-independent off-target activities also occur, which necessitates more unbiased studies aimed at detecting and validating such findings (Richter et al.). CC systems can also be combined with artificial intelligence (AI), where AI can improve gRNA design, predict off-target effects, and enhance gene-editing capacity by using a large dataset from a wide range of studies (Boretti). Moreover, AI can mediate the discovery and development of novel CC systems beyond natural limitations. Such innovative integration can mediate the personalized use of CC system and ensure safety, precision, and efficacy (Kim et al.).
In terms of NC/CRISPR applications, localization and efficient packaging of the CC systems are two main limitations, which should be addressed by future studies. As NCs can be modified through different approaches, PEGylation of NCs is a popular approach to decrease their clearance through the reticuloendothelial system, which results in increased duration in the blood or tissues. Various other modifications including specific cell receptors and cell-penetrating peptides can also enhance interaction with targeted cells and ameliorate cell internalization. However, integration of CRISPR systems and NCs is still in the early stage, which require more studies for the widespread use of this innovative approach for the treatment of bacterial infections and prevention of spread of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria (Wan et al.).

Conclusions
The CC system is a popular genetic engineering tool because it can be easily designed and can precisely target genetic regions. There is a growing interest in CC systems because of their potential in controlling as well as preventing HGT and the dissemination of antibiotic resistance. In addition, CC systems offer several advantages, including high efficiency, rapid turnaround time, low cost, and easy design, which allow these systems to effectively and precisely target antibiotic-resistant bacteria. NCs can help the CC systems to overcome their off-target effects by precisely delivering the systems in the target cells. NCs can also be engineered for target site release, payload protection, and high specificity, which can further ensure delivery of the components of CC in the target cells or regions without harming surrounding tissues. However, only a limited number of studies have demonstrated the implications of NCs in CC system delivery. In order to ensure their widespread use, more studies are required regarding the demonstration of their safety and efficacy, optimization of delivery vectors, and ensuring the accuracy of genome edits.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
The author (Fawaz M. Almufarriji) contributed to the study conception, design, material preparation, data collection, and analysis. He drafted the manuscript.

Funding
The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received during the preparation of this manuscript.

Data availability
All data related to this manuscript is included in the manuscript.

Declarations

Competing interests
The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.

References
Nanoparticles-based therapeutics for the management of bacterial infections: a special emphasis on FDA approved products and clinical trials
CRISPR-cas systems in the fight against antimicrobial resistance: current status, potentials, and future directions
Lipid nanocarriers-enabled delivery of antibiotics and antimicrobial adjuvants to overcome bacterial biofilms
Harnessing bacterial immunity: CRISPR-Cas system as a versatile tool in combating pathogens and revolutionizing medicine
Nanomaterials and their impact on the immune system
Principles of CRISPR-Cas9 technology: advancements in genome editing and emerging trends in drug delivery
Strategies to overcome antimicrobial resistance (AMR) making use of non-essential target inhibitors: a review
Lipid- and polymer-based nanoparticle systems for the delivery of CRISPR/Cas9
Mechanism and applications of CRISPR/Cas-9-mediated genome editing
Viral vectors for the in vivo delivery of CRISPR components: advances and challenges
Presence of type I-F CRISPR/Cas systems is associated with antimicrobial susceptibility in Escherichia coli
Fusogenic lipid nanocarriers: nature-inspired design for advanced drug delivery systems
Newly developed antibiotics against multidrug-resistant and carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacteria: action and resistance mechanisms
Global antimicrobial resistance; a peek in to the GLASS data
In vivo delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 therapeutics: progress and challenges
Theragnostic application of nanoparticle and CRISPR against food-borne multi-drug resistant pathogens
Nanotheranostics to target antibiotic-resistant bacteria: strategies and applications
Using CRISPR-cas systems as antimicrobials
The transformative potential of AI-driven CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing to enhance CAR T-cell therapy
Bourgeois J, Lazinski DW, Camilli A (2020) Identification of spacer and protospacer sequence requirements in the vibrio cholerae type I-E CRISPR/Cas system. mSphere. 5, 10.1128/msphere.00813-00820. 10.1128/msphere.00813-20
CRISPR-Cas systems in enterococci
Targeted DNA degradation using a CRISPR device stably carried in the host genome
Combating Gram-negative infections: the role of antimicrobial peptides and nanotechnology in overcoming antibiotic resistance
Anti-tuberculosis bacteriophage D29 delivery with a vibrating mesh nebulizer, jet nebulizer, and soft mist inhaler
Combining functionalities-nanoarchitectonics for combatting bacterial infection
Insert, remove or replace: a highly advanced genome editing system using CRISPR/Cas9
Strategies for nonviral nanoparticle-based delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 therapeutics
Nitrogen-doped carbon dots facilitate CRISPR/Cas for reducing antibiotic resistance genes in the environment
Targeted delivery of CRISPR/Cas9-mediated cancer gene therapy via liposome-templated hydrogel nanoparticles
Selective organ targeting (SORT) nanoparticles for tissue-specific mrna delivery and crispr-cas gene editing
Antibiotic resistance patterns of enterobacteriaceae isolated from patients with healthcare-associated infections
Impact of protein coronas on nanoparticle interactions with tissues and targeted delivery
Targeted intracellular delivery of antituberculosis drugs to Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected macrophages via functionalized mesoporous silica nanoparticles
Crispr technologies and the search for the PAM-free nuclease
Nanoparticles targeting hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells: multimodal carriers for the treatment of hematological diseases
Antimicrobial Resistance: Implications and Costs
Current knowledge on CRISPR strategies against antimicrobial-resistant bacteria
Antimicrobial resistance in ESKAPE pathogens
de Oliveira Santos JV, da Costa Júnior SD, de Fátima Ramos dos Santos Medeiros SM et al. (2022) Panorama of Bacterial Infections Caused by Epidemic Resistant Strains. Curr Microbiol. 79:175. 10.1007/s00284-022-02875-9
Crispr delivery systems for organ-specific targeting: advances and challenges
Harnessing the CRISPR-Cas systems to combat antimicrobial resistance
Nanoparticle delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 for genome editing
Nanomaterials in drug delivery: strengths and opportunities in medicine
Gold nanoparticles in nanomedicine: unique properties and therapeutic potential
Efficient polymer nanoparticle-mediated delivery of gene editing reagents into human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
Natural outer membrane permeabilizers boost antibiotic action against irradiated resistant bacteria
Nonviral in vivo delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 using protein-agnostic, high-loading porous silicon and polymer nanoparticles
The CRISPR-associated DNA-cleaving enzyme Cpf1 also processes precursor CRISPR RNA
Evolution of virulence in Enterococcus faecium, a hospital-adapted opportunistic pathogen
Garde S, Chodisetti PK, Reddy M (2021) Peptidoglycan: Structure, synthesis, and regulation. EcoSal Plus 9. 10.1128/ecosalplus.ESP-0010-2020
Angels and devils: dilemmas in dual-use biotechnology
Nanotechnology in gene editing: pioneering CRISPR-Cas delivery systems to tackle antibiotic resistance
CRISPR-cas system in the acquisition of virulence genes in dental-root canal and hospital-acquired isolates of Enterococcus faecalis
Role of CRISPR-Cas system on antibiotic resistance patterns of Enterococcus faecalis
Nanoparticles for CRISPR-Cas9 delivery
No evidence of inhibition of horizontal gene transfer by CRISPR-Cas on evolutionary timescales
Off-target effects in CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing
Nanoparticle uptake: the phagocyte problem
Efficient inter-species conjugative transfer of a CRISPR nuclease for targeted bacterial killing
Hao M, He Y, Zhang H et al. (2020) CRISPR-Cas9-Mediated Carbapenemase Gene and Plasmid Curing in Carbapenem-Resistant Enterobacteriaceae. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 64. 10.1128/aac.00843-00820. 10.1128/aac.00843-20
CRISPR-Cas9-mediated carbapenemase gene and plasmid curing in carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae
Treatment of infections caused by multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria: report of the British Society for Antimicrobial Chemotherapy/Healthcare Infection Society/British Infection Association Joint Working Party†
Measuring and mapping the global burden of antimicrobial resistance
Soft governance against superbugs: How effective is the international regime on antimicrobial resistance?
Avoiding the off-target effects of CRISPR/cas9 system is still a challenging accomplishment for genetic transformation
Collateral sensitivity associated with antibiotic resistance plasmids
Nanotechnology as a promising approach to combat multidrug resistant bacteria: a comprehensive review and future perspectives
CRISPR-Cas: biology, mechanisms and relevance
Safer and efficient base editing and prime editing via ribonucleoproteins delivered through optimized lipid-nanoparticle formulations
CRISPR/Cas9 immune system as a tool for genome engineering
Bacterial multidrug efflux pumps at the frontline of antimicrobial resistance: an overview
Nanotechnology’s frontier in combatting infectious and inflammatory diseases: prevention and treatment
CRISPR-Cas9 system: a prospective pathway toward combatting antibiotic resistance
CRISPR–Cas9 structures and mechanisms
Nanoparticles targeting biofilms: a new era in combating antimicrobial resistance
Gold nanocluster-mediated efficient delivery of Cas9 protein through ph-induced assembly-disassembly for inactivation of virus oncogenes
Inverse association between the existence of CRISPR/Cas systems with antibiotic resistance, extended spectrum β-lactamase and carbapenemase production in multidrug, extensive drug and pandrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae
Role of CRISPR-Cas systems and anti-CRISPR proteins in bacterial antibiotic resistance
Off-target effects in CRISPR-Cas genome editing for human therapeutics: progress and challenges
Off-target interactions in the CRISPR-Cas9 machinery: mechanisms and outcomes
Nonviral genome editing based on a polymer-derivatized CRISPR nanocomplex for targeting bacterial pathogens and antibiotic resistance
Challenges and opportunities in the application of CRISPR-Cas9: a review on genomic editing and therapeutic potentials
Interference requirements of type III CRISPR-Cas systems from Thermus thermophilus
Unlocking genome editing: advances and obstacles in CRISPR/Cas delivery technologies
Development of CRISPR-Cas13a-based antimicrobials capable of sequence-specific killing of target bacteria
Lipid nanoparticle-mediated CRISPR-Cas13a delivery for the control of bacterial infection
Clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats-mediated surface-enhanced raman scattering assay for multidrug-resistant bacteria
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated re-sensitization of antibiotic-resistant Escherichia coli harboring extended-spectrum β-lactamases
Revolutionizing CRISPR technology with artificial intelligence
CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing: curing genetic diseases by inherited epigenetic modifications
Genetically engineered cellular nanoparticles for biomedical applications
Microbiologically-synthesized nanoparticles and their role in silencing the biofilm signaling cascade
Nanoparticles in the treatment of infections caused by multidrug-resistant organisms
Lei P, Ju Y, Peng F et al. (2023) Applications and advancements of CRISPR-Cas in the treatment of lung cancer. Front Cell Dev Biol 11 – 2023. 10.3389/fcell.2023.1295084
Hidden diversity in Enterococcus faecalis revealed by CRISPR2 screening: eco-evolutionary insights into a novel subspecies
Crispr/Cas9 therapeutics: progress and prospects
Supramolecular antibacterial materials for combatting antibiotic resistance
Emergence and mechanism of carbapenem-resistant Escherichia coli in Henan, China, 2014
CRISPR-Cas9-mediated homology-directed repair for precise gene editing
Chemistry of class 1 CRISPR-Cas effectors: binding, editing, and regulation
Delivery strategies for CRISPR/Cas genome editing tool for retinal dystrophies: challenges and opportunities
Linking CRISPR–Cas9 double-strand break profiles to gene editing precision with BreakTag
Macrophage-specific in vivo gene editing using cationic lipid-assisted polymeric nanoparticles
The gram-negative permeability barrier: tipping the balance of the in and the out
Evolutionary classification of CRISPR–Cas systems: a burst of class 2 and derived variants
Crispr-cas-based antimicrobials: design, challenges, and bacterial mechanisms of resistance
Recent progress in CRISPR/Cas9 technology
Moreno De la Hoz RJ, Orjuela JH, Cruz JC et al. (2020) CRISPR-Cas9 gene-editing tool delivered by cell-penetrating, pHresponsive, core/shell magnetite/silver nanoparticles: An approach for antibiotic resistance spread control in wastewater treatment systems. Universidad de los Andes
Global burden of bacterial antimicrobial resistance in 2019: a systematic analysis
Association of virulence, biofilm, and antimicrobial resistance genes with specific clonal complex types of Listeria monocytogenes
Latest developed strategies to minimize the off-target effects in CRISPR-Cas-mediated genome editing
Polymer-stabilized Cas9 nanoparticles and modified repair templates increase genome editing efficiency
Development of covalent chitosan-polyethylenimine derivatives as gene delivery vehicle: synthesis, characterization, and evaluation
Molecular mechanisms of CRISPR-Cas immunity in bacteria
Parveen A, Chatterjee A, Karak P (2025) Biomedical applications of carbon-based nanomaterials: exploring recent advances in therapeutics, diagnostics, and tissue engineering. Adv Pharm Bull 15:232–247. 10.34172/apb.025.44083
Lipid polymer hybrid nanoparticles as potent vehicles for drug delivery in cancer therapeutics
Boosting intracellular delivery of lipid nanoparticle-encapsulated mRNA
The next generation of CRISPR–Cas technologies and applications
Price VJ, Huo W, Sharifi A et al. (2016) CRISPR-Cas and restriction-modification act additively against conjugative antibiotic resistance plasmid transfer in enterococcus faecalis. mSphere. 1, 10.1128/msphere.00064-00016. 10.1128/msphere.00064-16
Price VJ, McBride SW, Hullahalli K et al. (2019) Enterococcus faecalis CRISPR-Cas Is a Robust Barrier to Conjugative Antibiotic Resistance Dissemination in the Murine Intestine. mSphere. 4, 10.1128/msphere.00464-00419. 10.1128/msphere.00464-19
Advances in the delivery of anticancer drugs by nanoparticles and chitosan-based nanoparticles
CRISPR-Cas is associated with fewer antibiotic resistance genes in bacterial pathogens
Application of CRISPR-Cas system to mitigate superbug infections
Advances in nanoparticles-based approaches in cancer theranostics
Ph-responsive, cell-penetrating, core/shell magnetite/silver nanoparticles for the delivery of plasmids: preparation, characterization, and preliminary in vitro evaluation
Ratner HK, Weiss DS (2020) Francisella novicida CRISPR-Cas systems can functionally complement each other in DNA defense while providing target flexibility. J Bacteriol 202. 10.1128/jb.00670-19
Understanding and overcoming antibiotic resistance
Phage-assisted evolution of an adenine base editor with improved Cas domain compatibility and activity
Rodrigues M, McBride SW, Hullahalli K et al. (2019) Conjugative delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 for the selective depletion of antibiotic-resistant enterococci. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 63. 10.1128/aac.01454-01419. 10.1128/aac.01454-19
Carboxylated branched poly(β-amino ester) nanoparticles enable robust cytosolic protein delivery and CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing
CRISPR cas systems: from bacterial defense mechanisms to revolutionary tools reshaping genetic research and translation therapeutics
Innovative approaches to combat antibiotic resistance: integrating CRISPR/Cas9 and nanoparticles against biofilm-driven infections
The impact of Enterococcus spp. in the immunocompromised host: a comprehensive review
Antibacterial countermeasures via metal-organic framework-supported sustained therapeutic release
Cas14: Big advances from small CRISPR proteins
Tackling the outer membrane: facilitating compound entry into Gram-negative bacterial pathogens
Functionalization of nanoparticulate drug delivery systems and its influence in cancer therapy
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) management using CRISPR-Cas based genome editing
Recent progress of lipid nanoparticles-based lipophilic drug delivery: focus on surface modifications
CRISPR-cas technology: emerging applications in clinical microbiology and infectious diseases
Crispr-Cas9 delivery strategies and applications: review and update
Targeted homology-directed repair in blood stem and progenitor cells with CRISPR nanoformulations
Toxicology of nanoparticles in drug delivery
Sheu C-C, Chang Y-T, Lin S-Y et al. (2019) Infections caused by carbapenem-resistant enterobacteriaceae: an update on therapeutic options. Front Microbiol 10 – 2019. 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00080
Diversity and evolution of class 2 CRISPR–Cas systems
Challenges in delivery systems for CRISPR-based genome editing and opportunities of nanomedicine
Investigating the prevalence of CRISPR-Cas system and their association with antibiotic resistance genes and virulence factors in Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium strains isolated from hospitalized patients
Stimuli-responsive nanomaterials for the precision delivery of mRNA cancer vaccines
Delivery of CRISPR-Cas tools for in vivo genome editing therapy: trends and challenges
Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR)
Elimination of blaKPC−2-mediated carbapenem resistance in Escherichia coli by CRISPR-Cas9 system
The Application of the CRISPR-Cas System in Antibiotic Resistance
The spread of antibiotic resistance genes in vivo model
Non-invasive delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 ribonucleoproteins (Cas9 RNPs) into cells via nanoparticles for membrane transport
Optimal balance of hydrophobic content and degree of polymerization results in a potent membrane-targeting antibacterial polymer
Bacterial resistance to CRISPR-Cas antimicrobials
Golden gate assembly of CRISPR gRNA expression array for simultaneously targeting multiple genes
Exploring the dual impact of nanoparticles on human well-being: a comprehensive review of risks and benefits
Role of horizontal gene transfer in the dissemination of antimicrobial resistance in food animal production
Exploring molecular mechanisms of drug resistance in bacteria and progressions in CRISPR/Cas9-based genome expurgation solutions
Antimicrobial resistance: addressing a global threat to humanity
Novel strategy to combat antibiotic resistance: a sight into the combination of CRISPR/Cas9 and nanoparticles
Reversal of mcr-1-mediated colistin resistance in Escherichia coli by CRISPR-Cas9 system
Nanoparticles and their applications in cell and molecular biology
Association of CRISPR/Cas System with the Drug Resistance in Klebsiella pneumoniae
CRISPR/Cas9 in genome editing and beyond
Adeno-associated virus as a delivery vector for gene therapy of human diseases
The prevalence of colistin resistance in Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae isolated from food animals in China: coexistence of mcr-1 and blaNDM with low fitness cost
Systemic nanoparticle delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 ribonucleoproteins for effective tissue specific genome editing
Engineered CRISPR-Cas systems for the detection and control of antibiotic-resistant infections
Stimuli-responsive nanomedicines for the treatment of non-cancer related inflammatory diseases
Eliminated colistin-resistance dissemination by a carbon nanotube-mediated CRISPR/Cas9 system – a combined effect of curing plasmid and conjugation blocking
Cpf1 Is a Single RNA-Guided Endonuclease of a Class 2 CRISPR-Cas System
Application of the CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing technique in basic research, diagnosis, and therapy of cancer
Strategies in the delivery of Cas9 ribonucleoprotein for CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing