Load Dependency of Ventricular Pump Function: Impact on the Non-Invasive Evaluation of the Severity and the Prognostic Relevance of Myocardial Dysfunction
Ventricular pump function, which is determined by myocyte contractility, preload  and afterload, and, additionally, also significantly influenced by heart rhythm,  synchrony of intraventricular contraction and ventricular interdependence,  explains the difficulties in establishing the contribution of myocardial  contractile dysfunction to the development and progression of heart failure.  Estimating myocardial contractility is one of the most difficult challenges  because the most commonly used clinical measurements of cardiac performance  cannot differentiate contractility changes from alterations in ventricular  loading conditions. Under both physiological and pathological conditions, there  is also a permanent complex interaction between myocardial contractility,  ventricular anatomy and hemodynamic loading conditions. All this explains why no  single parameter can alone reveal the real picture of ventricular dysfunction.  Over time there has been increasing recognition that a load-independent  contractility parameter cannot truly exist, because loading itself changes the  myofilament force-generating capacity. Because the use of a single parameter is  inadequate, it is necessary to perform multiparametric evaluations and also apply  integrative approaches using parameter combinations which include details about  ventricular loading conditions. This is particularly important for evaluating the  highly afterload-sensitive right ventricular function. In this regard, the  existence of certain reluctance particularly to the implementation of  non-invasively obtainable parameter combinations in the routine clinical praxis  should be reconsidered in the future. Among the non-invasive approaches used to  evaluate ventricular function in connection with its current loading conditions,  assessment of the relationship between ventricular contraction (e.g., myocardial  displacement or deformation) and pressure overload, or the relationship between  ejection volume (or ejection velocity) and pressure overload, as well as the  relationship between ventricular dilation and pressure overload, were found  useful for therapeutic decision-making. In the future, it will be unavoidable to  take the load dependency of ventricular function much more into consideration. A  solid basis for achieving this goal will be obtainable by intensifying the  clinical research necessary to provide more evidence for the practical importance  of this largely unsolved problem.

1. Introduction
Ventricular pump function, which provides the necessary blood supply under a  wide range of circumstances to the tissues all over the body, depends in addition  to the myocyte contractility, also crucially on the existing loading conditions  (i.e., preload and afterload). Furthermore, myocardial pump function is also  significantly influenced by heart rhythm, synchrony of intraventricular  contraction and ventricular interdependence.
Under clinical conditions, evaluation of myocardial contractility is the most  difficult challenge because the most commonly used clinical measurements of  overall cardiac performance do not differentiate contractility changes from  alterations in loading conditions. Under both physiological and  pathological conditions, there is a permanent complex interaction between  myocardial contractility, ventricular anatomy and hemodynamic loading conditions.  During the last 3 decades there has been increasing recognition that a  “load-independent index of contractility” cannot truly exist, because loading  itself changes myofilament  sensitivity and force-generating capacity  . Therefore, for a reliable evaluation of ventricular dysfunction plus  differentiation between predominately myocardial and extra-myocardial causes of  that dysfunction, it is necessary to perform multi-parametric evaluations and to  use integrative approaches as well as parameter combinations which include  details about the ventricular loading conditions.
This article gives an overview of the current knowledge of the relationship  between the ventricular pump function and its loading conditions, as well as of  the diagnostic tools, with a particular focus on non-invasive approaches, aiming  at distinguishing secondary (overloading induced) myocardial morphological and  functional alterations from primary myocardial damages. Special attention is also  focused on differences between the left and right ventricle (LV and RV,  respectively) sensitivity to pressure and volume overloading. Overall, the review  aimed to provide an updated theoretical and practical basis for those engaged in  this demanding and still current topic due to the new challenges which have  arisen especially with the increasing use of temporary or durable mechanical  circulatory support devices.

2. Definition of Heart Failure: Difficulties and Challenges
Heart failure (HF), a clinical syndrome with different aetiologies and  pathophysiology rather than a specific disease, arises from the disability of the  heart to pump adequate amount of blood to meet the demands of the body at rest  and during physiological effort, without abnormally high cardiac filling  pressures. Such inability can result from a complex interplay between  intrinsic cardiac abnormalities and extracardiac factors that impair and limit  ventricular pump function. Since the early 1990s HF was therefore usually defined  as “a pathophysiological state in which an abnormality of cardiac function is  responsible for failure of the heart to pump blood at a rate commensurate with  metabolic requirements or to do so only from an elevated filling pressure”  . Patients who meet this definition of HF are a very heterogeneous  group with regard to the underlying pathomechanisms for the pathological  reduction of the cardiac output (CO) and/or increase of the filling pressure in  both or only in one of the two ventricles (depending on the individual  etiopathogenetic particularities of the HF syndrome). More recently, these  complex definitions, although accurate in principle, were considered less  suitable for the everyday practice because all the requirements can often not be  verified in outpatient care, and they also do not apply to all subgroups of  patients with HF. Therefore, a recently proposed “universal HF definition  and classification”, which aimed to facilitate the evaluation of HF patients,  defined HF as a clinical syndrome with symptoms and/or signs caused by a  structural and/or functional cardiac abnormality corroborated by elevated  natriuretic peptide levels and/or objective evidence of pulmonary or systemic  congestion. However, particularly in chronic HF accompanied by signs  and symptoms of pulmonary and/or peripheral congestion, further stratification of  patients into those with LV and/or RV systolic dysfunction and those with  predominantly diastolic dysfunction will often be necessary due to the existence  of relevant therapeutic and prognostic differences between these subsets of HF  patients. Somewhat surprisingly, in the recently proposed “universal HF  definition and classification”, right-sided HF is mentioned only very briefly in  a small chapter entitled: “Other syndromes related to heart failure”  . As Bozkurt et al. underline, they did not  specify left- or right-sided HF in their new definition and classification given  that in advanced HF biventricular failure is common, and right HF can also be  recognized as part of the above definition when patients present with symptoms or  signs caused by a cardiac abnormality and have elevated natriuretic peptide  levels or objective evidence of cardiogenic systemic or pulmonary congestion.  However, the revised classification of HF according to LV ejection fraction  (LVEF) which includes HF with reduced LVEF (HFrEF, defined as HF with LVEF  40%), HF with mildly reduced LVEF (HFmrEF, defined as HF with LVEF  41–49%), HF with preserved LVEF (HFpEF, defined as HF with LVEF 50%),  and HF with improved LVEF (HFimpEF, defined as HF with a baseline LVEF  40%, a 10 point increase from baseline LVEF, and a second  measurement of LVEF 40%), as well as the designation of RV failure as only  one of “other syndromes related to heart failure”, could lead to an  underestimation of the impact of RV dysfunction in HF. Last year, in the new  American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology/ Heart Failure Society of America guidelines, HF was defined as a complex clinical syndrome with  symptoms and signs that result from any structural or functional impairment of  ventricular filling or ejection of blood. From a pathophysiological point of  view, this definition appears more adequate that the definition proposed before  by Bozkurt et al..

3. Basic Insights into the Pathophysiology of Ventricular Dysfunction
Optimal cardiac function is based on an ordered sequence of mechanical events  orchestrated by electrical timing, which involves the interdependent work of both  ventricles. Although the LV and RV differ greatly in their size, geometry,  architecture, and function, the balance in their outputs must be maintained under  equilibrium conditions and also be rapidly restored during or after transitions  from one flow rate to another. Ventricular ejection is dependent on  myocardial contractility, preload and afterload. Additionally, ventricular pump  function is substantially influenced by heart rhythm, cardiac valve function  (i.e., valve alterations and dysfunction which affect the loading conditions of  the heart), synchrony of intra-ventricular and inter-ventricular contraction,  ventricular interdependence and pericardial constraint.
Both LV and RV failure occur most often as a consequence of myocardial injury of  various causes and/or hemodynamic overloading. In initial stages of ventricular  dysfunction, the ongoing increasing stretching of the myocardial fibers by the  increased intraventricular end-diastolic pressure (EDP) initiates an adaptive  rise in cardiomyocyte contraction force (Frank-Starling law of the heart) and a  myocardial hypertrophy. Neuro-hormonal activation (i.e., sympathetic activation)  by the low CO, aimed to maintain the blood supply to the vital organs by raising  the systemic vascular resistance (SVR) and also the renal retention of salt and  water (i.e., renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activation), also act initially  as adaptive responses. Persistent ventricular overloading-induced excessive  myocyte stretch and hypertrophy initiate pathological remodeling processes with  progressive increase in ventricular wall stiffness and reduction in pump function  . Spherical ventricular dilation (i.e., most characteristic  remodeling-induced morphologic alteration) increases the systolic wall stress  which in turn reduces the efficiency of ventricular myocardial contraction.  With the ongoing exacerbation of its geometry alterations the ventricle must  develop progressively higher wall tension to preserve the same systolic pressure  and, therefore, the dilation itself enhances the mechanical energy expenditure of  the failing ventricle. Simultaneously, the progressive increase of the  ventricular wall tension, associated with a corresponding reduction of the CO,  exacerbates the reduction of the myocardial oxygen supply by impairing the  coronary blood flow. Ventricular dilation and remodeling also cause size  and geometry alterations of the atrioventricular valve ring which facilitates the  development and progression of functional ventricular-atrial regurgitation,  inducing ventricular volume overloading with additional reduction of forward  stroke volume (fSV). The ventricular volume overloading-induced  increase of the end-diastolic volume (EDV) and the reduction of the ventricular  relative wall thickness (RWT = wall thickness/cavity diameter ratio) also worsen  the functional “afterload mismatch” and can therefore contribute to a further  reduction of the CO with an additional increase in ventricular EDP. The reduced  ventricular ejection will also increase the end-systolic ventricular volume  (ESV), which can further aggravate ventricular dysfunction. The resulting  ventricular myocyte overstretching abolishes the Frank-Starling mechanism and  also causes a progressive decrease of the myocardial compliance which aggravates  the diastolic dysfunction and will have an important contribution to both the  severity and the prognosis of HF. Thus, even if a systolic dysfunction was the  primary cause of HF, both systolic and diastolic dysfunction will finally  contribute together to the symptomatology and severity of HF and cannot be  considered as separate and independent entities.
The pathophysiology of diastolic heart failure (DHF) is characterized by a low  CO that results typically from a ventricle with thick walls but a small cavity  (increased mass/volume ratio). If the LV is stiff, the slow relaxation in  early diastole and the increased resistance to filling in late diastole induce an  increase in diastolic pressures associated with reduction of the stroke volume  (SV). The low CO manifests as fatigue, while the high EDP, which is  transmitted backwards through the pulmonary veins to the pulmonary capillaries,  induces dyspnea under slight physical stress or even at rest. Like in  systolic HF, these pathophysiological abnormalities trigger neuro-hormonal  activation and increase in the pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) leading to  pressure overload-induced RV dysfunction. In earlier stages, symptoms may be  unmasked by exercise because patients with DHF are unable to augment their SV by  increasing their ventricular EDV via the Frank-Starling mechanism. These  patients often have an exaggerated response of systolic blood pressure to  exercise. Mechanisms contributing to abnormal LV diastolic properties include  stiff large arteries, hypertension, myocardial ischemia (particularly in patients  with coronary microvascular dysfunction without functionally significant  epicardial coronary stenoses), diabetes, and intrinsic myocardial changes with or  without associated hypertrophy.

4. Anatomical and Functional Particularities of the Left and Right  Ventricle
Certain anatomical and functional particularities of the LV and RV must be  considered when assessing their systolic and diastolic function. The most  important particularities of the RV are the varying degrees of intensity, spatial  direction and timing of regional myocardial contraction, the fact that its  different anatomical regions (i.e., inlet, infundibulum and apex) play a  different role in blood ejection, as well as its characteristic responses to  hemodynamic overloading. In addition, the diversity in myocardial  mechanics (including its timing), even among the normal right ventricles,  complicates the evaluation of both normal and impaired RV function. Because the  thicker sub-endocardial RV layer is composed of preferentially longitudinally  arranged myocytes, whereas in the thinner subepicardium (approximately 25% of  wall thickness) the myofibers are arranged circumferentially, overall, the RV  myocytes are mainly oriented in the longitudinal direction. Due to the  different orientations of myocardial fibers in the inflow and outflow part, these  two essential parts of the RV are contracting perpendicular to each other: the RV  inflow longitudinally and the RV outflow circumferentially. As a  result, whereas the normal LV myocardial shortening occurs symmetrically in the  transverse and longitudinal planes, the normal RV contraction pattern is mainly  characterized by longitudinal shortening. Despite this, chronic pressure  and volume overload-induced hypertrophy of circumferential fibers can increase  the relative contribution of circumferential myocardial contraction to the global  RV systolic function. RV myocardial longitudinal shortening also  correlates strongly with RV ejection fraction (RVEF), whereas transverse shortening and RVEF do not  correlate.
Functioning predominantly as a volume pump, the compliant thin-walled RV  tolerates better volume than pressure overload and is more sensitive to afterload  changes than the LV. As a consequence of the distinctly high afterload  sensitivity of RV pump function, both reductions in ventricular ejection and  maladaptive ventricular dilation occur much earlier in the pressure overloaded RV  than in the pressure overloaded LV.
RV diastolic function also differs considerably from that of the LV. The thin RV  walls and the concave interventricular septum (IVS) are relatively distensible  conferring the RV a higher compliance which allows greater changes in RV volume,  associated with only small changes in the diastolic pressure. Thus, unlike  the LV, the RV may dilate significantly in response to acute pressure or volume  overload even without a decrease in myocardial contractility.
Although both systolic and diastolic myocardial dysfunction are always involved  in the pathogenesis of advanced HF due to primary impaired LV function, a  particularity of LV dysfunction is that in half of cases, diastolic dysfunction  has proved to be the major cause of HF. Before the use of the term HFpEF,  this complex clinical syndrome dominated by signs and symptoms of HF despite the  absence of relevant LVEF reduction was designated as diastolic HF, and  accordingly, HFpEF was originally also considered as a disorder caused solely by  abnormalities in LV diastolic function. Meanwhile, there are strong  indications that HFpEF should be considered as part of a systemic syndrome  involving multiple organ systems, likely triggered by inflammation and with an  important contribution of ageing, genetic predisposition, lifestyle factors, and  multiple comorbidities. Basic mechanisms affecting the myocardium in  HFpEF include myocyte alterations (hypertrophy, diastolic and systolic  dysfunction, energetic abnormalities), interstitial fibrosis, inflammation,  increased oxidative stress, endothelial dysfunction, as well as reduced density  and impaired autoregulation of the microcirculation. The major cardiovascular  pathophysiological processes involved in HFpEF incorporate increased systemic  vascular resistance, increased conduit arterial stiffness, abnormal  ventricular-arterial coupling, reduced LV long-axis systolic function, slowed  early diastolic relaxation, reduced LV compliance with increased end-diastolic  stiffness, reduced left atrial (LA) reservoir and contractile function, impaired  RV function, and chronotropic incompetence. Despite its limitations  for predicting cardiac functional reserve and symptoms, the diagnosis of LV  failure is still based on LVEF, although in fact, a preserved LVEF has no  diagnostic role for HFpEF except to exclude HFrEF. Thus, LVEF  enables effective separation of HFrEF and HFpEF patients, but has limited  capacity to further stratify HF patients. The LVEF value can estimate global  function but does not indicate LV volume or SV.
In HF caused initially by LV dysfunction, the rising filling pressures in the LV  and LA transmitted to the pulmonary vessels increase the filling pressures in the  post-capillary pulmonary circulation and thereby also the PVR. The resulting  pulmonary hypertension (PH) associated with increasing RV pressure-overloading  will be followed by progressive RV dysfunction.
Left-sided HF-related pulmonary hypertension (PH World Heath Organization [WHO] type 2) is the most common  cause of chronic RV failure. Unlike patients with RV failure related to pulmonary  arterial hypertension (PAH type 1, precapillary pulmonary hypertension without  elevated left-sided heart filling pressures) who benefit particularly from  selective pulmonary vasodilatation therapy, those with RV failure related to PH  type 2 can often not benefit from such a therapy, which may even aggravate the  congestion in the pulmonary circulation if the RV output improvement cannot be  immediately balanced by the failing LV.
Given the distinctly high afterload sensitivity of the RV pump function,  pressure overload is the predominant pathophysiological mechanism in RV failure  and pressure loading resulting from high resistance against blood flow from the  pulmonary artery to the LA as well as pulmonary valve stenosis are the major  causes for right-sided HF. Other causes of right-sided HF include RV  ischemia and infarction, primary cardiomyopathies with mainly RV involvement  (e.g., arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy), and cardiac lesions  associated with congenital heart diseases. Fig. 1 provides an overview of the  pathophysiological mechanisms involved in the development of RV failure in the  presence of high resistance to blood flow in the pulmonary circulation.
Overview of pathophysiological mechanisms involved in the 
development of right ventricular failure secondary to persistent increased 
resistance to blood flow in the pulmonary ciculation. RV, right ventricle; 
, tricuspid valve annulus; TR, tricuspid regurgitation; RVF, 
RV failure; PA, pulmonary artery. The arrows inside the boxes indicate increase () or 
decrease (). Green lettering and green arrows in or outside the box 
indicates favorable (adaptive) responses. Blue-green lettering in the boxes 
indicates reversibility of alterations. * The adaptive response is enabled 
by the Frank-Starling mechanism and the initially adaptive myocardial hypertrophy.

5. Impact of Hemodynamic Overload on Cardiac Structure and Function
It is well established that pressure and volume overload affect ventricular  size, geometry and pump function to an extent that depends largely on the  intensity and duration of ventricular overloading, as well as on the structural  and functional particularities of the LV and RV regarding their resistance and  responses (i.e., adaptive or maladaptive) to hemodynamic overloading.  Experimental studies revealed that, in pressure overload and volume  overload-induced HF, the pathological myocardial remodeling differs not only  structurally and functionally but is also associated with distinct proteomic  alterations.

5.1 Left Ventricular Systolic and Diastolic Function during Pressure  Overloading
Pressure overload-induced LV remodeling processes and myocardial dysfunction are  a major cause for HF particularly in elderly patients with arterial hypertension  (AH) and/or severe aortic stenosis (AS). For a long time, it has been  controversial whether the myocardium preserves normal systolic function in  pressure overload LV hypertrophy (LVH). This resulted in part from the fact  that most whole-heart studies incorporated endocardial measurements (e.g., LVEF)  that reflect LV chamber function, whereas most experimental studies utilized  myocardial or myofibril function. Experimental studies on LV myocardium  with pressure overload-induced hypertrophy revealed consistently depressed  cardiomyocyte contractility. By contrast, most studies involving  the entire LV indicated that the functional state of hypertrophied ventricles  evaluated by LVEF measurements remains long time unaltered before the LVEF and  other functional indexes become abnormal due to myocardial exhaustion and  decompensation. However, the use of LV midwall stress-shortening data  strongly indicated that myocardial contractile function in AH-related LVH can be  depressed also in the presence of a normal EF. Comparing patients with  massive AH-related pressure overload LVH but undoubtedly normal LVEF with healthy  persons (LVEF: 69  13% and 63  11%, respectively, p    0.01), Aurigemma et al. found in the AH patient group a depressed  LV myocardial shortening at the midwall and along the long axis, which indicated  the presence of a relevant myocardial contractile dysfunction. They concluded  that in patients with hypertensive LVH, the indexes of LV chamber function (ejection fraction  and circumferential shortening at the endocardium) may be normal or even  increased in the presence of depressed midwall and long-axis shortening. They  also found that the difference between endocardial and midwall shortening was  directly related to the magnitude of LVH, reflected by the RWT whose increase  reduces the LV systolic wall tension. Their observations suggest  that the increased endocardial circumferential shortening in the AH-related  pressure overload LVH patient group in comparison to healthy persons (42   10% vs. 37  5%, p   0.01) could be an adaptive myocardial  response to the high afterload. These considerations underscored the impact  of ventricular geometry on endocardial shortening, and they suggest that an  analysis of LV myocardial shortening at the midwall and along the long axis is  particularly important when LV mass and geometry are changing, especially for the  evaluation of LVH regression during the treatment of AH patients, as well as for  the postoperative patient monitoring after aortic valve (AV) replacement for AS  . The speckle-tracking-derived myocardial strain imaging by  echocardiography (also known as speckle-tracking echocardiography [STE]), which was introduced in the clinical praxis after 2005,  has meanwhile unambiguously confirmed the higher sensitivity of myocardial  deformation analysis in comparison to the LVEF measurements for early detection  and more reliable grading of LV systolic dysfunction.
The adaptive responses of the LV myocardium to pressure overload appear to be  both highly relevant and strikingly reversible even at advanced ages. An  evaluation of 80 patients (mean age 80  11 years) with severe AS and high  surgical risk before transcatheter AV implantation (TAVI) revealed at 8  3  months after TAVI an improvement of LVEF only in those with LVEF 50% before  TAVI (EF increase from 34.7  10% to 49  13%, p    0.001), although in this group the prevalence of coexistent coronary artery  disease (CAD) was almost twice as high than in the group with pre-implantation  LVEF 50% (76.5% vs. 39.1%, p   0.001). Although in  that study there was a significant LVEF and SV increase only in the patient group  with LVEF 50% before TAVI, the systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (PAPS)  decreased significantly and the tricuspid annular plane peak systolic excursion  (TAPSE) increased significantly in both groups. This indicates a  reduction of left-sided heart filling pressures after TAVI and thus also the  improvement of LV diastolic function which reduces both the congestion in the  pulmonary circulation and the pressure overloading of the RV. Also, in the study  by Naeim et al., STE data revealed in both patient groups important  beneficial post-TAVI changes in myocardial mechanics, which were partially  different, although before TAVI the mean values of the stenotic AV areas were  nearly identical in the two patient groups. Thus, whereas the global LV  longitudinal strain and strain rate (GLS and GLSR) improved significantly in both  groups, the global circumferential strain and strain rate (GCS and GCSR), which  were at baseline significantly lower in the patients with LVEF 50%, increased  significantly in this group after TAVI, while in the group with LVEF  50%, their values showed after TAVI an insignificant tendency toward  lower values. Strikingly, the apical circumferential strain (ACS), which  increased in the group with reduced LVEF from depressed values (18.7   11%) towards normal values (22  12%; p   0.03), decreased in  the group with preserved LVEF from supra-physiological values (36  11.5%)  towards normal values (32  9%; p   0.024). Similarly, the net  LV twist angle, which was low in patients with LVEF 50%, increased  significantly after TAVI towards normal values, whereas in those with preserved  LVEF, where this parameter was supra-physiological before TAVI, decreased  significantly thereafter. These observations suggest that like in AH-related  pressure overload LVH, high (supra-physiological) endocardial circumferential  shortening could be an adaptive myocardial response to the high afterload. At  least equally important is also the evidence provided by Naeim et  al., that the alterations in myocardial mechanics  detectable in patients with severe AS are at least partially reversible after  elimination of the stenosis even in octogenarian persons, and even in those with  coexistent CAD and evidence for reduced contractile function. This observation  not only confirms the assumption that many of the myocardial responses to  pressure overload are potentially reversible adaptive responses, but also  underscores the benefits of AV replacement even in elderly persons, for which a  coexistent CAD should not be considered by no means as an absolute  contraindication for TAVI.
As time passes, pressure overload-induced LV hypertrophy will be accompanied by  progressive diastolic dysfunction due to delayed relaxation and interstitial  fibrosis-related increased LV chamber stiffness. In a study of AS patients  who have not undergone valve surgery, the mitral E/e’ ratio (i.e., ratio of early  diastolic mitral inflow velocity to early diastolic mitral annulus velocity) was  the most predictive parameter of clinical events among clinical and imaging  measurements. In other studies, the E/e’ ratio was an important independent  predictor of early, midterm, and late mortality after AV replacement.

5.2 Left Ventricular Systolic and Diastolic Function during Volume  Overloading
LV volume overload occurs more often in response to mitral regurgitation (MR) or  aortic regurgitation (AR) where a relevant part of the ejected blood is not  delivered to the systemic circulation, but instead is either delivered back to  the LA or returned to the LV, respectively. The chronic volume  overload results in LV chamber enlargement with eccentric myocardial hypertrophy  which allows the ventricle to counteract, at least in part, the negative impact  of the regurgitation on the fSV.
LV volume overload is the major pathognomonic feature of chronic AR. The degree  of volume overload is determined by the magnitude of the AR, which is related to  the size of the regurgitant orifice, the aorta-ventricular pressure gradient, and  the diastolic time. However, the AR-related LV volume overload induced by  the simultaneous increase of both the SV and the regurgitant volume (RegV)  associated with concomitant progression the LV eccentric myocardial remodeling  lead inevitably also to an increase in LV myocardial wall tension, and thus also  to an additional pressure overloading. The progressive increase of the LV end-diastolic volume (LVEDV) can  also induce dilation and geometry change of the mitral valve ring associated with  MR of different degrees which aggravates LV dysfunction by aggravation of the  volume overload.

5.3 Right Ventricular Systolic and Diastolic Function during  Pressure Overloading
The adaptation of the RV to pressure overload is based on its intrinsic  myocardial contractility, the duration, progression rate (e.g., chronic steadily  increase or acutely occurring massive increase in the resistance to blood flow in  the pulmonary circulation) and severity of the pressure overloading, as well as  the adaptability of the RV myocardium to sustain abnormally high wall stress  . The initial adaptive responses to persistent pressure overload, which  are mainly achieved by an increase in myocardial mass (i.e., adaptive  hypertrophy) and contractility, are enabled by an upregulation of subcellular  organelles (e.g., sarcolemma, sarcoplasmic reticulum, myofibrils, and  mitochondria), which aim to minimize the wall stress for the RV exposed to an  abnormally high workload (homeometric adaptation). In this early adaptive  state, RV–pulmonary artery (PA) coupling, the CO and the RVEF, as well as the  exercise capacity are maintained. However, myocardial hypertrophy leads to  increased RV diastolic pressure, which indicates that the increased RV  contractile function occurs at the cost of an alteration of its diastolic  function. The aggravation of pressure overloading finally exhausts the  homeometric adaptation and induces a transition of the RV alterations to a  heterometric adaptation where the RV dilates, and uncoupling arises because its  contractility fails to match the excessively high afterload.
There are different stages of adaptive and maladaptive RV remodeling processes.  Throughout maladaptive RV remodeling, there are further stages of reversible and  irreversible RV failure (RVF). Thus, adaptive and maladaptive phenotypes are not  completely different responses, but rather parts of a sequence of ventricular  responses to pressure overloading. Currently, the mechanisms behind the  transition toward RVF are still incompletely understood.
Several mechanisms and myocardial structural changes have been associated with  either adaptive or maladaptive RV phenotypes (e.g., sympathetic hyperactivity,  metabolic shift from oxidative metabolism toward glycolysis, capillary  rarefaction, and fibrosis). Experimental data suggest a larger contribution of  interstitial fibrosis to total stiffness in end-stage RV failure, whereas  cardiomyocyte stiffening may play a larger role in earlier stages of pressure  overload-induced RV structural and functional alterations. Prolonged  activation of adaptive mechanisms, particularly in association with a progressive  increase of pressure overloading, finally leads to severe RV systolic dysfunction  and diastolic stiffness, followed by irreversible RVF. Given that RV adaptation  to pressure overload is quite variable among patients, the progression to  right-sided heart failure remains difficult to predict.
After full exhaustion of its adaptive capacities to overcome the excessively  high resistance in the pulmonary circulation, the RV responses to the  continuously high afterload exhibit more often a transition to pathological  myocardial hypertrophy associated with a down-regulation of subcellular adaptive  activities as well as ischemia due to reduced capillary density.  Oxidative stress, -handling abnormalities, mitochondrial dysfunction,  inflammation, and cardiomyocyte apoptosis appeared particularly involved in the  alteration of contractile function in patients with pathological RV hypertrophy  .
RVF caused by ventricular pressure overloading is ultimately the consequence of  both systolic and diastolic RV dysfunction. Nevertheless, whereas RV systolic  dysfunction was steadily found to be an independent predictor of mortality in PH,  for RV diastolic dysfunction such correlation was not found in all studies  . Given that RV diastole consists of several phases, it cannot be  characterized by one single parameter and, therefore, the evaluation of RV  diastolic function is much more demanding.

5.4 Right Ventricular Systolic and Diastolic Function during Volume  Overloading
Because of its anatomical and physiological particularities, the RV tolerates  volume overload better, and for much longer periods of time, than pressure  overload. Whereas in children the most common causes of RV volume overload  are congenital heart diseases, in adults, tricuspid and/or pulmonary  regurgitation in the presence of various cardiac pathologies are the major  triggers of RV chronic volume overload. In the early stages of volume  overloading, the RV increases its contractile function through the Frank-Starling  law, which can effectively compensate for the altered hemodynamic conditions.  This adaptive response was also confirmed by the evidence of an increase in RV  longitudinal shortening in the presence of relevant volume overload. Chronic  volume overload may ultimately lead to RV systolic dysfunction and increased  morbidity and mortality, particularly in the presence of superimposed pressure  overload and/or marked RV enlargement, which argues for corrective interventions  before significant RV dilatation ensues. RV volume overload  leads also to simultaneous LV dysfunction, without intrinsic alteration in  myocardial contractility, primarily due to LV underfilling secondary to septal  displacement and changes in LV geometry rather than due to a decreased fSV  of the RV.

6. Impact of Loading Conditions on the Evaluation of Ventricular  Function
Ideally, an index of contractility should be sensitive to changes in myocardial  contractile state but indifferent to loading conditions. Already more than 3  decades ago it was proven that the EF, which was long considered the most useful  single hemodynamic parameter for the assessment of ventricular dysfunction, is  highly load dependent and, therefore, its usefulness as a measure of ventricular  function is limited. Because the EF reflects the ventricular contractile  function in relation to loading conditions, it cannot be considered as an index  of contractility. Accordingly, patients with identical EF values can have  very different levels of myocardial contractility and ventricular dysfunction  . Even with unchanged contractility an increase of the afterload can  relevantly reduce the EF, whereas a reduction of the afterload increases the EF  . LVEF can be normal in patients with LV hypertrophy associated with small  cavity size, even in the presence of LV systolic dysfunction. Regarding the  highly load-sensitive RV, because there is no single morphological or functional  cardiac parameter which can alone reveal the overall appearance of RV  morphological and functional alterations, it is necessary to conduct  multiparametric assessments and to use integrative approaches utilizing parameter  combinations which also include data referring to the RV actual loading  conditions.

6.1 Left Ventricular Evaluation in Relation to Loading Conditions
There are several clinical presentations of LV dysfunction where the commonly  used volumetric EF calculation: LVEF (%) = [(EDV – ESV)/EDV)]  100,  based on EDV and ESV measurements enabled by different non-invasive methods  (e.g., echocardiography [Echo], magnetic resonance imaging [MRI], computed  tomography [CT], or invasively by LV contrast ventriculography during  catheterization, does not reflect the fraction of chamber volume ejected into the  systemic circulation. In this regard, both MR and AR are of highly  important relevance.
In the presence of MR, the difference between the EDV and ESV does not reflect  anymore the fSV because it becomes the sum of fSV + RegV.  This leads to an increase of the volumetric LVEF corresponding to the increased  blood volume delivered back to the LA which, in turn, erroneously leads to  overestimation of LV contractile function. Such overestimation can result  in an unfavourable delay of a necessary mitral valve (MV) replacement or repair.  Overestimation of LV pump function in the presence of relevant MR can be avoided  by using the formula: LVEF (%) = [fSV/EDV]  100. Direct  measurements of the fSV are possible with the pulsed-wave Doppler  . Such measurement of the fSV also allows calculations of the RegV  and the regurgitant fraction (RegF). The mitral RegV which is often  more difficult and less reliably and directly measurable can be calculated from  the directly measured LV EDV, ESV and fSV by the formula: RegV = EDV – (ESV  + fSV). The RegF can be obtained by dividing the RegV by the total  volume ejected by the LV during systole (i.e., fSV + RegV). Given that in  the presence of MR the difference between the EDV and ESV becomes the sum of  fSV + RegV, the RegF can also be calculated by the formula: RegF (%) =  [RegV/(EDV – ESV)]  100.
Although the LVEF reflects the LV contractile function also in the presence of  AR, it is important to take into consideration that an increase of the  aortic RegV in the detriment of the delivered blood volume into the systemic  circulation will not change the LVEF as long as the amount of blood ejected into  the aorta (i.e., fSV) remains unchanged. In the presence of AR, the true  effective blood volume which ultimately leaves the LV (i.e., the difference  between the fSV and RegV) can therefore differ even between patients with  identical LVEF, but different degrees of AR (i.e., different RegF). Thus, LVEF  lacks sensitivity to detect subclinical LV dysfunction in patients with AV  disease. This also explains why in asymptomatic patients, the LV cavity size  measurements were found more useful than the LVEF value for the prediction of  postoperative outcomes and for decision-making regarding the necessity of AV  replacement. The development of a secondary MR as a consequence of the  AR-related volume overloading-induced LV dilation can furthermore misleadingly  increase the volumetrically calculated LVEF.
In patients with AS, LVEF reduction does not clearly suggest impaired myocardial  contractility, if the hypertrophied left ventricle can develop supernormal  systolic pressures without relevant changes of its cavity size and geometry  . This can explain the frequently detected EF improvement after AV replacement. Given the increasing prevalence of AS with  advancing age, as well as its more frequent association with atherosclerosis and  AH in these patients, the impact of reduced systemic arterial compliance (SAC) on  the LV afterload in patients with “degenerative” AS was more intensively  investigated during the last two decades. Meanwhile there is conclusive  evidence that in AS patients older than 60 years, particularly in those with low  flow AS associated with reduced SAC, the LV faces a double load (i.e., valvular  and arterial) and, therefore, AS cannot be viewed in all patients as an isolated  disease of the AV. In patients with AS, reduced SAC has a major influence  on the occurrence of LV systolic and diastolic dysfunction. Relevant AS and  reduced SAC showed additive effects in increasing afterload and deteriorating LV  function. The total SAC can be indirectly calculated with the equation:  SAC = SVi/PP, where SVi is the SV index, and PP the brachial pulse pressure  (i.e., the difference between systolic and diastolic arterial blood pressure).  Whereas SVi/PP 0.6 mL//mmHg indicates normal SAC, values 0.6  mL//mmHg indicate reduced SAC. For estimation of the global LV  afterload in AS patients it appeared useful to calculate the “valvulo-arterial  impedance” () according to the formula:  = (SAP +  )/SVi, where SAP is the systolic arterial pressure,  is the  mean net gradient across the narrowed AV (i.e., mean gradient taking into account  pressure recovery) and SVi is the SV index.  represents the  valvular and arterial factors that oppose LV ejection by absorbing the mechanical  energy developed by the LV. A  5.0 mmHg/mL/ indicates  increased afterload that exceeds the limit of LV compensatory mechanisms and,  therefore, leads to afterload mismatch with subsequent LV systolic dysfunction  . From a therapeutic point of view, it is of crucial importance to  determine the respective contributions of the AV and the SAC to the afterload  excess because even if the high SAC cannot be normalized by medical treatment,  the implantation of AV prosthesis can be beneficial for the patient if this would  result in a significant reduction in the LV afterload. In this regard it appeared  useful to confront the value for  to the values of the energy loss index  (ELI) and SVi/PP. The ELI, a parameter calculable by the formula: ELI =  [(EOA  )/( – EOA)]/BSA, where EOA is the effective  orifice area of the AV,  is the aortic cross-sectional area calculated  from the diameter of the aorta measured at the sino-tubular junction, and BSA is  the body surface area, appeared useful for a better classification of patients  with AS, based on both the severity of AV narrowing (severe AS defined as ELI  0.55 /) and the degree of SAC alteration. Comparing 2  groups of elderly patients with severe AS (ELI 0.55 /) and  similar AV area indexes (i.e., 0.39  0.06 and 0.39  0.11  /) but with significantly different SAC (one group with SVi/PP  values 0.6 mL//mmHg, indicating normal arterial compliance, the other  with SVi/PP values 0.6 mL//mmHg, indicating reduced arterial  compliance), in the group with reduced arterial compliance, the  (which  reflects the global afterload) was significantly higher, whereas the peak and  mean pressure gradients across the stenotic AV, as well as the SV and cardiac  index, were significantly lower. In multivariate analysis excluding   identified , both the ELI and the SAC appeared to be independent  predictors of LV dysfunction, but when  was entered into the analysis, it  become the only hemodynamic variable associated with LV diastolic and systolic  dysfunction. Also in that study, although the global afterload was  significantly higher in the group with pathologically reduced arterial  compliance, the global afterload in that group was only 28.6% higher than in the  group with normal arterial compliance (i.e., 5.4  1.1 vs. 4.2  0.7  mmHg/mL/, p   0.001), which indicates that a LV afterload  reduction by AV prosthesis implantation can be beneficial also in the presence of  reduced SAC.
Because LVEF reduction is associated with poor prognosis in patients with  relevant AS, a progressive EF reduction is considered as a strong indicator for  necessary intervention. However, in patients without additional cardiac  co-morbidities, several adaptive mechanisms which act to preserve the EF can  delay the fall in EF during the transition period toward LV failure. This was  confirmed by the use of STE, which appeared more reliable than the conventional  echocardiography for early identification of patients with AS at great risk for  LV failure.
A more recent attempt to improve the diagnostic and prognostic value of the LVEF  revealed that the EF up to the time of maximal ventricular fiber shortening named  as: “First-Phase Ejection Fraction” (), can predict cardiac worsening  in patients with moderate AS better than other parameters including the  global longitudinal strain, the aortic valve area index, mean pressure gradient,  SV index and trans-aortic flow rate.  appeared also helpful for the  timing of a valve replacement in asymptomatic patients with severe AV narrowing  .
Due to the load dependency of all the measurements which are routinely used in  daily practice for evaluation of LV systolic function it is necessary to consider  this important problem in the interpretation of measured values. However,  the evaluation of systolic function in relation to its loading conditions  requires integrative approaches using several LV anatomical and functional  parameters in combination with hemodynamic parameters which usually necessitate  both invasively and noninvasively obtained measurements. However, such demanding  integrative approaches which include also invasively obtained hemodynamic  parameters are hardly applicable in the outpatients. The introduction of new  completely non-invasive methods for quantifying the LV myocardial work (MW),  which take into account the loading conditions during myocardial deformation and  involve combining non-invasively obtained LV pressure curves with STE-derived  strain measurements, has resulted in rising interest for noninvasive integrated  approaches. The pressure curve can be obtained by associating  peripheral systolic blood pressure (SBP) with Echo-derived cardiac event times  including isovolumic contraction (IVC), systolic ejection, and isovolumic  relaxation (IVR). With software support, by integrating the STE-derived  myocardial longitudinal strain measurements with the pressure curves, it is  possible to generate a non-invasive LV pressure-strain loop, which enables the  quantification of MW.
MW consists of 4 distinct components: the global work index (GWI), the global  constructive work (GCW), the global wasted work (GWW), and the global work  efficiency (GWE). Each of these components provides different  information about LV mechanics. The GWI quantifies the indexed total work  performed by the LV throughout the entire mechanical systole including both IVC  and IVR (corresponds to the myocardial energy translated into mechanical energy  between MV closure and opening). The GCW is the LV work that contributes to  LV ejection and is performed by contraction with and without myocyte shortening  (i.e., positive work during the IVC and ejection, respectively), and by active  relaxation (negative work implying energy-dependence) with and without myocyte  lengthening during the IVR and the early diastolic LV filling, respectively.  Thus, the GCW quantifies the energy consumed by the myocardium that contributes  effectively to the generation of the CO by facilitating LV ejection. On the other  hand, GWW represents the negative work that does not contribute to LV  ejection. It includes the negative segmental work during IVC and ejection  where the myocardium undergoes lengthening as well as positive segmental work  during IVR when the myocardium undergoes shortening. It quantifies the energy  consumed by the myocardium that is wasted and does not contribute to CO. Finally,  the GWE is the ratio between constructive work and total (constructive and  wasted) work, which reflects the net percentage of performed MW which is actually  translated into CO and can be calculate with the formula: GWE = [GCW/(GCW + GWW)]   100. In one study, patients with arterial hypertension (SBP  160 mmHg) revealed significantly higher GWI values in comparison to healthy  persons, despite rather unexpectedly normal GLS values. This result confirms  that usual STE-parameters as GLS are alone not able to reflect the increased  cardiac energy demand to counteract increased afterload.
In AS patients, the estimation of LV pressure from brachial artery blood  pressure measurements is limited due to the presence of AV obstruction, which  creates a higher peak intraventricular pressure compared with the  peripheral SBP. To address this limitation, Fortuni et al.  introduced a method in which they combined the mean gradient over the AV measured  by echocardiography with arterial SBP, creating a new parameter for the  noninvasive estimation of the LV pressure in patients with AS. GWI and GLS tend  to vary over time in AS patients. Initially, as long as the AS is compensated and  LV contractile function is preserved, both GWI and GCW increase, whereas absolute  GLS can appear incorrectly low due to its afterload dependency. Later, in  decompensated stages, when LV contractile function becomes impaired, both GWI and  GCW decrease, symptoms of heart failure occur irrespective of the underlying GLS  . Even in asymptomatic AS patients, lower GWI values appeared to be a marker  of decompensation and was also found associated with increased mortality.
In AR, which is characterized by an increase in both pre- and afterload,  initially, the RegV reduces the final SV which leaves the LV and increases the LV  enddiastolic volume. The elevated preload triggers LV adaptation according to the  Frank-Starling law which leads to an increase in SV that tends to compensate for  the volume overload. The elevated preload triggers LV adaptation according to the  Frank-Starling law which leads to an increase in SV that tends to compensate for  the volume overload. In the further course of the AR, sustained high LV wall  tension progressively leads to increased afterload. A recent study which included  patients with moderate or severe chronic AR and preserved LVEF has revealed that  before surgical intervention, both GWI and GCW were elevated in relation to the  severity of AR. A recent study which included patients with moderate or  severe chronic AR preserved LVEF has revealed that before surgical intervention,  both GWI and GCW were elevated in relation to the severity of AR. After the  elimination of the AR, the GWI, GCW, and GWE decreased significantly, while GWW  remained unchanged. However, in 28% of the patients, the GWI remained  abnormally high, suggesting reduced LV reverse remodeling in the presence of  irreversible myocardial damage.
Patients with severe secondary MR revealed significantly altered GWI and GCW  values. However, those alterations appeared to be associated with better GWE  and better preserved (i.e., less impaired) GWW values, which suggest the  existence of potential benefits on myocardial energetics caused by the additional  low impedance alternative for a partial emptying of the LV into the LA. This  could explain the finding that not only the altered GWI and GCW, but also better  GWE and better preserved (i.e., less impaired) GWW values appeared independently  associated with worse long-term survival in those patients. The latter may  also suggest that in very advanced stages of LV remodeling and dysfunction,  associated with severe secondary MR, the elimination of MR (by MV repair or  replacement) could also offset the potential benefits on myocardial energetics  provided before that therapy by the low impedance LA leak through the incompetent  MV, could trigger the development of post-interventional acute life-threatening  LV decompensation. It is well known that the postoperative necessity of a  ventricular assist devce (VAD) implantation or heart transplantation in patients  with advanced LV failure who underwent MV surgery for severe secondary MR is not  an absolute rarity. Table 1 (Ref.) provides an  overview of major Echo-derived combined parameters and indices for evaluation of  LV myocardial responses to pressure and/or volume overloading.
Summary of the most recommended echocardiography-derived 
parameter combinations and indices for evaluation of myocardial responses to left 
ventricular pressure and/or volume overloading.
Parameters	Calculation	Particularities and clinical usefulness	 	MR-corrected LVEF 	LVEF (%) = [fSV/EDV] × 100	- Avoids overvaluation of LV pump function in the presence of mitral regurgitation (MR) because the difference between the measured EDV and ESV is not anymore only the blood volume rejected into the aorta, but in fact becomes the sum of fSV and RegV.	 	fSV = forward stroke volume	- fSV measurements are possible with the Doppler. The RegV and RegF can be calculated by the formulas: RegV = EDV – (ESV + fSV) and RegF (%) = [ RegV/(EDV – ESV)] × 100.	 	EDV = end-diastolic volume	 	RegV = regurgitant volume	 	RegF = regurgitant fraction	 	First-phase ejection fraction () 	(%) = [(EDV – )/EDV] × 100	- Can predict cardiac worsening in patients with moderate AS better than other parameters including the global longitudinal strain, the AV area index, mean pressure gradient, stroke volume index (SVi) and trans-aortic flow rate.	 	 = the LV volume at the time point of the peak blood flow across the AV	- Appeared helpful for optimal timing of AV replacement in asymptomatic patients with severe AV narrowing.	 	Total systemic arterial compliance (SAC) 	SAC = SVi/PP	- In older patients with AS, reduced SAC (0.6 mL//mmHg) has an additive effect on LV pressure overloading during ejection associated with a major impact on the deterioration of LV function.	 	SVi = stroke volume index	- SAC appears useful for differentiation between the relative contribution of AS and arterial stiffness on LV pressure overloading.	 	PP = brachial pulse pressure*		 	“Valvulo-arterial impedance” () 	 = (SAP + )/SVi	-  represents the valvular and arterial factors that oppose LV ejection by absorbing the mechanical energy developed by the LV. Its calculation allows the estimation of the global LV afterload in AS patients.	 	SAP = systolic arterial pressure	- 5.0 mmHg/mL/ indicates increased afterload that exceeds the limit of LV compensatory mechanisms and, therefore, leads to afterload mismatch with subsequent LV systolic dysfunction.	 	 = mean net gradient across the AV		 	Energy loss index (ELI) 	ELI = [(EOA × )/( – EOA)]/BSA	- Useful for a better classification of patients with AS, based on both the severity of AV narrowing (severe AS defined as ELI 0.55 /) and the degree of SAC alteration.	 	EOA = the effective orifice area of the AV	- ELI, together with SAC and , can identify patients who could benefit from AV replacement despite reduced SAC values.	 	= aortic cross-sectional area		 	Global work index (GWI) 	Calculated by software from the global longitudinal strain (GLS), blood pressure values, and PW Doppler-derived time measurements of valvular events.	- GWI quantifies the indexed total work performed by the LV throughout the entire mechanical systole including both IVC and IVR (corresponds to the myocardial energy translated into mechanical energy between MV closure and opening).	 	- This new parameter has the advantage of incorporating information on afterload, through the interpretation of strain in relation to dynamic non-invasive LV pressure.	 	Global constructive work (GCW) 	It is calculated by the same software, using some of the measurements which were also used for calculation of GWI	- GCW is the LV work that contributes to LV ejection and is performed by shortening (positive work) during IVC and systole or by lengthening (negative work) in IVR.	 	- It quantifies the energy consumed by the myocardium that effectively contributes to cardiac output by facilitating LV ejection.	 	Global wasted work (GWW) 	It is calculated also by the same software, using some of the measurements which were used for calculation of GWI	- Represents the LV work that does not contribute to ejection.	 	- It quantifies the energy consumed by the myocardium that is wasted and does not contribute to the cardiac output (CO).	 	Global work efficiency (GWE) 	GWE (%) = [GCW/(GCW + GWW)] × 100	- GWE is the ratio between constructive work and total (constructive and wasted) work, which reflects the net percentage of the performed myocardial work, which is actually translated into CO.
MR, mitral regurgitation; LV, left ventricle; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; ESV, 
end-systolic volume; PW, pulsed-wave; AV, aortic valve; AS, aortic stenosis; IVC, 
isovolumic contraction; IVR, isovolumic relaxation; BSA, body surface area; MV, mitral valve. * PP, difference between 
systolic and diastolic arterial blood pressure.

6.2 Right Ventricular Evaluation in Relation to Loading Conditions
The presence of a distinctively high sensitivity of ventricular size, geometry  and function to pressure overloading associated with a relatively high tolerance  to volume overloading are major particularities of the RV with a relevant impact  on the reliability of its evaluation. Therefore, the evaluation of  the RV and LV differ not only in terms of the preferred techniques and measured  parameters but even more importantly in the interpretation of the measurements in  context with their particularities and the instantaneous hemodynamic loading  conditions.

6.2.1 Role in Estimation of the RV Recovery Potential and Early  Recognition of Impending RV Failure
Assessment of the RV in relation to its actual loading conditions and prediction  of both RV reverse remodeling and functional improvement in case of a reduction  of its hemodynamic overloading is particularly helpful in decision-making before  heart transplantation (HTx) and VAD implantation, as well as for optimal timing of lung transplant  listing for patients with refractory end-stage precapillary PH.
End-stage HF involves both ventricles, even if its initial cause was left-sided  heart disease. Although LV assist devices (LVADs) provide better survival and quality of life than  biventricular assist devices, it must also be considered that RVF associated with  increased morbidity (more often renal, hepatic or multi-organ failure) and  mortality can occur in about 25% of LVAD recipients, even if LVAD implantation  is later followed by a complementary RV assist device (RVAD) implantation. Therefore,  patients who require a long-term biventricular assist device, as well as those  who require a temporary RVAD in addition to the LVAD should be identified already  before surgery or at the latest intraoperatively. In the meantime, it  has become obvious that an Echo can be a cornerstone for major decision-making  processes prior to, as well as during, VAD implantation surgery. Those  patients who had an unfavorable clinical course of RV function after LVAD  implantation, revealed already pre-operatively significant differences in  Echo-derived parameter values related to right atrial (RA) and RV size, geometry and function  . Nevertheless, such anatomical and functional RV alterations in LVAD  candidates could not be recognized in all studies as significant risk factors for  RVF during LVAD support. The vast majority of Echo-derived variables  identified as risk factors for RVF were found alone not able to predict neither  RVF nor provide freedom from RVF after LVAD implantation.
RVF induced by myocardial pressure overloading is the main cause of death in  patients with severe PAH (i.e., mortality rate up to 40% in PAH patients with  acute RHF) and chronic thromboembolic PH. With the continuous  prolongation of waiting-times for lung transplantation (LTx), timely prediction  of no longer reversible RVF in LTx candidates is crucial for the optimal timing  of listing procedures, and therefore, the identification of significant  prognostic predictors is a major goal.

6.2.2 Attempts for RV Evaluation in Relation to Loading  Conditions
Two-dimensional echocardiography (2D-Echo) is the main working tool for routine  clinical evaluation of the RV anatomy and function. However, the utility of RV  volume measurements necessary for the calculation of the EF appeared unreliable  . Accordingly, RVEF calculations derived from 2D-Echo measurements are  no longer recommended, neither for scientific research nor for clinical use  . Because 3D-Echo provides better reproducibility and higher accuracy of  RV volume measurements, it can replace 2D-Echo for these measurements.  However, 2D-Echo remains particularly useful for the assessment of RV and RA size  and function, detection and quantification of tricuspid regurgitation (TR),  as well as for the measurement of the pressure gradient between the RV and the RA  (). Parameters like RV fractional area  change () and TAPSE, and especially the 2D-STE-derived RV and RA strain  and strain rate parameters can provide important functional details.
Although a large number of non-invasively and invasively derived individual  parameters were tested over the time for their diagnostic and prognostic value in  different pathological conditions with relevant involvement of the right-sided  heart, there is still controversy about the reliability of the individual  parameters used in the clinical praxis. The main reason for this controversy lies  in the fact that all right-sided anatomical and functional parameters are  load-dependent. Given the particularly high load dependency of RV size,  geometry and pump function, it is necessary to consider this fundamental aspect  in the interpretation of all collected data related to the evaluation of the  right-sided heart. Because no single parameter, regardless the method (e.g.,  Echo, MRI or CT) used for its measurement, can alone reveal the overall picture  of RV dysfunction, it is necessary to carry out multiparametric assessments and  to also apply integrative approaches using combinations of parameters which  should always also include details about the RV hemodynamic loading conditions  . In the past few years, the potential usefulness of various  parameters and indices of ventricular myocardium adaptability to load referring  to different concepts like ratios of functional parameters and load, RV-PA  coupling, or indices reflecting the ability of the RV to overcome increased PVR  was also investigated. Over the past few years, several indices of  load adaptability referring to different concepts like simple ratio of function  and load, RV-PA coupling, or indices assessing the ability of the RV to overcome  increased PVR have been proposed. There was a general tendency to  create parameter combinations and indices from measurements obtained either by  invasive or non-invasive examinations.
The best known index obtained from invasive measurements is the right heart  catheterization derived stroke work index, which is calculated by the  formula: right heart catheterization (RHC) derived RV stroke work index ()= (mPAP–mRAP)  SVi, where mPAP is the mean PA  pressure, mRAP the mean RA pressure and SVi the mean SV index. This  parameter was found useful for the prediction of a short-term severe worsening of  RV function in pre-capillary PH, as well as for pre-implant prediction of  post-implant RVH in LVAD candidates with secondary RV dilation and dysfunction  . In LVAD candidates, although this index was identified as an  independent predictor for RVF after LVAD implantation with a higher predictive  value in comparison with conventional Echo parameters like  or RV  outflow tract fractional shortening (which were also identified as independent  predictors), its predictive value was lower than that revealed by the STE-derived  RV free wall longitudinal strain (RVFWLS), which is undoubtedly an afterload  dependent parameter. Thus, this observation can also be considered as an  indication of the existence of limitations for the use of solely RHC-derived  measurements which provide no direct information, neither about the RV geometry  and size, nor about its contractile abilities. In principle, it is also possible  to calculate the RVSWi by using conventional Echo-derived measurements because  the mean pressure gradient mPAP– mRAP can be replaced by the continuous-wave  Doppler-derived mean RV–RA pressure gradient obtained from the velocity-time  integral (VTI) of TR, whereas the Echo-derived measurements necessary for the SV  calculation are easily obtainable.
Most of the tested integrative approaches based only on Echo-derived parameters  appeared more or less limited by the lack of more precise hemodynamic data.  Nevertheless, these approaches have the advantage of being particularly suited  for close monitoring of outpatients. Undoubtedly, the most optimal integrative  approaches would necessitate both non-invasively obtained RV measurements  (derived from different Echo techniques, CT or MRI) and invasively obtained  hemodynamic details during RHC, because most of the tested approaches based only  on Echo-derived parameters appeared limited due to the lack of more precise  hemodynamic data. Thus, with the exception of the above mentioned  RVFWLS, the RHC-derived RVSWi was found more useful than the currently used  Echo-derived parameters for the evaluation of the RV in end-stage congestive HF  . The correlation between the RV stroke work index () calculated from Echo-derived  and RHC-derived measurements can also be poor, which is quite  understandable given the lack of precise hemodynamic data provided by the  Echo-derived parameters as well as the lack of information about the RV size,  geometry and myocardial contractile properties provided by RHC-derived  parameters.
During the last few years, several complex Echo-derived indexes suggested as  possible surrogates for the RHC-derived RVSWi, as well as different Echo-derived  composite variables which incorporate either RV myocardial displacement and load,  or velocity of myocardial shortening and load, were tested for their usefulness  for both the evaluation of RV remodeling and dysfunction, and the prediction of  impending severe RV failure.
A simplified composite Echo-derived index was proposed as a surrogate for the   is the “RV contraction-pressure index” (RVCPI), which is derived as  RVCPI = TAPSE  . The RVCPI  showed a close correlation with the RHC-derived  and a high sensitivity  and specificity to predict depressed . In a prospective study  including patients with advanced congestive HF, a multivariate analysis  identified the presence of a low RVCPI as the best predictor of outcome, whereas  neither TAPSE or , nor TAPSE/systolic PAP or /systolic pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP)  revealed significant predictive values. The usefulness of the RVCPI as an  independent predictor of short-term postoperative patient outcomes (including RV  failure) after LVAD implantation was also confirmed in one study. Another  Echo-derived surrogate for the invasively obtained  (i.e., calculated  from RHC-derived measurements), designed by the authors as “RV stroke work”  (), also showed a close correlation with the RHC-derived . This Echo-derived RVSW incorporates the SV and load and is calculated as:   = 4  [TR jet peak velocity]2  [pulmonary  valve-area  VTI], where VTI is the velocity-time integral of the  systolic transpulmonary jet.
During the last decade, certain Echo-derived composite indices which include  either longitudinal movement of a RV myocardial component and load (i.e.,  TAPSE/systolic PAP and TAPSE/PVR) or velocity of myocardial shortening (i.e.,  velocity of deformation) and load (i.e., afterload-corrected peak systolic  longitudinal strain rate) appeared also useful for assessment of RV contractile  function.
The TAPSE/systolic PAP ratio is a simplified approach to assess RV contraction  by plotting longitudinal myocardial shortening vs. the force generated for  overcoming the imposed load. This parameter can facilitate therapeutic  decision-making processes and prognostic assessments in patients with RV  dysfunction, and, based on its high correlation with invasively evaluated RV  systolic elastance/arterial elastance TAPSE/systolic PAP was also proposed as an  index of RV-PA coupling. Several studies demonstrated a high  reproducibility of the necessary measurements and this index appeared able to  predict mortality in patients with HF due to primary impaired LV function and  also in patients with severe PAH. However, as mentioned above  the significant predictive value of mortality in patients with HF originating  from primary impaired LV function was not confirmed by all studies.
The RV ejection efficiency (RVEe), defined as RVEe = TAPSE/PVR, is another  composite variable which was proposed as a non-invasive index of RV-PA coupling  . Thus, using TAPSE as a surrogate for RV ejection and the Echo-derived PVR  as a surrogate for the RHC-derived PVR, the RVEe is easily calculable with the  formula: PVR = TR peak velocity/RV outflow tract velocity-time integral. The calculation of  the RVEe might be appropriate for the assessment of RV systolic function.  However, further studies will be necessary to determine whether the Echo-derived  RVEe can be indeed useful for the assessment of RV function. A limitation of this  index is its decreasing reliability with the aggravation of the TR in patients  with high afterload-induced severe RV dilation. It is well-known that advanced TR  is a confounding factor that can affect the use of TAPSE for assessing RV  function.
The ratio of SV/RV end-systolic volume (SV/RVESV) was also recommended as a surrogate for the RV-PA coupling,  defined as the ratio between ventricular maximal elastance and arterial elastance  (i.e. Emax/Ea), which could therefore be useful in the evaluation of myocardial  contractility corrected for afterload. The major limitations of SV/RVESV are the  fundamentally wrong suppositions that the relationship between the RV  end-systolic pressure and RVESV is linear and crosses the origin, and that, also  for the RV, the end-systolic elastance (Ees) coincides with Emax. Another  weakness of SV/RVESV is the inaccurate measurement of RV volumes with 2D-Echo.  Given that the 2D-Echo-derived RV area measurements are much more reliable than  the RV volume measurements, and one study has already confirmed the  potential usefulness of the RV area change/RV end-systolic area ratio as a  prognostic marker in patients with severe PAH, this simple approach could be more  useful in a clinical setting.
The “afterload-corrected peak systolic global longitudinal strain rate”  (GLSR), based on the relationship between RV myocardial shortening-velocity and  RV load, which is calculated by multiplying the measured systolic GLSR value  with the , is an easy, obtainable and reproducible combined  parameter for the evaluation of RV contractile function in relation to loading  conditions. Due to the load-dependency of myocardial shortening velocity,  the GLSR will decrease simultaneously with the increase of the RV systolic  pressure. Thus, as long as the RV contractile function remains stable, also the  combined parameter GLSR   remains  relatively stable. However, once the afterload increase overwhelms the ability of  the RV to adapt its pump function correspondingly (i.e., afterload mismatch), any  further reduction of the GLSR will be associated with an increase of the RA  pressure with a corresponding reduction of the , even before  the RV systolic pressure will finally also decrease as a result of the ongoing  maladaptive ventricular remodeling and deterioration of RV myocardial  contractility. The load-corrected peak GLSR can be therefore more helpful  for the assessment of RV contractile function than the peak GLSR alone and has  the advantage to include also the impact of TR on the RV function.
A different approach for the assessment of RV adaption to pathologically  elevated afterload is provided by the Echo-derived “RV load-adaptation index”  (), a composite variable which reflects the relationship between RV  hemodynamic load and RV dilation. The theoretical basis for the  combination of the individual components of that index is the fact that in  patients with similar resistance to the blood flow in the pulmonary circulation,  less RV dilation indicates better adaptation to high afterload (Fig. 2). As shown  in Fig. 3, using for the  calculation the easily measurable TR  velocity-time integral () as a surrogate of the hemodynamic load and  the RV end-diastolic area () instead of the not reliably measurable RVEDV  for obtaining together with the end-diastolic long axis lengths () a  reliable RV size-geometry index, allows the obtainment of a highly reproducible  dimensionless index:  = [ (cm)    (cm)]/ (). The use of the  as a surrogate  of the RV hemodynamic load and not the , which is calculated  from the mean velocity of the TR jet allows not only the obtainment of a  dimensionless index, but it has also the advantage of including the duration of  the afterloading during the RV systole. Inclusion of the  end-diastolic and not the end-systolic RV area and long-axis measurements into  the  calculation formula is more appropriate, especially in advanced RV  overloading, because RV dilation is more reliably quantifiable in the  end-diastole (particularly in the presence of relevant TR, which leads to  underestimation of the RV dilation in the end-systolic phase). A small  RV area relative to the long-axis length (i.e., unaltered RV size and geometry)  in a person with a high  (i.e., high RV systolic pressure without  elevated RA pressure) gives a higher  value, which strongly suggests an  unrestricted adaptation to load (i.e., capability to rise the RV systolic  pressure without either a significant RV dilation, or a relevant elevation of the  RA pressure) indicating a good or at least adequate RV contractile function, and  also the ability of the RV to improve its pump function after reduction of the  pressure overloading. A spherical RV dilation indicated by a large RV  area relative to its long-axis length despite a rather low  value,  which points to a greater increase in RA pressure than in RV systolic pressure,  will generate a low  which reveals the presence of a poor adaptation to  hemodynamic overloading (disproportionally severe RV dilation despite a  relatively low RV pressure load indicating also a reduced RV systolic function)  indicating also a reduced RV myocardial contractility. It was found that   values 15 suggest an excessively low RV adaptability to load which  can be incapable to prevent RVF even in the presence of a normal PVR  .
Right ventricular adaptation to increasing afterload. PVR, 
pulmonary vascular resistance; RV, right ventricle; , RV end-diastolic 
volume; , end-diastolic long-axis lengths; , RV long-axis length. RV adaptation to increasing afterload is 
describable by the ratio between the right heart catheterization (RHC) derived 
PVR and the RV dilation (/) assessed by echocardiography. PVR 

/ can be therefore considered as an RHC- and 
echocardiography-derived load adaptation index. As shown in the figure, at 
identical supranormal PVR values, reduced adaptation is reflected by massive 
spherical dilation (i.e., excessively high /) and therefore by 
a correspondingly reduced PVR 
/. Using the Doppler 
echocardiography-derived tricuspid regurgitation velocity-time integral 
() as a surrogate of hemodynamic load instead of the PVR and the RV 
end-diastolic area () instead of the not reliably measurable  allows the non-invasively obtainment of a simple highly reproducible 
dimensionless RV load adaptation index:  = [ (cm) 
 (cm)]/ ().
Calculation of the right ventricular “load adaptation index” 
from 2D-Echo-derived measurements in a patient with advanced heart failure due to 
primary impaired left ventricular function. , right ventricular 
end-diastolic area (in the apical 4-chamber view); , end-diastolic long 
axis length; , velocity-time integral calculated from the continuous 
wave Doppler-derived measurements of the tricuspid regurgitation velocity; RA, 
right atrium; HR, heart rate; , lead adaptation index of the right ventricle. * Values 18 reflect a highly reduced RV adaptability to 
persistent hemodynamic overloading, whereas values 15 indicate a severely 
impaired adaptability of the RV to afterload which could be insufficient to 
provide a sufficient ejection of blood even after normalization of the afterload 
(e.g., after LVAD implantation in advanced LV failure or lung transplantation in 
refractory pulmonary arterial hypertension).
Recently, the Echo-derived RV global work efficiency (RV-GWE) was found useful  for predicting the risk of early RHF after LVAD implantation. In this small  study, the predictive value of the RV global work efficiency was superior to that  of both the TAPSE/systolic PAP and the RVFW longitudinal strain/sPAP ratio.
More recently, 3D-STE data were used to assess the relationship between RV  remodeling and afterload (i.e., RV end-systolic volume index and systolic PAP)  . Regression analysis between the systolic PAP and RV end-systolic volume  index appeared to be able to distinguish adapted, adapted-remodeled and  adverse-remodeled RV from one another.
Table 2 (Ref.) provided an overview of major  Echo-derived combined parameters and indices for evaluation of RV myocardial  responses to pressure and/or volume overloading.
Overview on major echocardiography-derived combined 
parameters and indices for evaluation of right ventricular myocardial responses 
to pressure and/or volume overloading.
Parameters	Calculation	Particularities and clinical usefulness	 	RV contraction-pressure index (RVCPI) 	RVCPI = TAPSE × Δ	- The RVCPI revealed a close correlation with the RHC-derived  plus high predictability of depressed .	 	TAPSE = tricuspid annular peak systolic excursion	- Was found to be an independent predictor of early RVF after LVAD implantation.	 	Δ = pressure gradient between the RV and RA	- In a multivariate analysis, a low RVCPI was identified as the best predictor of outcome, whereas neither TAPSE/sPAP nor /sPAP revealed significant predictive values.	 	RV stroke work (RVSW) 	RVSW = 4 × [TRj peak velocity]2 × [PVA × VTI]	- By incorporating the SV and load, it revealed a strong correlation with the RHC-derived .	 	TRj = tricuspid regurgitation jet	- Direct calculation of the RV stroke volume can be challenging due to the difficulties to counteract the angle dependency of systolic flow VTI measurements along the PVA.	 	PVA = pulmonary valve area		 	TAPSE/sPAP 	Calculated from conventional echo-derived measurements.	- Easily obtainable useful parameter for estimation of RV performance by assessing the relationship between longitudinal displacement and load, which correlates well with the invasively evaluated RV systolic elastance/arterial elastance.	 	- Was found useful for prediction of cardiovascular mortality in patients with HF induced by LV dysfunction, as well as in patients with advanced PAH, but this usefulness could not be confirmed in all studies.	 	RV ejection efficiency (RVEe) 	RVEe = TAPSE/PVR	- A limitation is its decreasing reliability with the aggravation of the TR.	 	Echo-derived PVR = TR peak velocity/	- Is clinical usefulness is currently not established.	 	SV/RVESV ratio 	Stroke volume/RV end-systolic volume	- Is considered as a surrogate for the RV-PA coupling which is defined as Emax/Ea (i.e., ratio of end-systolic ventricular elastance and arterial elastance). It facilitates the estimation of myocardial contractility corrected for afterload.	 	- Its limitations are the incorrect inherent assumptions that the relationship between the RV end-systolic pressure and RV endsystolic volume is linear and crosses the origin and that Ees coincides with Emax, as well as its as the not very reliable calculation of RV volumes from 2-dimensional echocardiography-derived parameters.	 	RVArea change/ESA 	RV area change/RV end-systolic systolic area	- It was proposed as a surrogate for RV-PA coupling. One study has already confirmed its potential usefulness for the prognostic assessment of patients with advanced PAH.	 	Afterload-corrected peak GLSR 	Afterload corrected peak GLSR = GLSR × Δ, where GLSR is the global longitudinal strain rate, and Δ the pressure gradient between the RV and RA.	- Easily obtainable and reproducible combined variable reflecting the relation between RV myocardial velocity of shortening and RV loading conditions. This combined parameter was found more useful for the assessment of RV contractile function than the peak GLSR as an individual parameter.	 	- Has the advantage of also including the impact of TR on RV function.	 	- Revealed a high ability to predict in LVAD candidates the development or aggravation of RHF after LVAD implantation, as well as a high predictive value for imminent worsening of RV function in potential lung transplant candidates with precapillary PH.	 	RV load-adaptation index ( ) 	 = [ (cm) ×  (cm)]/ ()	- Simple and highly reproducible parameter which reflects the relationship between RV hemodynamic load and RV dilation which appeared preoperatively highly predictive for RV function after implantation of a LVAD.	 	- Appeared highly predictive value for imminent RV failure in lung transplant candidates with pre-capillary PH.	 	RV global work efficiency (GWE) 	GWE (%) = [GCW/(GCW + GWW)] × 100	- Was found useful for predicting the risk of early RHF after LVAD implantation.	 	- Its predictive value was found superior to that of both the TAPSE/sPAP and the RVFW longitudinal strain/sPAP ratio.
RV, right ventricle; RHC, right heart catheterization; SWI, stroke work index; 
sPAP, systolic pulmonary arterial pressure; FAC, fractional area change; VTI, 
velocity-time integral; SV, stroke volume; HF, heart failure; PAH, pulmonary 
arterial hypertension; TR, tricuspid regurgitation; PA, pulmonary artery; Ees, 
end-systolic elastance; PH, pulmonary hypertension; RHF, right heart failure; 
RVFW, RV free wall; GCW, global constructive work; GWW, global wasted work; RA, right atrium; RVF, RV failure; ESA, end-systolic area; LVAD, left ventricular assist device; , RV stroke work index; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; RVESV, RV end-systolic volume; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; GLSR, global longitudinal strain rate; , end-diastolic long-axis lengths; , end-diastolic area.

7. Conclusions
Assessment of ventricular dysfunction and prediction of its further course,  selection of the most appropriate therapeutic approaches, as well as monitoring  of therapy results, are crucial to the successful management of patients with HF.  However, despite the important progress achieved in medical technology with a  corresponding improvement of diagnostic methodologies (particularly for cardiac  imaging) there are still substantial challenges, particularly those related to  the load dependency of ventricular morphology and myocardial contractile  function. The latter fact explains why no single parameter is able to alone  reveal the real picture of ventricular dysfunction.
Given that the use of a single parameter is inadequate, it is necessary to  perform multiparametric evaluations and to also apply integrative approaches  using parameter combinations which include details about the ventricular loading  conditions. This is particularly important for the evaluation of RV dysfunction  because of its remarkably high sensitivity to supernormal afterload. In this  regard, the existence of certain reluctances towards the implementation of such  parameter combinations in the routine clinical praxis is difficult to understand.
Among the non-invasive attempts to evaluate ventricular function in connection  with its current loading conditions, the relationship between ventricular  contraction (e.g., myocardial displacement or deformation) and pressure overload,  the relationship between ejection volume or ejection velocity and pressure  overload, as well as the relationship between ventricular dilation and pressure  overload were found useful for therapeutic decision making.  However, based on the available evidence, currently it is not possible to  establish a reliable hierarchy of combined parameters based on their reliability  for evaluation of the LV and RV in relation to their loading conditions. Given  the crucial impact of interconnected myocardial remodeling and contractility on  the ability of a ventricle to overcome hemodynamic overload, it would be more  beneficial to use combined parameters reflecting both the relationship between  pump function and afterload, and the relationship between ventricular overloading  and remodeling responses for clinical decision-making (particularly in the case  of severe RV dysfunction). The latter approach would also have the advantage of  diminishing the negative impact of TR on the reliability of parameters which  reflect the relationship between pump function and afterload by the concurrent  use of the RV load adaptation index whose reliability even increases with the  progression of TR.
In the future it will be necessary to pay more attention to the load dependency  of ventricular pump function and to take into consideration its impact on the  evaluation of the severity and the prognostic relevance of myocardial  dysfunction. Further sustained efforts to provide more evidence for its practical  importance by intensifying the clinical research in this field could be a solid  basis for achieving this goal.
Publisher’s Note: IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author Contributions
The single author was responsible for the entire preparation of this manuscript.

Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Funding
This research received no external funding.

Conflict of Interest
The author declares no conflict of interest. Michael Dandel is serving as one of the Editorial Board members and Guest editors of this journal. We declare that Michael Dandel had no involvement in the peer review of this article and has no access to information regarding its peer review. Full responsibility for the editorial process for this article was delegated to Massimo Iacoviello.

References
Effects of simultaneous alterations in preload and afterload on measurements of left ventricular contractility in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy: comparisons of ejection phase, isovolumetric and end-systolic force-velocity indexes
Contractile strength and mechanical efficiency of left ventricle are enhanced by physiological afterload
Pathophysiology of heart failure
Defining diastolic heart failure: a call for standardized diagnostic criteria
Heart failure
Universal definition and classification of heart failure: a report of the Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology, Japanese Heart Failure Society and Writing Committee of the Universal Definition of Heart Failure: Endorsed by the Canadian Heart Failure Society, Heart Failure Association of India, Cardiac Society of Australia and New Zealand, and Chinese Heart Failure Association
How to diagnose heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: the HFA-PEFF diagnostic algorithm: a consensus recommendation from the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)
2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Echocardiographic assessment of the right ventricle: Impact of the distinctly load dependency of its size, geometry and performance
Balance between right and left ventricular output
Echocardiographic findings in acute and chronic pulmonary diseases
Prediction of short-term outcomes in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy referred for transplantation using standard echocardiography and strain imaging
Evaluation of ventricular synchrony with equilibrium radionuclide angiography: assessment of variability and accuracy
Stretch-induced programmed myocyte cell death
Recovery of failing hearts by mechanical unloading: Pathophysiologic insights and clinical relevance
Pathophysiology of heart failure
Pathophysiological characterization of isolated diastolic heart failure in comparison to systolic heart failure
Diastolic heart failure: a concise review
Prognostic Impact of Cardiac Diastolic Function and Coronary Microvascular Function on Cardiovascular Death
Right ventricular function in cardiovascular disease, part I: Anatomy, physiology, aging, and functional assessment of the right ventricle
Ventricular systolic dysfunction with and without altered myocardial contractility: Clinical value of echocardiography for diagnosis and therapeutic decision-making
EAE/ASE recommendations for image acquisition and display using three-dimensional echocardiography
Anatomy, echocardiography, and normal right ventricular dimensions
Longitudinal but not circumferential deformation reflects global contractile function in the right ventricle with open pericardium
Right ventricular anatomy, function, and echocardiography evaluation
Right heart adaptation to pulmonary arterial hypertension: physiology and pathobiology
Assessment of right ventricular adaptability to loading conditions can improve the timing of listing to transplantation in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension
Epidemiology of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
Management of patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction
A novel paradigm for heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: comorbidities drive myocardial dysfunction and remodeling through coronary microvascular endothelial inflammation
Quantifying left ventricular function in heart failure: What makes a clinically valuable parameter?
Assessment and diagnosis of right ventricular failure-retrospection and future directions
Pressure overload and volume overload-induced chronic heart failure are associated with characteristic left ventricular myocardial proteomic alterations
Geometric changes allow normal ejection fraction despite depressed myocardial shortening in hypertensive left ventricular hypertrophy
Severe low-gradient aortic stenosis: impact of inadequate left ventricular responses to high afterload on diagnosis and therapeutic decision-making
Sarcomere shortening in pressure overload hypertrophy
Myocardial mechanical alterations during gradual onset long-term hypertension in rats
Left ventricular chamber filling and midwall fiber lengthening in patients with left ventricular hypertrophy: overestimation of fiber velocities by conventional midwall measurements
Left ventricular midwall mechanics in systemic arterial hypertension. Myocardial function is depressed in pressure-overload hypertrophy
Intramural myocardial shortening in hypertensive left ventricular hypertrophy with normal pump function
Echocardiographic strain and strain rate imaging–clinical applications
Myocardial deformation in aortic valve stenosis: relation to left ventricular geometry
Cardiac mechanics in mild hypertensive heart disease: a speckle-strain imaging study
Impact of global left ventricular afterload on left ventricular function in asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis: a two-dimensional speckle-tracking study
Assessment of Left Ventricular Mechanics in Patients with Severe Aortic Stenosis after Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation: 2-D Speckle Tracking Imaging Study
Pre- and post-operative diastolic dysfunction in patients with valvular heart disease: diagnosis and therapeutic implications
Prognostic value of E/E’ ratio in patients with unoperated severe aortic stenosis
Noninvasive estimate of left ventricular filling pressure correlated with early and midterm postoperative cardiovascular events after isolated aortic valve replacement in patients with severe aortic stenosis
Load dependency of right ventricular performance is a major factor to be considered in decision making before ventricular assist device implantation
Anatomy, Function, and Dysfunction of the Right Ventricle: JACC State-of-the-Art Review
Adaptive versus maladaptive right ventricular remodelling
Adaptive and maladaptive hypertrophic pathways: points of convergence and divergence
Adaptation and Maladaptation of the Right Ventricle in Pulmonary Vascular Diseases
Right Ventricular Myocardial Stiffness in Experimental Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension: Relative Contribution of Fibrosis and Myofibril Stiffness
Mechanisms for the transition from physiological to pathological cardiac hypertrophy
Guidelines for the echocardiographic assessment of the right heart in adults: a report from the American Society of Echocardiography endorsed by the European Association of Echocardiography, a registered branch of the European Society of Cardiology, and the Canadian Society of Echocardiography
Different prognostic significance of right and left ventricular diastolic dysfunction in heart failure
Evaluation and Management of Right-Sided Heart Failure: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
Right ventricular mechanical pattern in health and disease: beyond longitudinal shortening
The overloaded right heart and ventricular interdependence
Ejection fraction revisited
Disparity between ejection and end-systolic indexes of left ventricular contractility in mitral regurgitation
Early detection of left ventricular dysfunction in patients with mitral regurgitation due to flail leaflet is still a challenge
Relative Prognostic Importance of Left and Right Ventricular Ejection Fraction in Patients With Cardiac Diseases
Assessment of Left Ventricular Function by Echocardiography: The Case for Routinely Adding Global Longitudinal Strain to Ejection Fraction
Role of echocardiography in selection, implantation, and management of left ventricular assist device therapy
Geometry as a Confounder When Assessing Ventricular Systolic Function: Comparison Between Ejection Fraction and Strain
Load Adaptability in Patients With Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
Right ventricular load adaptability metrics in patients undergoing left ventricular assist device implantation
Optimal combination of right ventricular functional parameters using echocardiography in pulmonary arterial hypertension
2008 Focused update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the 1998 Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Valvular Heart Disease): endorsed by the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Potential Impact of Tricuspid and Mitral Valve Regurgitation on the Diagnostic and Prognostic Value of Ventricular Ejection Fraction
Quantitation of mitral regurgitation
Effect of preoperative ejection fraction, left ventricular systolic dimension and hemoglobin level on survival after aortic valve surgery in patients with severe chronic aortic regurgitation
Aortic valve replacement for severe aortic regurgitation in asymptomatic patients with normal ejection fraction and severe left ventricular dilatation
Impact of Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction on Clinical Outcomes in Bicuspid Aortic Valve Disease
Relation of myocardial mechanics in severe aortic stenosis to left ventricular ejection fraction and response to aortic valve replacement
Recovery of left ventricular mechanics after transcatheter aortic valve implantation: effects of baseline ventricular function and postprocedural aortic regurgitation
Impact of systemic hypertension on the assessment of aortic stenosis
Reduced systemic arterial compliance impacts significantly on left ventricular afterload and function in aortic stenosis: implications for diagnosis and treatment
“Overestimation” of catheter gradients by Doppler ultrasound in patients with aortic stenosis: a predictable manifestation of pressure recovery
Low systemic arterial compliance is associated with increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in aortic valve stenosis
First-Phase Ejection Fraction Is a Powerful Predictor of Adverse Events in Asymptomatic Patients With Aortic Stenosis and Preserved Total Ejection Fraction
Global longitudinal strain is a strong independent predictor of all-cause mortality in patients with aortic stenosis
Association of Left Ventricular Global Longitudinal Strain With Asymptomatic Severe Aortic Stenosis: Natural Course and Prognostic Value
A novel clinical method for quantification of regional left ventricular pressure-strain loop area: a non-invasive index of myocardial work
A new approach to assess myocardial work by non-invasive left ventricular pressure-strain relations in hypertension and dilated cardiomyopathy
How to measure left ventricular myocardial work by pressure-strain loops
Normal Values for Myocardial Work Indices Derived From Pressure-Strain Loop Analyses: From the CCHS
Left Ventricular Myocardial Work in Patients with Severe Aortic Stenosis
State-of-the-Art: Noninvasive Assessment of Left Ventricular Function Through Myocardial Work
Myocardial Work Predicts Outcome in Asymptomatic Severe Aortic Stenosis: Subanalysis of the Randomized AVATAR Trial
Noninvasive Left Ventricular Myocardial Work in Patients with Chronic Aortic Regurgitation and Preserved Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction
Prognostic Implications of Left Ventricular Myocardial Work Indices in Patients With Secondary Mitral Regurgitation
Should moderate or greater mitral regurgitation be repaired in all patients with LVEF <30%? Surgery, mitral regurgitation, and heart failure: the valves are all repairable but the patients are not
Right atrial size and tricuspid regurgitation severity predict mortality or transplantation in primary pulmonary hypertension
Clinical and prognostic relevance of echocardiographic evaluation of right ventricular geometry in patients with idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension
Pathophysiology of the right ventricle and of the pulmonary circulation in pulmonary hypertension: an update
Pathophysiology of the right ventricle in health and disease: an update
Evaluation of the right ventricle by echocardiography: particularities and major challenges
Echocardiographic parameters associated with right ventricular failure after left ventricular assist device: A review
Left ventricular vs. biventricular mechanical support: Decision making and strategies for avoidance of right heart failure after left ventricular assist device implantation
The right ventricular failure risk score a pre-operative tool for assessing the risk of right ventricular failure in left ventricular assist device candidates
Predictors of severe right ventricular failure after implantable left ventricular assist device insertion: analysis of 245 patients
Preoperative evaluation of right ventricular function
Prediction of right ventricular failure after ventricular assist device implant: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies
Tricuspid incompetence and geometry of the right ventricle as predictors of right ventricular function after implantation of a left ventricular assist device
Usefulness of two-dimensional echocardiographic parameters of the left side of the heart to predict right ventricular failure after left ventricular assist device implantation
Predicting survival in pulmonary arterial hypertension: insights from the Registry to Evaluate Early and Long-Term Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension Disease Management (REVEAL)
Pulmonary Hypertension
Survival in patients with primary pulmonary hypertension. Results from a national prospective registry
“Who’ll be the next in line?” The lung allocation score in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension
Right ventricular free wall longitudinal strain and stroke work index for predicting right heart failure after left ventricular assist device therapy
Hemodynamic measurements after cardiac surgery: transesophageal Doppler versus pulmonary artery catheter
Right Ventricular Stroke Work Index
Right ventricular stroke work index by echocardiography in adult patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension
Echocardiographic evaluation of right ventricular stroke work index in advanced heart failure: a new index?
Echocardiographic estimation of right ventricular stroke work in children with pulmonary arterial hypertension: comparison with invasive measurements
Prognostic incremental role of right ventricular function in acute decompensation of advanced chronic heart failure
Usefulness of right ventricular contraction pressure index to predict short-term mortality and right heart failure in patients who underwent continuous-flow left ventricular assist device implantation
Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion and pulmonary arterial systolic pressure relationship in heart failure: an index of right ventricular contractile function and prognosis
Right ventricular ejection efficiency: a new echocardiographic measure of mechanical performance in chronic pulmonary hypertension
Echocardiography of Right Ventriculoarterial Coupling Combined With Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing to Predict Outcome in Heart Failure
RV Contractile Function and its Coupling to Pulmonary Circulation in Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction: Stratification of Clinical Phenotypes and Outcomes
Echocardiographic predictors of adverse outcomes after continuous left ventricular assist device implantation
Feasibility of intraoperative three-dimensional transesophageal echocardiography in the evaluation of right ventricular volumes and function in patients undergoing cardiac surgery
Severe tricuspid regurgitation shows significant impact in the relationship among peak systolic tricuspid annular velocity, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion, and right ventricular ejection fraction
The right ventricle in pulmonary arterial hypertension
Echocardiographic Assessment of the Right-Sided Heart for Surveillance of Patients With Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension
Right ventricular myocardial work for the prediction of early right heart failure and long-term mortality after left ventricular assist device implant
Characterization of right ventricular remodeling in pulmonary hypertension associated with patient outcomes by 3-dimensional wall motion tracking echocardiography