Novel Techniques to Manage Temporomandibular Disorders – A Multidisciplinary Approach
ABSTRACT
Temporomandibular joint is a compound, bilateral, ginglymoarthroidal joint articulating the condyle to temporal glenoid fossa. TMDs often project a constellation of signs and symptoms. Therefore, the treatment plan for TMD’s should be more holistic. Current literature supports the interrelationship between chronic pain and behavioral, psychological, and psychosocial factors. This review elicits various treatment strategies for TMD’s and emphasizes combination of various therapies in resolution of pain and discomfort in patients with such disorders.

INTRODUCTION
The temporomandibular joint is a bilateral ginglymoarthroidal joint containing synovial fluid connecting the mandibular condyle and the temporal glenoid fossa. Temporomandibular disorders (TMD) are defined as “A collective term embracing several clinical problems that involve the masticatory musculature, TMJ, and associated structures, or both”.
The etiology of TMD is multifactorial. Apart from the prevalence in age and gender, the main etiologic factors to TMD are occlusal, emotional stress, trauma, airway compromise, and parafunction. Other factors like fibromyalgia, autoimmune disorders, and psychiatric illness are also associated with TMD’s. TMDs affect approximately 10%–15% of adults. Its incidence peaks in the age group 20 to 40 years and is more commonly seen in women than in men [Table 1].
Classification of TMJ pain by bell
Masticatory myalgia	TMJ arthralgia	 	Splinting painSpastic painInflammatory pain	Discal painRetrodiscal painCapsular painArthropathic pain

Management
TMDs are diverse and project a constellation of signs and symptoms. Hence, the treatment plan for TMD’s should be more holistic. Management of TMDs can be either psychological/cognitive, operational approaches, or a combination of both, depending upon the severity of the disorder.

Psychological approach/cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
CBT emphasizes the relationships between cognition, behavior, and emotions. It helps the patients to challenge their problematic thoughts and to change the behavior related to their feelings.

Cognitive techniques
Cognitive behavioral techniques have shown long-term advantages in managing TMD pain over pharmacological and dental techniques. A meta-analysis was done by Fernandez and Turk (1989) to determine the relative and overall efficacy of cognitive coping strategies on self-reported pain. Interventions in cognitive behavioral therapy include skills training, identifying, and challenging automatic negative thoughts, goal setting, relaxation training, breathing exercises, cognitive visualization exercises, behavioral coping strategies, relapse prevention, and stress management.

Stress management
Higher levels of stress can increase bruxism and resting activity of the muscle or both. Autonomic nervous system activation can be related to other psychophysiological disorders seen commonly with TMD, such as irritable bowel syndrome, premenstrual syndrome, interstitial cystitis, and fibromyalgia.

Patient education and cognitive awareness training
It is very important to educate the patient about the relationship between muscle hyperactivity and emotional stress before commencing any treatment. The patient may be unaware of the parafunctional habits, as most of them occur subconsciously, and should be instructed to avoid non-functional tooth contacts.

Restrictive use
Painful mandibular movements should be avoided, as they can cause cyclic muscle pain and central excitatory effects. Certain dietary modifications, like asking the patient to eat softer food, chew slowly, and take small bites.

Voluntary avoidance
The patient is advised to immediately disengage the tooth contacts that occur at any time other than chewing, swallowing, and speaking. It can be done by puffing some air in between their lips and teeth, as this guides the mandible into a relaxed position.

Relaxation therapy
They are substitutive and active relaxation therapy.

Substitutive relaxation therapy
It is a behavior modification technique used to lessen the impact of any stressful event on the patient. Patients are encouraged to take out any stressful situation and substitute them with their hobbies, sports, or recreational activities.

Active relaxation therapy
Regular voluntary relaxation of symptomatic muscle reduces the symptoms of pain and establishes normal health and function by increasing the blood flow to the tissues, eliminating metabolic waste.

Breathing exercises
The patient is taught to become completely aware of the respiratory movements by feeling the position and movement of the hands on the chest and abdomen and is advised to perform this diaphragmatic breathing for 5 min/day every second hour.

Biofeedback
It uses electromyography to monitor the state of contraction or relaxation of the muscles through electrodes placed on the surface of muscle monitored. Patients monitor their muscle activity by keeping their masseter relaxed. Higher readings appear on the scale when the patient clenches and lower reading when muscles are relaxed.

Hypnosis
It is a type of dissociative state when the unconscious mind is open for recommendations for positive change. Patients may be given an audio cassette, which may help them to practice attaining a relaxed state at any stressful events. CBT group showed a marked improvement in each follow-up and showed continued improvements up to 6 months.

Operational approaches
Operational approaches to manage TMD encompass a variety of techniques and strategies aimed at alleviating the pain and dysfunction associated with these complex conditions, enhancing patient outcomes through both non-invasive and surgical interventions.

Physical therapy/physiotherapy
It involves more of a self-management approach wherein the patient is involved in his therapy and is part of the treatment plan concerning his well-being. Physiotherapy has a positive short-term relief and is better than no treatment. De Bar et al. also concluded that this approach is more productive in long cases of TMD’s or chronic conditions. Sugimoto et al. in a study concluded that electrotherapy in adjunct to occlusal splint therapy was a successful treatment plan in many patients suffering from TMD’s.

Low-level laser therapy
It utilizes specific wavelengths (700–1000 Hz) to interact with tissue without producing extreme heat. Along with, bio-stimulation, it also produces analgesic effects through its irradiation.

Occlusal therapies
Occlusal splints provide more preliminary information on the existing function and parafunctional habits and help in obtaining information regarding vertical dimensions. Splints are usually worn during the night while sleeping for at least 1 year.

Pharmacological modalities
Pharmaceutical drugs help in managing the pain, but they do not remove the underlying cause. Medications are generally used in patients with muscle and/or TMJ tenderness by palpation.

Acupuncture
Acupuncture is an old form of Chinese medicine, which is known for stimulating the secretion of “feel good” hormones within the central nervous system. The acupuncture sessions typically range from 15 to 30 minutes.

Surgery
Surgeries can be minimally invasive, like intra-articular injections of corticosteroids or sodium hyaluronate, arthroscopy, arthrocentesis, arthrotomy, arthroplasty, interpositional grafting, and total disc replacement.

CONCLUSION
Temporomandibular disorder is a complex clinical condition with multifactorial etiology. This review elicits the need of TMD awareness and its comprehensive management. Starting from assessing the psychological status of TMD patients, it lays down the focus on two types of management techniques, the psychological involving cognitive behavior therapy, relaxation therapy, and biofeedback and the operational involving various kinds of splint therapy and surgical approaches.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
The history of the glossary of prosthodontic terms
The management of temporomandibular disorder using occlusal splint therapy and bio-behavioral therapy
Diagnosis and treatment of temporomandibular disorders
Temporomandibular joint pain: Diagnostic characteristics of chronicity
Temporomandibular disorders
The utility of cognitive coping strategies for altering painperception: A meta-analysis
Management of Temporomandibular Disorders and Occlusion-E-book
Short- and long-term efficacy of brief cognitive-behavioral therapy for patients with chronic temporomandibular disorder pain: A randomized, controlled trial
An assessment of the efficacy of physical therapy and physical modalities for the control of chronic musculoskeletal pain
Use of complementary and alternative medicine for temporomandibular disorders
A clinical study on SSP (silver spike point) electro-therapy combined with splint therapy for temporo-mandibular joint dysfunction
Oxford handbook of clinical dentistry: The best-selling dental handbook