Quality Evaluation of Free-living Validation Studies for the Assessment of 24-Hour Physical Behavior in Adults via Wearables: Systematic Review
Background
Wearable technology is a leading fitness trend in the growing commercial industry and an established method for collecting 24-hour physical behavior data in research studies. High-quality free-living validation studies are required to enable both researchers and consumers to make guided decisions on which study to rely on and which device to use. However, reviews focusing on the quality of free-living validation studies in adults are lacking.
Objective
This study aimed to raise researchers’ and consumers’ attention to the quality of published validation protocols while aiming to identify and compare specific consistencies or inconsistencies between protocols. We aimed to provide a comprehensive and historical overview of which wearable devices have been validated for which purpose and whether they show promise for use in further studies.
Methods
Peer-reviewed validation studies from electronic databases, as well as backward and forward citation searches (1970 to July 2021), with the following, required indicators were included: protocol must include real-life conditions, outcome must belong to one dimension of the 24-hour physical behavior construct (intensity, posture or activity type, and biological state), the protocol must include a criterion measure, and study results must be published in English-language journals. The risk of bias was evaluated using the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 tool with 9 questions separated into 4 domains (patient selection or study design, index measure, criterion measure, and flow and time).
Results
Of the 13,285 unique search results, 222 (1.67%) articles were included. Most studies (153/237, 64.6%) validated an intensity measure outcome such as energy expenditure. However, only 19.8% (47/237) validated biological state and 15.6% (37/237) validated posture or activity-type outcomes. Across all studies, 163 different wearables were identified. Of these, 58.9% (96/163) were validated only once. ActiGraph GT3X/GT3X+ (36/163, 22.1%), Fitbit Flex (20/163, 12.3%), and ActivPAL (12/163, 7.4%) were used most often in the included studies. The percentage of participants meeting the quality criteria ranged from 38.8% (92/237) to 92.4% (219/237). On the basis of our classification tree to evaluate the overall study quality, 4.6% (11/237) of studies were classified as low risk. Furthermore, 16% (38/237) of studies were classified as having some concerns, and 72.9% (173/237) of studies were classified as high risk.
Conclusions
Overall, free-living validation studies of wearables are characterized by low methodological quality, large variability in design, and focus on intensity. Future research should strongly aim at biological state and posture or activity outcomes and strive for standardized protocols embedded in a validation framework. Standardized protocols for free-living validation embedded in a framework are urgently needed to inform and guide stakeholders (eg, manufacturers, scientists, and consumers) in selecting wearables for self-tracking purposes, applying wearables in health studies, and fostering innovation to achieve improved validity.

Introduction

24-Hour Physical Behavior
Although physical activity (PA) has been commonly assessed using self-report measures in the past decades, device-based measurement of PA research has been on the rise for several years. This method has also developed since its implementation and moved forward from assessing single parameters such as steps and counts, over the assessment of sedentary behavior (SB) and PA in parallel, to an integrated perspective of different movement and nonmovement patterns—the so-called 24-hour activity cycle (24-HAC). Studies have shown that these different parameters independently contribute to health. Hence, the current World Health Organization guidelines encourage adults and older adults to increase the time spent on PA while simultaneously limiting the amount of sedentary time. Positive implications can be expected for overall physical and mental health throughout the life span, including having a healthy sleep pattern to this recommendation.
This apparent shift from investigating a single behavior such as PA to a multi-perspective focus on 24-hour physical behavior (ie, including sleep, SB, and PA) has also been theoretically addressed. Rosenberger et al introduced the 24-HAC model as a new paradigm for PA, and Trembley et al provided a conceptual model of movement-based terminology around the 24-hour cycle. This approach was further extended by the Prospective Physical Activity, Sitting, and Sleep consortium, which suggested a subdivision of the 24-hour physical behavior construct into 3 behaviors by applying different dimensions, meaning that each behavior covers aspects of biological (ie, sleep or awake), postural (eg, lying, sitting, and upright), and intensity (eg, light, moderate, and vigorous) dimensions. Therefore, the differentiation among PA, SB, and sleep in terms of the 24-HAC model requires valid and simultaneous assessments of all 3 dimensions (ie, biological state, posture or activity type, and intensity; Multimedia Appendix 1, Table S1) under real-life conditions. Rigorous validation studies performed in a free-living environment are necessary to accurately predict the performance of a device and algorithm under real-life conditions.

Wearable Technology and Validation
As technical opportunities have evolved rapidly during the past decades, wearables (ie, body-worn devices such as accelerometers, smartwatches, pedometers, or fitness trackers) have become a leading fitness trend, with an estimated US $95 billion industry, which is still growing. Moreover, a considerable number of research studies integrated device-based methods to capture physical behavior data, and first discussions have already come up on whether it is prime time for wearables with scientific validation to be a global physical behavior surveillance methodology. However, the application of wearables in studies that assess health-related questions presents several methodological and practical challenges. For example, strategies for data processing, monitoring protocols, assessment limitations (eg, muscle-strengthening exercises), and quality criteria such as validity need to be taken into account.
An important test quality criterion is the concept of validity, which represents a fundamental criterion for evaluating the quality of an instrument, referring to the degree to which it truly measures the construct it targets. Regarding the 24-hour physical behavior cycle, researchers are commonly interested in criterion-referenced validity as their assessed outcome parameters are highly objective. Although (or because of) the number of validation studies has increased over the past years, there is high heterogeneity across published protocols and used measurement methods, which severely limits valid device comparisons. Thus, suggestions for standardized validation procedures have received increasing attention in the scientific community.

Standardized Protocols and Validation Framework
There have been several attempts in this direction, as collaborations such as the INTERLIVE network have already started developing standardized protocols to validate consumer wearables for steps and heart rate. Furthermore, Keadle et al introduced a stage process framework of validity to facilitate the development and validation of processing methods for assessing physical behavior using wearables. This framework contains 5 validation phases with increasing levels, starting from device manufacturing and culminating with application in health studies. Validation studies should be implemented following mechanical testing (phase 0) and calibration testing (phase 1). Here, a fixed and semistructured evaluation under laboratory conditions (phase 2) should be applied, followed by an evaluation under real-life conditions (phase 3). The validation of devices should pass through all these stages before the respective device can be used in health research studies (phase 4). As there is a nonnegligible difference in error rates between laboratory and real-life conditions, a wide array of activities of daily living should be captured and compared under real-life conditions. It also needs to be taken into account that participants are instructed to perform specific activities under laboratory conditions, which may result in unnaturally performed activities (eg, the Hawthorne effect). Hence, the quantification of measurement error is essential to be defined in an unconstrained free-living environment, and wearables’ outcomes should be compared with a reference measure such as video recordings or the doubly labeled water method, depending on the outcome parameter of choice. Overall, the aim should be the realization of standardized validation protocols to be embedded in a framework, which may have positive implications for all stakeholders such as manufacturers, scientists, and consumers. The results of validation studies are helpful to disabuse consumers and can assist researchers in study design when selecting an appropriate wearable device for the respective question or questions to be answered.

Objectives
Although validated devices are a prerequisite for proper research and validation frameworks have been proposed, to the best of our knowledge, no previous review has systematically evaluated the characteristics and quality of free-living validation studies. This review focuses on the following purposes. First, as our main purpose, we aimed to raise researchers’ and consumers’ attention to the quality of published validation protocols while aiming to identify and compare specific consistencies and inconsistencies between validation protocols. To evaluate the quality of the studies, we followed core principles, recommendations, and expert statements with published quality criteria (eg, study duration, number of included participants, selection of criterion measures, and data synchronization). Second, we aimed to provide a comprehensive and historical overview of which wearable devices have been validated for which purpose and whether they show promise for use in further studies.

Methods
This study followed the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) reporting guidelines (Multimedia Appendix 1, Table S2).

Search Strategy and Study Selection
Three separate search strings were combined: terms for validation analyses, 24-hour physical behavior constructs, and wearables. An a priori pilot search was conducted to optimize the final term (Multimedia Appendix 1, Table S3). Publications from 1970 to December 2020 were searched using the following databases: EBSCOhost, IEEE Xplore, PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science. We reran the search in July 2021 to check for updates and checked the reference lists of included studies for publications that met the inclusion criteria.
All articles were imported to the Citavi library (Citavi 6.8; Swiss Academic Software GmbH). After removing all duplicates, the study selection process included 3 screening phases for eligibility. In the first phase, 2 reviewers (MG and RN) independently screened the titles of the publications. Articles were excluded only if both reviewers categorized them as not eligible for review purposes. In the second phase, 2 reviewers (MG and RN) independently screened and reviewed the abstracts of the publications. Discrepancies in screening were resolved by consulting with a third reviewer (BvHM). Finally, in the third phase, the full texts of the remaining articles were assessed for eligibility by 7 members of the author’s team (MG, RN, DD, KS, SS, IT, and BvHM). Each article was independently screened by at least two reviewers. Discrepancies in screening were resolved through discussion until a consensus was reached. The reviewers were not blinded to the author or journal information.

Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
On the basis of the population, intervention, comparison, and outcome principle, we included peer-reviewed English-language publications that met the criteria described in the following sections.

Population
Participants were adults and older adults aged ≥18 years, regardless of health conditions. Studies that specifically targeted adults and populations of older adults (aged ≥18 years) were excluded.

Intervention
Any wearable validation study in which at least one part of the study was conducted under free-living (naturalistic or real-life) conditions (eg, at participants’ homes or schools and without instructions on when to start or stop a particular activity) was included. Studies in which the protocol was conducted under laboratory conditions were excluded.

Control or Comparison
We included only studies where a criterion measure was described (eg, observation or wearable devices) and excluded all studies where no criterion measure was described (eg, comparison between 2 devices without indicating a criterion measure).

Outcomes
Studies were included in which the wearable outcome or outcomes could be classified into at least one dimension of the 24-hour physical behavior construct (ie, biological state, posture or activity type, or intensity; Multimedia Appendix 1, Table S1). We excluded studies in which the outcome did not distinguish among sleep-wake states; intensities; or posture or activity types such as sleep quality, gait analyses, or heart rate parameters.

Data Extraction and Synthesis
Data extraction and synthesis were conducted independently by 2 authors (MG, RN, DD, KW, SS, or IT). Discrepancies were discussed until a consensus was reached. The following study details were extracted: author, year, location, population information (sample size, mean age of participants, percentage of females, and ethnicity), measurement period, validated wearable device (wearing position, software, epoch length, and cutoff point or algorithm), dimensions of the 24-hour physical behavior construct (biological state, intensity, and posture or activity type), validated outcome, criterion measure, statistical analyses for validation purposes, conclusion, and funding information. Given the wide range of study protocols in terms of varying conditions (eg, wear location, measurement duration, sample size, statistical analyses, or criterion measure), we conducted a narrative synthesis based on the reported results or conclusions. The data synthesis focused on the purpose (ie, whether the included wearables showed promise for use in further studies). In particular, we classified the studies as moderate to strong validity, mixed results, and poor or weak validity.

Quality Assessment
The risk of bias for each article was evaluated using the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2 (QUADAS-2) tool. The tool comprises 4 different domains (ie, patient selection, index measure, criterion measure, and flow and timing). Following the QUADAS-2 guidelines, we selected a set of signaling questions for each domain and added questions modified from the QUADAS-2 background document based on core principles, recommendations, and expert statements for validation studies. The risk of bias assessment was independently conducted by at least two authors. Discrepancies were discussed until a consensus was reached. The study quality was evaluated at the domain level; that is, if all signaling questions for a domain were answered yes, then the risk of bias was deemed to be low. If any signaling question was answered no, then the risk of bias was deemed to be high. The unclear category was only used when insufficient data were reported for evaluation. On the basis of domain-level ratings, we created a decision tree to evaluate the overall study quality as low risk, some concerns, or high risk (Multimedia Appendix 1, Figure S1).

Results

Overview
The search resulted in 13,285 unique records, with 222 (1.67%) publications being included (Figure 1). Most studies (208/222, 93.7%) validated an outcome from one dimension, whereas few (14/222, 6.3%) studies validated outcomes from 2 different dimensions (ie, intensity and posture or activity type or intensity and biological state) at the same time during a study protocol. Only 0.5% (1/222) of studies included outcomes from all the 3 dimensions. In particular, of all the 237 identified outcomes, 153 (64.6%) were classified into the intensity dimension, 38 (16%) were classified into the posture or activity type dimension, and 47 (21.2%) were classified into the biological state dimension.
PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) flowchart illustrating the literature search and screening process.

Participant and Study Characteristics
Of the included studies, 84.2% (187/222) were published within the past decade (in or after 2011), indicating the increasing use of wearable technologies for physical behavior measurement (Table 1); 93.2% (207/222) were conducted in wealthier high-income countries in North America, Europe, or Australia and Oceania. The number of participants ranged between 1 and 3752, although most studies (113/222, 50.9%) recruited between 20 and 50 participants. The mean age of the participant samples ranged between young (18.0, SD 0.6 years) and older adults (86.4, SD 6.0 years). In most studies, the mean age of the sample was between 18 and 64 years, and the proportion of female participants ranged from 26% to 74% (144/222, 64.8%). Healthy participants were recruited in 79.7% (177/222) of all studies, whereas 20.7% (46/222) of all studies included participants with different physical and mental health restrictions such as cardiometabolic diseases or chronic heart failure in 2.7% (6/222), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in 2.7% (6/222), stroke in 2.3% (5/222), insomnia in 2.3% (5/222), or intellectual and visual disabilities in 0.9% (2/222). Information about the participants’ ethnicity was reported in 14.9% (33/222) of all studies. The conceptualization of study protocols regarding measurement duration varied between approximately 30 minutes and up to several weeks. The study duration of ≤1 day was predominantly for studies that focused on posture or activity-type outcomes (ie, in 18/36, 50% of the included studies). Most studies (205/222, 92.3%) conducted statistical analyses at the person or study level (eg, correlations, 2-tailed t tests, and repeated-measures ANOVA). Some studies (21/222, 9.5%) conducted both person or study-level analyses and epoch-by-epoch comparisons (eg, sensitivity and specificity). Approximately 10.4% (23/222) of studies reported that the manufacturer was involved in the study funding or provided devices for validation purposes. No funding information was reported by 16.2% (36/222) of the studies, whereas the remaining studies (164/222, 73.9%) indicated that funding was independent of manufacturer companies. Detailed data extraction is reported as a supplement (Multimedia Appendix 1, Table S4).
Summary of data extraction: participant and study characteristics (N=237).
Category	Total, n (%)	Biological state (n=47), n (%)	Posture or activity type (n=37), n (%)	Intensity (n=153), n (%)	 	Publication year	 		Before or in 1999	7 (3)	1 (2.1)	3 (8.1)	3 (2)	 		2000-2010	28 (11.8)	4 (8.5)	3 (8.1)	21 (13.7)	 		After or in 2011	187 (78.9)	42 (89.4)	31 (83.8)	129 (84.3)	 	Study locationa	 		Africa	1 (0.4)	—b	—	1 (0.7)	 		Asia	17 (7.2)	5 (10.6)	2 (5.4)	10 (6.5)	 		Europe	95 (40.1)	14 (29.8)	21 (57)	69 (45.1)	 		North America	92 (38.8)	21 (44.7)	10 (27)	65 (42.5)	 		Australia or Oceania	16 (6.8)	7 (14.9)	4 (10.8)	7 (4.6)	 	Number of participants	 		≤19	71 (30)	12 (25.5)	22 (59.5)	40 (26.1)	 		20-50	113 (47.7)	23 (48.9)	13 (35.1)	86 (56.2)	 		≥51	38 (16)	12 (25.5)	2 (5.4)	27 (17.6)	 	Age (years; mean age)c	 		18-64	174 (73.4)	36 (76.6)	28 (75.7)	122 (79.7)	 		≥65	44 (18.6)	10 (21.3)	7 (18.9)	31 (20.3)	 	Sex (female; %)d	 		0-25	33 (13.9)	6 (12.8)	6 (16.2)	22 (14.4)	 		26-74	144 (60.8)	36 (76.6)	22 (59.5)	99 (64.7)	 		75-100	35 (14.8)	5 (10.6)	8 (21.6)	23 (15)	 	Measurement duration (days)e	 		≤1	69 (29.1)	17 (36.2)	19 (51.4)	39 (25.5)	 		2-6	50 (21.1)	15 (31.9)	7 (18.9)	33 (21.6)	 		≥7	101 (42.6)	15 (31.9)	9 (24.3)	80 (52.3)	 	Criterion measure	 		Doubly labeled water	42 (17.7)	—	—	42 (27.5)	 		Heart telemetry	—	—	—	—	 		Indirect calorimetry	4 (1.7)	—	—	4 (2.6)	 		Observation (direct)	7 (3)	—	4 (10.8)	3 (2)	 		Observation (images)	2 (0.8)	—	2 (5.4)	—	 		Observation (video)	14 (5.9)	—	11 (29.7)	5 (3.3)	 		Polysomnography	24 (10.1)	24 (51.1)	—	—	 		Questionnaire or diary	16 (6.8)	6 (12.8)	4 (10.8)	6 (3.9)	 		Wearable	113 (47.7)	14 (29.8)	16 (43.2)	94 (61.4)	 		EEGf or Zmachine	4 (1.7)	3 (6.4)	—	—	 	Statistical analyses	 		Epoch-by-epoch	33 (13.9)	13 (27.7)	15 (40.5)	8 (5.2)	 		Person or study level	208 (87.8)	44 (93.6)	28 (75.7)	150 (98)
aOne study did not report the study location.
bNot available.
cA total of 5 studies were not included in the summary statistics because of the lack of age information. One study was counted twice as it included 2 different age groups.
dA total of 10 studies was not included in the summary statistics because of the lack of sex information.
eA total of 2 studies was not included in the summary statistics because of the lack of measurement duration information.
fEEG: electroencephalogram.

Wearables
We identified 163 different wearables from 82 companies, of which 61 (37.4%) were classified as research-grade devices and 102 (62.6%) were classified as commercial-grade devices. The types of wearables varied across uniaxial, biaxial, or triaxial accelerometers and pedometers. On the basis of our narrative data synthesis, we ranked 26.4% (122/463 of results or conclusions as moderate to strong validity, 48.8% (226/463) as mixed validity, and 25% (115/463) as poor or weak validity (Multimedia Appendix, Table S5). In relation to other types of wearables, triaxial accelerometers were used in 70.5% (167/237) of all included studies. Detailed technical information for each wearable device is available as a supplement (Multimedia Appendix, Table S6). Of the 163 different wearables, 96 (58.9%) were validated only once. ActiGraph GT3X/GT3X+ (36/163, 22.1%), Fitbit Flex (20/163, 12%), and ActivPAL (12/163, 7.4%) were used most often in the included validation studies. Of all the 222 reviewed articles, 78 (35.1%) studies included different types of wearables, and 26 (11.7%) studies included different wearing positions to enable inter- and intradevice comparisons (Table 2). The variation of different sensor models within a study protocol ranged from 1 to 12 different wearables. In particular, 64.9% (144/222) of all studies included one model of wearable, 20.3% (45/222) included 2 different models of wearables, and 14.9% (33/222) included ≥3 different models of wearables. We identified 11 different validated outcomes. Of all reported outcomes, 51.3% (164/320) represented continuous parameters such as steps, energy expenditure, or counts, whereas 48.8% (156/320) represented categorical outcomes such as sleep time, time spent in light PA, or time spent in moderate to vigorous PA. Approximately 18% (40/222) of studies validated 2 different outcomes such as steps and energy expenditure during a study protocol. More than half of the studies (125/237, 52.7%) validated one type of wearable device in a single wearing position. We identified 13 different wearing positions. The wrist and hip or waist positions were used most often for validation purposes. In 50% (111/222) of all studies, the authors provided information about the software application used for data preprocessing.
Summary of data extraction: wearables (N=237).
Category	Total, n (%)	Biological state (n=47), n (%)	Posture or activity type (n=37), n (%)	Intensity (n=153), n (%)	 	Type	 		Uniaxial accelerometer	44 (10.8)	13 (14.4)	3 (6.4)	29 (9.2)	 		Biaxial accelerometer	28 (6.9)	1 (1.1)	2 (4.3)	26 (8.3)	 		Triaxial accelerometer	286 (70.1)	72 (80)	40 (85.1)	212 (67.5)	 		Pedometer	30 (7.4)	2 (2.2)	—a	30 (9.6)	 		Unclear	20 (4.9)	2 (2.2)	2 (4.3)	17 (5.4)	 	Outcome	 		Sleep time	42 (13.1)	42 (89.4)	—	—	 		Sleep-wake metrics	5 (1.6)	5 (10.6)	—	—	 		Different postures or types	29 (9.1)	—	30 (73.2)	—	 		Sit-to-stand transitions	5 (1.6)	—	5 (12.2)	—	 		Time in sedentary behavior	32 (10)	—	6 (14.6)	26 (11.2)	 		Time in light physical activity	14 (4.4)	—	—	14 (6)	 		Time in moderate to vigorous physical activity	33 (10.3)	—	—	33 (14.2)	 		Time in physical activity	6 (1.9)	—	—	6 (2.6)	 		Energy expenditure	72 (22.5)	—	—	72 (30.9)	 		Steps	75 (23.4)	—	—	75 (32.2)	 		Counts	7 (2.2)	—	—	7 (3)	 	Wear positionb	 		Ankle	11 (2.4)	1 (1)	1 (1.6)	9 (2.6)	 		Backpack, pocket, and bra	20 (4.3)	—	2 (3.1)	19 (5.6)	 		Chest	15 (3.3)	1 (1)	3 (4.7)	11 (3.2)	 		Foot	3 (0.7)	1 (1)	—	2 (0.6)	 		Hip and waist	148 (32.2)	7 (7.1)	23 (35.9)	124 (36.4)	 		Leg	3 (0.7)	—	3 (4.7)	—	 		Lower back	12 (2.6)	1 (1)	3 (4.7)	10 (2.9)	 		Neck	3 (0.7)	—	—	3 (0.9)	 		Thigh	28 (6.1)	2 (2)	15 (23.4)	13 (3.8)	 		Torso	1 (0.2)	—	—	1 (0.3)	 		Trunk	3 (0.7)	—	3 (4.7)	—	 		Upper arm	12 (2.6)	1 (1)	1 (1.6)	10 (2.9)	 		Wrist	201 (43.7)	83 (84.7)	10 (15.6)	139 (40.8)
aNot available.
bOne study did not report any information about the sensor wearing position and one study did not specify the information about the sensor wearing position. If studies included multiple devices or different wearing positions, we counted each device and wearing position separately.

Study Quality
In total, we included 9 signaling questions as quality criteria to evaluate the risk of bias. The percentage of studies that met the criteria ranged from 38.7% (92/238) to 92% (219/238; Table 3). On average, 5.2 (SD 1.41) of 9 questions were answered with yes (ie, meeting the criteria). Studies validating a biological state, intensity, or posture or activity type outcome met on average 4.6 (SD 1.23), 5.5 (SD 1.36), and 4.9 (SD 1.51) out of 9 questions with yes (ie, no risk of bias), respectively. We evaluated whether the reference standard was the appropriate gold standard as a central criterion for evaluating overall study quality. In 38.4% (91/237) of all studies, the reference standard was equivalent to the suggested criterion measures. Wearables were the most frequently selected reference criterion in 50.5% (112/222) of the studies. On the basis of our classification tree to evaluate the overall study quality (Multimedia Appendix 1, Figure S1 and Table S7), 4.6% (11/237) of studies were classified as low risk. Furthermore, 16% (38/237) of studies were classified as having some concerns, and 72.9% (173/237) of studies were classified as high risk. To provide an overview of the study quality, Figure 2 illustrates the overall study quality on a study level, separated by each dimension of the 24-hour physical behavior construct.
Criteria for the risk of bias assessment and the percentage of studies meeting these criteria (N=237).
Criteria items	Studies meeting criterion, n (%)	 		Total	Biological state (n=47)	Posture or activity type (n=37)	Intensity (n=153)	 	Domain 1: patient selection or study design	 		Was the study conducted in different free-living settings (eg, work or home)?	174 (91.6)a	N/Ab	28 (75.7)	146 (95.4)	 		Did the study take place for at least 2 days?	156 (65.8)	28 (59.6)	16 (43.2)	112 (73.2)	 		Did the study provide any information about the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the recruiting process?	165 (69.6)	34 (72.3)	25 (67.6)	106 (69.3)	 		Did the study include a sample of at least 20 participants?	163 (68.8)	36 (76.6)	15 (40.5)	112 (73.2)	 	Domain 2: index measure	 		Was the algorithm of the validated outcome reported (ie, formula) or at least further information cited?	97 (40.9)	23 (48.9)	18 (48.6)	56 (36.6)	 		Did the participants wear the wearable for at least 8 hours per day?	107 (56.3)a	N/A	15 (40.5)	92 (60.1)	 	Domain 3: criterion measure	 		Is the selected reference the gold standard?	91 (38.4)	23 (48.9)	14 (37.8)	54 (35.3)	 	Domain 4: flow and timing	 		Did the authors provide any information about data synchronization?	75 (41.4)c	24 (51.1)	22 (59.5)	29 (19)	 		Were all participants included in the analyses or were any exclusion reasons provided?	218 (92.4)d	45 (95.7)	31 (83.8)	142 (92.8)
aOnly relevant for 190 studies.
bN/A: not applicable.
cOnly relevant for 181 studies.
dOnly relevant for 236 studies.
The overall risk of bias classification separated by different dimensions of the 24-hour physical behavior construct. The number within the circles represents the study number, as listed in the full data extraction. Studies with a green circle were evaluated as low risk, the orange circle represents the quality with some concerns, and red circles represent high risk. LPA: light physical activity; MVPA: moderate to vigorous physical activity.

Discussion

Principal Findings
We evaluated the characteristics and quality of free-living validation studies in which at least one dimension of the 24-hour physical behavior construct (ie, biological state, posture or activity type, and intensity) was assessed using wearables and validated against a criterion measure. In summary, the validation of biological state and posture or activity-type outcomes was rare, and almost all of the 163 different types of research- and commercial-grade wearables were validated for only one aspect of the 24-hour physical behavior construct (ie, intensity outcomes). Compared with the selected quality criteria for studies under free-living conditions that are in line with published core principles, recommendations, and expert statements, most of the reviewed protocols failed to meet the criteria; however, only a few of the evaluated studies were overall ranked with low risk of bias or with some concerns. Therefore, more high-quality validation studies with adults and older adults under real-life conditions are needed. According to the framework of wearable validation studies, the aim of phase 3 studies is to validate device outcomes under real-life conditions against appropriate reference measures.

Criterion Measure
Our evaluation of the most central category physical behavior criterion measure followed Keadle et al; for example, physiological outcomes (eg, activity energy expenditure) are recommended to be validated against indirect calorimetry or doubly labeled water, behavioral criterion measures (eg, step count and postures) are recommended to be validated against video-recorded direct observation, and the recommended criterion measure for differentiation between sleep and wake patterns is polysomnography. Notably, only 40.9% (91/222) of the reviewed studies used the recommended gold standard. Primarily, research-grade devices served as criterion measures, which is highly critical as there is no evidence that wearables can serve as a basis for validating other wearables and offer a high risk of bias regarding criterion validity.

Study Duration
Optimally, study protocols take place over a 24-hour period over multiple days, thus covering a wide range of representative habitual activities. This recommended criterion was covered by 2 signaling questions. First, we evaluated whether data collection was not restricted to one particular setting (eg, at work or at home), which was met by nearly all the reviewed studies. Second, as it is almost not feasible to collect data over several days for criterion measures such as video recording, we specified at least 2 days for a low-risk classification. Two-thirds of the reviewed studies met this criterion. However, we identified a considerable number of studies (69/222, 31.1%) that collected data over a short period (≤1 day). The risk of bias might have been present as the setting was restricted to a specific environment (eg, at work), thus limiting the ability to capture a wide range of habitual behaviors. Moreover, reactivity is a serious issue that reveals a potential error source when collecting data from wearables. Researchers expected that reactivity would be a time issue, implying that participants may change their behavior at the beginning of the monitoring period but return to a more stable pattern later. Similar effects have been observed in sleep laboratories using polysomnographic monitoring.

Study Population
Ideally, the validity of wearables can be generalized to a wide range of diverse samples (eg, age, sex, ethnicity, and health condition). While focusing on adults and older adults (aged ≥18 years), this review revealed that 78.4% (174/222) of the studies included samples between 18 and 64 years of age, whereas there was a lack of studies that included older adults. Critically, most devices (99/163, 60.7%) were validated only once. According to the recommended principle, validation study protocols should include either a variety of cohorts within a single study or a series of studies with different participant characteristics. For example, we could only identify 20.3% (45/222) of studies that included samples with restricted health conditions. As a practical implication, a given wearable device might be valid for healthy adults and older adults but not for those with health restrictions. A solution might be to recruit a larger sample size, which would enable a higher intersubject variability, or to conduct a series of validation studies with varying participant characteristics. Optimally, sample size calculations ensure adequate power for validation purposes. Finally, although challenging because of data protection guidelines, we recommend reporting information about ethnicity (reported in 32/222, 14.4% of studies) whenever possible and providing detailed information about inclusion and exclusion criteria regarding the recruiting process and for statistical analyses.

Wearing Position and Types of Wearables
To enable a comparison between different wearables or wearing positions, researchers may simultaneously collect data from multiple sensors or different wearing positions. Most of the reviewed studies did not include multiple wearables (eg, research and commercial grade) and did not capture data from the validated devices at different wearing positions (eg, hip or waist, wrist, and thigh). Depending on the primary outcome of interest, the recommendations of where to place the wearable device may vary. For example, to assess sleep-wake patterns, wrist-worn devices may optimize the recording of small movements that occur at the distal extremities when an individual is supine. For example, Fairclough et al reported that wrist placement promotes superior compliance than that of the hip position. In contrast, if researchers are interested in differentiating between body postures (eg, sitting vs standing), the thigh might be the position of choice because of the option of wearing the device under clothing to accurately assess intensity and posture or activity types. However, only 1.8% (4/222) of studies validated posture or activity-type outcomes using thigh-worn devices. Future validation studies are needed with multiple devices and different wearing positions to increase comparability and to inform end users of which device to use and where to place it. In addition, future signal analytical research purposes might be valuable in terms of extracting different outcomes from a single wearing position. Moreover, different types of wearables (ie, pedometers and uniaxial, biaxial, and triaxial accelerometers) have been validated. Researchers should be aware that the different types of devices have different technical requirements. For example, uniaxial accelerometers measure acceleration in 1 direction, whereas triaxial accelerometers measure acceleration in 3 directions. Thus, triaxial accelerometers provide more information, which might be helpful in developing further algorithms.

Synchronization, Transparency, and Statistical Analyses
We evaluated whether the studies reported data synchronization, wear time, the algorithm of the validated outcome, and data analyses. As less than half (75/222, 33.8%) of all included studies reported information about the synchronization process between index and criterion measures, potentially introducing errors and biasing results, we suggest future research endeavors to apply time-stamped solutions such as asking participants to perform 3 vertical jumps at the beginning and the end of the measurement. Following practical consideration when applying wearables, a large number of studies defined a valid day if ≥10 hours of wear time during waking hours were captured. We set the quality criterion to ≥8 hours per day, revealing that 56% (107/190) of studies considered the wear time criteria for a valid day. Capturing shorter periods may increase the risk of bias as less time is available to assess the data in different settings (eg, at home or at work).
A critical aspect from the perspective of transparency is the presentation of algorithms. Only 43.7% (97/222) of studies reported the algorithm or at least cited further information on the validated outcomes. In particular, no information about the used algorithms was provided in studies in which a commercial-grade device was validated. At this point, researchers often do not have access to the raw data of commercial-grade wearables or the black box algorithms. Moreover, companies can update wearables’ firmware or algorithms at any time, which hinders comparability. In addition, the pace at which technology is evolving in optimizing algorithms far exceeds the pace of published validation research. Open-source methods that are more flexible in using algorithms for different devices are needed.
A quality criterion for the used statistical analyses was not set because of the lack of consistent statistical guidelines for reporting the validity of an activity monitor. Most of the reviewed studies used traditional statistical tests of differences such as t tests or ANOVAs. Optimally and in line with recently published suggestions, researchers should integrate different analytical approaches such as combining traditional analyses with equivalence testing and including epoch-by-epoch comparisons whenever possible.

Limitations
Some points merit further discussion. First, the evaluation of study quality was based on self-selected criteria. In particular, we selected the QUADAS-2 tool and added further signaling questions in line with core principles, recommendations, and expert statements. However, as we are not aware of any further quality tools and signaling questions for wearable validation purposes, our selected criteria can serve as a starting point for future systematic reviews that focus on the study quality of wearable technology under free-living conditions. Second, our included validation studies were published between 1987 and 2021. Given the rapid development of wearable technologies and the increasing availability of different research and commercial-grade devices, quality standards have been developed. Thus, when interpreting the study protocols, the time during which the study was conducted should be considered. Third, our review focused on the quality of study protocols. However, we did not take into account further important considerations when using wearables, such as wear or nonwear time algorithms, costs of the monitor, or time of data processing. Fourth, our findings were limited to our search strategy; thus, we may have missed further validation studies. However, we applied backward and forward citation searches through the reference lists of the included studies to identify articles that may not have appeared in our search. Finally, this systematic review was limited to articles published in the English language.

Conclusions
Currently, there is a wealth of research on commercial-grade wearables; however, the quality of published validation protocols in adults had not been assessed thus far. However, this is a critical step to enable both researchers and consumers to make guided decisions on which study to rely on and which device to use. To this end, our review unraveled that most validation studies did not meet the recommended quality principles. Primarily, there is a lack of validation studies with gold standard reference measures such as video recording, polysomnography, or the doubly labeled water method. Moreover, most devices were validated only once and focused predominantly on intensity measure outcomes. Given the rising interest in the 24-hour physical behavior construct in health research, the next generation of validation studies should consider the validity of >1 aspect of the 24-hour physical behavior construct during a study protocol or to conduct a series of studies. Thus, we conclude that standardized protocols for free-living validation embedded in a framework are urgently needed to inform and guide stakeholders (eg, manufacturers, scientists, and consumers) in (1) selecting wearables for self-tracking purposes, (2) applying wearables in health studies, and (3) fostering innovation to achieve improved validity.
Authors' Contributions: MG, UWEP, MR, and BvHM contributed to the conception and design of the study. MG, RN, DD, and MB contributed to the development of the search strategy. MG, SS, KW, RN, MB, DD, IT, and BvHM conducted the systematic review. MG, KW, SS, IT, DD, MB, and RN performed the data extraction. All authors assisted with the interpretation. MG, UEWP, HB, CRN, BvHM, MR, and KW were the principal authors of the manuscript. All authors contributed to the drafting and revision of the final manuscript. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: UWEP works as a consult for Boehringer-Ingelheim. The authors have no other conflicts to declare.

Abbreviations
24-HAC
24-hour activity cycle
PA
physical activity
PRISMA
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
QUADAS-2
Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-2
SB
sedentary behavior
The 24-hour activity cycle: a new paradigm for physical activity
Sedentary Behavior Research Network (SBRN) - Terminology Consensus Project process and outcome
World Health Organization 2020 guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour
Thigh-worn accelerometry for measuring movement and posture across the 24-hour cycle: a scoping review and expert statement
Validation of accelerometer for measuring physical activity in free-living individuals
The accuracy of talking pedometers when used during free-living: a comparison of four devices
Validation of Fitbit-Flex as a measure of free-living physical activity in a community-based phase III cardiac rehabilitation population
About the accuracy and problems of consumer devices in the assessment of sleep
How valid are wearable physical activity trackers for measuring steps?
Use of wrist activity for monitoring sleep/wake in demented nursing-home patients
Objective physical activity assessment in patients with chronic organ failure: a validation study of a new single-unit activity monitor
Accuracy and validity of a combined heart rate and motion sensor for the measurement of free-living physical activity energy expenditure in adults in Cameroon
Step count standardization: validation of step counts from the Withings Activite using PiezoRxD and wGT3X-BT
A validation of wrist actigraphy against polysomnography in patients with schizophrenia or bipolar disorder
Comprehensive comparison of Apple Watch and Fitbit monitors in a free-living setting
The validity of the commercially-available, low-cost, wrist-worn Movband accelerometer during treadmill exercise and free-living physical activity
Validity of self-reported and objectively measured sedentary behavior in pregnancy
Free-living activity counts-derived breaks in sedentary time: are they real transitions from sitting to standing?
Reliability and construct validity of the SENS Motion® activity measurement system as a tool to detect sedentary behaviour in patients with knee osteoarthritis
Estimation of sleep stages in a healthy adult population from optical plethysmography and accelerometer signals
Which activity monitor to use? Validity, reproducibility and user friendliness of three activity monitors
Validation of the VitaBit sit-stand tracker: detecting sitting, standing, and activity patterns
Effect of wearables on sleep in healthy individuals: a randomized crossover trial and validation study
Factors that may influence the classification of sleep-wake by wrist actigraphy: the MrOS Sleep Study
Comparison of sleep parameters from actigraphy and polysomnography in older women: the SOF study
Validation of a consumer-grade activity monitor for continuous daily activity monitoring in individuals with multiple sclerosis
Accuracy of consumer-based activity trackers as measuring tool and coaching device in patients with COPD and healthy controls
Validity and usability of physical activity monitoring in patients with Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)
Estimation of free-living energy expenditure using a novel activity monitor designed to minimize obtrusiveness
Improving assessment of daily energy expenditure by identifying types of physical activity with a single accelerometer
Validation of the activPAL3 in free-living and laboratory scenarios for the measurement of physical activity, stepping, and transitions in older adults
Video analysis validation of a real-time physical activity detection algorithm based on a single waist mounted tri-axial accelerometer sensor
Estimation of free-living energy expenditure by heart rate and movement sensing: a doubly-labelled water study
Validation and reliability of two activity monitors for energy expenditure assessment
Validity of Fitbit's active minutes as compared with a research-grade accelerometer and self-reported measures
Measuring free-living physical activity with three commercially available activity monitors for telemonitoring purposes: Validation study
Concurrent validity of wearable activity trackers under free-living conditions
Polar Activity Watch 200: a new device to accurately assess energy expenditure
Real-life step and activity measurement: reliability and validity
Ambulatory accelerometry to quantify motor behaviour in patients after failed back surgery: a validation study
Automated algorithms for detecting sleep period time using a multi-sensor pattern-recognition activity monitor from 24 h free-living data in older adults
Objective and subjective measurement of energy expenditure in older adults: a doubly labeled water study
A comparison of sedentary behavior as measured by the Fitbit and ActivPAL in college students
Validity of the ActiGraph activity monitor for individuals who walk slowly post-stroke
An investigation of a novel three-dimensional activity monitor to predict free-living energy expenditure
Validation of fitness tracker for sleep measures in women with asthma
Free-living cross-comparison of two wearable monitors for sleep and physical activity in healthy young adults
Reliability and validity testing of the MotionWatch 8 in older adults
Predicting energy expenditure in elders with the metabolic cost of activities
Assessment of laboratory and daily energy expenditure estimates from consumer multi-sensor physical activity monitors
Comparison of wrist-worn Fitbit Flex and waist-worn ActiGraph for measuring steps in free-living adults
Evaluation of a commercially available pedometer used to promote physical activity as part of a national programme
Comparative validity of physical activity measures in older adults
Non-traditional wearing positions of pedometers: validity and reliability of the Omron HJ-203-ED pedometer under controlled and free-living conditions
Validation of the Fitbit Charge 2 compared to the ActiGraph GT3X+ in older adults with knee osteoarthritis in free-living conditions
Physical activity monitor accuracy for overground walking and free-living conditions among pregnant women
Evaluation of the ability of three physical activity monitors to predict weight change and estimate energy expenditure
A comparison of two motion sensors for the assessment of free-living physical activity of adolescents
Long-term mobility monitoring of older adults using accelerometers in a clinical environment
Free-living energy expenditure of adult men assessed by continuous heart-rate monitoring and doubly-labelled water
The accuracy of smart devices for measuring physical activity in daily life: validation study
Low-Cost consumer-based trackers to measure physical activity and sleep duration among adults in free-living conditions: validation study
Methods for activity monitor validation studies: an example with the Fitbit charge
A practical validation study of a commercial accelerometer using good and poor sleepers
Physical activity assessment between consumer- and research-grade accelerometers: a comparative study in free-living conditions
Physical activity using wrist-worn accelerometers: comparison of dominant and non-dominant wrist
Validation of PiezoRx pedometer derived sedentary time
Congruent accuracy of wrist-worn activity trackers during controlled and free-living conditions
Accuracy of uploadable pedometers in laboratory, overground, and free-living conditions in young and older adults
Comparison of accuracy of various non-calorimetric methods measuring energy expenditure at different intensities
Steps per day measured by consumer activity trackers worn at the non-dominant and dominant wrist relative to a waist-worn pedometer
Field evaluation of the Computer Science and Application's Inc. Activity monitor during running and skating training in adolescent athletes
The validity of consumer-level activity monitors in healthy older adults in free-living conditions
Evaluation of activity monitors in controlled and free-living environments
The validity of consumer-level, activity monitors in healthy adults worn in free-living conditions: a cross-sectional study
Evaluation of ActiGraph's low-frequency filter in laboratory and free-living environments
Physical activity monitoring in patients with peripheral arterial disease: validation of an activity monitor
Validation of a physical activity accelerometer device worn on the hip and wrist against polysomnography
Software thresholds alter the bias of actigraphy for monitoring sleep in team-sport athletes
Recognizing human activity in free-living using multiple body-worn accelerometers
Assessment of free-living daily physical activity in older claudicants: validation against the doubly labeled water technique
Prior automatic posture and activity identification improves physical activity energy expenditure prediction from hip-worn triaxial accelerometry
Validation of a novel device to measure and provide feedback on sedentary behavior
Comparison of the performance of the activPAL Professional physical activity logger to a discrete accelerometer-based activity monitor
Estimating physical activity and sedentary behavior in a free-living context: a pragmatic comparison of consumer-based activity trackers and actigraph accelerometry
Reliability of commercially available sleep and activity trackers with manual switch-to-sleep mode activation in free-living healthy individuals
Performance assessment of new-generation Fitbit technology in deriving sleep parameters and stages
Comparison of wrist-worn and hip-worn activity monitors under free living conditions
Validity, potential clinical utility and comparison of a consumer activity tracker and a research-grade activity tracker in insomnia disorder II: outside the laboratory
Validity of the polar M430 activity monitor in free-living conditions: validation study
Estimation of energy expenditure using accelerometers and activity-based energy models—validation of a new device
Validation study of Polar V800 accelerometer
Evaluation of the MyWellness Key accelerometer
Detecting free-living steps and walking bouts: validating an algorithm for macro gait analysis
Validity of activity monitor step detection is related to movement patterns
Validity of smartphones and activity trackers to measure steps in a free-living setting over three consecutive days
Validity of the Fitbit One for measuring activity in community-dwelling stroke survivors
Validity of an accelerometer-based activity monitor system for measuring physical activity in frail older adults
Sleep detection with an accelerometer actigraph: comparisons with polysomnography
Comparing GENEActiv against Actiwatch-2 over seven nights using a common sleep scoring algorithm and device-specific wake thresholds
Accuracy of armband monitors for measuring daily energy expenditure in healthy adults
Accelerometry combined with heart rate telemetry in the assessment of total energy expenditure
Validity of GT3X and Actiheart to estimate sedentary time and breaks using ActivPAL as the reference in free-living conditions
Accuracy of Actigraph inclinometer to classify free-living postures and motion in adults with overweight and obesity
Validation of the triaxial accelerometer for the evaluation of physical activity in Japanese patients with COPD
Validity of a commercial wearable sleep tracker in adult insomnia disorder patients and good sleepers
Agreement rates for sleep/wake judgments obtained via accelerometer and sleep diary: a comparison
Validity of Fitbit Charge 2 in controlled college physical education settings
Improving hip-worn accelerometer estimates of sitting using machine learning methods
Using the SenseCam to improve classifications of sedentary behavior in free-living settings
Validation of the ActiGraph GT3X and activPAL accelerometers for the assessment of sedentary behavior
Training-induced changes in daily energy expenditure: methodological evaluation using wrist-worn accelerometer, heart rate monitor, and doubly labeled water technique
Wrist-worn accelerometers in assessment of energy expenditure during intensive training
Assessing energy expenditure in male endurance athletes: validity of the SenseWear Armband
Validation of a wireless patch sensor to monitor mobility tested in both an experimental and a hospital setup: a cross-sectional study
Automatic sleep/wake scoring from body motion in bed: validation of a newly developed sensor placed under a mattress
Reliability and validity of ten consumer activity trackers
Validation of wearable monitors for assessing sedentary behavior
Field-based measurement of sleep: agreement between six commercial activity monitors and a validated accelerometer
Validity of activity monitors worn at multiple nontraditional locations under controlled and free-living conditions in young adult women
Comparability of activity monitors used in Asian and Western-country studies for assessing free-living sedentary behaviour
The validity of MotionSense HRV in estimating sedentary behavior and physical activity under free-living and simulated activity settings
Actigraphy of wrist and ankle for measuring sleep duration in altitude travelers
Motion sensor accuracy under controlled and free-living conditions
Concurrent validity of Nokia Go activity tracker in walking and free-living conditions
Validity of the SenseWear armband step count measure during controlled and free-living conditions
Concurrent validation of the Actigraph gt3x+, Polar Active accelerometer, Omron HJ-720 and Yamax Digiwalker SW-701 pedometer step counts in lab-based and free-living settings
Comparison of wearable trackers' ability to estimate sleep
Feasibility, reliability, and validity of using accelerometers to measure physical activities of patients with stroke during inpatient rehabilitation
The convergent validity of Actiwatch 2 and ActiGraph Link accelerometers in measuring total sleeping period, wake after sleep onset, and sleep efficiency in free-living condition
Energy expenditure estimated by accelerometry and doubly labeled water: do they agree?
A novel machine learning unsupervised algorithm for sleep/wake identification using actigraphy
Lifesource XL-18 pedometer for measuring steps under controlled and free-living conditions
Evaluations of Actiheart, IDEEA® and RT3 monitors for estimating activity energy expenditure in free-living women
The activPALTM accurately classifies activity intensity categories in healthy adults
Validity of two wearable monitors to estimate breaks from sedentary time
Validation of an armband to measure daily energy expenditure in older adults
Validation of a device for the ambulatory monitoring of sleep patterns: a pilot study on Parkinson's disease
Reliability of sleep measures from four personal health monitoring devices compared to research-based actigraphy and polysomnography
Estimating sedentary time from a hip- and wrist-worn accelerometer
Measurement of active and sedentary behavior in context of large epidemiologic studies
Validity of a novel research-grade physical activity and sleep monitor for continuous remote patient monitoring
Assessment of the MyWellness Key accelerometer in people with type 2 diabetes
Convergent validity of the Fitbit Charge 2 to measure sedentary behavior and physical activity in overweight and obese adults
A validation study of the Fitbit one in daily life using different time intervals
Estimating physical activity and sedentary behaviour in a free-living environment: a comparative study between Fitbit Charge 2 and Actigraph GT3X
Verification of a motion sensor for evaluating physical activity in COPD patients
Measuring energy expenditure after stroke: validation of a portable device
Assessing the performance of a commercial multisensory sleep tracker
Accuracy of 12 wearable devices for estimating physical activity energy expenditure using a metabolic chamber and the doubly labeled water method: validation study
A dual-accelerometer system for detecting human movement in a free-living environment
Agreement between activity-monitoring devices during home rehabilitation: a substudy of the AAA STOP trial
Assessment of physical activity and energy expenditure by GPS combined with accelerometry in real-life conditions
Measurement of sedentary time and physical activity in rheumatoid arthritis: an ActiGraph and activPAL™ validation study
Comparing accelerometer, pedometer and a questionnaire for measuring physical activity in bronchiectasis: a validity and feasibility study?
Validation of the PiezoRx® step count and moderate to vigorous physical activity times in free living conditions in adults: a pilot study
Validity of the Fitbit activity tracker for measuring steps in community-dwelling older adults
The validity of the GENEActiv wrist-worn accelerometer for measuring adult sedentary time in free living
Between-monitor differences in step counts are related to body size: implications for objective physical activity measurement
Actigraphy-based sleep estimation in adolescents and adults: a comparison with polysomnography using two scoring algorithms
Validity of physical activity monitors during daily life in patients with COPD
Validation of three alternative methods to measure total energy expenditure against the doubly labeled water method for older Japanese men
Concurrent validity of the Fitbit for assessing sedentary behavior and moderate-to-vigorous physical activity
Sleep assessment by means of a wrist actigraphy-based algorithm: agreement with polysomnography in an ambulatory study on older adults
Validity and reliability of Fitbit activity monitors compared to ActiGraph GT3X+ with female adults in a free-living environment
Twenty-four hours of sleep, sedentary behavior, and physical activity with nine wearable devices
Validation of the ActiGraph two-regression model for predicting energy expenditure
Comparison of total energy expenditure assessed by two devices in controlled and free-living conditions
Consumer wearable devices for activity monitoring among individuals after a stroke: a prospective comparison
The assessment of 24-hour energy expenditure in elderly women by minute-by-minute heart rate monitoring
Home is where sleep is: an ecological approach to test the validity of actigraphy for the assessment of insomnia
The validity of activity monitors for measuring sleep in elite athletes
Comparison of a new wrist-worn accelerometer with a commonly used triaxial accelerometer under free-living conditions
Validation of activity tracking procedures in elderly patients after operative treatment of proximal femur fractures
Pedometer measures of free-living physical activity: comparison of 13 models
Can consumer grade activity devices replace research grade actiwatches in youth mental health settings?
Comparison of physical activity measures derived from the Fitbit Flex and the ActiGraph GT3X+ in an employee population with chronic knee symptoms
Validity of energy expenditure estimation methods during 10 days of military training
Evaluation of the Omron HJ-720ITC pedometer under free-living conditions
Accuracy of a combined heart rate and motion sensor for assessing energy expenditure in free-living adults during a double-blind crossover caffeine trial using doubly labeled water as the reference method
Validating Fitbit for evaluation of physical activity in patients with knee osteoarthritis: do thresholds matter?
Validity of Garmin Vívofit and polar loop for measuring daily step counts in free-living conditions in adults
Wrist-worn activity trackers in laboratory and free-living settings for patients with chronic pain: criterion validity study
Patient-focused endpoints in advanced cancer: criterion-based validation of accelerometer-based activity monitoring
Detection of physical activity types using triaxial accelerometers
Energy expenditure by multisensor armband in overweight and obese lactating women validated by doubly labeled water
Comparison of single- and dual-monitor approaches to differentiate sitting from lying in free-living conditions
Measuring energy expenditure in habitually active and sedentary pregnant women
Validation of the Fitbit Zip and Fitbit Flex with pregnant women in free-living conditions
Evaluation of a portable device to measure daily energy expenditure in free-living adults
Integration of physiological and accelerometer data to improve physical activity assessment
Validation of a compact motion sensor for the measurement of physical activity in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Validity and reliability of Fitbit Flex for step count, moderate to vigorous physical activity and activity energy expenditure
A validation study of a consumer wearable sleep tracker compared to a portable EEG system in naturalistic conditions
Sleep estimates using microelectromechanical systems (MEMS)
Validity evaluation of the Fitbit Charge2 and the Garmin vivosmart HR+ in free-living environments in an older adult cohort
Video-recorded validation of wearable step counters under free-living conditions
Accuracy of a step counter during treadmill and daily life walking by healthy adults and patients with cardiac disease
Evaluation of quality of commercial pedometers
The validation of Fibit Zip™ physical activity monitor as a measure of free-living physical activity
Ambulatory monitoring of physical activity in working situations, a validation study
Reliable recognition of lying, sitting, and standing with a hip-worn accelerometer
Validating measures of free-living physical activity in overweight and obese subjects using an accelerometer
Construct validity of the Actiwatch-2 for assessing movement in people with profound intellectual and multiple disabilities
The Fitbit One physical activity tracker in men with prostate cancer: validation study
Comparison of two types of Actiwatch with polysomnography in older adults with intellectual disability: a pilot study
Validity of ambulatory accelerometry to quantify physical activity in heart failure
Concurrent validity of the MOX activity monitor compared to the ActiGraph GT3X
Estimation of daily energy expenditure in pregnant and non-pregnant women using a wrist-worn tri-axial accelerometer
Estimating sleep parameters using an accelerometer without sleep diary
Validity and responsiveness of four measures of occupational sitting and standing
Comparison of two ActiGraph accelerometer generations in the assessment of physical activity in free living conditions
Concurrent validity of Actigraph-determined sedentary time against the Activpal under free-living conditions in a sample of bus drivers
Validity of six consumer-level activity monitors for measuring steps in patients with chronic heart failure
Validity of combining heart rate and uniaxial acceleration to measure free-living physical activity energy expenditure in young men
The validity of objective physical activity monitoring in older individuals
Comparison of ActiGraph GT3X+ and StepWatch step count accuracy in geriatric rehabilitation patients
Field validation of the MTI Actigraph and BodyMedia armband monitor using the IDEEA monitor
Validation of a noninvasive, disposable activity monitor for clinical applications
Estimating energy expenditure from wrist and thigh accelerometry in free-living adults: a doubly labelled water study
An evaluation of the IDEEA™ activity monitor for estimating energy expenditure
Validity of actigraphy in young adults with insomnia
Identifying adults' valid waking wear time by automated estimation in activPAL data collected with a 24 h wear protocol
Improving the criterion validity of the activPAL in determining physical activity intensity during laboratory and free-living conditions
Validity of combination use of activity record and accelerometry to measure free-living total energy expenditure in female endurance runners
Validity of a triaxial accelerometer and simplified physical activity record in older adults aged 64-96 years: a doubly labeled water study
Worldwide survey of fitness trends for 2022
How can global physical activity surveillance adapt to evolving physical activity guidelines? Needs, challenges and future directions
Population-level physical activity surveillance in young people: are accelerometer-based measures ready for prime time?
Assessing physical behavior through accelerometry – state of the science, best practices and future directions
The COSMIN checklist for assessing the methodological quality of studies on measurement properties of health status measurement instruments: an international Delphi study
Calibration and validation of wearable monitors
Recommendations for determining the validity of consumer wearable and smartphone step count: expert statement and checklist of the INTERLIVE network
A framework to evaluate devices that assess physical behavior
Wearable, yes, but able…?: it is time for evidence-based marketing claims!
Recommendations for determining the validity of consumer wearable heart rate devices: expert statement and checklist of the INTERLIVE Network
The Hawthorne Effect: a randomised, controlled trial
Reliability and validity of commercially available wearable devices for measuring steps, energy expenditure, and heart rate: systematic review
Toward harmonized treadmill-based validation of step-counting wearable technologies: a scoping review
QUADAS-2: a revised tool for the quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Utilization of the PICO framework to improve searching PubMed for clinical questions
Actigraphic sleep tracking and wearables: Historical context, scientific applications and guidelines, limitations, and considerations for commercial sleep devices
The SBSM guide to actigraphy monitoring: clinical and research applications
Diagnostic test evaluation methodology: a systematic review of methods employed to evaluate diagnostic tests in the absence of gold standard - an update
Standardizing analytic methods and reporting in activity monitor validation studies
Measuring physical activity in children with pedometers: reliability, reactivity, and replacement of missing data
No familiarization or 'first-night effect' evident when monitoring sleep using wrist actigraphy
Assessment of physical activity using wearable monitors: recommendations for monitor calibration and use in the field
Reactivity: an issue for short-term pedometer studies?
Statistical considerations in the analysis of accelerometry-based activity monitor data
Practical considerations in using accelerometers to assess physical activity, sedentary behavior, and sleep
Wear compliance and activity in children wearing wrist- and hip-mounted accelerometers
Accelerometer data collection and processing criteria to assess physical activity and other outcomes: a systematic review and practical considerations
Physical activity in the United States measured by accelerometer
Accuracy of Fitbit devices: systematic review and narrative syntheses of quantitative data
A primer on the use of equivalence testing for evaluating measurement agreement
Validation of accelerometer wear and nonwear time classification algorithm