Scoping review of evidence-based practice guidelines for the evaluation and care of young children with developmental disabilities in LMIC settings: evidence for action
Abstract
Introduction
Childhood disability is increasingly prevalent, particularly in low-income and middle-income countries, as more children survive worldwide. Global practice guidelines are essential to address the need for timely identification, evaluation and management of children with developmental disabilities, particularly in resource-limited settings. This scoping review aims to summarise recent evidence-based practice guidelines for the assessment and care of children aged 0–5 years at risk or with developmental disabilities and identify those practice guidelines that are suitable for use across both global and resource-limited settings.
Methods
We searched PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL as well as websites for professional associations using Google to identify evidence-based practice guidelines for specific developmental disabilities with established global prevalence estimates. We identified additional literature through snowballing. Practice guidelines were included if they were published between September 2012 and June 2024, were in English, and demonstrated a systematic process of reviewing available evidence, which then provided information on the detection, diagnosis, treatment and management of children under five with developmental disabilities. Three reviewers independently screened results by title, abstract and full text. Study characteristics and outcome data were extracted, and results were narratively synthesised.
Results
43 practice guidelines met the eligibility search criteria. Few evidence-based practice guidelines were generated from resource-limited settings (n=3, 7.0%). Of these, two were published in Malaysia and one from Cameroon. Most of the practice guidelines focused on both assessment and management (n=20, 46.5%), with some addressing only assessment (n=9, 20.9%) or management of the conditions (n=14, 32.6%).
Conclusions
Practice guidelines focusing on the identification and support of children with developmental disabilities, chiefly published within high-income settings, are available to be selectively adapted and utilised across similar localities globally. All young children with developmental disabilities worldwide have the right to access equitable, timely and quality health and developmental care services.

WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC
Developmental disabilities (DDs) are common globally and a major concern to parents, caregivers and stakeholders involved in their care and support.
Practice guidelines play a pivotal role in enabling and promoting the delivery of equitable, effective and high-quality healthcare to individual patients.
Presently, children with DDs living in resource-limited settings are often not provided with capable and equitable health and developmental care, particularly as there are few evidence-based specific practice guidelines to inform effective care.
Practice guidelines, if adopted by national or international professional healthcare societies and organisations, can inform and empower appropriate investment to support the delivery of equitable health and developmental care for children with DDs.

WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS
Comprehensive review of evidence-based paediatric practice guidelines used globally in the evaluation and care of children with DDs.
An understanding of the components of the practice guidelines that may be both appropriate and adaptable within most clinical settings, including resource-limited settings for children aged 0–5 years with DDs.

HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH, PRACTICE OR POLICY
Several practice guidelines developed within high-resource settings may be adapted for use in lower-resource settings to ensure efficacy and equity in the care and support of the health and development of children with DDs.
There remains a critical need for research, incorporating key disaggregated variables, to evaluate the effectiveness of the utilisation of practice guidelines with appropriate adaptations, within local-to-regional low-income and middle-income settings for young children at risk for, or with, DDs.
Successful adherence to adapted practice guidelines for young children with disabilities will augment progress towards the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals, particularly goals 4.1, 4.2.

Introduction
The number of young children with disabilities surviving into later life is increasing globally. Recent evidence shows that more than 7.5% of children under 5 years of age live with a developmental disability (DD), with 95% of these children residing in low-income and middle-income countries (LMICs). Studies from India report an even higher prevalence of approximately 12.5% of children aged 2–9 years. Childhood DDs most commonly disrupt early development, expressed as developmental delays, dissociations and/or deviations from neurotypical development. These disabilities comprise a heterogeneous group of conditions that typically manifest during infancy and early childhood, impacting a child’s ability to learn, think, solve problems, communicate and interact with others as expected for their age and local culture. This often impacts on age-appropriate motor and adaptive skills, communication, cognition, social behaviour and learning and limits a child’s inclusion, participation and acceptance in local society.
As access to effective medical care for acutely sick children improves, more young children with one or more DDs are surviving, but they are not thriving. The first 5 years of life are crucial as it is a period of rapid physical, neurodevelopmental, behavioural and social growth. Supporting children under five with DDs is vital during this period when the brain is most plastic, grows fastest and is most responsive to the outside world. Early developmental screening and detection, assessment and referral for evidence-informed early intervention care are needed to reduce term costs, services and morbidity for these children and their families. With almost all countries having ratified both the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and, taking into account the disability-inclusive provisions within the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (UNSDGs) (2015), evidence-based practice guidelines in global settings are essential for addressing the needs of young children with DDs.
To provide a framework for this paper, it is essential to be aware of the various international coding systems for DDs used by healthcare professionals. These code designations-by-disorder are used for several purposes which include research, tracking prevalence rates of specific developmental diagnoses, clinical services and patient charting and health insurance billings-payments. The two coding systems most frequently used internationally are the WHO International Classification of Diseases-11, and the Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-5-TR (DSM-5-TR) by the American Psychiatric Association. A third system, which advocates for a broader perspective on disabilities that moves beyond diagnostic categories alone, is the WHO International Classification of Functioning (ICF). This model recognises the dynamic interrelationship between an individual’s health condition(s) and life contextual factors influencing body function and structure, activity capabilities and participation within their communities  The WHO Pocketbook of Hospital Care for Children is another example of guidelines for treating and managing common childhood illnesses in LMICs, and it has since been implemented in 46% of these countries. However, there is a paucity of international guidelines for identifying, supporting and managing children with DDs. Although some recommended treatment and managing guidelines are available for certain DDs, which are useful in optimising patient care and improving clinical outcomes, most of them come from high-income countries (HICs), with few clinical guidelines promoted globally on how to support and manage children with identified conditions.
The WHO has developed a general international healthcare guidebook (WHO mhGAP version 2), but the broad scope of these guidelines may not always address specific DDs or specific regional needs effectively. In addition, current practice guidelines for DDs often focus more on diagnostic pathways and less on more inclusive interprofessional approaches that emphasise enhancing overall functioning and participation rather than just specific diagnoses. Furthermore, many practice guidelines may be created, but they do not always go through the systematic processes of ensuring that they are evidence-based. From this perspective, we believe that a full scoping review of published guidelines (with a focus on those that are evidence-based) will provide us with clearer information as to the present situation from this perspective. Evidence-based practice guidelines are those that are based on a systematic review of available evidence, those developed by an interdisciplinary panel of experts, based on a transparent process, provide grading for quality and strength of evidence, and are revised at a specific timeline to incorporate new evidence.
Implementing practice guidelines and recommendations is vital in streamlining the timely implementation of evidence-based interventions. National and international practice guidelines, which are evidence-based, should aim to prioritise cost-effectiveness, feasibility, acceptability and efficacy in diagnostic and early intervention strategies. This focus helps ensure that young children with DDs in LMIC settings receive timely, effective support while optimising limited healthcare resources. Early childhood-focused practice guidelines also help prevent the misuse of these resources by steering funding away from ineffective or costly management approaches, such as unproven dietary alterations and supplements, passive stretching, stem cell therapies and hyperbaric oxygen. Evidence-based practice guidelines therefore play a crucial role in LMIC settings in ensuring that methodologies for the identification, management and support of young children with DDs adhere to the highest standards and minimise the risks.
This scoping review aims to synthesise evidence related to practice guidelines for addressing the needs of children with specific DDs in early childhood. This review will serve as a comprehensive source for existing practice guidelines relating to the screening, diagnosis, treatment and management of children under the age of five with DDs. The DDs in this review are most pertinent to children under the age of 5 and represent a heterogeneous group of conditions which includes global developmental delay (GDD), cerebral palsy (CP), autism spectrum disorder (ASD), epilepsy, attentional deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and sensory impairments (including hearing and vision impairment). It is crucial to acknowledge that not all early childhood healthcare or Early Childhood Intervention programme settings possess the capacity to provide precise diagnostic assessments; nevertheless, children and families still require appropriate support. Therefore, the objectives of this review are to determine which practice guidelines can be successfully adapted for low-resource settings and to offer recommendations for future clinical guideline adaptations and development.

Methods
For this paper, we define the term clinical practice guideline as a ‘recommendation for clinicians about the care of patients with specific conditions which should be based on the best available research evidence and practice experience’. We did a comprehensive database search and screened those eligible clinical guidelines that were specific to the conditions that we have concentrated on and where there was a clear process for systematically reviewing the literature to base the guidelines on. We then extracted data and completed a content analysis of the clinical recommendations outlined in the practice guidelines. For each condition, we provide some general information about the practice guidelines identified and then also provide information to clinicians on consensus from these practice guidelines that could be recommended across global settings. This scoping review is registered in Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/xvdsk).

Eligibility criteria
We aimed to identify evidence-based practice guidelines, as well as any research papers that provided practice guidelines with an evidence base which were related to the screening, diagnosis, treatment and management of children under 5 years of age with GDD, CP, ASD, ADHD, epilepsy, hearing and vision impairment. We define ‘evidence-based practice guidelines’ for inclusion based on a systematic review of the available published English language literature, developed by an interdisciplinary panel of experts via a transparent process and provide grading for the quality and strength of evidence. The practice guidelines had to describe at least one of the following: clinical assessment, diagnosis or management of the different DDs. We excluded practice guidelines that were specific to other conditions which might be related to DDs but are not the condition themselves (eg, practice guidelines for patients with epilepsy associated with Tuberous sclerosis complex). Articles that were not written in the English language or were not in our search period were excluded. Our inclusion criteria for evidence-based practice guidelines are listed in figure 1.
Inclusion criteria for practice guidelines relating to children with developmental disabilities. ADHD, attentional deficit hyperactivity disorder; ASD, autism spectrum disorder; CP, cerebral palsy; GDD, global developmental delay.

Information sources
We conducted a literature search using key terms on major databases, including PubMed, Scopus, CINAHL as well as the websites of professional paediatric associations (online supplemental file 1) using Google search (https://www.google.com/). We also searched grey literature databases and reviewed reference lists of included studies to find additional articles for consideration. The detailed search terms comprised the index, and free terms of the different DDs and the evidence-based recommendations combined with Boolean operators (“OR” and “AND”). Each of the conditions was searched separately on the Google search. The key search terms are outlined in online supplemental file 2. The databases were searched on 21 September 2022, while the Google searches were done between 6 October 2022 and August 2023. The literature search was updated on 12 June 2024. The relevant journal articles were screened by title and full paper using Covidence software. The first 100 hits on Google search were retrieved and those that appeared relevant were reviewed (figure 2).
PRISMA diagram showing flow from identification, screening to inclusion of evidence-based guidelines on developmental disabilities. PRISMA, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses.

Selection of evidence sources
Three reviewers (DoM, AMM and DeM) independently screened the articles by title, abstract and full paper. These three were supported by the wider authorship group who all had specialised expertise in childhood DDs. Any discrepancies in the articles screened were resolved by reassessment of the article, discussion and consensus.

Data extraction
We developed a data extraction template into which we entered data on the characteristics of the identified practice guidelines, such as the author, publication date, professional organisation that developed the clinical guideline, country it was developed in, type of DDs, age of children, population the clinical guideline is intended for, scope of the practice guidelines and summary recommendations.

Quality assessment
We used the Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation (AGREE II) to assess the quality of reporting of the practice guidelines. AGREE II has a 7-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) for 23 items grouped into six domains: scope and purpose, stakeholder involvement, rigour of development, clarity of presentation, applicability and editorial independence. For each of the 23 items, a score of 7 indicates an exceptional reporting that meets all the criteria while 2–6 partially meets the criteria. Therefore, higher percentage scores reflect exceptional reporting. The appraisal was conducted independently by DoM, AMM and DeM for each domain.

Data analysis and synthesis
We narratively synthesised the practice guidelines with discrepancies discussed between two reviewers, with consultation from third and fourth reviewers, if needed. We extracted guidelines that were similar across all DDs and then those relating to a specific DD and highlighted the potential opportunities to implement these practice guidelines in LMICs (Figures 4a-f). We also provided information on common features across all practice guidelines for the conditions we have considered in figure 3. We used Statistical Package for Social Scientists V.22 to synthesise the results of AGREE II appraisal. For AGREE II domains, we summed all the scores, converted them into a percentage for each clinical guideline and calculated an overall mean percentage and SD for all practice guidelines, with higher percentages indicating higher quality of reporting.
Common recommendations from practice guidelines which can be considered in LMIC settings across the selected DDs. DDs, developmental disabilities; LMIC, low-income and middle-income country.

Patient and public involvement and engagement
This scoping review did not directly involve patients, caregivers or members of the public in its design, conduct or analysis. However, the topic was informed by our team’s ongoing clinical and research engagement with families of children with DDs in LMICs. The review aimed to identify and synthesise clinical guidelines that can ultimately inform more equitable, family-centred care. We acknowledge the value of involving families and caregivers in future stages of this work, particularly in the adaptation and implementation of guidelines in resource-limited settings.

Results
We screened 6725 articles from the databases and 1510 website links. A total of 307 articles were considered for full-text screening. A further 264 articles were eliminated as they were reviews of guidelines (secondary sources) (n=39) or they were not available in the English language (n=1). Articles were also eliminated if they were guidelines focusing on implementation and not on identification, screening, diagnosis or management (n=12) and if they were not practice guidelines (n=150). Finally, all articles that had a different intended patient population from the population of interest for our study, for example, a specific population of patients with seizures associated with tuberous sclerosis complex (n=3), those retired guidelines with newer versions superseding these guidelines (n=3), duplicates (n=2), draft clinical guideline (n=2), ones with no publication date indicated or which were not evidence-based practice guidelines were also removed (n=51) (figure 2).
We found 43 eligible studies that met the inclusion criteria in this scoping review (table 1). Almost all (n=36, 83.7%) of the practice guidelines were from HICs; four (9.3%) were developed for global use, while three (7.0%) were developed in LMICs (Cameroon and Malaysia). Most of the practice guidelines (n=31, 72.1%) were intended for use by interdisciplinary teams working with children, for example, health and social care professionals, while 16.3% (n=7) were tailored for specific experts, for example, neurologists, epilepsy specialists, audiologists, otolaryngologists, ophthalmologists or optometrists. The rest of the articles did not specify the intended population. Most of the practice guidelines focused on both assessment and management (n=20, 46.5%), with some addressing only assessment (n=9, 20.9%) or management of the conditions (n=14, 32.6%) (table 2).
Characteristics of practice guidelines included
Author/s	Type of guideline	Country	Specific condition	Age of child	Focus	Population/professionals guideline intended for	 	ADHD	 	AADPA	CG	Australia	NS	Children, adolescents, adults	Screening, diagnosis, treatment and support	Healthcare professionals, providers, people with ADHD, families, carers	 	AWMF	CG	Germany	NS	Children, adolescents’ adults	Prevention, diagnostic and treatment	Interdisciplinary team	 	Barbaresi et al	CG	USA	Complex ADHD	0–18	NS	Multi-disciplinary team	 	Bolea-Alamañac et al	EBG	UK	NS	Children, adolescents, adults	Management	Multidisciplinary team	 	MOH Malaysia	CPG	Malaysia	NS	Children and adolescents	Management	Interdisciplinary team	 	NICE	CG	UK	NS	0–5	Diagnosis and management	Healthcare professionals, commissioners, providers, people with ADHD, families.	 	Saudi Arabia MOH	MoH protocols	Saudi Arabia	NS	Chidren, adolescents, adults	Assessment and management	Interdisciplinary team	 	Singapore MOH	CPG	Singapore	NS	Children and adolescents	Assessment and management	Interdisciplinary team	 	Wolraich et al	CG	USA	NS	Children, adolescents, adults	Screening, diagnosis, treatment, support	Interdisciplinary team	 	Autism spectrum disorder	 	Goodall et al	National guideline	Australia	NS	Children, young people, adults	Assessment and diagnosis	Interdisciplinary team	 	Anderson et al	CPG	USA	NS	Young children	Assessment and intervention	Interdisciplinary team	 	Bruder et al	Guideline	USA	NS	Children	Diagnosis	Interdisciplinary team	 	Government of Dubai	CPG	Dubai	NS	0–18 years	Management	Interdisciplinary team	 	Alenezi et al	CPG	Saudi Arabia	NS	Children	Management	Interdisciplinary team	 	Mae et al	CPG	Singapore	NS	Children and adolescents	Screening, diagnosis, and treatment and support	Interdisciplinary team	 	Magellan health	CPG	USA	NS	Children, youth, and young adults	Assessment, diagnosis, and treatment	Interdisciplinary team	 	Malaysia MOH	CPG	Malaysia	NS	0–18 years	Detection, assessment, and intervention	Interdisciplinary team	 	Whaikaha-Ministry of Disabled People	Guideline	New Zealand	NS	Children, young people and adults	Screening, assessment, and treatment	Interdisciplinary team	 	NICE	CG	UK	NS	0–18	Support and management	Healthcare professional and commissioners	 	SIGN	CG	UK	NS	Children and young people	Assessment, diagnosis, and intervention	Specialist healthcare professionals	 	Veereman et al	CPG	Belgium	NS	Children and young people	Management		 	Cerebral Palsy	 	Castelli et al	Guidelines	Italy	NS	0 and above	Recommendations for rehabilitation	Interdisciplinary team	 	Demont et al	Guidelines	France	NS	Children, adolescents, adults	Motor rehabilitation	Interdisciplinary team	 	Jackman et al	CPG	UK	NS	Children and young people	Interventions	Clinicians	 	Morgan et al	CG	USA	NS	0–2	Recommendations for interventions	NS	 	Novak et al	CG	Global	NS	Children	Assessment and management	Interdisciplinary	 	NICE	CG	UK	NS	0–25	Assessment and management	Health and social care professionals, children with CP, families	 	Waikato Health Board	CPG	New Zealand	NS	0–18 years	Management	Interdisciplinary team	 	Epilepsy	 	Mercadé Cerdá et al	CPG	Spain	NS	Children and adults	Management	NS	 	Glauser et al	EBG	USA	Status epilepticus	Children and adults	Treatment	Interdisciplinary team	 	Japanese Soc Neuro	CPG	Japan	NS	Infants, children, young adults, adults	Diagnosis, examination, and treatment	Healthcare workers	 	NICE	CG	UK	NS	0–65	Assessment and management	Healthcare professionals and commissioners	 	Pressler et al	CPG	Global	Seizure	Neonates	Treatment	NP	 	SIGN	CG	UK	NS	NS	Assessment and Management	Epilepsy specialist	 	Wilmshurst et al	CG	NS	Infantile seizures	0–2	Management	Neurologists	 	Global Developmental Delay	 	Canadian Task Force Preventive Health	CG	Canada	NS	1–4	Screening	NP	 	Hearing impairment	 	American Academy Audiology	CG	USA	Paediatric amplification	Children	Treatment	Clinicians	 	British Association of Audio vestibular physicians	CG	UK	Progressive permanent childhood hearing impairment	NS	Etiological investigations	Medical practitioners	 	WHO	CG	Global	NS	0–6 weeks	Screening	Interdisciplinary team	 	WHO	Handbook	Global	NS	Children and adults	assessment and management	Interdiciplinary	 	Vision impairment	 	American Optometric Assn	CG	USA	NS	0–18 years	Assessment	Interdisciplinary team	 	Delpero et al	CG	Canada	NS	0–5	Examination	Ophthalmologists, optometrist	 	North West	Practice guideline	Cameroon	Low vision and blindness	0–18	Identification, assessment, referral, follow-up	Interdisciplinary team
AADPA, Australian ADHD Professionals Association; ADHD, attentional deficit hyperactivity disorder; AWMF, Association of Scientific Medical Societies; CG, clinical guideline; CPG, Clinical Practice Guideline; EBG, Evidence-Based Guideline; MOH, Ministry of Health; NICE, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; NP, not provided; NS, not specified; SIGN, Scottish Intercollegiate Network.
Characteristics of Evidence Based Practice guidelines for Developmental Disabilities included in the Scoping Review
Characteristics of guidelines	Frequency	Per cent	 	Region			 	 LMIC	3	7.1	 	 HIC	36	85.7	 	 Global	3	7.1	 	Type of DD			 	 ADHD	9	21.4	 	 ASD	12	28.6	 	 CP	6	14.3	 	 Epilepsy	7	16.7	 	 GDD	1	2.4	 	 Hearing impairment	4	9.5	 	 Vision impairment	3	7.1	 	Definition of DD provided	 	 Yes	34	83.3	 	 No	7	16.7	 	Population/professional guideline intended for	 	 Interdisciplinary team	30	71.4	 	 Specific experts	7	16.7	 	 Not provided	4	9.5	 	 Not specified	1	2.4
ADHD, attentional deficit hyperactivity disorder; ASD, autism spectrum disorder; CP, cerebral palsy; DD, developmental disability; GDD, global developmental delay; HIC, high-income country; LMIC, low-income and middle-income country.

Quality of guidelines
Generally, the practice guidelines we identified were judged to be of good quality according to the AGREE II ratings (online supplemental file 3). The average overall quality score was 75.5%, with those which had a clear scope and purpose scoring at 87.6%. Due to good stakeholder involvement (professionals and/or end users) by many who create practice guidelines, this got a high rating (74.9%). Many guidelines had good rigour in the development process, including evidence of clarity, literature review search methods, selection criteria, consideration of benefits and harms, timelines for updating procedures and external review processes with an overall score of 69.7%. Generally, all practice guidelines had excellent (96.6%) clarity and were unambiguous, offering various management options with key recommendations easily discernible. The rating for the applicability of operation for the guidelines we identified was 63.5%. This indicates that many of the practice guidelines provided adequate practical information for implementation, including clinical guideline summary documents, links to checklists and algorithms, and considerations of resource implications through economic evaluations, drug costs, methods for accessing cost information, and in some cases, insights into barriers to implementation. Finally, editorial independence was rated 74.9%, with author conflicts of interest and sources of funding clearly stated.

Developmental screening and surveillance recommendations
The practice guidelines referenced for young children with DDs share several similarities in their recommendations, which would be suitable to be adapted for use within many LMIC settings. These included early child developmental surveillance and targeted or ‘fixed-point’ developmental screening. Developmental surveillance is a ‘family-centred’ and ‘longitudinal process’ for monitoring any child’s individual developmental profile. Central features of developmental surveillance include gathering appropriate neurodevelopmental information, including parental concerns, and documenting clinical observations and useful examination findings at each early child health encounter. The use of culturally and locally sensitive developmental milestones can guide the paediatric care provider to develop a profile of age-dependent strengths and weaknesses in a young child, as well as to flag any developmental domain of concern. Developmental screening is the specific ‘application of a standardised testing instrument (or questionnaire) with published sensitivity and specificity at specific ages,’ at a set point in time.

Clinical care guidelines: adapted recommendations
Common recommendations from the practice guidelines which can be considered for any programme (across different types of DDs) with an aim of improving outcomes for children with DDs are shown in figure 3. We also list for each DD potential opportunities to implement the clinical guidelines in LMIC settings (figure 4a–f).
(a) Adaptable approaches for assessment and management of global developmental delay (GDD). (b) Adaptable approaches for assessment and management of cerebral palsy (CP). (c) Adaptable approaches for assessment and management of ASD. (d) Adaptable approaches to assessment and management of ADHD. (e) Adaptable approaches to assessment and management of epilepsy. (f) Adaptable approaches to assessment and management of sensory impairments. ADHD, attentional deficit hyperactivity disorder; ASD, autism spectrum disorder; ECI, early childhood intervention; GMA, General Movements Assessment; HINE, Hammersmith Infant Neurological Exam; NICU, Neonatal Intensive Care Unit.

Global developmental delay
Only one clinical guideline met our inclusion criteria for young children with GDD (also now labelled as Intellectual Disability in DSM V-TR) although some other guidelines exist. The Canadian Guideline supports close monitoring and identification of risk factors such as prematurity or low birth weight for children who present with signs, symptoms or concerns from caregivers (figure 4a).

Cerebral palsy
We identified seven practice guidelines relating specifically to CP. These practice guidelines emphasise the significance of early screening for CP through a thorough history-taking (key risk factors) and physical examination conducted by a qualified physician. Some practice guidelines recommend using specific tools such as the General Movements Assessment by trained staff or the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Exam during regular check-ups for babies under 3 months old who are at risk of developing CP. In cases where neurological symptoms are present and a history suggests risk factors for CP, in high-income settings, an MRI, if available, is recommended to check for any brain abnormalities. During treatment, clinicians need to consider the child’s family preferences, age and their ability. An examination involves evaluating the child’s movement, muscle tone, strength and sensation. Some practice guidelines specifically recommend considering the wider ICF-CY issues, ensuring that body structure and function, participation and environmental factors are considered during diagnosis. Many practice guidelines also recommend the importance of evaluating and treating other conditions that often accompany CP, such as epilepsy, visual and hearing difficulties, speech and language difficulties, intellectual disability, chronic pain, musculoskeletal issues, sleep and behavioural difficulties. Some practice guidelines provide specific advice on developing individual feeding plans, early communication and augmentative communication. Evidence-based practice guidelines for the treatment of CP may involve medication to manage seizures, severe spasticity or drooling, as well as a review for bone mineral density and a review of sleep and pain issues. Physical, occupational, speech and language therapies are recommended to help improve the child’s body structure and function but, more importantly, prevent long-term contractures and hip and spine difficulties through good postural management. Some practice guidelines also recommend specific gait training, physical activities and hand-arm bimanual intensive treatment as first-line treatment for CP. In figure 4b, we highlight potential opportunities in implementing these practice guidelines in LMICs.

Autism spectrum disorder
We identified 12 evidence-based practice guidelines for the identification and support of children with ASD—mostly from high-income settings. Most practice guidelines provide evidence that screening for autism can occur between 18 and 24 months during routine health checks, using a tiered approach to screening. This approach first involves routine developmental surveillance and monitoring, and second, the use of specific ASD screening questionnaires. Almost all practice guidelines recommend that young children suspected of having ASD should undergo further detailed interdisciplinary medical and developmental evaluations by trained child-health professionals, including paediatricians, child psychiatrists, psychologists and additional professionals using age-appropriate and validated evaluative tools. All practice guidelines recommend the use of support programmes for children with ASD, in particular evidence-based group-based interventions, which can be led by parent champions in some cases, to support developmental skill building. Some practice guidelines from high-resource settings promote specific autism-focused educational practices and communication strategies, such as the use of the Picture Exchange Communication System, environmental visual supports and behavioural therapies. Behavioural interventions are usually designed to address sensory sensitivities, repetitive or non-functional behaviours and also methods to support better early communication and shared social skills are equally recommended. Parent-caregiver training programmes are a cornerstone of care for children with autism. These include focused interventions addressing a limited range of behaviours or skills, and comprehensive modules to guide families with a broader range of behaviours, skills and functional family well-being. Many of these approaches adhere to the philosophy of being both ‘patient and family-centred’. In figure 4b, we highlight potential opportunities in implementing these practice guidelines in LMICs.

Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
We identified nine practice guidelines for the identification and support of children with ADHD. Most of the practice guidelines identified were from HICs. These practice guidelines recommend conducting a comprehensive assessment of ADHD using information from multiple sources. They highlight the importance of investigating the presence of co-occurring medical conditions, such as in utero exposure to alcohol, drugs or early infant-child factors, including hyperthyroidism, significant head trauma, poor nutrition and lead exposure. Most practice guidelines recommend psychosocial supports and interventions as the first-line approach for children under 5 years old. These include environmental modifications at home and school (appropriate for age and ability), ADHD-based behavioural training programmes for homes, childcare and early educational settings, as well as, when appropriate, utilisation of ADHD-based social skills programmes. For example, parent behaviour management strategies are taught to help parents reinforce positive behaviours in their children, provide clear and safe feedback on negative behaviours and ignore provocative behaviours. In figure 4d, we highlight potential opportunities to implement these practice guidelines in LMICs.

Epilepsy
We identified seven international evidence-based practice guidelines for the diagnosis and management of epilepsy. All emphasise a comprehensive diagnostic approach beginning with a detailed history from the child and/or caregivers after a first suspected seizure. This is followed by a physical examination and, when possible, an eyewitness account or mobile phone video to aid in seizure classification, syndrome identification and determining aetiology. Some guidelines recommend EEG to support diagnosis and aetiology. Guidelines suggest genetic and metabolic testing when the cause remains unclear after initial evaluation. MRI is recommended when specific concerns arise during examination or based on seizure type. Additionally, they emphasise the need to evaluate for other neurodevelopmental, cognitive or behavioural challenges. Treatment approaches depend on individual needs, family context and psychosocial considerations, including the availability and affordability of treatment. All guidelines emphasise patient-centred care that incorporates family factors and psychosocial needs. The International League against Epilepsyrecommends initiation of anticonvulsant medication after a second unprovoked seizure, with specific recommendations for age, seizure type and comorbidities. After a first afebrile seizure with a more than 60% recurrence risk, it is recommended to refer to a specialist for further assessment and treatment. Psychoeducation for family-caregivers including seizure causation, risks of community stigma, coping and management strategies is encouraged along with structured reviews to monitor progress (figure 4e).

Sensory impairment
Healthy hearing and vision are essential for normal childhood development, and early identification and intervention of sensory impairments are crucial to maximising a child’s full potential. These impairments can hinder communication, cognition, motor and social-emotional growth.

Hearing impairment
The four practice guidelines identified highlight early screening and diagnosis to prevent speech and language delays. Universal newborn hearing screening using automated auditory brainstem response and otoacoustic emission assessments is recommended with age-appropriate methods applied at key stages; 6–8 months: (distraction techniques); 9–12 months: (conditioned response or visual reinforced audiometry), 2–4 years: (play audiometry) and for 4 years and older (pure-tone audiometry). Comprehensive history taking should assess medical and family history, high-risk pregnancies, prematurity, prenatal infections (eg, TORCH (Toxoplasmosis, Rubella, CMV, Herpes)), neonatal jaundice, substance exposure, trauma and recent infections. Physical and otoscopic examinations of the ear along with neurological examination including cranial nerves are essential.
Confirmed cases require audiological evaluation and intervention within 6 months. The Joint Committee on Infant Hearing’s 1-2-3 guideline recommends screening by 1 month, diagnosis by two, and intervention by 3 months. Further diagnostics, such as genetic testing and imaging, help identify syndromic causes. Interventions vary by severity and aetiology but include cochlear implants, hearing aids and speech therapy. Family-centred care, with education on communication strategies, sign language or auditory-verbal therapy using a team approach, is emphasised.

Vision impairment
Evidence-based guidelines emphasise routine vision screening with eye examinations to detect impairments such as cataract and retinoblastoma, strabismus/amblyopia, refractive errors, nystagmus, abnormal visual behaviour and cerebral visual impairment (CVI). Risk factors to identify include prematurity, low birth weight, intrauterine infections, birth trauma, hypoglycaemia, seizure disorders, family history and vitamin A deficiency. CVI is the leading cause of visual impairment in children under 16, often undiagnosed due to coexisting neurological conditions and learning disabilities. Screening, including the fundal ‘red’ reflex examination, should be conducted at birth and be integrated into maternal-child visits. Interventions include early access to glasses, patching, squint surgery and developmental therapies. For irreversible vision loss, a comprehensive assessment including the use of assistive technologies (eg, magnifiers, braille) and educational support is essential. Referral to a paediatric ophthalmologist is recommended for surgery or specialised care. Guidelines stress interdisciplinary collaboration and culturally sensitive family engagement to improve outcomes. Strengthening early screening and relevant interventions in LMICs can enhance inclusion and maximise developmental potential for children with sensory impairments (figure 4f).

Discussion
This scoping review identified 41 evidence-based practice guidelines for children with or at risk of DDs out of 8234 articles or sites. Most were generated in HIC settings, with only three from LMICs (two from Malaysia and one from Cameroon). While both HIC and LMICs have published guidelines, many have not been developed using a systematic evidence-based process. Furthermore, numerous research papers from LMIC settings do contain proper evidence, although they are not always formatted and ratified by clinical organisations as specific practice guidelines. Most of the evidence-based practice guidelines we identified were of good quality, with clear scope, stakeholder involvement and methodological rigour. In particular, many HIC professional organisations have developed robust guidelines. However, quality could be enhanced further by including more detail on developmental methods, timelines for updates, cost considerations and implementation facilitators and barriers.
We identified very few global guidelines designed for use across diverse cultural or resource-limited settings despite clear evidence of higher prevalence of DDs within LMIC settings. Clearly, there is a compelling need for early intervention and a global ‘push’ to improve early child development emphasised by the UNSDGs and through this, to create better international guidelines. Competing health priorities in LMICs may explain the gap in their creation, and WHO’s mh-GAP handbook has worked to provide some of this essential guidance, but can be limited in scope with a need for more specific guidelines. This highlights the tension between generalisability and specificity.

Key considerations when adapting and implementing guidelines for DDs in LMICs
We have identified several unique elements within healthcare that can influence the effective and meaningful implementation of clinical care guidelines, which should be considered in local healthcare settings.

Culture
Effective implementation must respect cultural and faith-based beliefs. These shape perceptions of health, disability and engagement with healthcare and therapeutic interventions. Cultural teachings and faith-based traditions can influence the way parents/families care for young children, whether they will take an active or passive role in healthcare and therapeutic interventions, or even how they communicate with a healthcare professional about their child. Clinicians should recognise how these factors influence family behaviour, communication and care-seeking.

Environmental and socioeconomic factors
Both environmental and socioeconomic factors influence a young child’s brain maturation and neurodevelopment. While HIC guidelines often focus on biomedical risks, incorporating broader social determinants and a humanistic approach can enhance personal relevance and equity. Growing evidence highlights the scientific relationship between early life experiences, physical health and future neurodevelopmental patterns. Therefore, the effective implementation of clinical guidelines should take these factors into careful consideration. Integrating this awareness promotes cultural sensitivity and supports a more humanistic approach—one that incorporates both medical and neurodiversity models while emphasising human dignity and individual potential.

Monitoring early child developmental profiles
Comprehensive early child developmental monitoring is vital to be integrated into routine child health visits in order to support and guide best practice even if there is not good evidence for any tool being perfect at screening level in terms of specificity. While LMICs often lack validated, culturally adapted tools to achieve this, some tools have been successfully modified. Implementation approaches, however, must be tailored to the local context, with local norming and linguistic appropriateness crucial for effective surveillance. The use of developmental tools to guide assessment should, however, when possible, have normative data for local populations of children, be culturally modifiable and offered within the family’s own primary language.

Broadening already existing guidelines and identifying comorbidities
Several existing practice guidelines for specific physical illnesses can be adapted for broader use. For example, WHO’s international guideline for the Treatment and Care of Persons affected by the Zika, the Integrated Management of Childhood Illness, and the WHO Pocketbook of primary healthcare for children and adolescents could be adapted to support children with DDs using transdisciplinary approaches. Recognising comorbidities that often coexist may be helpful, such as those with ASD or epilepsy syndromes who have significant co-occurring feeding, nutritional or cardiac difficulties. The adaptation of any clinical care guideline between different settings should take into account key regional and local supports and barriers to early childhood healthcare and education inclusion services.

Comprehensive (when feasible) interdisciplinary assessments
Overall, current practice guidelines highlight the importance of collaborative teamwork guiding comprehensive diagnostic and monitoring and evaluation processes. Collaborative, community-based assessments are vital but challenging in resource-limited contexts with few trained professionals. Although, ideally, professionals could collaborate across fields to prioritise the goals and needs of the child and family, there is a need for clearer frameworks on what constitutes interdisciplinary evaluation and how to implement it efficiently.

Using evidence-based practice guidelines as an advocacy tool
The omission of service provision and related costs from healthcare, education and other government budgets perpetuates a cycle of inadequate care and insufficient resources. Evidence-based practice guidelines that are adaptable across global settings can help standardise clinical practice while also serving as advocacy tools to promote equitable, cost-effective and sustainable care systems. These guidelines provide a structured framework for delivering care to individuals with DDs, enhancing the consistency and quality of services, and increasing awareness and expertise among professionals involved in assessment and intervention.

Strengths and limitations
This review provides a comprehensive synthesis of current recommendations for the clinical assessment, diagnosis and management of various DDs, based on evidence-based guidelines. However, we have excluded non-evidence-based materials (eg, expert opinions, clinical reports, programmatic reports and position statements) and limited our search to English-language publications. Further, we did not assess the effectiveness of adapting guidelines from HIC settings for use in LMIC ones—an area needing further exploration.

Conclusions
Practice guidelines can have significant implications for healthcare professionals involved in the care of children with DDs. They offer evidence-based recommendations for early detection, assessment and tailored interventions to improve developmental outcomes. Emphasising family-centred care and interdisciplinary collaboration, these guidelines promote caregiver engagement and holistic support. Ongoing monitoring ensures fidelity, clinical efficacy and adherence to ethical standards. For families, such guidelines provide clarity and reassurance, even in resource-limited settings. A cohesive set of international, culturally sensitive recommendations is essential to guide effective care globally.

Supplementary material
Funding: The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Provenance and peer review: Part of a Topic Collection; Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Patient consent for publication: Not applicable.
Ethics approval: Not applicable.
Data availability free text: Not applicable.
Patient and public involvement: Patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.

References
Global and regional prevalence of disabilities among children and adolescents: Analysis of findings from global health databases
Caring for children with developmental delay - reaching the vulnerable
Neurodevelopmental disorders in children aged 2-9 years: Population-based burden estimates across five regions in India
Brain plasticity and behaviour in the developing brain
Convention on the Rights of the Child, 20 November 1989
Convention on the rights of persons with disabilities 2006 [106]
Sustainable development goals (SDGs) and disability
International classicfication of diseases 11th revision: the global standard for diagnostic health information
Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders: DSM-5
International classification of functioning, disability, and health: children & youth version: ICF-CY
Handbook IMCI: integrated management of childhood illness
Pocket book of hospital care for children: guidelines for the management of common childhood illnesses
Global implementation survey of Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI): 20 years on
Role of Pediatricians, Pediatric Associations, and Academic Departments in Ensuring Optimal Early Childhood Development Globally: Position Paper of the International Pediatric Association
Global services and support for children with developmental delays and disabilities: Bridging research and policy gaps
MhGAP intervention guide for mental, neurological and substance use disorders in non-specialized health settings: mental health gap action programme (mhGAP)
Clinical practice guidelines: The good, the bad, and the ugly
Interprofessional collaboration for children with physical disabilities: a scoping review
Designing clinical guidelines that improve access and satisfaction in the emergency department
ECIA national guidelines: best practice in early childhood intervention
A systematic review of interventions for children with cerebral palsy: state of the evidence
Rehabilitative Therapies in Cerebral Palsy: The Good, the Not As Good, and the Possible
Global and regional prevalence of disabilities among children and adolescents: Analysis of findings from global health databases
Guide to clinical practice guidelines: the current state of play
Overview of clinical practice guidelines: UpToDate
Covidence systematic review software
AGREE II: advancing guideline development, reporting and evaluation in health care
IBM spss statistics for windows, version 22.0 [computer software]
Evidence-Informed Milestones for Developmental Surveillance Tools
Improving the odds for effective developmental surveillance
Recommendations on screening for developmental delay
Comprehensive Evaluation of the Child With Intellectual Disability or Global Developmental Delays
Current evidence-based recommendations on investigating children with global developmental delay
Early Intervention for Children Aged 0 to 2 Years With or at High Risk of Cerebral Palsy: International Clinical Practice Guideline Based on Systematic Reviews
Recommendations for the rehabilitation of children with cerebral palsy
Cerebral palsy in under 25s: assessment and management. NICE guideline NG62
Evidence-Based, Implementable Motor Rehabilitation Guidelines for Individuals With Cerebral Palsy
Interventions to improve physical function for children and young people with cerebral palsy: international clinical practice guideline
Cerebral palsy clinical practice guideline CP-CPG
Early, Accurate Diagnosis and Early Intervention in Cerebral Palsy: Advances in Diagnosis and Treatment
Autism spectrum disorder in under 19s: support and management
Assessment, diagnosis and interventions for autism spectrum disorders: a national clinical guideline
2023 clinical practice guidelines on autism spectrum disorder in children and adolescents in Singapore
Clinical practice guideline on assessment and intervention services for young children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD)
Management of autism spectrum disorder in children and adolescents
Dubai clinical practice guidelines for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) in children and adolescents (from birth to 18 years of age)
Introduction to magellan’s adopted clinical practice guidelines for the assessment and treatment of children with autism spectrum disorders
Connecticut guidelines for a clinical diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder
Management of autism in children and young people: a good clinical practice guideline
Parenting interventions to promote early child development in the first three years of life: A global systematic review and meta-analysis
Society for Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics Clinical Practice Guideline for the Assessment and Treatment of Children and Adolescents with Complex Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adolescents
Evidence-based guidelines for the pharmacological management of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: Update on recommendations from the British Association for Psychopharmacology
Long version of the interdisciplinary evidence- and consensusbased (S3) guideline “Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in children, adolescents and adult
Australian evidence-based clinical practice guideline for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd)
MOH protocols for the management of attention deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD) across the life span
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Management of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents
Guidelines. attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: diagnosis and management, copyright © nice 2018
Individual and Combined Association Between Prenatal Polysubstance Exposure and Childhood Risk of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Epilepsies in children, young people and adults NICE guideline
Summary of recommendations for the management of infantile seizures: Task Force Report for the ILAE Commission of Pediatrics
Evidence-Based Guideline: Treatment of Convulsive Status Epilepticus in Children and Adults: Report of the Guideline Committee of the American Epilepsy Society
Treatment of seizures in the neonate: Guidelines and consensus‐based recommendations—Special report from the ilae Task Force on Neonatal Seizures
Clinical practice guidelines for epilepsy 2018
The Spanish Society of Neurology’s official clinical practice guidelines for epilepsy
Epilepsies in children and young people: investigative procedures and management
American academy of audiology clinical practice guidelines pediatric amplification
WHO recommendations on maternal and newborn care for a positive postnatal experience
Guidelines for aetiological investigation into progressive permanent childhood hearing impairment
Hearing screening: considerations for implementation
Position Statement: Principles and Guidelines for Early Hearing Detection and Intervention Programs
Evidence-based clinical practice guidelines for the periodic eye examination in children aged 0-5 years in Canada
Evidence-based clinical practice guideline: comprehensive pediatric eye and vision examination
Best practice for the identification, assessment and refferals of children wih visual impairment in the North West region of cameroon
Advances in the evaluation and management of cortical/cerebral visual impairment in children
Chronic cortical visual impairment in children: aetiology, prognosis, and associated neurological deficits
Guidance for identification and treatment of individuals with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder based upon expert consensus
Early Diagnosis of Cerebral Palsy in Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Treatment guidelines: neurodevelopmental disorders
mhGAP intervention guide for mental, neurological and substance use disorders in non-specialized health settings: mental health gap action programme (mhGAP)
Global leadership is needed to optimize early childhood development for children with disabilities
Nurturing care for early childhood development: a framework for helping children survive and thrive to transform health and human potential
Influence of religious beliefs on healthcare practice
Beliefs and perception of ill-health causation: a socio-cultural qualitative study in rural North-Eastern Ethiopia
State of the Art Review: Poverty and the Developing Brain
Early life stress and development: potential mechanisms for adverse outcomes
Early life exposures, neurodevelopmental disorders, and transposable elements
Neurodiversity and humanism in autism: An LMIC health care setting perspective
Optimising the use of routine immunisation clinics for early childhood development in sub-Saharan Africa
Systematic Review and Meta-analysis: Real-World Accuracy of Children’s Developmental Screening Tests
Screening tools for early identification of children with developmental delay in low- and middle-income countries: a systematic review
Developmental screening tools: feasibility of use at primary healthcare level in low- and middle-income settings
WHO toolkit for the care and support of people affected by complications associated with zika virus
Pocket book of primary health care for children and adolescents: guidelines for health promotion, disease prevention and management from the newborn period to adolescence. Pocket book of primary health care for children and adolescents: guidelines for health promotion, disease prevention and management from the newborn period to adolescence
Autism medical comorbidities
Comorbidities in cerebral palsy: a patient registry study
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and comorbidity: A review of literature
Tackling healthcare access barriers for individuals with autism from diagnosis to adulthood
Pediatricians’ perspectives on childhood behavioral and mental health problems in Jordan
Model for Service Delivery for Developmental Disorders in Low-Income Countries
Child disability services in Bangladesh
Key standards and principles for developing evidence-based clinical guidelines: balancing health professional, patient, funder, and government needs

Data availability statement
All data relevant to the study are included in the article or uploaded as supplementary information.

Review Process File
2025