Toward understanding grapevine responses to climate change: a multi-stress and holistic approach
Abstract
Recent research has extensively covered the effects of climate change factors, such as elevated CO2, rising temperatures, and water deficit on grapevine (Vitis spp.) biology. However, assessing the impacts of multiple climate change-related stresses on this crop remains complex due to interactive effects among environmental factors, and the regulatory mechanisms that underlie these. Consequently, there is a substantial discrepancy between the number of studies conducted with a single factor or two factors simultaneously, and those with a more holistic approach. Changes in crop phenology in response to temperature have been a major focus of many studies. We highlight how the impact of rising temperatures will be enhanced during specific developmental periods, such as grape ripening. However, how these shifts may result in deleterious effects on yield and quality deserves further research. Rising temperatures will most certainly continue to represent a substantial threat to viticulture due to its effects on grape phenology, composition, and crop water requirements. Nevertheless, elevated CO2 may offer some relief through increased water use efficiency, as shown in recent studies. Hormones play a major role within the repertoire of regulatory mechanisms that plants possess, with crosstalk between hormones explaining the effects of combined stresses. In fact, growth regulators can fine-tune stress responses depending on the multiple stresses present. This review focuses on the interaction of climate change factors across viticultural areas of the globe, and how multi-stress responses are mediated by abscisic acid and jasmonate, with emphasis on the intricate interconnections of signalling among different plant hormones.
There is evidence of complex interplay between CO2 , temperature, and water deficit, demonstrated by crosstalk of regulatory mechanisms; therefore, we need multi-stress approaches to comprehensively assess the impacts of climate change on grapevine.

Introduction

Climate change projections show a broad range of ripening temperature increases and changes in precipitation
Human activities have unequivocally caused the increase in the concentration of greenhouse gases (GHG), dominated by carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4), since the pre-industrial era. The atmospheric CO2 concentration reached a historical high of 425 ppm in 2024. Global surface temperatures in the period 2011–2020 was around 1.1 °C higher compared to the beginning of 20th century, and significant increases in the occurrence of extreme hot events, such as heat waves, have been detected. The Sixth Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) assessed the results from climate models participating in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 (CMIP6) for the World Climate Research Program. For future projections, the report considers five scenarios based on the Shared Socio-economic Pathways (SSPs), from SSP1-1.9 to SSP5-8.5, which represent the low and very high warming end of future emissions pathways, respectively. These scenarios range from stabilisation of CO2 levels below 400 ppm by the end of the century (SSP1-1.9), to increases up to 600, 850 and 1100 ppm for the SSP2-4.5, SSP3-7.0, and SSP5-8.5, respectively. Compared to 1850–1900, average global temperature at the end of the present century is very likely to be 1.0 °C to 1.8 °C higher in the low CO2 emission scenario (SSP1-1.9), and by 3.3 °C to 5.7 °C in the most pessimistic one (SSP5-8.5). An increase in average temperature will be accompanied by an increase in the frequency of warm/hot extreme events in most land areas.
These temperature projections correspond to global average estimates for the whole year and the whole planet, including air temperature over the oceans. However, focusing on grapevine—growing locations and the grape ripening period (i.e. August-September for the northern hemisphere and February-March for the southern hemisphere; Fig. 1 see data in Zenodo https://zenodo.org/records/14179181), temperature increases would be much higher. The increase in land surface air temperature for the end of the century in the SSP5-8.5 scenario, will be, on average, 7.11 and 5.24 °C for the northern and southern hemisphere, respectively Fig. 2A, D. Considering only the locations of grape growing regions (N=492, Fig. 1), the increases may go up to 8.3 °C (Fig. 2B, C, E, F). Wine-producing regions in Europe and North America will likely have a greater temperature rise than those in South America, Africa, and Australia. Specifically, the projected rise in temperature may have a more pronounced impact on the Mediterranean region, where temperatures are expected to increase on average by 4.5 and 8 °C during the period of grape ripening for SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5, respectively.
Worldwide distribution of the 492 grape production areas.
(A, D) Increases in temperature for the grape ripening months (August-September Northern hemisphere; February-March Southern hemisphere) across the globe for the end of the century (2080–2100 average of a 13 model ensemble of the CMIP6 provided by WorldClim 2.1: https://worldclim.org/cmip6maps.html) according to the SSP2-4.5 (A, B, and C) and SSP5-8.5 (D, E, and F) scenarios compared to the historical average for the period 1970–2000. (B, E) Boxplot (median, interquartile range, min, max, and outliers >1.5 times the interquartile range) of the average increase in temperature for the ripening months in viticultural areas of the different continents by the end of the century. (C, F) Evolution of average temperature for a selection of viticultural areas throughout the century. Africa, n=23; Asia, n=9; Australia, n=45; Europe, n=315; North America, n=79; South America, n=19.
Regarding the water cycle, changes in frequency, intensity, and total volume of precipitation are projected in some land regions. Precipitation projected for the end of the century indicates an increase up to 30% in the scenario SSP5-8.5 in the west coast of Canada (Fig. 3A and 3D). However, other regions will experience a reduction in annual accumulated precipitation. For example, under SSP5-8.5, wine-growing regions of Africa, Australia, and Europe show average reductions of 12%, 8%, and 10%, respectively (Fig. 3E). However, under the SSP2-4.5 such locations would have lower reductions of 7%, 4%, and 3%, respectively (Fig. 3B). Again, the Mediterranean region is predicted to be one of the most severely affected areas, as the precipitation levels are forecast to decline by up to 30% (Fig. 3A and 3D). Although reductions in precipitation account on average less than 10% in Europe, North America, and Australia, some locations are already water-scarce and further reductions may accelerate the transition from rainfed to irrigated (Fig. 3C, F), impacting sustainability practice. In addition, greater warming over land than over the ocean will reduce near-surface relative humidity.
(A, D) Changes in annual accumulated precipitation across the globe for the end of the century (2080–2100 average of a 13 model ensemble of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6 provided by WorldClim 2.1: https://worldclim.org/cmip6maps.html) according to the SSP2-4.5 (A, B, and C) and SSP5-8.5 (D, E, and F) scenarios compared to the historical average for the period 1970–2000. (B, E) Boxplot (median, interquartile range, min, max, and outliers >1.5 times the interquartile range) of the average change in precipitation for the ripening months in viticultural areas of the different continents by the end of the century. (C, F) Evolution of average annual precipitation for a selection of viticultural areas throughout the century (C, F). Africa, n=23; Asia, n=9; Australia, n=45; Europe, n=315; North America, n=79; South America, n=19.
Soil moisture may also be impacted by changing climate conditions. Higher evapotranspiration, due to growing atmospheric water demand, will decrease soil moisture in the Mediterranean region, south-western North America, South Africa, south-western South America and south-western Australia. For average daily temperatures between 20–25 °C, reference evapotranspiration typically increases 0.3 mm d–1 (6% increase) for each degree temperature rise. It must be noted that changes in solar radiation and relative humidity can affect this relationship. In addition, the relationship between temperature and reference evapotranspiration often follows a quadratic equation, which suggests exacerbated effects in the hottest climates. Projections using a drought indicator based on precipitation and potential evapotranspiration indicate an increase in water deficit in most viticultural areas of the world, but especially in Europe and the USA.
Predictions in some grape-growing areas also forecast increased salinity risks to viticulture, surpassing the grapevine threshold by the end of the century. The salt-affected soil area is also gradually increasing due to climate change. Soil salinity tends to increase with rising temperatures and reduced precipitations due to phenomena such as increased evaporation, reduced leaching, or ground water rise. In addition, the pressure of population, industry, and agriculture on water resources has led to the search for alternative sources of irrigation water, usually with a higher salt concentration. Aside for these factors, recent simulations based on global climate models indicate an overall increase in the surface solar radiation over some grapevine growing areas such as the European domain.
All these predictions indicate that grapevine production areas may become more unfavourable for viticulture, due to a multi-stress environment combining elevated CO2, extreme temperatures, and, in some cases, longer periods of water scarcity, soil salinity, and high radiation levels. Recently, a new avenue in the study of plant responses to combined stresses has emerged, referred to as multifactorial stress combination. This approach suggests that plant responses to stresses occurring simultaneously cannot be predicted by adding the response to each single stress applied individually. Thus, understanding these complex interactions is crucial for adapting viticultural practices to mitigate the potential negative impacts of climate change on grape quality and wine production. In this review, we describe recent studies on the impact of different climate change-related stress factors on grapevine physiology and grape composition. We focus on the possible trade-offs involved in the physiological, biochemical, and molecular responses of grapevine, as well as in the interactions among pathways to multiple environmental stresses.

Why is grapevine phenology in the spotlight?
The strong changes in crop and wildlife phenology constitute some of the most noticeable bioclimatic effects of climate change for society. In the case of grapevine, harvest date has advanced dramatically in the last decades, largely due to the increase in temperature. However, other factors, such as water deficit or higher levels of air CO2, may also be contributing to the advancement of the onset of veraison and hastening of sugar accumulation (Fig. 4). These factors might also result in an earlier harvest in the future, with decreased quality of grapes for wine or fresh consumption, as quality parameters such as sugars, organic acids, pigments and desired aromas are inadequately accumulated. The combined effect of these factors is often unexplored when analysing historical records, and, temperature aside, only water availability has been studied. It must be noted that, for long-term historical records, temperature, CO2 levels, and precipitation may be highly autocorrelated (e.g. warm years tend to be also dry years), making it very hard to separate their individual contribution. There is evidence that both moderate increases in, and reductions of, current CO2 concentrations can affect harvest timing, but also yields, distorting source–sink ratios. In addition, in experiments testing the effect of an increase in temperature, an advance in berry maturity (i.e. harvest) has not always been observed. Therefore, the advancing trends in phenology observed in historical records (i.e. earlier harvests in recent years) should not be automatically assumed to be entirely due to rising temperatures.
Relationships between grapevine physiological processes (in green), grape composition (in purple), and the three main environmental factors associated with climate change: elevated CO2, water deficit, and rise in temperatures (in orange). Arrows show where at least one study has found relationships between the indicated elements. Double sided arrows imply feedback. Yellow arrows indicate an up-regulation, blue arrows indicate down-regulation, pink double-sided arrows indicate feedback, and black arrows indicate unclear effect or not enough data. A description of every link can be found in Table 1.
Description of the links between climate change factors and their effects on grapevine physiological processes and berry composition.
Link #	Explanation	Reference	 	1	Elevated CO2 increases the C/N balance through either a dilution effect or the reduction of N uptake and assimilation		 	2	Elevated CO2 increases carbon assimilation rates		 	3	Elevated CO2 induces stomatal closure		 	4	Water deficit decreases water potentials		 	5	Water deficit induces stomatal closure		 	6	Water deficit reduces carbon assimilation through non-stomatal limitations		 	7	Water deficit promotes berry sugar accumulation		 	8	Water deficit reduces vegetative growth and fruit production		 	9	Water deficit reduces berry acidity		 	10	Water deficit promotes anthocyanin biosynthesis		 	11	Water deficit promotes the production of certain aroma compounds		 	12	Elevated temperature reduces carbon assimilation through non-stomatal limitations		 	13	Elevated temperature increases transpiration rates		 	14	Elevated temperature reduces berry anthocyanin content		 	15	Elevated temperature reduces the production of certain aroma compounds		 	16	Elevated temperature reduces berry acidity		 	17	Elevated temperature reduces certain astringent compounds		 	18	Lower water potentials are associated with stomatal closure and lower transpiration rates are associated with better water status		 	19	Stomatal conductance increases carbon assimilation		 	20	Larger leaf area results in higher transpiration rates		 	21	Berry transpiration promotes sugar accumulation		 	22	Higher carbon assimilation rates promote berry sugar accumulation		 	23	Higher carbon assimilation rates promote growth and fruit production, and greater leaf area increases plant carbon assimilation		 	24	Nitrogen dilution promotes the production of certain aroma compounds		 	25	Nitrogen dilution promotes the production of anthocyanins		 	26	Nitrogen dilution may reduce vigour and fruitfulness, and increases in vigour and fruitfulness can also dilute nitrogen		 	27	Great vigour and fruitfulness affect negatively aroma profiles		 	28	Great vigour and fruitfulness reduce berry anthocyanin content		 	29	Great fruitfulness may result in lower sugar accumulation		 	30	Sugar accumulation in berries induces the synthesis of anthocyanins		 	31	Berry sugar accumulation affects aroma compounds in different ways		 	32	Berry sugar accumulation is associated with reductions in its acidity		 	33	Berry sugar accumulation affects astringent compounds in different ways
Although changes in phenology are noticeable with the naked eye, it is less obvious why they are detrimental to grape production and wine composition. Among the most evident effects mediated by changes in phenology is the shift of the ripening period towards the warmest months (Fig. 5). This increase in temperature during ripening is deleterious for grape composition (e.g. anthocyanins and organic acids) in most cases. quantified that for each degree that growing season average temperature rises for a given location, the temperature during ripening will rise an additional 0.33 °C due to the shift into the warmer months. Still, the direct effects of the shortening of the berry developmental and ripening period are not well understood. It may be tempting to select varieties with higher heat requirements for budbreak, flowering, or veraison, thus, having a later or longer ripening period. However, it is uncertain whether a longer ripening under scorching temperatures can mitigate the effects of climate change on grape composition. For instance, in experiments conducted in warm climate using different source sink proportions, for example cluster thinning and defoliation, shorter ripening time (i.e. faster sugar accumulation) was associated with higher levels of anthocyanins and organic acids within the berry and wine, a desirable trait. This may be related to a reduced exposure time to elevated temperature, giving less time for phenolic degradation and organic acid respiration. Accordingly, in experiments with genotypes of differing ripening period, those with longer ripening showed lower grape acidity values at maturity, associated with a higher malate breakdown, which would be counterproductive. A faster sugar accumulation in warmer years has, historically, positively affected vintage ratings, a measure of wine quality, in some areas, as in cold years grapes may need to be picked underripe. Contrarily, for some temperate or warm regions, we may be already at the tipping point of the positive relationship between temperature and vintage ratings
Advancing phenology can shift the ripening period to the warmest months of the year and alter grape berry composition. Grapes in the chart are presented in different sizes to represent the increase in berry mass and different colours to represent the synthesis of anthocyanins.
A moderately slow ripening has been perceived as a positive trait, and even necessary for certain wine styles. Desirable varieties are those that ripen towards the end of the summer. This may be due to the need for the so-called ‘softening’ of the grape flavours or ‘mouthfeel’, possibly related to changes in proanthocyanidins and other phenolic compounds (e.g. flavonols, hydroxycinnamic acids, or benzoic acids) conferring noticeable astringency to wines. Proanthocyanidins (also known as condensed tannins) have been the main focused in this regard, in part due to the complexity in how they occur, in terms of overall amount, degree of polymerization and composition of the polymers, and how these factors affect astringency. Although contradicting reports exist, proanthocyanidins content is thought to decrease in grape seeds and skins over time, while they may increase in wines due to better extractability. In addition, polymer size may increase or decrease over time, either due to their evolution or due to different contributions of skins versus seeds to the wine proanthocyanidin pool. Temperature was reported to reduce proanthocyanidin levels of berries (Fig. 4), while water deficit does not seem to have a strong effect. Still, how climate change affects the softening of the astringency through a shortening of the ripening period remains somewhat unclear, and there is no study combining several factors to our knowledge.
Aromas and aroma precursors add another layer of complexity to the assessment of the issue of shifting phenologies. While some aromas (e.g. methoxypyrazines) decrease sharply as grapes continue to ripen, others may have a short-term peak in concentration during grape development. Temperature and other stress factors show effects on aroma levels and will be discussed later (see ‘Combined effects of environmental factors on physiological processes’). The mediation of a desynchronization of aroma-related processes is often theorised but it has not been demonstrated yet. Some studies point to a desynchronization of events like onset of sugar accumulation, anthocyanin accumulation, loss of acidity, loss of astringency or aroma profile constitution as a great risk for grape quality decline under climate change. However, this phenomenon may not be easy to capture. Recent studies show that the triggering of ripening is a highly orchestrated process involving sugar transport, hormones, and transcription factors (TFs) (see ‘Potential crosstalk in hormonal signalling related to climate change factors’). However, sugar accumulation may be, directly or indirectly, the trigger signal for some ripening processes, such as the start of anthocyanin accumulation or shifts in organic acid degradation (Fig. 4). Therefore, sugar translocation into berries may be linked with processes such as anthocyanin biosynthesis and malic acid respiration, and their desynchronization is unlikely.

Combined effects of environmental factors on physiological processes

Stomatal control and transpiration
There are numerous studies dealing with the effects of climate change factors on grapevines at the level of leaf physiology (i.e. gas exchange) compared to studies reporting water usage at the crop level (i.e. evapotranspiration). Although leaf transpiration rates and crop evapotranspiration are somewhat related, large discrepancies may be expected when comparing plants with different leaf areas (see ‘Vigor’) or crop density. Plants have a range of plasticity in stomatal traits to adapt to different conditions. Based on paleobotanical analysis, the evolutionary response of stomatal density to changes in the atmospheric CO2 levels is clear. Decreases in stomatal density have also been reported in a broad range of plant species exposed to atmospheres enriched with CO2, which may improve intrinsic water use efficiency (Fig. 4). However, some studies report few changes in stomatal density in vascular plants, thus suggesting that the magnitude of stomatal density in response to high CO2 might depend on the experimental facility, experiment duration, plant genotype, and other environmental conditions.
Temperature is also reported to impact stomatal density. reported that stomatal area increased in grapevine leaves grown under elevated temperature, however, these changes only increased stomatal conductance under conditions favouring high transpiration rates (i.e. when conductance is greater than 200 mmol m–2 s–1). Conversely, when climate change factors (elevated CO2, high temperature and water deficit) were applied in combination, ‘Cabernet Sauvignon’ plants displayed smaller stomata, higher density, and similar stomatal conductance. This, in turn, can result in lower transpiration rates at the whole plant or crop level, which may help the plant to cope with water scarcity or increases in vapour pressure deficit (VPD), associated with higher temperature and lower relative humidity (RH) in the air. However, reductions in stomatal conductance may also affect the capacity of plants for cooling under elevated temperature and prolonged solar exposures.
As the risks of leaf overheating increases due to increasing CO2 and temperature, leaf size may also be impacted. In fact, this has been observed in the evolutionary path of plants, as broad leaves (megaphylls) only evolved when both the levels of CO2 and temperatures decreased in the Devonian period. Thus, smaller leaves have been demonstrated to be an evolutive advantage to dissipate heat in times when Earth had temperatures and CO2 levels similar to SPP5-8.5, which could be a trait for the selection of scions.
Temperature, and, to a lesser extent, relative humidity are intrinsically associated with evapotranspiration rates in relation to changes in VPD. However, temperature increases may also reduce the viscosity of water, thus increasing the hydraulic conductivity of the xylem and mesophyll, which can exacerbate transpiration rates while stomatal opening remains similar across a range of temperatures. These phenomena have been observed in vineyards, where a rise in temperature of just 2 °C significantly increased plant water use estimated through sap flow. Interestingly, elevated CO2 may counteract this effect and maintain transpiration rates similar to those of controls, mediated by reductions in stomatal conductance. Although elevated CO2 may mitigate exacerbation of evapotranspiration under elevated temperature, the addition of all the factors increasing water demands and the reduction of precipitation will change the water balance to increase deficit in locations like the Mediterranean (see ‘Climate change projections show a broad range of ripening temperature increases and changes in precipitation’).
Grape transpiration has received attention in recent years due to its key role in the ripening process. Grape water loss through transpiration acts as one of the main driving forces for the accumulation of solutes (Fig. 4). It maintains the water potential gradient between the grape and stem, promoting the import of photoassimilates into the grape and ripening of the fruit. Grape transpiration largely depends on the cuticular conductance, since stomatal density is lower than one stomata per square mm, and these become occluded by epicuticular wax during grape development. Although plants have some mechanisms that may modulate fruit cuticular conductance (i.e. increased wax accumulation and/or modifications of wax composition), grape transpiration is predominantly a biophysical process largely influenced by environmental factors, including temperature, relative humidity, solar radiation, and wind speed. It can be reasonably deduced that the changes projected in these variables over the following decades may affect ripening times through their impact on berry water loss. recently reported that the changes in temperature and in air relative humidity projected by the year 2100 will increase bunch transpiration (i.e. application of antitranspirants) and the accumulation rate of berry sugars, whereas a suppression of bunch transpiration will partially alleviated the impact of these environmental conditions on the ripening time. These results confirm the contribution of transpiration to a faster ripening under climate change conditions. Similarly, changes in the solar radiation level may increase transpiration rates mostly due to an increase in berry temperature.

Carbon assimilation and allocation
Carbon assimilation has been studied under climate change multi-stress conditions. While increases in CO2 levels can increase carbon assimilation and non-structural carbohydrates, the photosynthetic response of grapevine to temperature follows a curvilinear pattern with an optimum between 20 °C and 30 °C (Fig. 4). Interestingly, under elevated CO2 carbon assimilation rates are more responsive to temperature, increasing up to 25 °C and decreasing beyond 30 °C. Elevated CO2 has been reported to counteract the negative effect of water deficit on net photosynthesis and water use efficiency, not only through photochemical and stomatal effects, but through an increased Rubisco carboxylation rate. Conversely, if temperatures or water deficit reach certain extremes, photosynthetic machinery may be inhibited and, at some point, shut down carbon assimilation processes. These scenarios are not the norm now, but shutdown phenomena may become more frequent as summer temperatures continue to rise to the extent forecasted (Fig. 2).
There are a number of studies that positively correlate changes in carbon assimilation with ripening rates. However, factors such as temperature, solar radiation, and water deficit have been reported to increase ripening rates without inducing changes in carbon assimilation rates, or even decreasing them. This suggests that these climate change factors may affect ripening through modifications in carbon allocation, rather than through a superior plant carbon balance. Using 14C labelling, reported a higher carbon translocation to the fruit clusters of vines subjected to heat stress compared to control fruits. As discussed here, there may be different regulatory processes involved in this response, such as changes in grape transpiration in the case of elevated temperature, and plant hormones and smaller berries in the case of water deficit. Both extreme temperatures and water deficit can inflict massive reductions in carbon assimilation, due to biochemical inhibition or stomatal closure, and eventually impair ripening.

Vigour
Current vineyard vigour, the growth in terms of shoot length and thickness and canopy density, is set by a number of factors, including soil properties and moisture, the application of fertilisers, and scion/rootstock traits. Most viticultural areas today use rootstocks bred for specific conditions in the 19th century. The current increase in CO2 does not seem to affect vigour in the short-term compared to pre-industrial levels. However, increases in CO2 levels to 550 ppm resulted in increases of grapevine vegetative biomass, and greater increases in vegetative biomass can be expected when plants experience up to 700 ppm of CO2 for consecutive seasons (Fig. 4). Such increases may be driven by a higher water use efficiency, resulting in more carbohydrates and better water status as discussed earlier (see ‘Carbon assimilation’). However, increases in vigour induced by CO2 may be a risk for grapevines under scenarios with reduced precipitation and increased evapotranspiration. Although some canopy will be necessary to protect fruit from increasing radiation, most viticultural systems may not benefit from denser canopies, with greater growth of lateral shoots, which may congest the fruit zone. This creates a window of opportunity for those genotypes capable of maintaining a moderate vigour under elevated CO2, and, therefore, maintaining better water use efficiencies across growth and fruit ripening instead of converting water savings into more vigour. Currently, there is no data available about how different rootstocks affect the response to elevated CO2, which makes this a pressing issue. Current genotypes were bred under 280 ppm of CO2 and they are not necessarily optimised for elevated CO2 levels and a more arid environment, where vigour could be a disadvantage. In addition, increased vigour has been associated with decreases in anthocyanins, which reduces the oenological potential of grapes.
Grape yields have also been reported to increase under elevated CO2 due to an overall improved carbon assimilation and/or water status. This may counteract, to some extent, the effect of water deficit in regions with higher evapotranspiration and lower water availability, thus maintaining sustainable yields. However, increases in precipitation are also forecast in many viticultural areas and, in those cases, plant growth may increase with potential deleterious effects for grape composition.

Grape composition: anthocyanin abundance and diversity
Anthocyanins constitute a core component of wine colour. Despite anthocyanin evolution through vinification and ageing, a major factor determining wine tonality, the initial anthocyanin profile of grapes sets the starting point of wine hues (Fig. 6). Anthocyanins mainly differ in the substituents of their B-ring (Fig. 6) of the general flavonoid structure. These substituents allow classifying anthocyanins into mono/4'-OH (pelargonidin), di/3',4'-OH (cyanidin and peonidin) and tri/ 3',4',5'-OH (delphinidin, petunidin, and malvidin) hydroxylated derivatives, which can shift wine hues from red to purple, respectively. The enzymes Flavonoid 3' hydroxylase (F3'H) and Flavonoid 3'5' hydroxylase (F3'5’H) are mostly responsible for the diversification of the B-ring substituents. Although there is a great number of isoforms of F3'5'-OHs, which lead to tri-hydroxylated substituents, anthocyanin diversification is often linked to the expression of one or few F3'5'H gene (accession no. AJ880356). The expression of F3'5'Hs is several-fold induced at the onset of veraison, concomitantly with other key enzymes responsible for the stabilization (UFGT), conjugation (GST4), and transport (e.g. AnthoMATEs) of anthocyanins. Notably, the expression of many of these genes and their central regulator, myb-related TF (MYBA1), decrease as grapes mature. Hydroxylation seems to lag slightly compared to synthesis, as anthocyanin profiles start with lower proportions of 3',4',5'-OH anthocyanins and these increase over time. The up-regulation of F3'5'Hs has been mostly linked to water deficit, resulting in increases in the amount or proportion of 3',4',5'-OH anthocyanins. The same happens with MYBA1 and UFGT; water deficit increases their expression in an abscisic acid (ABA)-dependent manner.
Effects of climate change factors on anthocyanin profile and its potential effects on the hue of anthocyanins. Different colours represent the approximated change in hue expected for wines affected by changes in anthocyanin profiles in response to climate change factors.
Solar UV-B radiation may interfere with the accumulation of 3',4',5'-OH anthocyanins as it may induce F3’H expression and increase the proportion of 3',4'-OH anthocyanins (; 2017). This induction may be due to the excitation of UVR8, a UV-B specific receptor, leading to the up-regulation of MYBF1, a myb-related TF related to flavonols, and other transcriptional regulators that may bind to flavonol synthase (FLS) gene promoters among several flavonoid genes. demonstrated that the UV-responsive gene HY5 was also able to induce MYBA6/A7 expression, two central regulators of anthocyanin biosynthesis which are not able to induce the expression of F3'5'H genes and thus only lead to the accumulation of di-hydroxylated anthocyanins in UV-B treated berries. In addition, there may be other mechanisms shaping flavonoid profiles. reported major increases in 3',4' hydroxylation of flavonols, which hydroxylase expression by itself could not explain. Here, the hypothesis is that the strong induction of FLS observed alters the competition between synthesis (i.e. FLS) and diversification enzymes (i.e. F3'H and F3'5'H) for the same substrates, creating a less hydroxylated profile.
In addition to biosynthetic regulatory mechanisms, differential anthocyanin degradation has been suggested to explain effects of elevated temperatures on anthocyanin profiles (Fig. 4). B-ring substituents may confer other anthocyanin properties in addition to colour. While hydroxylation increases the antioxidant capacity of anthocyanins, the radical scavenging capacity is inversely correlated with the methylation of 5' position. Given that most, if not all, full-bodied red wines are made with varieties with a highly hydroxylated profile, free radicals in grapes are most likely breaking down delphinidin or petunidin derivatives more rapidly than malvidin, and cyanidin more rapidly than peonidin. This would explain the increase in the proportion of malvidin in response to temperature given by a great number of studies. A good proportion of these studies also report an increase in the proportion of acetyl, caffeoyl or coumaroyl anthocyanin acylates. These increases are also the result of a more rapid degradation of non-acylated anthocyanins, shaping flavonoid profile under elevated temperature towards acylation. Enzymes such as β-glucosidases, polyphenol oxidases, and peroxidases have been described to degrade anthocyanins under elevated temperature. Therefore, it should not be disregarded that some of these enzymes may have a greater affinity for certain anthocyanins, thus shaping anthocyanin profile. In addition, the down-regulation of TFs, such as HY5, that are involved in the signalling of anthocyanin synthesis can play a major role in the reduction of anthocyanins under elevated temperature. Additionally, the grape UV-B receptor UVR1, required for HY5 activation under UV-B, shows down-regulation under high temperature.
In multi-stress conditions, where several or all stress factors are combined, solar radiation may have a net effect, reducing the hydroxylation anthocyanin profile despite the increase in berry temperature, opposite to its effect as a single stressor (Fig. 6). This preponderance of solar radiation over temperature on anthocyanin profile has been reported even when most anthocyanins have been broken down due to overexposure. reported the effect of a heat wave on anthocyanins and showed an increase in malvidin relative abundance over the 3 d period of the event, suggesting that malvidin derivatives are the most temperature-resistant anthocyanins. When water deficit was combined with high temperature exposure, anthocyanin profiles are shifted again to more hydroxylated. However, this shift in hydroxylation does not seem to prevent anthocyanins from being degraded. Ultimately, temperatures needed to compromise anthocyanin concentration stability under field conditions are rather high (~45 °C or higher), and currently these can only be reached when warm air temperatures are combined with direct exposure to high levels of solar radiation. The forecast increase in air temperatures and solar radiation imply that canopies or shade nets may become necessary to protect anthocyanins or any other thermally labile compounds. However, for the increases of 8 °C forecasted under SSP5-8.5 (Figs 1, 2) most viticultural areas would reach 45 °C on a regular basis, making colour stability a major struggle.
Elevated CO2 may not be as strong an effector of anthocyanin biosynthesis or degradation as radiation, water deficit, or temperature are. However, dilution of nitrogen in plant tissues, a widely reported response in plants under elevated CO2 (Fig. 4), may lead to changes in grape anthocyanin composition. Nitrogen can act as a repressor of anthocyanin biosynthesis, mediated by the LATERAL ORGAN BOUNDARY DOMAIN (LDB) protein, which can lower anthocyanin accumulation in grapes. Thus, the regulatory pathways for elevated CO2 to promote anthocyanin biosynthesis, aside from the mediation of sugar accumulation, exist. However, no study yet has reported significant increases in anthocyanins in response to elevated CO2. In fact, elevated CO2 may be regarded more as a negative factor for anthocyanin biosynthesis, mediated by increases in yield and shortening of the ripening period mentioned (see ‘Why is grapevine phenology in the spotlight?’). In addition, increased vigour, a common response to elevated CO2, has been associated with decreases in berry anthocyanins.

Grape composition: acidity
Organic acids are important constituents of grapes and wines as they highly influence the organoleptic properties, microbiological control, and wine stabilisation. Tartaric and malic acids are the predominant acids, which together account for over 90% of the total acidity in the berry. Both tartaric and malic acid are accumulated in the berry from post-anthesis until veraison. At this stage, berries undergo a metabolic shift, and malic acid is liberated from the vacuole and actively metabolised as a major carbon source for energy metabolism and biosynthesis. Gluconeogenesis, respiration through the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, amino acid interconversion, ethanol production, and the synthesis of secondary compounds are some of the metabolic pathways through which malic acid is catabolised.
Tartaric acid accumulation has a limited response to temperature. However, warm temperatures during grape ripening leads to lower malic acid concentration and, consequently, lower titratable acidity (Fig. 4). High temperature during grape ripening has been reported to increase the activity and transcript levels of NAD-dependent malic enzyme (NAD-ME), the transcripts of malate dehydrogenase, and to up-regulate several mitochondrial dicarboxylate/tricarboxylate transporter encoding genes. In addition, the observed increase in amino acids derived from pyruvate, oxaloacetate, and α-ketoglutarate under high temperatures suggests an increased flux through the TCA cycle and an accelerated respiration of malate. This is consistent with the increased respiration rates measured in grapes exposed to elevated temperature both at veraison and ripening. In contrast to the consistent effect of elevated temperatures, there are contradictory results regarding the impact of water deficit on grape acidity and organic acid levels. In general, acidity is less responsive to water deficit when it is applied after veraison. However, decreases in malic acid concentration and titratable acidity have been reported under drought conditions. Such decrease in organic acids has been explained as an indirect thermal effect of water deficit associated with the reduced vegetative growth, leading to sun heating of the berries. Therefore, the expected reduction in plant vigour induced by lower water availability may exacerbate the effect of elevated temperature due to an increased solar exposure of the berries. Overall, studies on the direct effect of elevated CO2 reveal limited effect on grape acidity. However, high CO2 may partially counteract the negative effects of elevated temperature and drought on acid degradation due to alterations in bunch microclimate associated with higher plant vigour.
The acidity of grape berries depends on the ratio between the concentrations of free organic acids and their potassium (K+) salt forms, which increases throughout ripening. K+ is involved in the neutralisation of negative charges and can reduce the amount of free tartaric acid by forming potassium bitartrate, and thus affecting the final acidity and pH of the must (freshly pressed grape juice, including skin, seed, and stems). Therefore, changes in the concentration of K+ induced by climate change related factors can lead to changes in the acidity level of grape berries. In this sense, elevated temperature and heat waves increase the accumulation K+ during grape ripening, thus contributing to a lower acidity. Such negative effect of elevated temperature on the oenological potential of grapes may be amplified by drought, as a strong up-regulation of K+ channels present in either berry phloem or in berry flesh cells has been reported under drought stress (Cuéllar et al., 2010,). The accumulation of K+ into the berry increases when drought is combined with elevated temperature, which may contribute to an improved osmotic adjustment in grape cells. In contrast, in a 3 year study performed with fruit-bearing cuttings, elevated CO2 decreased the K+ levels of berries by 11%, so, in a future climate change scenario, CO2 may counteract the K+ associated-reductions in grape acidity induced by water deficit and elevated temperature. UV-B radiation may also increase the content of K+ and decrease pH in the must. These may be mediated by changes in the berry relative skin mass or berry size, as the K+ content in the skins is much greater than in the flesh.

Grape composition: aromas
Grape aromatics and their precursors are key compounds for berry oenological potential. Grape and wine aromatics with a significant impact on wine quality fall in the following categories: mono- and sesquiterpenes, norisoprenoids, furan derivatives, lipoxygenase pathway products, phenylpropanoid products, volatile sulphur, and methoxypyrazines.
Globally, accumulation of aromatics in grapes has an ambiguous response to elevated temperature, probably because it is difficult to separate temperature and light exposure effects in field trials. found that an increase 1.5 °C above ambient temperature decreased the content glutathionylated precursor of the 3SH (3-sulfanylhexan-1-ol) in ripe berries, whereas found no significant effect. Grapes produced in cooler climates tend to have a higher methoxypyrazine (MP) content, and it is predicted that an increase in temperature will decrease MP content at harvest due to repression of the key structural gene of the biosynthetic pathway O-methyltransverase VviOMT3. This would be beneficial to red wines made from high MP producing grapes (e.g. Cabernet Sauvignon, Merlot, Cabernet Franc, Carmenere) with less herbaceous notes when these are undesirable, but might be a problem for white Sauvignon wines, which could show less aromatic complexity. C13-norisoprenoids levels are generally reported to be higher in warm climates, as exemplified by the increase of 1,1,6-trimethyl-1,2-dihydronaphtalene (TDN) in Riesling or ß-ionone in Pinot Noir grapes grown in warm and sunny areas. A noticeable exception is the decrease in ß-damascenone levels reported by; C13-noisoprenoids, such as TDN, ß-ionone, and ß-damascenone, have been consistently shown to increase in grapes grown under drought stress, particularly in some widely used ‘elite’ red cultivars such as Syrah, Cabernet-Sauvignon, Merlot, and Tempranillo.
Monoterpene production in grapes is highly sensitive to solar radiation, both to its thermal and light components. This is the case of linalool (rose flavour), which was found to decrease with elevated temperature in Sauvignon Blanc or Riesling grapes (Fig. 4), and beta-ocimene, a berry late-ripening specific monoterpene positively regulated by the drought- and light-responsive MYB24 TF. Moderate water deficit has been shown to have a positive effect on berry aromatic potential. Monoterpene concentrations were also reported to increase under moderate water deficit in several studies, and S-glutathione and S-cysteine conjugates of volatile thiol precursors were found to increase under moderate water deficit and more severe water stress. However, recent studies suggest that this effect might be indirectly associated with a reduced absorption of nitrogen under water deficit, since this element is crucial to produce volatile thiol precursors in grapes.
The negative impact of elevated CO2 on the nitrogen status of C3 plants, including grape berries, has been widely reported, related to reduced biomass and C content, as well as diminished N uptake and assimilation into amino acids. As many wine aromas arise from free amino acids and other nitrogen sources during the fermentation, there is a good basis for expecting changes in the aroma profile similar to that seen at a low concentration of yeast. However, no experiments have been conducted to test the effect of elevated CO2 on grape aromas, and this remains largely unexplored.

Potential crosstalk in hormonal signalling related to climate change factors
Plant hormones orchestrate a symphony of responses in grapevine development and its acclimation to environmental challenges, ensuring vine resilience and productivity through a complex interplay of signals. While jasmonates have been associated with temperature and CO2 responses, one of the most important growth regulators in grapes, ABA, is known as a central player in drought responses, in addition to its well-documented role in developmental transitions, such as ripening inception. Therefore, changes in hormone concentrations due to climate change can affect important phenological traits.

Abscisic acid
ABA is a plant hormone largely associated with abiotic stress tolerance. There are many reports showing that water or osmotic stress increase ABA levels in plant tissues, but other stresses have also been reported to increase ABA levels. This is the case for CO2, high and low temperatures, relative humidity, and light. Such a wide range of climate change factors capable of influencing ABA levels could represent important crosstalk for ABA regulated processes and a chance for factors to have interactive, cumulative, or counteracting effects. Considering the shift of most viticultural areas to more arid climates with elevated CO2 (see ‘Climate change projections show a broad range of ripening temperature increases and changes in precipitation’), most of which contribute to higher levels of ABA. Since sensitivity to ABA is a key genotypic trait in the magnitude of stress responses, adaptation strategies for multi-stress may aim to fine-tune ABA signalling.
The existence of multiple abiotic stressors affecting ABA levels may be related to the different transcriptional regulatory networks converging in ABA synthesis, transport, and/or catabolism. The literature is rich with examples of ABA signalling responses in different grapevine tissues (reviewed by). These studies have led to the proposition of several central ABA regulators, some of which have been functionally characterised, enhancing our understanding of how stress reception leads to increased levels of ABA. recently used a series of omics approaches to characterise the berry-specific NAM, ATAF, and CUC (NAC) family member, NAC60 TF, showing how several genes coding for proteins related to ABA biosynthesis, perception, and signalling were bound by NAC60. Among these, two nine-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase (NCED) genes, a zeaxanthin epoxidase (ZEP/ABA1), and a putative ABA beta-glucosidase (VIT_01s0011g00760) were identified as potential targets. Several genes coding for ABA 8'-hydroxylases were also identified, suggesting that NAC60 also regulates the rate of ABA accumulation through its oxidative degradation pathway. Since NAC60 is a mostly berry-specific TF, the up-regulation of ABA biosynthetic genes in other organs should be regulated by other factors. Root-specific TFs should be further studied, as NCED genes are highly upregulated in roots, concomitant with increased ABA levels under water stress. This could also be the case for WRKY08 (VIT_04s0008g05760) and WRKY24 (VIT_08s0058g00690), which show higher drought-responsiveness in roots. The Basic Leucine Zipper ABSCISIC ACID RESPONSE ELEMENT-BINDING FACTORS (ABF) ABF1 and ABF2 are also highly expressed in roots upon drought. Despite being part of the downstream ABA-signalling pathway, ABF2 overexpression showed the up-regulation of ABA 8'-hydroxylases, suggesting that these TFs may have a role in fine-tuning ABA levels after stress is imposed. It is known that proteins in the NGATHAs (NGA) family act as regulators of NCED3 expression under water stress in model plants such as Arabidopsis. Drought‐inducible AtNCED3 is regulated by the AtNGA1 protein, which is, in turn, post-translationally regulated through protein stabilisation in an ABA-independent pathway in response to incipient water stress, while it is degraded when plants are not under stress. Despite being identified within their family, grapevine NGA-like genes have not yet been related to NCED gene expression regulation or ABA accumulation.
The mechanisms by which multiple stresses lead to ABA accumulation and signalling remain poorly understood. This is largely due to the lack of transcriptomic comparisons between multiple and singular stresses, with only one study in grape investigating the combined effects of drought and temperature. Genetic approaches have demonstrated the importance of ABA in sugar response pathways, representing a potential common backbone for interconnecting other types of stresses to ABA signalling. Sucrose non-fermenting-1(SNF1)-related kinases (SnRKs) have central roles in sugar and ABA signalling in several plant species. These genes are induced upon drought and/or high temperature in grapevines and could represent effective intermediates in ABA signalling. It is worth noting that not all stresses affect ABA metabolism and signalling in the same way. This may lead to unexpected outcomes in multi-stress scenarios. Even in the case of water stress, higher ABA levels are not always related to up-regulation of ABA synthesis-related genes, which highlights the importance of other processes such translational regulation and ABA catabolism or conjugation.

Jasmonic acid
Our understanding of the role of jasmonates in grapevine physiology has improved in recent years, in part due to the use of methyl jasmonate as an elicitor of specialised metabolites such as flavonoids and stilbenes. Jasmonates are associated with plant defence and stress tolerance, and are particularly inducible in response to mechanical wounding. Jasmonic acid is also induced by high solar radiation and elevated temperature conditions and results in acclimation to these environmental conditions. Although heat is perceived by the plant in several ways, rapid changes in the lipid composition of the plasma membrane may begin as a signalling cascade towards the expression of heat tolerance genes. Further downstream of these genes, oxylipin 12-oxo-phytodienoic acid, a precursor of jasmonoy-l-isoleucine (active form of jasmonate), activates the expression of MpJA-R and MpHSR (heat stress-response genes) upon heat stress, ultimately conferring thermotolerance. Changes in the accumulation of endogenous jasmonic acid has also been linked to the acquisition of drought tolerance via the activity of a NAC TF in Vitis amurensis. The expression of VaNAC17 is strongly induced by drought, exogenous ABA, and methyl jasmonate application. Even though jasmonic acid is not widely regarded as a drought signal, it can be similarly elicited in response to water deficit as ABA in grapevine leaves.
It remains unclear what potential combination or interaction effects elevated CO2 may have on grapevine jasmonate signalling. In Arabidopsis, elevated CO2 reduces jasmonic acid responses, in favour of salicylic acid (SA) signalling. This acts to counteract the effects of elevated CO2 (repressing), while enhancing high temperature and drought effects. Crosstalks between ABA and jasmonates also exist, some of which are essential to reduce oxidative damage. This may be linked to the possibility of ABA being part of the signalling cascade of heat stress responses.

Hormone interactions related to berry development are influenced by climate change
Recent findings have expanded our knowledge on how hormones interact regarding fruit development and especially when describing the effects of climate change on this physiological process (reviewed by). In a simplistic manner, ABA, ethylene, and brassinosteroids are regarded as ripening promoters, while jasmonates, indole acetic acid, cytokinins, and gibberellins are considered as inhibitors. Despite these classifications, there are multiple cases of crosstalk among these ripening promoters and inhibitors, making this topic complex enough to dedicate it to a review on its own.
Understanding what triggers the onset of berry ripening is of great importance, especially in the context of climate change as changes in global temperatures are known to modify the timing and duration of the ripening phase. Ripening is one of the best studied developmental transitions in plants. Hormones are known to interact and subsequently change in a cascading effect (reviewed by). In grapes, the early green berry stages are characterised by an incremental decrease of auxins. A drop in auxin levels is necessary for ABA-mediated processes to be triggered, including ripening inception. Ethylene seems necessary for ABA signalling to take place, as shown by the strong increase in NCED5/2 expression upon pre-veraison ethephon (ethylene releasing substance) treatments, correlated with increased ABA content, anthocyanin production, total soluble solids, and expression of gene related to sugar transport and sucrose cleavage.
Exogenous applications of brassinosteroids (BRs) and BR inhibitors promote and suppress the onset of ripening, respectively. Recently, performed transcriptomic analyses of auxin-treated berries prior to veraison, and hypothesised that BRs may promote ethylene production that in turn triggers ABA signalling, finally activating ripening. This model, however, still needs validation. Similar effects have been seen with the application of methyl jasmonate to berry clusters but it is unclear whether it acts in parallel to the other hormones, or if it is somewhat interchangeable and can also trigger ripening. Despite these uncertainties, there is enough evidence for hormonal crosstalk affecting the onset and duration of the ripening stage.
Berry transpiration is a key phenomenon necessary to trigger ripening as antitranspirants can largely inhibit ripening. This is most certainly related to the suppression of the transpirational flow, necessary for transport through vascular tissues. This transport includes sugars, and hormones, which could affect ripening in different degrees based on the results observed for numerous exogenous applications. Cluster-detached berries grown in vitro in a sucrose media can commence ripening without the application of exogenous growth regulators or the contribution of plant hormones produced in other parts of the plant. Therefore, the hormonal requisites necessary for ripening are either not obligated or produced within the berries itself, meaning hormones produced outside of the berry are not required for ripening. This suggests that sugars may act upstream of one or more of these hormones, promoting ripening inception. identified VviMSA, coding for an ASR (ABA-, stress-, and ripening-induced) protein, was involved in a common transduction pathway of sugar and ABA signalling. Ultimately, plant hormones are modulators of ripening and although most of them influence grape ripening, some may be more effective than others.
The timing and duration of ripening determines berry quality and is influenced by a plethora of endogenous (e.g. hormone or carbon balance) and external (e.g. environmental or biotic stress-related) stimuli. Determining how these factors modulate this physiological process can lead to the opportunity of manipulating ripening and design climate change mitigation strategies aimed at avoiding extremely hot episodes during the productive period. ABA agonists and ethylene releasing compounds (e.g. ethephon) can be used to modulate ripening as their impact on anthocyanin production is promising. However, it is not clear whether aroma profiles may benefit from the application of exogenous hormones. Beyond hormone-centred strategies, the natural manipulation of gene expression, via activating or repressing central regulators of ripening, could also impact plant resilience to climate change. The NAC60 TF has been postulated as a regulator of the ripening transition through the activation of specialised metabolic pathways, the degradation of chlorophylls, and the activation of different hormone-related genes. NAC60 seems a promising target for manipulation as it is induced close to veraison by ABA and temperature.

Conclusions
In grapevine, as in most crops, there is still a large gap of knowledge concerning the holistic effect of climate change, considering different stress combinations. This is mostly due to the need to dissect the effect of each individual factor and the exponential increase in complexity when performing multi-stress experiments. The potential impact and adaptation of viticulture to multiple stresses has been considered already. However, empirical validation is needed, especially for climate change factors interacting with rising temperatures. Rising temperatures and elevated CO2 will continue to increase and may stabilise at different levels depending on the scenario, while reduced water availability will depend on the geographical distribution of vineyards. Depending on the specific region and time of year, the increases in temperature may be more extreme than considered in most experiments. Therefore, highly summarised data, such as annual averages for the whole planet, may underestimate the impacts of climate change. In particular, the increase in temperature during the grape ripening months in mid-northern latitudes may pose a significant challenge regardless of the limited water availability. There is enough evidence for considering multi-stress studies when assessing the problem of climate change or suggesting adaptation strategies. We believe that more studies combining two or more stresses simultaneously are needed in order to gain a systems view of the impact of climate change on viticulture.

Author contributions
JM-L: conceptualization, writing—original draft and revision, EG: writing—original draft and revision, TM: writing—original draft and revision and IP: conceptualization, writing—original draft and revision

Funding
This work was supported by ‘ANDIA talento senior 2021’ (Gobierno de Navarra)

Data availability
Data (mean maximum and mean minimum temperature and precipitation) extracted from WorldClim 2.1 maps for the location of each grape-growing region, for each month of the year, for the 5 time periods and the projections SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5 are publicly available in Zenodo at https://zenodo.org/records/14179181.

References
GOLDEN2-LIKE transcription factors regulate WRKY40 expression in response to abscisic acid
The response of photosynthesis and stomatal conductance to rising [CO2]: mechanisms and environmental interactions
Transport mechanisms of plant hormones
Climate change 2021: the physical science basis
Tempranillo clones differ in the response of berry sugar and anthocyanin accumulation to elevated temperature
Growth performance and carbon partitioning of grapevine Tempranillo clones under simulated climate change scenarios: elevated CO2 and temperature
High relative air humidity and continuous light reduce stomata functionality by affecting the ABA regulation in rose leaves
Jasmonic acid is required for plant acclimation to a combination of high light and heat stress
Assessment of the spatial variability of anthocyanins in grapes using a fluorescence sensor: relationships with vine vigour and yield
Transcriptional response of abscisic acid (ABA) metabolism and transport to cold and heat stress applied at the reproductive stage of development in Arabidopsis thaliana
Projected changes in surface solar radiation in CMIP5 global climate models and in EURO-CORDEX regional climate models for Europe
Citizen science across two centuries reveals phenological change among plant species and functional groups in the Northeastern US
Evolutionary responses of stomatal density to global CO2 change
Evolution of leaf-form in land plants linked to atmospheric CO2 decline in the Late Palaeozoic era
Impact of stomatal density and morphology on water-use efficiency in a changing world
Free Air CO2 Enrichment (FACE) of grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.): II. Growth and quality of grape and wine in response to elevated CO2 concentrations
Relationships between harvest time and wine composition in Vitis vinifera L. cv. Cabernet Sauvignon 2. Wine sensory properties and consumer preference
Relationships between harvest time and wine composition in Vitis vinifera L. cv. Cabernet Sauvignon 1. Grape and wine chemistry
Influence of plant water status on the production of C-13-norisoprenoid precursors in Vitis vinifera L. Cv. Cabernet Sauvignon grape berries
Stomatal activity of the grape berry cv. Riesling, Müller-Thurgau and Ehrenfelser
Identification of the flavonoid hydroxylases from grapevine and their regulation during fruit development
Impact of elevated temperature and water deficit on the chemical and sensory profiles of Barossa Shiraz grapes and wines
Multi-hormonal analysis and aquaporins regulation reveal new insights on drought tolerance in grapevine
Effect of water deficit on Merlot grape tannins and anthocyanins across four seasons
Influence of water regime on grape aromatic composition of Muscat of Alexandria in a semiarid climate
Bunch transpiration is involved in the hastening of grape berry ripening under elevated temperature and low relative humidity conditions
A grape ASR protein involved in sugar and abscisic acid signaling
Screening and evolution of volatile compounds during ripening of ‘Nebbiolo’,‘Dolcetto’and ‘Barbera’(Vitis vinifera L.) neutral grapes by SBSE–GC/MS
Effect of Saccharomyces cerevisiae inoculum size on wine fermentation aroma compounds and its relation with assimilable nitrogen content
Transcriptional regulation of anthocyanin biosynthesis in ripening fruits of grapevine under seasonal water deficit
Elevated CO2-induced responses in stomata require ABA and ABA signaling
Drought tolerance of the grapevine, Vitis champinii cv. Ramsey, is associated with higher photosynthesis and greater transcriptomic responsiveness of abscisic acid biosynthesis and signaling
The sucrose non-fermenting-1-related (SnRK) family of protein kinases: potential for manipulation to improve stress tolerance and increase yield
Climate change decouples drought from early wine grape harvests in France
Modern viticulture in southern Europe: vulnerabilities and strategies for adaptation to water scarcity
Potassium transport in developing fleshy fruits: the grapevine inward K+ channel VvK1.2 is activated by CIPK-CBL complexes and induced in ripening berry flesh cells
The grapevine R2R3-MYB transcription factor VvMYBF1 regulates flavonol synthesis in developing grape berries
Long-term in vitro culture of grape berries and its application to assess the effects of sugar supply on anthocyanin accumulation
Ecophysiological, genetic, and molecular causes of variation in grape berry weight and composition: a review
Photosynthetic acclimation to elevated CO2 combined with partial rootzone drying results in improved water use efficiency, drought tolerance and leaf carbon balance of grapevines (Vitis labrusca)
Treatment of grape berries, a nonclimacteric fruit with a synthetic auxin, retards ripening and alters the expression of developmentally regulated genes
Drought stress modulates cuticular wax composition of the grape berry
VviNAC33 promotes organ de‐greening and represses vegetative growth during the vegetative‐to‐mature phase transition in grapevine
The transcription factor VviNAC60 regulates senescence-and ripening-related processes in grapevine
Water cycle changes
Analytical and theoretical studies of antioxidant properties of chosen anthocyanins; a structure-dependent relationships
Multi-seasonal effects of warming and elevated CO2 on the physiology, growth and production of mature, field grown, Shiraz grapevines
Anthocyanins: factors affecting their stability and degradation
Drivers of soil salinity and their correlation with climate change
Expansion and subfunctionalisation of flavonoid 3’,5’-hydroxylases in the grapevine lineage
Effect of flavonols on wine astringency and their interaction with human saliva
WorldClim 2: new 1‐km spatial resolution climate surfaces for global land areas
Down-regulation of photosynthesis by drought under field conditions in grapevine leaves
The biochemistry of organic acids in the grape
Complex interplay of hormonal signals during grape berry ripening
Global warming and wine quality: are we close to the tipping point
Climate change projections for the Mediterranean region
Approaches and determinants to sustainably improve crop production
Temperature and CO2 dependency of the photosynthetic photon flux density responses of leaves of Vitis vinifera cvs. Chardonnay and Merlot grown in a hot climate
Photosynthetic light responses of apple (Malus domestica) leaves in relation to leaf temperature, CO2 and leaf nitrogen on trees grown in orchard conditions
Modelling photosynthetic responses to temperature of grapevine (Vitis vinifera cv. Semillon) leaves on vines grown in a hot climate
The impact of high temperatures on Vitis vinifera cv. Semillon grapevine performance and berry ripening
Heat stress affects flowering, berry growth, sugar accumulation and photosynthesis of Vitis vinifera cv. Semillon grapevines grown in a controlled environment
New insights into the oral interactions of different families of phenolic compounds: Deepening the astringency mouthfeels
Methyl jasmonate applications in viticulture: a tool to increase the content of flavonoids and stilbenes in grapes and wines
Combined metabolite and transcriptome profiling reveals the norisoprenoid responses in grape berries to abscisic acid and synthetic auxin
Vine nitrogen status does not have a direct impact on 2-methoxy-3-isobutylpyrazine in grape berries and wines
Impact of heat stress, water stress, and their combined effects on the metabolism and transcriptome of grape berries
A review of recent advances in research on extreme heat events
Jasmonates as signals in the wound response
Malate, tartrate, potassium, and sodium in flesh and skin of Shiraz grapes during ripening: concentration and compartmentation
Response of Vitis vinifera cv.‘Tempranillo’ to partial rootzone drying in the field: water relations, growth, yield and fruit and wine quality
Yield components and grape composition responses to seasonal water deficits in Tempranillo grapevines
Jasmonic acid involves in grape fruit ripening and resistant against Botrytis cinerea
Crosstalk between phytohormones and secondary metabolites in the drought stress tolerance of crop plants: a review
Climate influences on grapevine phenology, grape composition, and wine production and quality for Bordeaux, France
Climate change and global wine quality
Anthocyanin profiles and color properties of red wines made from Vitis davidii and Vitis vinifera grapes
Deficit irrigation alters grapevine growth, physiology, and fruit microclimate
Effect of elevated CO2 and temperature on phenology, carbohydrates, yield and grape composition-preliminary results
High ambient temperature represses anthocyanin biosynthesis through degradation of HY5
Simulating the impact of climate change (elevated CO2 and temperature, and water deficit) on the growth of red and white Tempranillo grapevine in three consecutive growing seasons (2013–2015)
Leaf temperature and its dependence on atmospheric CO2 and leaf size
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal fungi improve the performance of Tempranillo and Cabernet Sauvignon facing water deficit under current and future climatic conditions
Timing of cluster light environment manipulation during grape development affects C13 norisoprenoid and carotenoid concentrations in Riesling
Dissecting the biochemical and transcriptomic effects of a locally applied heat treatment on developing Cabernet Sauvignon grape berries
Salicylic acid and jasmonic acid in elevated CO2-induced plant defense response to pathogens
The genetic basis of grape and wine aroma
The photomorphogenic factors UV-B RECEPTOR 1, ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL 5, and HY5 HOMOLOGUE are part of the UV-B signalling pathway in grapevine and mediate flavonol accumulation in response to the environment
Heat stress in Marchantia polymorpha: sensing and mechanisms underlying a dynamic response
Flavonol profile is a reliable indicator to assess canopy architecture and the exposure of red wine grapes to solar radiation
Partial solar radiation exclusion with color shade nets reduce the degradation of organic acids and flavonoids of grape berry (Vitis vinifera L.)
Mitigating heat wave and exposure damage to ‘Cabernet sauvignon’ wine grape with partial shading under two irrigation amounts
Sensitivity of grapevine phenology to water availability, temperature and CO2 concentration
Elevated CO2 alleviates the exacerbation of evapotranspiration rates of grapevine (Vitis vinifera) under elevated temperature
Source–sink manipulations have major implications for grapevine berry and wine flavonoids and aromas that go beyond the changes in berry sugar accumulation
Ultraviolet-B radiation and water deficit interact to alter flavonol and anthocyanin profile in grapevine berries through transcriptomic regulation
UV-B alleviates the uncoupling effect of elevated CO2 and increased temperature on grape berry (Vitis vinifera cv. Tempranillo) anthocyanin and sugar accumulation
End of century temperature and precipitation projections (SSP2-4.5 and SSP5-8.5) for 490 grape-growing regions [Dataset]
A group of grapevine MYBA transcription factors located in chromosome 14 control anthocyanin synthesis in vegetative organs with different specificities compared with the berry color locus
Grape composition under abiotic constrains: water stress and salinity
Fruit transpiration: mechanisms and significance for fruit nutrition and growth
Loss of anthocyanins in red-wine grape under high temperature
Effects of elevated CO2 on grapevine (Vitis vinifera L.): physiological and yield attributes
The grapevine VviPrx31 peroxidase as a candidate gene involved in anthocyanin degradation in ripening berries under high temperature
Effect of postharvest dehydration on the composition of pinot noir grapes (Vitis vinifera L.) and wine
Abscisic acid perception and signaling: structural mechanisms and applications
The basic leucine zipper transcription factor ABSCISIC ACID RESPONSE ELEMENT-BINDING FACTOR2 is an important transcriptional regulator of abscisic acid-dependent grape berry ripening processes
Characterization of the grapevine Shaker K+ channel VvK3. 1 supports its function in massive potassium fluxes necessary for berry potassium loading and pulvinus‐actuated leaf movements
Respiration activity in different above-ground organs of Vitis vinifera L. in response to temperature and developmental stage –
New trends for reference evapotranspiration and climatic water deficit
Grape berry transpiration influences ripening and must composition in cv. Tempranillo (Vitis vinifera L.)
Grapevine varieties show different sensitivities to flavonoid alterations caused by high temperatures under two irrigation conditions
Comparative analysis of abscisic acid levels and expression of abscisic acid-related genes in Scots pine and Norway spruce seedlings under water deficit
Non-climacteric fruit development and ripening regulation:‘the phytohormones show’
Identifying the future water and salinity risks to irrigated viticulture in the Murray-Darling Basin, South Australia
Evaluating the influence of temperature on proanthocyanidin biosynthesis in developing grape berries
Effects of manipulated berry transpiration on post-veraison sugar accumulation
Day and night heat stress trigger different transcriptomic responses in green and ripening grapevine (Vitis vinifera) fruit
Temperature desynchronizes sugar and organic acid metabolism in ripening grapevine fruits and remodels their transcriptome
Potassium in the grape (Vitis vinifera L.) berry: transport and function
Physiological thresholds for efficient regulated deficit-irrigation management in winegrapes grown under semiarid conditions
Sugar and ABA response pathways and the control of gene expression
Stomatal density and stomatal index as indicators of paleoatmospheric CO2 concentration
Transpiration increases under high‐temperature stress: potential mechanisms, trade‐offs and prospects for crop resilience in a warming world
Elevated temperature decouples anthocyanins and sugars in berries of Shiraz and Cabernet Franc
Elevated temperature altered the reaction norms of stomatal conductance in field-grown grapevine
Photosynthetic response of Tempranillo grapevine to climate change scenarios
Carbon balance, partitioning and photosynthetic acclimation in fruit-bearing grapevine (Vitis vinifera L. cv. Tempranillo) grown under simulated climate change (elevated CO2, elevated temperature and moderate drought) scenarios in temperature gradient gre
Vineyards in transition: a global assessment of the adaptation needs of grape producing regions under climate change
Grape berry biochemistry revisited upon proteomic analysis of the mesocarp
Effect of light exposure on linalool biosynthesis and accumulation in grape berries
Arabidopsis thaliana NGATHA1 transcription factor induces ABA biosynthesis by activating NCED3 gene during dehydration stress
Multi-omics and integrated network analyses reveal new insights into the systems relationships between metabolites, structural genes, and transcriptional regulators in developing grape berries (Vitis vinifera L.) exposed to water deficit
Increasing temperature and vapour pressure deficit lead to hydraulic damages in the absence of soil drought
Characterizing aromatic typicality of Riesling wines: merging volatile compositional and sensory aspects
Characterization, quantification, and bioactivities of anthocyanins in Cornus species
Effect of high temperature on grapevines (Vitis vinifera L.). I. Translocation of 14C-photosynthates
Abscisic acid in plants under abiotic stress: crosstalk with major phytohormones
Combined effects of early season leaf removal and climatic conditions on aroma precursors in Sauvignon Blanc grapes
A whole canopy gas exchange system for the targeted manipulation of grapevine source-sink relations using sub-ambient CO2
Influence of deficit irrigation and kaolin particle film on grape composition and volatile compounds in Merlot grape (Vitis vinifera L.)
Effect of grape bunch sunlight exposure and UV radiation on phenolics and volatile composition of Vitis vinifera L. cv. Pinot noir wine
Nitrogen supply affects anthocyanin biosynthetic and regulatory genes in grapevine cv. Cabernet-Sauvignon berries
Separation of sunlight and temperature effects on the composition of Vitis vinifera cv. Merlot Berries
The transcription factor VaNAC17 from grapevine (Vitis amurensis) enhances drought tolerance by modulating jasmonic acid biosynthesis in transgenic Arabidopsis
Up-regulation of NCED3 and ABA biosynthesis occur within minutes of a decrease in leaf turgor but AHK1 is not required
Regulation of malate metabolism in grape berry and other developing fruits
Metabolic effects of elevated temperature on organic acid degradation in ripening Vitis vinifera fruit
Grapes on steroids. Brassinosteroids are involved in grape berry ripening
Optimal ranges and thresholds of grape berry solar radiation for flavonoid biosynthesis in warm climates
Effects of irrigation at different fractions of crop evapotranspiration on water productivity and flavonoid composition of Cabernet Sauvignon grapevine
Application of fractions of crop evapotranspiration affects carbon partitioning of grapevine differentially in a hot climate
Crop quality under rising atmospheric CO2
Modulation of grape cuticular wax composition following multiple heatwaves influences grape transpiration
The concept of terroir in viticulture
Climate change impacts and adaptations of wine production
Understanding and managing nitrogen nutrition in grapevine: a review
Grapevine potassium nutrition and fruit quality in the context of climate change
Sucrose metabolism and transport in grapevines, with emphasis on berries and leaves, and insights gained from a cross-species comparison
Evolution over the growing season of volatile organic compounds in Viognier (Vitis vinifera L.) grapes under three irrigation regimes
Impact of hormone applications on ripening-related metabolites in Gewürztraminer grapes (Vitis vinifera L.): the key role of jasmonates in terpene modulation
Transcriptome and metabolite integrated analysis reveals that exogenous ethylene controls berry ripening processes in grapevine
Earlier wine-grape ripening driven by climatic warming and drying and management practices
Development of the HadISDH. marine humidity climate monitoring dataset
Primary productivity and physiological responses of Vitis vinifera L. cvs. under Free Air Carbon dioxide Enrichment (FACE)
The effect of elevated CO2 on berry development and bunch structure of Vitis vinifera L. cvs. Riesling and Cabernet Sauvignon
The responses of stomatal density to CO2 partial pressure
The effects of a moderate grape temperature increase on berry secondary metabolites: This article is published in cooperation with the 21th GIESCO International Meeting, June 23-28 2019, Thessaloniki, Greece. Guests editors: Stefanos Koundouras and Laurent Torregrosa
The Arabidopsis LOS5/ABA3 locus encodes a molybdenum cofactor sulfurase and modulates cold stress–and osmotic stress–responsive gene expression
Elevated-CO2 response of stomata and its dependence on environmental factors
The impact of multifactorial stress combination on plant growth and survival
Effect of short‐time high‐temperature treatment on the photosynthetic performance of different heat‐tolerant grapevine cultivars
MYB24 orchestrates terpene and flavonol metabolism as light responses to anthocyanin depletion in variegated grape berries
Grape berry transpiration: determinant factors, developmental changes, and influences on berry ripening
Stability-increasing effects of anthocyanin glycosyl acylation
Grape berry ripening delay induced by a pre-véraison NAA treatment is paralleled by a shift in the expression pattern of auxin-and ethylene-related genes