Patritumab deruxtecan in breast cancer treatment: a drug evaluation
ABSTRACT
Breast cancer is a complex disease due to its heterogeneity. While there have been impressive advancements in the treatment of the different breast cancer subtypes, challenges persist when the tumor develops acquired treatment resistance and finally progresses on a given therapy. Since human epidermal growth factor receptor 3 (HER3) plays a key role in developing resistance to several anticancer therapies, many efforts have been performed over the last decades to effectively target HER3. However, most of these attempts have been unsuccessful due to their limited efficacy or severe toxicity. Numerous antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) targeting HER3 are now being explored. Patritumab deruxtecan (U3-1402; HER3-DXd), the most advanced ADC targeting HER3 in clinical development, has demonstrated significant antitumor activity and a manageable safety profile in patients with breast cancer. This efficacy has been observed across diverse tumor subtypes and varying levels of HER3 expression. In this review, we will analyze the results of clinical trials investigating HER3-DXd in breast cancer and explore its potential role in future clinical applications and treatment algorithms.
Plain Language Summary
A potential new treatment for breast cancer
This paper discusses a new drug called Patritumab deruxtecan, used to treat breast cancer. This drug works by targeting a protein called HER3 (human epidermal growth factor receptor 3), which is found on some cancer cells. The protein helps cancer cells grow and survive, even when other treatments are used. When there is too much HER3, the cancer can become more difficult to treat. Early studies have shown promising results. The drug seems to be beneficial to some people whose breast cancer did not get better with other treatments. Most side effects are mild and can be managed. The most common side effects are nausea, low blood count, liver problems, diarrhea, and tiredness. A few people had lung problems, but these were rare and usually mild. Larger studies are needed to learn more about how well this drug works and its safety. More ongoing clinical trials are evaluating Patritumab deruxtecan in different types of breast cancer. These studies will help understand whether this drug can become a regular treatment option in the future.

Introduction
Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease requiring personalized treatment for each patient. Over the last decade, a wealth of new molecules has been integrated in the treatment algorithm of early and advanced breast cancer, thanks to their impact on disease and survival outcomes. For instance, the addition of immunotherapy to chemotherapy has significantly improved the survival outcomes of patients with triple negative breast cancer. Likewise, the addition of CDK4/6 inhibitors to endocrine therapy has substantially improved the outcome of patients with hormone-receptor positive (HR+) metastatic breast cancer, but also of patients with HR+ early breast cancer at higher risk of recurrence. Antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) are one of the fastest-growing classes of cancer therapies. These drugs are composed of monoclonal antibodies conjugated to cytotoxic agents via stable linkers, designed to deliver the therapeutic payload primarily to tumor cells expressing the specific antigen targeted by the antibody. The development of ADCs is advancing rapidly in breast cancer, where some have demonstrated unprecedented results across different subtypes, including HR+, triple negative and human epidermal growth factor receptor positive (HER2-pos) breast cancer. Currently, 15 ADCs have been approved worldwide, with three having received approval for early or metastatic breast cancer and many others that are now in late-stage clinical trials. While novel ADCs have shown impressive outcomes in breast cancer treatment, some patients experience little to no benefit from currently approved ADCs. In addition, despite major advancements in linker technologies, antibody backbones, and payloads, many ADCs still pose toxicity challenges, which affect patients’ quality of life. Therefore, the continued development of new ADCs for breast cancer remains a critical need. Since human epidermal growth factor receptor 3 (HER3) plays a crucial role in the development of resistance to various anticancer therapies, significant efforts have been made over the past decades to effectively target HER3. However, most of these attempts have been unsuccessful due to limited efficacy or severe toxicity. While there are a few common and manageable side effects generally reported with ADCs, some of them might become life-threatening. Hematologic and liver toxicities are often associated with Trastuzumab Emtansine. Cardiac dysfunction, although manageable in most cases, may sometimes become severe and lead to treatment interruption. Interstitial lung disease is observed in about 13–15% of patients receiving Trastuzumab deruxtecan and requires an accurate management and follow-up. Any grade ≥2 ILD leads to definitive discontinuation of the drug.
Currently, numerous ADCs targeting HER3 are under investigation. In this review, we thoroughly examine the pharmacological characteristics, clinical efficacy, and toxicity profile of Patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd, U3-1402), the most advanced ADC targeting HER3 in clinical development. This is a review of published literature using database and gray literature searching methods evaluating phase I/II trials results with the intent to define the activity and clinical safety of HER3-DXd.

Why targeting HER3 in breast cancer?
HER3 belongs to the human epidermal growth factor receptor family, which includes the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), HER2 (or erbB2/neu), HER3 (erbB3) and HER4 (erbB4). Over the years, the critical role of these receptors in tumorigenesis has been well established.
HER3 overexpression has been described in multiple types of cancer such as colorectal, gastric, cervical, ovarian, breast cancer, and melanoma. About 50–70% of breast cancers exhibit HER3 overexpression. ERBB3 expression measured by messenger Ribonucleic Acid (mRNA) assays in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue was analyzed in a clinical trial conducted by Pascual et al., showing the highest mRNA expression in the HR+/HER2- subtype (52%), followed by triple-negative breast cancer (29%) and, then, HR+/HER2+ subtype (14%) and HR-/HER2+ (5%). Its overexpression is often associated with more aggressive tumor behavior and with the tumor ability to escape treatment.
HER3 has an important role in the development of therapy resistance across different subtypes of breast cancer. In hormone receptor positive (HR+) breast cancer, HER3 overexpression has been described as a mechanism of resistance to endocrine therapy, due to the phosphorylation of estrogen receptor (ER) by HER2:HER3 heterodimers, regardless of estrogen binding. It has been shown that exposure of HR+ cell lines to Fulvestrant leads to HER3 protein expression and enhance neuregulin 1β (NRG-1β) sensitivity, by reducing ER protein expression. Indeed, breast cancer resistant to Fulvestrant showed an overexpression of EGFR, HER2, and HER3 and the downregulation of HER3 restored the activity of Tamoxifen. Similarly, in HER2-positive breast cancer, HER3 overexpression has been associated with resistance to trastuzumab and lapatinib. In trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer cell lines, the co-expression of HER2, HER3, and Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) leads to heterotrimerisation between HER3 and the other 2 receptors and activation of PI3K (phosphoinositide 3-kinase)/AKT (protein kinase B) and SRC (sarcoma kinase) pathways. Breast cancer cells made resistant to lapatinib, after prolonged exposure, showed activation of HER3:EGFR dimerization, rather than HER2:HER3 activation.
Combining therapies that inhibit EGFR, HER3, and PIK3CA is conceptually attractive given the extensive cross-talk and compensatory signaling within this network. Such an approach could, in theory, overcome resistance mechanisms and deliver deeper, more durable responses. However, each of these pathways is also critical to normal tissue homeostasis, and their simultaneous blockade is associated with overlapping toxicities. As a result, while scientifically interesting, this combination is likely to be prohibitively toxic in the clinic, limiting its feasibility without the development of novel dosing strategies, more selective inhibitors, or innovative delivery systems such as ADCs.
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell lines expressing both HER3 and EGFR exhibited HER3 phosphorylation as a mechanism of resistance when treated with a PI3K or AKT inhibitor, so that the concurrent inhibition of EGFR and HER3 phosphorylation, alongside suppression of the PI3K-AKT signaling pathway appeared to effectively reduce cell proliferation. High HER3-EGFR heterodimerization was also associated with worse distant metastases free survival after adjuvant therapy in TNBC.
Despite growing interest in HER3 as a therapeutic target, many approaches, particularly some monoclonal antibodies directed against HER3 (such as seribantumab and lumretuzumab) have not achieved the expected clinical outcomes. The main obstacle is that HER3, unlike other receptors such as HER2, lacks of an autonomous tyrosine kinase activity, so that its function mainly depends on the heterodimerization with other receptors like HER2 and EGFR. This peculiarity of HER3 makes its targeting particularly complex, with most of the monoclonal antibodies (Moab) showing limited activity in clinical trials, failing to effectively inhibit the receptor. To overcome the limitations and resistance mechanisms of Moab directed against HER3, bispecific antibodies such as zenocutuzumab (MCLA-128), which targets both HER2/HER3, have been tested and are currently being evaluated in phase I/II studies (eNRGy, NCT02912949).
The most promising results have been observed with ADCs, which overcome the limitations of monoclonal antibody-based anti-HER3 therapies by delivering potent therapeutic payloads directly to HER3-expressing tumor cells. A key example is HER3-DXd, an ADC that combines an anti-HER3 monoclonal antibody with a cytotoxic payload, a topoisomerase I inhibitor, capable of exerting a “bystander” effect. Over the last couple of years, several clinical trials have tested HER3-DXd in early and advanced breast cancer, showing robust efficacy across different subtypes and particularly in HR+/HER2-negative breast cancer.

Patritumab deruxtecan: a new ADC targeting HER3
Patritumab deruxtecan is an ADC that consists of patritumab, a human anti-HER3 immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) monoclonal antibody, which is linked covalently to a topoisomerase I inhibitor payload (MAAA-1181a, a derivative of exatecan; henceforth referred to as DXd), via a tetrapeptide-based cleavable linker, with a drug-to-antibody ratio of approximately 8.

Pharmacology
HERD3-DXd cellular activity (created in BioRender. SABAU, A. (2025) https://BioRender.com/gmhn1nt).
HER3-DXd binds to HER3 and, thus, blocks the binding to its ligand, the growth factor neuregulin β1 (NRG), so preventing HER3-mediated signaling and induces HER3 internalization. Once the ADC reaches the lysosomes, the linker is degraded by lysosomal proteases. This process allows the release of the cytotoxic payload, which then penetrates the cell nucleus. The drug exerts its action by inhibiting the activity of topoisomerase I, a crucial enzyme in the DNA repair process, thereby generating genetic damage that induces cell death. This effect is particularly pronounced in rapidly dividing tumor cells, which are more vulnerable to disruptions in their replication processes. Additionally, the hydrophobic and uncharged payload may diffuse through the cell membrane, enabling a “bystander” antitumor effect, meaning it extends its action to adjacent tumor cells, not only those directly targeted. The mechanism of action of HER3-DXd is summarized in Figure 1.
The pharmacokinetics of HER3-DXd has been thoroughly described in a pooled analysis of 3 phase I/II clinical trials in patients with colorectal, non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and breast cancer (n = 425). U31402-A-J101 is a phase I/II dose escalation and dose expansion study with HER3-DXd in patients with metastatic breast cancer expressing HER3 and HR+, HER2-positive or triple negative breast cancer. U31402-A-U102 is a phase I dose escalation and expansion study of HER3-DXd in non-small cell lung cancer. U31402-A-U202 is a phase II study which evaluated the activity of patritumab deruxtecan in advanced or metastatic colorectal cancer.
In all these trials, Patritumab deruxtecan was administered intravenously at a dose comprised between 1.6 and 8.0 mg/kg. An every 3-week dosing was chosen in most of the patients, except of a small group who received the treatment every 2 weeks (n = 12). In this pooled analysis, the majority of patients (55%) received 5.6 mg/kg, followed by those receiving 6.4 mg/kg and 4.8 mg/kg (21% and 15% of patients, respectively). 51% of patients had NSCLC, 40% breast cancer, and 9% colorectal cancer. Pharmacokinetic (PK) assessments of both the DXd-conjugated antibody (intact patritumab linked with one or more molecules of DXd) and of unconjugated DXd were systematically performed in at least two cycles (cycle 1 and either cycle 2 or 3) for each cohort, with some additional assessments in the following cycles.
The analysis of data from the first cycle showed that the distribution and elimination patterns of the DXd-conjugated antibody in the body aligned with a two-compartment PK model, a central compartment and a peripheral compartment, with parallel linear and nonlinear clearance. From doses of 4.8 mg/kg and above, the linear clearance was quantitatively the most relevant. Conversely, the distribution and elimination of the unconjugated DXd followed a one-compartment model with linear clearance. This pooled analysis also evaluated a wide number of clinical covariates, showing that weight, albumin level, sex, and tumor type (breast cancer) were significantly associated with the clearance of the DXd-conjugated antibody, while weight and hepatic function were associated, respectively, with release rate constant and clearance of the unconjugated DXd.
Furthermore, based on the results of these three studies, the 5.6 mg/kg dosing regimen every 3 weeks was selected having shown a significant clinically meaningful objective response rate, along with a manageable safety profile. At this dose, the half-life of the DXd-conjugated antibody was 7.3 days (standard deviation [SD],2.6 days).

Clinical activity
Activity of HER3-DXd has been tested in different breast cancer subtypes across several studies, both in early and metastatic setting. In metastatic breast cancer, U31402-A-J101, the first study that evaluated HER3-DXd in this setting, showed promising results in heavily pretreated patients with different breast cancer subtypes. U31402-A-J101 is an open-label, global, three-part phase I/II study that evaluated safety and activity of HER3-DXd in patients with pretreated advanced breast cancer expressing HER3. In the dose escalation part, patients with any breast cancer subtype and high HER3 expression (immunohistochemistry [IHC] 2+ or 3+) received HER3-DXd at the doses 1.6, 3.2, 4.8, 6.4, or 8.0 mg/kg once every 3 weeks. Likewise, dose-finding part included patients with highly HER3-expressing breast cancer, of any subtype, to receive further uptitration dosing regimens (either 3.2 mg/kg during the first cycle, 4.8 mg/kg during the second cycle, and 6.4 mg/kg once every 3 weeks thereafter or 4.2 mg/kg once every 2 weeks for three cycles followed by 6.4 mg/kg once every 3 weeks for subsequent cycles). In the dose-expansion part, the safety and efficacy of the two doses (4.8 mg/kg and 6.4 mg/kg) were evaluated in patients with HER3-high – or low – expressing HR+/HER2-negative breast cancer or HER3-high – expressing TNBC. To note that HER3 assessment and scoring were modified throughout the study, namely in the dose-finding and expansion part, to use HER3 membrane expression at 10x magnification. In this study, membrane positivity of ≥75% was defined as HER3 high, while membrane positivity ≥25% to <75% was defined as HER3 low.
Patients in the dose finding part and those in the dose-expansion part with HR+/HER2 negative breast cancer were eligible only if they had received at least two to maximum six lines of chemotherapy regimens, including at least two for advanced disease with at least one previous taxane-based chemotherapy. Patients with triple negative breast cancer must have progressed after one or two lines of chemotherapy for advanced breast cancer. Out of 235 patients screened, 182 were enrolled of whom 113 with HR+/HER2− breast cancer, 53 with TNBC, 14 with HER2+ breast cancer and 2 with unknown subtype. The median treatment duration was 5.9 months, with disease progression and treatment adverse events being the main reasons for discontinuation (73.1% and 8.2%, respectively). At a median follow-up of 31.9 months, the ORR (objective response rate) by blinded independent central review (BICR) was 30.1% (95% CI, 21.8 to 39.4), 22.6% (95% CI, 12.3 to 36.2) and 42.9% (95% CI, 17.1 to 71.1) in HR+/HER2-negative, TNBC and HER2-positive breast cancer, respectively. The median PFS (progression-free survival) was 7.4 months (95% CI, 4.7 to 8.4 months), 5.5 months (95% CI, 3.9 to 6.8 months) and 11.0 months (95% CI, 4.4 to 16.4 months) in the three groups, respectively. Despite patients being heavily pretreated (median number of lines for advanced breast cancer = 5), antitumor activity was noted at all doses tested, except for the dose of 1.6 mg/kg (the lowest established in the trial).
Efficacy and safety of HER3-DXd are also being evaluated in a three-part phase II BRE345 study (NCT04699630) in patients with different breast cancer subtypes and unselected for HER3 expression. Results of the part A of this trial have been presented by Dr E. P. Hamilton at ASCO (American Society of Clinical Oncology) 2023. Enrolled patients had HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer and had received 0 to 2 prior chemotherapy treatments, along with prior endocrine therapy (ET) plus a cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 (CDK4/6) inhibitor for hormone receptor-positive (HR+) breast cancer, or 1 to 3 prior chemotherapy regimens for TNBC. The primary endpoints were the ORR and PFS at 6 months, while secondary endpoints included safety and tolerability, CBR (clinical benefit rate) and DOR (duration of response). A total of 60 patients were treated in Part A. Among them, 29 had HR+ breast cancer and 19 patients had TNBC. Among the 47 evaluable patients, HER3 membrane expression at 10x magnification was ≥75% in 30 patients (63.8%), 25% to 74% in 13 (27.7%) and <25% in four patients (8.5%). The median duration of treatment was 5.2 months, with 21 patients still undergoing treatment at the time of the data cutoff. Overall ORR was 35.0% (95% CI, 23.1 to 48.4), being the highest in HR+/HER2-negative breast cancer (41.4% [95% CI, 23.5 to 61.1]). No substantial differences were observed in the ORR among patients with HER3-membrane expression ≥75% and between 25 and 74%: 33.3 (95% CI, 17.3 to 52.8) and 46.2% (95% CI, 19.2 to 74.9), respectively.
More recently, our group has evaluated efficacy and safety of HER3-DXd in patients with HR+/HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer, who were less pretreated as compared to the 2 prior studies. ICARUS BREAST 01 (NCT04965766) is a phase II, multi-center, single-arm trial designed to assess the efficacy and safety of HER3-DXd in patients with HR+/HER2− advanced breast cancer who have experienced disease progression on CDK4/6 inhibitors plus endocrine therapy and one line of chemotherapy for advanced breast cancer. While at the beginning only patients with HER3 membrane expression ≥75% were allowed, the study was amended in April 2022 to include all patients who met the eligibility criteria, regardless of HER3 expression. The primary endpoint was the confirmed ORR and secondary endpoints included the CBR, PFS, DOR and safety. At the data cutoff on 16 April 202416 April 2024, 99 patients had been enrolled, with 19 still receiving treatment. The median treatment duration was 251.0 days (interquartile range [IQR], 144.5;402.0) with disease progression and adverse events being the most frequent reasons for treatment discontinuation, in 64.6 and 8.1%, respectively. At a median follow-up of 15.3 months (95% CI 13.0 to 17.2), the ORR was 53.5% (95% CI, 43.2 to 63.6) and the median PFS was 9.4 months (95% CI, 8.1 to 13.4). This study also relied on a longitudinal mandatory tumor and blood sample collection at baseline, on-treatment and at progression for identifying potential biomarkers associated with response or resistance to HER3-DXd. The first exploratory analysis performed on tumor samples, while showing that HER3-DXd activity was independent of HER3 membrane expression by IHC, underlined that HER3 spatial distribution relative to neighboring cells could affect treatment outcome. Furthermore, AI-digital pathology analysis on tumor biopsies at baseline showed a significant association between areas containing a moderate number of HER3-positive cells, surrounded by connective tissue, with few immune cells and no necrotic areas (cluster 0) and treatment response. Consistently, a better ADC penetration in the tumor tissue, as shown by imaging mass cytometry on tumor biopsies at 3 days from cycle 1, was associated with a greater tumor shrinkage. In conclusion, in ICARUS BREAST 01 study, analysis by imaging mass cytometry of tumor biopsies collected on-treatment showed an association between HER3-DXd tumor cells positivity and tumor shrinkage, suggesting that the ADC intratumor distribution may affect its activity.
Efficacy of HER3-DXd in metastatic breast cancer.
U3-1402-J101	BRE345	ICARUS BREAST01	 	Patient population	HR+/HER2-neg, n = 113TNBC, n = 53HER2-positive, n = 14	TNBC, n = 19HR+, n = 29Unknown, n = 12	HR+/HER2-neg, n = 99	 	Prior lines of therapy, median (range)	HR+/HER2-neg: 6 (2–15)TNBC: 3 (1–13)HER2-positive: 5.5 (2–11)	Overall population: 3 (1–9)	Overall population: 2 (1–4)	 	HER3 expression, %	IHC 2+ and 3+ or ≥75% membrane positivity, 88.5≥25% and <75% membrane positivity, 11.5	≥75% membrane positivity, 50.0≥25% and <75% membrane positivity, 21.7 <25% membrane positivity, 6.7Unknown, 21.6	≥75% membrane positivity, 49.4≥25% and <75% membrane positivity, 7.1 <25% membrane positivity, 16.2Unknown, 27.3	 	ORR, % (95% CI)	HR+/HER2-neg, 30.1 (21.8 to 39.4)TNBC, 22.6 (12.3 to 36.2)HER2-pos, 42.9 (17.7 to 71.1)	Overall population, 35 (23.1, 48.4)	Overall population, 53.5 (43.2; 63.6)	 	PFS, months (95% CI)	HR+/HER2-neg, 7.4 (4.7 to 8.4)TNBC, 5.5 (3.9 to 6.8)HER2-positive, 11.0 (4.4 to 16.4)	NA	Overall population, 9.4 (8.1; 13.4)
Abbreviations: HR = hormone receptor; HER = human epidermal growth factor receptor; TNBC = triple negative breast cancer; n = number of patients; IHC = immunohistochemistry; ORR = objective response rate; CI = confidence interval; PFS = progression free survival; NA = not available.
The main results from the three clinical trials mentioned above are summarized in Table 1.
Two studies have also evaluated the activity of HER3-DXd in early breast cancer. SOLTI-1805 TOT-HER3 (NCT04610528) is a prospective, single-arm, multicenter, window-of-opportunity trial designed to assess the biological effects of a single dose of HER3-DXd in the preoperative setting, in patients with early breast cancer, who were assigned to one of four cohorts defined according to ERBB3 mRNA expression, as determined on tumor biopsy at baseline. In part A, eligible patients were given a single intravenous dose of HER3-DXd at 6.4 mg/kg, underwent a second tumor biopsy at day 21 ± 3 days and then received subsequent standard treatment, such as additional neoadjuvant systemic therapy and/or surgical resection. The primary study endpoint in part A was the change in the CelTIL (cellular tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes) score between baseline and tumor samples collected at 21 days from drug administration. The CelTIL score was calculated as follows: −0.8 × Tumor cellularity (in %) + 1.3 TILs (in %). Secondary study endpoints included the clinical ORR at day 21, as assessed through clinical examination, the variations in CelTIL score based on baseline levels of ERBB3 mRNA expression and HER3 IHC-based protein and changes in the CelTIL score according to PAM50-based tumor classification. Overall, 78 patients were enrolled in the part A of the study, of whom 15 with ultra-low ERBB3 mRNA expression and 21 in each of the low, medium, and high ERBB3 mRNA cohorts. HER3 IHC protein expression was assessable in 67 patients (86%). The majority of patients presented high overall HER3 membrane expression (45 patients). Low HER3 expression (between 25% and 74%) was observed in 12 patients (17.9%), while negative HER3 expression (less than 25%) was found in 1 patient (1.5%). The authors also reported a weak Spearman correlation (coefficient = 0.36) between HER3 membrane expression and ERBB3 mRNA. Among the 77 patients who were evaluable for efficacy, the median increase in CelTIL score from baseline was 3.5 (IQR, −3.8 to 12.7; p = 0.003). Among the 62 patients assessable for clinical response, the ORR by palpation was 45%. Furthermore, responders exhibited a more significant increase in the CelTIL score from baseline, with a median increase of +11.9 (IQR, 0.2 to 25.5), compared to patients with stable disease at C1D21, who had a median increase of +1.9 (IQR, −2.5 to 9.3). Consistently with the prior studies, the response to HER3-DXd, here evaluated by change in CelTIL score, was independent of baseline ERBB3 mRNA and HER3 protein expression.
In the Part B of TOT-HER3 study, a single dose of 5.6 mg/kg of HER3-DXd was assessed in patients with early-stage breast cancer, of whom 20 with HR+/HER2− tumor and 17 with TNBC. The primary endpoint was to evaluate changes in the CelTIL score. Following a single dose of HER3-DXd, the CelTIL score increased in 21 patients (57%) and decreased in 16 patients (43%). Overall, a mean increase in the CelTIL score of 9.4 (p = 0.046) was observed, with mean differences of 2.2 in HR+/HER2− patients and 17.9 in TNBC patients. Out of the 37 patients, 34 were assessable for clinical response, resulting in an ORR by radiology of 32% (30% in HR+/HER2− and 35% in TNBC). Consistently with part A, a greater increase in the CelTIL score (mean increase = 23.9, p = 0.043) was reported among patients with clinical response and ERBB3 mRNA expression did not correlate with changes in the CelTIL score.
The SOLTI-2103 VALENTINE (NCT05569811) is a parallel, randomized, non-comparative, open-label, phase II trial evaluating HER3-DXd as neoadjuvant treatment in patients with operable HR+/HER2-negative breast cancer. Patients were eligible if they had tumors with Ki67 of 20% or higher and/or a high genomic risk. A total of 122 patients were randomized 2.2.1 to receive six cycles of HER3-DXd 5.6 mg/kg q21d or six cycles of HER3-DXd 5.6 mg/kg q21d with letrozole 2.5 mg QD ± ovarian function suppression or standard chemotherapy with four cycles adriamycin/epirubicin and cyclophosphamide, followed by four cycles of weekly paclitaxel. The majority of patients had stage II breast cancer (64.0%) and HER3-membrane expression at baseline ≥75% at 10x magnification (83.3%). The study showed no differences in the primary endpoint, being the pathological complete response (pCR) rate 4.0% (95% CI, 0.5 to 13.7) in the HER3-DXd single agent arm, 2.1% (95% CI, 0.1 to 11.1) in the arm combining HER3-DXd with letrozole and 4.2% (95% CI, 0.1 to 21.1) in the chemotherapy arm. Similarly, no differences were found in the clinical response rate over the 3 groups, while the highest Ki67 decrease was reported in the patients treated with HER3-DXd arm + letrozole.
The use of pCR as primary endpoint could be questionable in study of neoadjuvant therapy in HR+/HER2- early breast cancer, because the greatest association of pCR with EFS (event-free survival) and OS (overall survival) was observed in triple negative breast and HER2-positive breast cancer and was less evident in HR+ tumors. However, luminal breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with some subtypes, which showed remarkable pCR rates with neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
Activity of HER3-DXd in early breast cancer.
TOT-HER3	VALENTINE	 	Study population	Part A: HR+/HER2-neg, n = 73; TNBC, n = 3Part B: HR+/HER2-neg, n = 20; TNBC, n = 17	HR+/HER2-neg, n = 122	 	Treatment	Part A:1 dose of HER3-DXd 6.4 mg/kg, n = 78Part B:1 dose of HER3-DXd 5.6 mg/kg, n = 37	6 cycles of HER3-DXd 5.6 mg/kg, n = 506 cycles of HER3-DXd 5.6 mg/kg + letrozole 2.5 mg, n = 484 cycles AC/EC- >4 cycles paclitaxel, n = 24	 	Response	Part A: a mean increase in CelTIL score of 6.9 (p = 0.003)Part B: a mean increase in CelTIL score of 9.4 (p = 0.046)	pCR rate HER3-DXd = 4.0%pCR rate HER3-DXd + letrozole = 2.1%pCR rate AC/EC-T = 4.2%
Abbreviations: HR = hormone receptor; HER = human epidermal growth factor receptor; pCR = pathological complete response; n = number of patients; AC = doxorubicin-cyclophsphamide; EC = epirubicin-cycliphosphamide; T = taxane.
Activity of Patritumab deruxtecan in TOT-HER3 and SOLTI-2103 VALENTINE trials is presented in Table 2.

Safety and tolerability
Adverse events (AE) in clinical trials evaluating HER3-DXd.
U31402-A-J101(N = 182)	BRE345(N = 60)	ICARUS BREAST 01(N = 99)	SOLTI TOT-HER 3(N = 78)	VALENTINE(N = 122)	 	Most frequent AEs of any grade (occurring in ≥30% patients)	99.5% (TEAEs)Nausea (79.7%)Thrombocytopenia (62.1%)Neutropenia (61.0%)Decreased appetite (52,7%)Vomiting (46.2%)WBC count decrease (42.3%)Diarrhea (41.2%)Anemia (40.1%)AST increased (34.6%)ALT increased (31.9%)Fatigue (31.9%)Stomatitis (30.2%)	93.3% (TRAEs)Nausea (50.0%)Fatigue (45.0%)Diarrhea (36.7%)Vomiting (31.7%)Anemia (30.0%)	98.0% (TRAEs)Fatigue (82.8%)Nausea (74.7%)Diarrhea (52.5%)Alopecia (40.4%)	96.2% (TEAEs)Nausea (67,9%)Fatigue (39,7%)Alopecia (35,9%)	96.0% (TRAEs)*Nausea (56.0%)Alopecia (52.0%)Fatigue (50.0%)Diarrhea (42.0%)	 	Grade ≥3 AEs (occurring in ≥10%)	42.3% (G3); 25.3% (G4)Neutropenia 26,9% (G3); 12,6% (G4)Thrombocytopenia 12,1% (G3); 18,7% (G4)Anemia 18,1% (G3); 0,5% (G4)Decreased WBC count 15,9% (G3); 2,2% (G4)	G3-G4 31.7%	G3-G4 50.1%Nausea (14.1%)Neutrophil count decrease (12.1%)Diarrhea (10.1%)	12,8% (G3); 5,1% (G4)	G3-G4 14.0%	 	AEs associated with dose reduction	19,2%	15.0%	20.2%	NA	6.0%	 	AEs associated withtreatmetinterruption	54,9%	23.3%	26.3%	NA	12.0%	 	AEs associated with treatmentdiscontinuation	9,9%	NE	11.1%	NA	0%	 	Treatment-related ILD	6,6%1,6% G12.7% G21.6% G30% G40,5% G5	1.7%	7.1%7.1% G1	0	0
*Treatment arm with HER3-DXd as single agent.
Abbreviations: TEAE = treatment-emergent adverse events; TRAE = treatment related adverse events; N = number of patients included; NA = not applicable; NE = not evaluable; ILD = interstitial lung disease.
Ongoing clinical trials of HER3-DXd in breast cancer patients.
Phase	Indication	Status	 	ICARUS-BREAST02	IB/II	HER3-DXd as monotherapy and in combination with other anti-cancer agents in patients with inoperable advanced breast cancer	Recruiting	 	TUXEDO-3	II	HER3-DXd in breast cancer and non-small cell lung cancer brain metastases and solid tumor leptomeningeal disease	Active, not recruiting	 	HERTHENA-Breast-01	I/II	HER3-DXd in HER2 positive unresectable locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer	Recruiting	 	HERTHENA-Breast03	II	HER3-DXd + Pembrolizumab before or after Carboplatin/Paclitaxel + Pembrolizumab compared with Pembrolizumab + chemotherapy followed by surgery and adjuvant Pembrolizumab for high risk triple negative or HR low positive/HER2- breast cancer	Recruiting	 	HERTHENA-Breast04	III	HER3-DXd in monotherapy versus treatment of physician’s choice in HR+/HER2- unresectable locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer	Recruiting
Abbreviations: HR = hormone receptor, HER = human epidermal growth factor receptor.
Table 3 provides a summary of adverse events observed in clinical trials conducted on HER3-DXd, focusing on the frequency and severity of treatment-associated toxicities. We present the results from U31402-A-J101, NCT04699630, ICARUS BREAST 01, SOLTI-TOT HER3 and SOLTI-VALENTINE clinical trials. The most frequently reported HER3-DXd-associated adverse events include nausea, fatigue, vomiting, and diarrhea. Among them, nausea emerges as the predominant symptom across all analyzed studies, requiring systematic antiemetic prophylaxis. Among treatment-emergent adverse events of any grade thrombocytopenia was reported in 71.4% of patients in the 6.4 mg/kg dose group from the phase I study U31402-A-J101, compared to 60.4% in the 4.8 mg/kg dose group. Toxicity rates from the two dose groups are summarized in Table 4.
Regarding grade ≥3 adverse events, particularly neutropenia and thrombocytopenia are the most significant severe toxicities, as observed in U31402-A-J101 trial. Overall, interstitial lung disease (ILD) has been reported in a low proportion of patients, with an incidence of about 7% in U31402-A-J101 and ICARUS-BREAST 01 study. Other studies reported a negligible rate or no ILD. Most of ILD cases were grade 1, with 1 case out of 12 patients of grade 5 ILD reported in the U31402-A-J101 trial.
Data from the SOLTI VALENTINE study, presented at the San Antonio Breast Cancer Symposium (SABCS) 2024, indicate that HER3-DXd regimens exhibit superior tolerability compared to standard anthracyclines/taxanes chemotherapy, with a lower incidence of treatment modifications. Overall, data highlight an acceptable safety profile for HER3-DXd, with promising tolerability compared to traditional chemotherapy regimens. However, proactive management of associated toxicities, particularly nausea, remains essential to improve patients’ quality of life.
TEAE of any grade reported by dose subgroup.
U31402-A-J101	SOLTI-TOT HER3	 	TEAE of any grade (%)	4.8 mg/kg (N = 48)	6.4 mg/kg (N = 98)	5.6 mg/kg (N = 37)	6.4 mg/kg (N = 78)	 	Nausea	68.8	80.6	65	67	 	Thrombocytopenia	60.4	71.4	46	41	 	Neutropenia	62.5	66.3	0	19	 	Anemia	43.8	43.9	8	4	 	Fatigue	31.3	33.7	46	41	 	Alopecia	20.8	28.6	27	36	 	Diarrhea	41.7	43.9	22	24	 	Increased AST	43.8	34.7	14	19
Abbreviations: N = number of patients; TEAE = treatment-emergent adverse events.
In Table 5 we summarize the TEAE of any grade by dose subgroup in the U31402-A-J101 and SOLTI-TOT HER3 clinical trials. Grade ≥3 TEAE from the J101 study were reported in 81.6% of cases in the highest dose group and 64.6% in the 4.8 mg/kg group. ILD was seen in a proportion of 7.1% (7 patients out of 98) in the 6.8 mg/kg group and 2.1% (1 patient out of 48) in the lower dose group.

Discussion
Recent clinical trial data presented in this review demonstrate that HER3-DXd exhibits significant efficacy combined with a manageable safety profile. These findings position Patritumab deruxtecan as a promising candidate for further large-scale trials, particularly in metastatic breast cancer patients, including those with HR+/HER2-negative or HER2-low breast cancer, who have experienced progression after standard therapies. However, there are still some questions that need to be addressed. First, HER3 expression does not appear to correlate with HER3-DXd outcomes, a finding that may be explained by several factors. Primarily, there are not validated IHC-based HER3 assays and there are no standardized scoring methods and defined thresholds for predicting HER3-DXd activity. In the clinical trials presented above, HER3 positivity was defined differently. The current detection methods are still limited, making it mandatory to define a standardized technique as the impact of detection methods (IHC antibody clone numbers and scoring criteria) on the comparability of the results is extremely high. Secondly, whereas HER2 is mainly localized on the cell membrane, HER3 is abundantly expressed in intracellular compartments and undergoes rapid clathrin-mediated internalization. In cell lines co-expressing HER2 and HER3, both patritumab (an anti-HER3 antibody) and HER3-DXd displayed markedly faster internalization than HER2-targeted antibodies, so that even a relatively small fraction of HER3 receptors reaching lysosomes may be sufficient to drive the activity of HER3-DXd. Thirdly, considerable IHC and mRNA HER3 expression was observed in the vast majority of breast cancers, so limiting the possibility to clearly determine the activity of the ADC in tumors with lack or very low HER3 expression.
Furthermore, it is likely that HER3 expression varies over time, as a result of prior treatments, such as PI3K/AKT/mTOR inhibitors, endocrine therapy, HER2-directed therapies. Dynamic changes in the expression of HER3 might raise the question if using circulating tumor cells or specific imaging techniques could be taken into account in the future in order to detect cancer heterogeneity and longitudinal changes of target expression. While a high proportion of breast cancer express HER3, HER3 mutations and amplifications are extremely rare (less than 3%). Yet there is no clear evidence from clinical trials. Preclinical studies have shown no difference in HER3-DXd activity between cell lines with or without ERBB3 mutations.
Another key question is whether HER3-DXd can be effective to overcome acquired resistance to ADCs. Given that HER3 expression in HER2+ breast cancer is associated with a poorer outcome, we sought to determine if HER3-DXd can be an effective treatment option, either as single agent or in combination with olaparib, in patients who progressed on prior treatment with T-DXd. ICARUS BREAST02 (NCT06298084) is an ongoing phase Ib/II multicentric trial that aims to evaluate tolerability, safety and efficacy of patritumab deruxtecan in monotherapy and in combination with other anti-cancer treatments in patients with advanced breast cancer who have progressed after trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd). Applying sequential treatments with ADCs targeting different cell membrane antigens could be a potential strategy to overcome ADC resistance.
Another key question is whether HER3-DXd can be effective to overcome acquired resistance to ADCs. Applying sequential treatments with ADCs targeting different cell membrane antigens could be a potential strategy to overcome ADC payload resistance. Preclinical and clinical evidence suggest that resistance to ADCs can sometimes be driven by the target expression, thereby maintaining sensitivity to the payload. Yet, so far, real-world data have shown only limited benefit from the sequential use of ADCs carrying similar payload classes, as in most cases resistance mechanisms are largely driven by the payload itself, limiting the efficacy of a subsequent ADC with the same class of cytotoxic agent. In this context, ADCs employing alternative payloads may represent a promising strategy to overcome ADC resistance.
Another key point to be addressed is which treatments could be combined with HER3-DXd to maximize its efficacy. In SOLTI-TOT HER3 trial, it has been observed that a single dose of patritumab deruxtecan increased the immune infiltration and reduced tumor proliferation across a wide spectrum of ERBB3 mRNA and HER3 protein expression levels. This led to a switch to a less aggressive tumor phenotype. The same trial showed that some immune-related genes (including PD-1 gene) presented an overexpression after one dose of HER3-DXd, underlying that patritumab deruxtecan may trigger an anti-tumor immune response. Therefore, the association of HER3-DXd with PD-1 or PD-L1 inhibitors could represent a synergic combination strategy to be tested in patients with breast cancer.
It also remains to be determined if HER3-DXd can be effective in patients with brain metastases. The implication of HER3 in disease progression to the brain was evaluated in several clinical trials. A particular interest in this subject was shown by Tomasich et al. in a retrospective clinical trial including patients diagnosed with non-small cell lung cancer and breast cancer. Out of 132 brain tissue samples obtained from patients diagnosed with breast cancer, 99 showed HER3 expression, with a higher incidence in HER2 positive and HER2 low samples. This might show that a special interest should be given to this particular subgroup of patients with poor prognosis where HER3 targeting agents could become a potentially promising therapeutic option. In addition, the cohort 3 of the TUXEDO study, which included patients with leptomeningeal metastases from breast and lung cancer, showed an intracranial ORR of 11.1% and intracranial CBR of 50% with HER3-DXd.
Finally, it is important to note that HER3-DXd presents some differences in the safety profile as compared to other ADCs such as trastuzumab deruxtecan and datopotamab deruxtecan. While they use the same payload (deruxtecan), the expression of the target antigen in normal tissue may be variable. Trastuzumab deruxtecan targets HER2 which can be expressed in normal epithelial cells of the respiratory and gastrointestinal system, explaining the higher frequency of ILD and digestive symptoms. It can also be expressed in cardiac myocytes needing regular supervision of the myocardial function. Datopotamab deruxtecan targets TROP2 expressed in the normal epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract, oral cavity and ocular mucosa, thus eye toxicity, stomatitis, and digestive side effects. HER3 can be found in bone marrow precursor cells and moderately in lung, gastrointestinal and skin epithelia, explaining the hematological toxicity as the most frequent side effect and a lower incidence of ILD.

Conclusion
Drug Summary.
Drug namePatritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd, U3-1402)
Pharmacology/designHER3-targeted antibody-drug conjugate consisting of patritumab, a human anti-HER3 immunoglobulin G1 monoclonal antibody, linked covalently to a topomerase I inhibitor payload via a tetrapeptide-based cleavable linker, with a drug-to-antibody ratio of approximately 8.
Mechanism of actionAfter HER3-DXd binds to the receptor, the ADC-receptor complex is internalized through the cell membrane. The cleavable linker is degraded by lysosomal proteases, releasing the cytotoxic payload which will therefore inhibit Topoisomerase I, inducing DNA damage. The hydrophobic and uncharged payload may also diffuse through the cell membrane, enabling a “bystander” effect by extending its action to adjacent tumor cells.
Indications under investigationDifferent subtypes of breast cancer (HR+/HER2–, triple-negative, HER2+), in advanced or metastatic setting, including heavily pretreated disease. Being studied in patients with brain metastases.
Dose and administrationIntravenous perfusion, every 3 weeks. The typical dosing in clinical trials was 5.6 mg/kg IV.
In a Phase I/II clinical trial (U3-1402-J101) evaluating multiple subtypes and heavily pretreated breast cancer patients, the objective response rate (ORR) was 30,1% for HR+/HER2-, 22,6% for triple-negative and 42,9% for HER2+ breast cancer, with a median progression-free survival (mPFS) of 7,4 months, 5,5 months and 11 months, respectively
In ICARUS-BREAST01 evaluating HR+/HER2- breast cancer patients progressing after CDK4/6 inhibitor and 1 line of chemotherapy, the ORR was 53,5% with a median PFS of 9,4 months
In TUXEDO-3 clinical trial including patients with leptomeningeal metastases from breast and lung cancer, an intracranial ORR of 11,1% was observed.
Key efficacy findings (investigational)
Safety/tolerabilityCommon side effects: nausea, hematologic toxicities, fatigue, diarrhea, alopecia, liver toxicity Severe: interstitial lung disease/pneumonitis (including grade 3–5 events); hematologic and gastrointestinal toxicities.
Regulatory statusInvestigational, not yet approved for breast cancer.
Over the last couple of years, several phase I and II studies have demonstrated the remarkable efficacy of HER3-DXd across different breast cancer subtypes, both in early and metastatic setting. Undoubtedly, the activity of HER3-DXd along with its manageable safety profile, warrant to be furtherly confirmed in larger clinical trials in early and metastatic breast cancer. Importantly, a clear cutoff to define the optimal activity of HER3-DXd according to HER3 expression level is still lacking. Clinical activity has been observed across a wide range of HER3 membrane expression; however, the efficacy in tumors with low or absent HER3 expression remains uncertain, and these tumors represent only a small subset of breast cancers. This uncertainty underscores the importance of refining biomarker strategies to guide patient selection, while ongoing larger trials will be key to determine whether HER3-DXd should be developed as a broadly active agent or within a biomarker-driven framework. In the clinical trials presented above, HER3 positivity was defined differently. The current detection methods are still limited, making it mandatory to define a standardized technique as the impact of detection methods (IHC antibody clone numbers and scoring criteria) on the comparability of the results is extremely high.

Article highlights
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 3 (HER3) overexpression is involved in treatment resistance in all clinical subtypes of breast cancer
Patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd) is a human immunoglobulin G1 (IgG1) monoclonal antibody targeting HER3, covalently linked to a topoisomerase I inhibitor payload via a cleavable tetrapeptide linker, with a drug-to-antibody ratio of roughly 8
HER3-DXd showed substantial activity across different breast cancer subtypes and a wide range of HER3 expression. Side effects consist mainly in nausea, fatigue, diarrhea and hematologic toxicity, with manageable profile. Interstitial lung disease was rarely reported.

Author contributions
Adina Sabau: Writing – Original draft preparation, Writing – Review and editing, Visualization; Jessica Paparo: Writing – Review and editing, Visualization; Rasha Cheikh-Hussin: Writing – Review and editing; Noemie Corcos: Writing – Review and editing; Fernanda Mosele: Writing – Review and editing; Barbara Pistilli: Writing – Original draft preparation, Writing – Review and editing.

Disclosure statement
Barbara Pistilli: Consulting fees: Astra Zeneca (institutional), Seagen (institutional), Gilead (institutional), Novartis (institutional), Lilly (institutional), MSD (institutional), Pierre Fabre (personal), Daiichi Sankyo (institutional/personal); Research funding (to my institution): Astra Zeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Gilead, Seagen, MSD; Travel support: Astra Zeneca; Gilead; MSD; Daiichi Sankyo, Pfizer
Fernanda Mosele: Consulting fees: Novartis, Pegascy
The following authors do not have competing interests: Adina Sabau, Jessica Paparo, Rasha Cheikh-Hussin, Noemie Corcos. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.

Reviewer disclosures
A reviewer on this manuscript has disclosed speakers’ fees and positions on advisory boards for Astra Zeneca and Daichi Sankyo. Peer reviewers on this manuscript have no other relevant financial relationships or otherwise to disclose.

Data sharing statement
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available in reference numbers.

References
Papers of special note have been highlighted as either of interest (•) or of considerable interest (••) to readers.
ESMO clinical practice guideline for the diagnosis, staging and treatment of patients with metastatic breast cancer
Early breast cancer: ESMO clinical practice guideline for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up
Overall survival with pembrolizumab in early-stage triple-negative breast cancer
Pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy in advanced triple-negative breast cancer
Palbociclib and letrozole in advanced breast cancer
Overall survival with ribociclib plus letrozole in advanced breast cancer
Monarch 3: abemaciclib as initial therapy for advanced breast cancer
Abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy for hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, node-positive, high-risk early breast cancer (monarchE): results from a preplanned interim analysis of a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial
Ribociclib plus endocrine therapy in early breast cancer
Unlocking the potential of antibody-drug conjugates for cancer therapy
Trastuzumab deruxtecan after endocrine therapy in metastatic breast cancer
Trastuzumab deruxtecan in previously treated HER2-low advanced breast cancer
Sacituzumab govitecan in metastatic triple-negative breast cancer
Trastuzumab deruxtecan versus treatment of physician’s choice in patients with HER2-positive metastatic breast cancer (DESTINY-Breast02): a randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 3 trial
Overall survival with sacituzumab govitecan in hormone receptor-positive and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-negative metastatic breast cancer (TROPiCS-02): a randomised, open-label, multicentre, phase 3 trial
Understanding the biology of HER3 receptor as a therapeutic target in human cancer
Novel anticancer targets: revisiting ERBB2 and discovering ERBB3
Erbb receptors and signaling pathways in cancer
Expression of c‐erbB receptors, heregulin and oestrogen receptor in human breast cell lines
The ErbB signaling network: receptor heterodimerization in development and cancer
Her3 overexpression and survival in solid tumors: a meta-analysis
Long road towards effective HER3 targeting in breast cancer
Erbb3 mRNA expression in breast cancer (BC): a SOLTI biomarker discovery analysis
Patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd), a human epidermal growth factor receptor 3-directed antibody-drug conjugate, in patients with previously treated human epidermal growth factor receptor 3-expressing metastatic breast cancer: a multicenter, phase I/II trial
Estrogen receptor α is the major driving factor for growth in tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer and supported by HER/ERK signaling
Fulvestrant-induced expression of ErbB3 and ErbB4 receptors sensitizes oestrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cells to heregulin β1
Downregulation of ErbB3 abrogates ErbB2-mediated tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer cells
Heterotrimerization of the growth factor receptors erbB2, erbB3, and insulin-like growth factor-I receptor in breast cancer cells resistant to herceptin
An heregulin-EGFR-HER3 autocrine signaling axis can mediate acquired lapatinib resistance in HER2+ breast cancer models
Antagonism of EGFR and HER3 enhances the response to inhibitors of the PI3K-Akt pathway in triple-negative breast cancer
Combined HER3-EGFR score in triple-negative breast cancer provides prognostic and predictive significance superior to individual biomarkers
Phase Ib study evaluating safety and clinical activity of the anti-HER3 antibody lumretuzumab combined with the anti-HER2 antibody pertuzumab and paclitaxel in HER3-positive, HER2-low metastatic breast cancer
Abstract A14: a randomized trial of exemestane ± seribantumab (MM-121) in postmenopausal women with locally advanced or metastatic ER/PR+ HER2- breast cancer: final analysis and extended subgroup analysis
Abstract OT3-06–01: sHERBOC: a double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial of seribantumab (MM-121) plus fulvestrant in postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive, heregulin positive, HER2 negative metastatic breast cancer whose disease progressed after prior systemic therapy
Targeting HER3 for cancer treatment: a new horizon for an old target
Her3 in cancer; from the bench to the bedside
Population pharmacokinetics of patritumab deruxtecan in patients with solid tumors
A novel HER3-targeting antibody-drug conjugate, U3-1402, exhibits potent therapeutic efficacy through the delivery of cytotoxic payload by efficient internalization
U3-1402, a novel HER3-targeting antibody-drug conjugate, for the treatment of colorectal cancer
U3-1402a, a novel HER3-targeting ADC with a novel DNA topoisomerase I inhibitor, demonstrates a potent tumor efficacy
Efficacy and safety of patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd) in EGFR inhibitor-resistant, EGFR-mutated non-small cell lung cancer
Bystander killing effect of DS-8201a, a novel anti-human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 antibody-drug conjugate, in tumors with human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 heterogeneity
Herthena-Lung01, a phase II trial of patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd) in epidermal growth factor receptor–mutated non–small-cell lung cancer after epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy and platinum-based chemotherapy
An open label, phase II study of patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd, U3-1402) in patients (pts) with previously treated advanced/metastatic colorectal cancer (CRC)
Evaluation of covariate effects on pharmacokinetics of monoclonal antibodies in oncology
A phase 2 study of HER3-DXd in patients (pts) with metastatic breast cancer (MBC)
Efficacy, safety and biomarker analysis of ICARUS-BREAST01: a phase II study of patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd) in patients (pts) with HR+/HER2- advanced breast cancer (ABC)
Patritumab deruxtecan in untreated hormone receptor-positive/her2-negative early breast cancer: final results from part a of the window-of-opportunity SOLTI TOT-HER3 pre-operative study
Solti-1805 tot-her3 study concept: a window-of-opportunity trial of patritumab deruxtecan, a HER3 directed antibody drug conjugate, in patients with early breast cancer
Solti-1805 TOTHER3 trial: a window-of-opportunity trial of patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd) in patients with treatment naïve, early breast cancer
The evaluation of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) in breast cancer: recommendations by an international TILs working group 2014
Patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd) in hormonal receptor-positive/HER2-negative (HR+/HER2-) and triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC): results of part B of SOLTI TOT-HER3 window of opportunity trial
Patritumab deruxtecan in HER2-negative breast cancer: part b results of the window-of-opportunity SOLTI-1805 TOT-HER3 trial and biological determinants of early response
155tip a randomised phase ii trial of neoadjuvant multi-agent chemotherapy (CHT) or patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd; U3-1402) ± endocrine therapy (ET) for high-risk hormone receptor-positive (HR+/HER2-) early breast cancer (EBC): sOLTI-2103 valentine trial
Pathological complete response and long-term clinical benefit in breast cancer: the CTNeoBC pooled analysis
Pathologic complete response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy and impact on breast cancer recurrence and survival: a comprehensive meta-analysis
Neoadjuvant HER3-DXd alone or in combination with letrozole for high-risk HR+/HER2- early EBC: primary results of the randomized phase II SOLTI Valentine trial
Her3 pet imaging: 68Ga-labeled affibody molecules provide superior Her3 contrast to 89Zr-labeled antibody and antibody-fragment-based tracers
U3-1402 sensitizes HER3-expressing tumors to PD-1 blockade by immune activation
Erbb3 interacts with Hrs and is sorted to lysosomes for degradation
Parallel genomic alterations of antigen and payload targets mediate polyclonal acquired clinical resistance to sacituzumab govitecan in triple-negative breast cancer
Trastuzumab deruxtecan in metastatic breast cancer with variable HER2 expression: the phase 2 DAISY trial
Datopotamab deruxtecan in advanced or metastatic HR+/HER2- and triple-negative breast cancer: results from the phase I TROPION-PanTumor01 study
Icarus-breast02: safety, tolerability, & anti-tumor activity of patritumab deruxtecan (HER3-DXd) monotherapy & combinations in patients (pts) with inoperable advanced breast cancer (ABC) following progression on trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd)
Her3 and downstream pathways are involved in colonization of brain metastases from breast cancer
Heregulin-HER3-HER2 signaling promotes matrix metalloproteinase-dependent blood-brain-barrier transendothelial migration of human breast cancer cell lines
Frequent overexpression of HER3 in brain metastases from breast and lung cancer
Patritumab deruxtecan in leptomeningeal metastatic disease of solid tumors: the phase 2 tuxedo-3 trial
Toxicities and management strategies of emerging antibody–drug conjugates in breast cancer
Systematic review of the side effects associated with anti-HER2-targeted therapies used in the treatment of breast cancer, on behalf of the EORTC quality of life group
Expression of Trop2 cell surface glycoprotein in normal and tumor tissues: potential implications as a cancer therapeutic target
Toxicity profile of antibody-drug conjugates in breast cancer: practical considerations