Application of Neurotrophic Factors as a Therapeutic Approach for Neurodegenerative Diseases
Neurotrophic factors (NTFs) are secreted proteins that are crucial in neuronal growth, survival, and function. Individuals with neurodegenerative diseases, characterized by neuronal loss and various functional disorders, have been reported to exhibit altered levels of NTFs. This suggests that modulating NTF levels may offer a promising therapeutic strategy to alter the progression of neurodegenerative diseases. Although numerous efforts have been made to deliver NTFs to target regions, their clinical application remains challenging due to their inability to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and the adverse side effects observed in clinical trials. Consequently, various delivery methods have been explored to overcome these limitations. In this review, we discuss recent therapeutic approaches utilizing NTFs and their signaling pathways as interventions against neurodegenerative diseases.

INTRODUCTION
Neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), Huntington’s disease (HD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), are characterized by neuronal degeneration mainly in the central nervous system (CNS), mostly accompanied by abnormal accumulation of certain proteins in the area, resulting in functional loss, such as cognitive impairment and/or decline in motor ability. Neurodegeneration is often associated with ageing and dementia, which has become a significant social burden worldwide due to the increasingly ageing global population. The number of dementia patients is predicted to reach 152 million by 2050. However, the development of medicines had limited success to date, as the majority of medications only delay, rather than reverse, the progression of these diseases.
Many efforts have emerged for alternative therapeutic approaches to fulfill the unmet needs for treating neurodegenerative diseases. As a neuronal defense mechanism, neurotrophic factors (NTFs) have been identified as candidates, as NTFs perform crucial roles in neuronal homeostasis and survival. Numerous studies have reported that NTF levels in patients or animal models of neurodegenerative diseases are reduced or disrupted compared to healthy control populations, and these disrupted NTF levels also result in deleterious progression in neurodegenerative diseases. These previous findings suggest that supporting the neuronal defense mechanism by introducing NTFs into diseased area became an important part of efforts to rectify the progression of neurodegenerative diseases. Several efforts exist that utilize NTFs as a therapeutic tool. However, while NTFs offer great potential, their application remains challenging, and efforts have not always been successful in clinical trials due to limitations such as the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and side effects, as well as the short half-life of NTFs.
To overcome these limitations in implementing clinical applications and beyond, the utilization of various NTFs, delivery mechanisms [e.g., utilization of adeno-associated virus (AAV) and stem cells], and relevant pathways [e.g., activation of ras homolog enriched in brain (Rheb) and mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)] have been explored as part of efforts to establish treatments for neurodegenerative diseases. However, limitations in clinical application persist, highlighting the importance of continued research as a promising strategy moving forward. This review provides an overview of the current state of research on various therapeutic approaches aimed at halting the progression of neurodegenerative diseases, focusing on the use of NTFs and/or their associated signaling pathways.

MAJOR NEUROTROPHIC FACTORS AND THEIR LINK TO THE Rheb–mTOR PATHWAY
NTFs are secreted proteins that are crucial for supporting neuronal growth, survival, and functionality. Moreover, NTFs can interact with certain receptors on the cell surface to activate intracellular signaling cascades. This mechanism supports the various roles of NTFs in relation to neurons. Notably, NTFs are involved in neuronal proliferation, differentiation, survival during neuronal development, and are also important for the protrusion of the neurites. In addition, NTFs have roles in the synaptic aspect, including the formation and maintenance of the synapse, as well as synaptic plasticity, which is important for learning and memory. NTFs also participate in the repair process, promoting regeneration after injury and modulating inflammation and glial responses.
NTFs are categorized mainly into three groups: the neurotrophin family, the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family, neurokines, and other NTFs (Table 1). Meanwhile, the Rheb–mTOR pathway is also involved in the expression of multiple NTFs as a key upstream mechanism.

Neurotrophins
The neurotrophin family, a well-characterized group among NTFs, includes the nerve growth factor (NGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), and neurotrophin-4/5 (NT-4/5), and plays essential roles in neuronal development, survival, plasticity, and maintenance in both the CNS and peripheral nervous system (PNS). NGF promotes the survival of sympathetic, sensory, and basal forebrain cholinergic neurons, which are important in memory functions. BDNF is key for synaptic plasticity and survival of cortical and dopaminergic neurons and is highly expressed in the hippocampus, cortex, and cerebellum. NT-3 aids spinal cord development and proprioceptive neuron survival, while NT-4/5, similar to BDNF, primarily supports the PNS.
Neurotrophins promote signals via the high-affinity tropomyosin receptor kinase (Trk) receptors, with NGF targeting TrkA, BDNF and NT-4/5 targeting TrkB, and NT-3 targeting TrkC. Additionally, neurotrophins bind to the p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75NTR) with lower affinity, which modulates Trk signaling and may trigger apoptosis under certain conditions. Overall, neurotrophins promote neuronal survival, differentiation, axon/dendrite growth, synaptic plasticity, neurotransmitter regulation, and neural repair.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor family
The GDNF family, which comprises GDNF, neurturin, artemin, and persephin, is well known for supporting the development, survival, and function of dopaminergic and motor neurons, making the GDNF family highly relevant in PD and ALS research. GDNF is the most studied NTF protein in the context of PD and is essential for dopaminergic neuron survival in the substantia nigra, while also supporting motor and peripheral neurons. Neurturin shares features with GDNF and aids parasympathetic, sensory, and enteric neurons, while artemin supports sensory, sympathetic, and motor neurons, also aiding in pain and nerve regeneration. Persephin represents the least explored family member, although persephin is known to support motor and gamma-aminobutyric acidergic (GABAergic) neurons.
Each GDNF family member binds a specific GDNF family receptor-α (GFRα) co-receptor: GFRα1 for GDNF, GFRα2 for neurturin, GFRα3 for artemin, and GFRα4 for persephin —and signals via the REarranged during Transfection (RET) tyrosine kinase receptor. This signaling activates intracellular pathways including phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/protein kinase B (Akt) (survival), mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) (growth), and phospholipase C gamma (PLCγ) (plasticity). Collectively, these factors promote neuronal survival, axonal regeneration, synaptic plasticity, neuromuscular maintenance, and pain modulation.

Neurokines
Neurokines are cytokines, mainly from the interleukin-6 (IL-6) family, and influence neuronal survival, differentiation, inflammation, and synaptic plasticity. This group of neurokines includes the ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF), leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), IL-6, interleukin-11 (IL-11), cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1), oncostatin M (OSM), cardiotrophin-like cytokine (CLC), and neuropoietin. CNTF supports motor neuron survival and glial differentiation, while LIF promotes neuronal and astrocytic development and regulates neural stem cells (NSCs). IL-6 and IL-11 mediate neuroinflammation and neuroprotection. CT-1 and CLC support motor and sensory/autonomic neurons, OSM modulates inflammation and astrocyte activity, and neuropoietin aids oligodendrocyte precursor differentiation.
Neurokines act through CNTF receptor α (CNTFRα), LIF receptor β (LIFRβ), and glycoprotein 130 (gp130) receptors, contributing to neuronal survival, glial development, synaptic modulation, and injury repair in the CNS.

Other neurotrophic factors
In addition to the main NTF families, further factors also support neural health: Insulin-like growth factors (IGF-1, IGF-2) act via IGF-1 receptor (IGF1R) to regulate neurogenesis, survival, and function. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), acting through VEGF receptors (VEGFR-1/2), contributes to angiogenesis and neuroprotection in the CNS. Fibroblast growth factors (FGFs) promote stem cell proliferation and neural development via the FGF receptors (FGFRs). Meanwhile, additional factors, such as ephrins and neuregulins, aid in axonal guidance, synaptogenesis, and plasticity.

Rheb–mTOR pathway
Rheb is a small guanosine triphosphatase (GTPase) and known to be an activator of the mTOR signaling pathway. Rheb directly activates mTOR complex 1 (mTORC1), which promotes protein synthesis and neuronal growth, inhibits autophagy, and regulates cell survival signaling. The activation of the Rheb–mTOR pathway by NTFs is widely recognized as a fundamental nutrient signaling pathway. Moreover, this pathway plays a pivotal role in promoting the expression of NTFs by enhancing transcription, mRNA translation, and cellular metabolism. Specifically, Rheb-mTOR pathway activation via AAV-Rheb (S16H) enhances translation of BDNF mRNA, cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB)-mediated transcription, transcription and secretion of GDNF, and expression of CNTF. The upregulation of BDNF and GDNF via Rheb–mTORC1 activation are involved in the interplay between neurons and astrocytes that further feedbacks via production of CNTF and GDNF from astrocytes to aid neuroprotection (Fig. 1). In addition, there is evidence that mTOR pathway activation induces upregulation of VEGF-A mRNA, IGF-1, and NGF, but they are not yet confirmed in the neurons.

NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES AND DISRUPTION OF NEUROTROPHIC FACTORS

Alzheimer's disease
AD is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder and the most common cause of dementia, accompanied by symptoms including memory loss, impaired reasoning and judgment, language difficulties, changes in behavior, and personality. Age, genetics (e.g., APOE ε4 allele), cardiovascular health, inflammation, and oxidative stress have been reported as risk factors. In the progression of AD, extracellular protein amyloid-beta (Aβ) accumulates to form Aβ plaques, disrupting neuronal communication and triggering inflammation. In addition, hyperphosphorylated tau protein leads to microtubule destabilization, accumulates into neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), and induces neuronal death. The synaptic and neuronal loss is distinct, especially in the hippocampus and cortex. Meanwhile, NTFs are disrupted in AD patients and are expected to contribute to the progression of the disease.
BDNF mRNA expression is decreased in the hippocampal and temporal cortical neurons in AD brains, which are critical regions for synaptic plasticity, learning, and memory. Meanwhile, TrkB receptors, which bind BDNF with high affinity, are also either downregulated or exhibit impaired function in AD. Furthermore, BDNF transcription and signaling are negatively affected by Aβ oligomers and tau pathology. The Val66Met polymorphism in BDNF leads to reduced activity-dependent BDNF secretion and is linked to higher AD risk and earlier cognitive decline. Thus, disrupted BDNF signaling contributes to accelerated neuronal atrophy, dendritic degeneration, impaired synaptic plasticity and long-term potentiation (LTP), diminished memory formation, and reduced neuronal resistance to oxidative stress and neurotoxins in AD.
NGF signaling is disrupted in both preclinical and clinical stages of AD due to the impaired maturation of precursor of nerve growth factor (proNGF) and increased degradation of mature NGF in the frontal cortex. Additionally, defects in the retrograde axonal transport of mature NGF exacerbate the imbalance between proNGF and mature NGF levels. The expression of TrkA, a high-affinity receptor for NGF, is also reduced in cholinergic neurons. This shift promotes proapoptotic signaling through the proNGF–p75NTR pathway, contributing to the degeneration and loss of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons. These changes result in impaired attention, learning, and memory, suggesting a strong link between NGF dysfunction, cognitive decline, and cholinergic system deficits in AD.
Moreover, the IGF-1 levels are decreased in AD in both the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum. Additionally, IGF1Rs in neurons are either downregulated or exhibit impaired function. AD neurons also tend to develop resistance to IGF1R and insulin signaling, which disrupts downstream PI3K/Akt pathways. Subsequently, IGF-1 dysfunction in AD contributes to reduced Aβ clearance due to impaired autophagy and phagocytosis, weakened neuroprotective and antiapoptotic mechanisms, diminished glucose metabolism, mitochondrial dysfunction, and impaired synaptic plasticity, particularly in hippocampal neurons—ultimately leading to cognitive decline.
Although direct evidence of CNTF disruption in AD patients remains limited, prior studies have shown that lower CNTF gene expression is associated with poorer cognitive function in diabetic individuals, suggesting a possible role in dementia, including AD. This role may involve reduced expression of CNTF receptor components such as CNTFRα, LIFR, and gp130, leading to impaired downstream signaling. Meanwhile, CNTF deficiency can compromise astrocyte-mediated neuronal support and reduce cholinergic neuron survival, contributing to memory impairments. Additionally, CNTF deficiency weakens the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) signaling pathway, which is essential for neuronal maintenance and repair.
Rheb expression is reduced in the prefrontal cortex of post-mortem AD brains and shows an inverse correlation with beta-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1), a key enzyme involved in Aβ production, suggesting a potential link to Aβ pathology. Rheb also exhibits neuroprotective effects in hippocampal neurons, protecting these neurons from thrombin-induced cell death, which is relevant to AD-like neurodegeneration. Thus, Rheb downregulation leads to decreased mTORC1 activation, a pathway essential for regulating protein synthesis, cellular metabolism, neuronal survival, and synaptic integrity. Notably, mTOR signaling dysregulation is considered a contributing factor in the pathogenesis of AD. As a result, reduced Rheb impairs BDNF-mediated neurotrophic signaling and increases neuronal susceptibility to oxidative and metabolic stress.

Parkinson’s disease
PD is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder primarily affecting motor function, caused by the loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta of the brain, accompanied by symptoms including motor (bradykinesia, resting tremor, rigidity, postural instability) and nonmotor (depression, cognitive impairment, sleep disorders, autonomic dysfunction) disorders. Age, genetics [e.g., synuclein alpha (SNCA), leucine rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1)], and environmental toxins (e.g., pesticides) have been identified as risk factors of PD. In the progression of PD, intracellular protein α-synuclein aggregates into Lewy bodies, which cause neuronal dysfunction and cell death. In addition, neuroinflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction also contribute to the progression of PD. NTFs are disrupted in PD patients and are expected to contribute to the progression of the disease.
The GDNF protein levels are reduced in the substantia nigra pars compacta in PD. Meanwhile, impaired retrograde transport of GDNF from the striatum to dopaminergic neuron cell bodies contributes to neuronal degeneration. Additionally, decreased expression of the GFRα1 and RET receptors further disrupts GDNF signaling. This loss of neuroprotective support accelerates neuronal degeneration, impairs neuronal repair mechanisms, and hampers dopamine synthesis. As a result, dopaminergic neurons become increasingly susceptible to oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction.
BDNF levels are also diminished in dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta of PD patients. Additionally, the expression of TrkB, a high-affinity receptor of BDNF, is reduced in this region. Factors such as α-synuclein accumulation, oxidative stress, and neuroinflammation have been shown to suppress BDNF transcription. This decline in BDNF signaling may worsen α-synuclein-induced toxicity, disrupt synaptic plasticity, and compromise the survival of dopaminergic neurons, ultimately contributing to the impairments in motor learning and cognitive functions associated with PD.
Moreover, CNTF expression is reduced in the substantia nigra pars compacta of PD patients. Astrocyte dysfunction, a common feature in PD, further contributes to decreased CNTF secretion. Inflammatory cytokines may also interfere with CNTF-induced JAK/STAT signaling. These findings suggest that disruption of the CNTF pathway leads to a loss of neurotrophic support for dopaminergic neurons, diminished resilience to excitotoxic and inflammatory insults, increased stress sensitivity, and impaired glial–neuronal communication—factors essential for neuroprotection and neural repair.
Conversely, IGF-1 levels are elevated in both the serum and CSF of PD patients, which may reflect a compensatory or “fight-to-injury” response. Notably, one study reported that IGF-1 levels are more strongly associated with the progression of nonmotor symptoms than motor symptoms in PD. However, IGF1R expression is decreased in regions, including the frontal white matter and amygdala, and insulin/IGF-1 signaling is disrupted due to persistent inflammation and mitochondrial dysfunction. This impairment also affects the PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway. Thus, IGF-1 pathway disruption leads to mitochondrial instability, increased oxidative stress, impaired neuronal energy metabolism and survival, and reduced autophagic clearance of toxic proteins, such as α-synuclein, ultimately compromising the viability of dopaminergic neurons.

Huntington’s disease
HD is a rare, inherited neurodegenerative disorder that is characterized by progressive motor dysfunction, cognitive decline, and psychiatric symptoms. HD is an autosomal dominantly inherited disorder caused by a CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the huntingtin (HTT) gene, which leads to the production of a toxic, mutant form of the HTT protein (mHTT). In HD, toxic mutant huntingtin protein aggregates predominantly affect the striatum and cortex. Meanwhile, NTFs are disrupted in HD patients and are expected to contribute to the progression of the disease.
In HD, BDNF levels and transcription are reduced in the cortex, caudate, putamen, and serum. The mHTT protein suppresses BDNF gene transcription by interfering with key transcription factors such as CREB and repressor element 1 silencing transcription factor (REST)/neuron-restrictive silencer factor (NRSF). Additionally, mHTT disrupts microtubule dynamics, impairing axonal transport of BDNF from the cortex to the striatum. TrkB, the high-affinity receptor for BDNF, is also downregulated in striatal neurons. Together, these disruptions lead to a loss of BDNF-mediated trophic support, resulting in cortical and striatal neuron degeneration, impaired synaptic plasticity, deficits in learning and motor control, and accelerated cognitive and behavioral deterioration.
IGF-1 levels are also reduced in both serum and plasma. However, IGF-1 treatment has been shown to protect striatal neurons from mHTT-induced cell death through Akt signaling cascade. Additionally, chronic neuroinflammation and oxidative stress in HD may further impair IGF-1 signaling. Therefore, diminished IGF-1 leads to reduced Akt-mediated antiapoptotic signaling, contributing to increased neuronal loss, impaired energy metabolism, mitochondrial dysfunction, decreased neuronal growth, and weakened neurogenesis and repair mechanisms.
Furthermore, mTOR activity is decreased in the striatal neurons of both HD patients and animal models. Moreover, mHTT has been shown to disrupt the Rheb–mTORC1 signaling pathway, although this finding was reported in a cardiac model. This disruption resulted in impaired autophagy and the accumulation of mHTT, leading to increased cellular stress, disturbed protein homeostasis, and neurodegeneration. Additionally, the breakdown in mTOR–BDNF signaling was shown to compromise neuronal survival mechanisms further.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
ALS is a progressive neurodegenerative disease that primarily affects motor neurons, the nerve cells responsible for controlling voluntary muscles. ALS is characterized by the loss of upper and lower motor neurons in the brain and spinal cord, as well as progressive muscle weakness, spasticity, and paralysis, along with difficulties in speaking, swallowing, and breathing. ALS is mainly sporadic and 5~10% are familial, often linked to gene mutations [e.g., superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1), TAR DNA binding protein (TARDBP), fused in sarcoma (FUS), chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 (C9orf72)], involved in oxidative stress, glutamate excitotoxicity, protein aggregation [e.g., transactive response DNA binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43), FUS, and SOD1], mitochondrial dysfunction, and neuroinflammation. NTFs are disrupted in ALS patients and are expected to contribute to the progression of the disease.
CNTF expression is diminished in the spinal cords of individuals with ALS. Since astrocytes are a major source of CNTF, the dysfunction of astrocytes in ALS likely contributes to reduced CNTF secretion. Additionally, CNTF signaling through the JAK/STAT pathway is impaired, weakening the neuroprotective functions provided by this pathway. This suppression of the CNTF pathway may lead to a loss of trophic support for spinal motor neurons, hastened neuronal degeneration and muscle wasting, and impaired compensatory mechanisms during the later stages of the disease.
The GDNF levels are also reduced in the serum of ALS patients. Moreover, loss of astrocyte-mediated GDNF signaling exacerbates disease progression in ALS models. The disruption of GDNF signaling has been shown to promote decreased motor neuron survival and maintenance, increased sensitivity to oxidative stress and excitotoxic insults, and deterioration of neuromuscular junctions.
Findings relating to the BDNF levels in the serum of ALS patients have been inconsistently reported: some studies show increased levels, while others report reductions. However, specific ALS subgroups, such as C9orf72 mutation carriers or individuals with depressive symptoms and lower cognitive performance, exhibit notably lower BDNF levels. The TrkB receptor, a high-affinity receptor of BDNF, is often downregulated or functionally compromised in ALS. In addition, the truncated TrkB isoform, TrkB.T1, is upregulated and acts as a dominant-negative regulator, inhibiting full TrkB signaling. These abnormalities in BDNF signaling contribute to decreased synaptic plasticity, reduced motor neuron resilience, impaired axonal regeneration, and heightened neuronal vulnerability to stress.
IGF-1 expression is reported to be decreased in the serum of ALS patients, while CSF levels have also exhibited a decline in some studies, although findings are not entirely consistent. Inflammatory responses, oxidative stress, and motor neuron damage suppress IGF1R signaling, a dysfunction that extends to downstream effectors, such as the Akt and mTOR pathways. Moreover, reduced IGF-1 activity leads to impaired protein synthesis, mitochondrial dysfunction, and neuronal loss, as well as decreased autophagy, resulting in the accumulation of toxic proteins such as TDP-43 and SOD1, along with accelerated axonal degeneration and muscle denervation.
VEGF levels are reduced in motor neurons within the CSF and spinal cord of ALS patients. This decrease is particularly evident in motor neurons and astrocytes, where VEGFR-2 signaling is also impaired, reducing neurovascular support. Lower VEGF expression contributes to compromised blood–spinal cord barrier (BSCB) integrity, leading to hypoxia and insufficient nutrient delivery to motor neurons. In addition, reduced VEGF expression weakens angiogenesis, neuroprotection, and glial support, further exacerbating motor neuron vulnerability.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2
SCA2 is a rare, inherited neurodegenerative disorder that belongs to the group of spinocerebellar ataxias. The cerebellum and brainstem are primarily impacted, accompanied by symptoms including ataxia (impaired balance and coordination), slow saccadic eye movements, dysarthria, muscle stiffness, tremors, and, in later stages, Parkinsonism, dementia, and neuropathy. SCA2 has a strong genetic background (autosomal dominant) that is caused by a CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in the ataxin 2 (ATXN2) gene on chromosome 12, leading to the production of an abnormally long polyglutamine tract in the ataxin-2 protein, which becomes toxic to neurons. Notably, more repeats are known to cause earlier onset and more severe disease. During the progression of SCA2, Purkinje cells in the cerebellum undergo progressive degeneration, and the brainstem, spinal cord, and cerebral cortex are also involved. Motor neurons are also affected in the later stage of the disease. While direct evidence of NTF disruption has not been presented in SCA2 patients, evidence has been presented in animal models of SCA2. Therefore, NTFs are potentially downregulated and are expected to contribute to the progression of the disease in a clinical context.
The BDNF levels were reduced in the Purkinje cells and other cerebellar neurons in a SCA2 mouse model. The mutant ATXN2 protein is known to disrupt transcriptional regulation and RNA processing, contributing to decreased BDNF expression. Additionally, anterograde transport of BDNF to its target neurons, such as Purkinje cells, may be impaired. This potential decline in BDNF compromises synaptic plasticity and neuroprotection in cerebellar neurons, heightens the vulnerability of Purkinje and brainstem neurons to stress and degeneration, and worsens motor coordination deficits associated with cerebellar atrophy.
Similarly, GDNF expression is diminished in the cerebellum of the SCA2 mouse model, while reductions were also observed in the spinal cord and brainstem—regions heavily influential in motor function. Astrocyte dysfunction, which impairs glial-derived GDNF production, further limits the availability of GDNF. This leads to weakened support for motor neurons due to impaired GFRα1/RET signaling, particularly in the spinal cord, and contributes to instability at neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) and muscle denervation. These effects may promote motor neuron loss and muscle weakness, resembling the ALS-like symptoms occasionally observed in SCA2.
Additionally, CNTF levels were decreased in the cerebellum of the same SCA2 model. This reduction likely impairs survival signaling through the CNTF receptor complex, particularly affecting lower motor neurons and brainstem nuclei, and resulting in increased motor neuron degeneration, worsening muscle weakness, and further breakdown of glial–neuronal interactions, all of which may accelerate disease progression.
As listed above, numerous reports have demonstrated that the expression of NTFs and their signaling pathways is disrupted in the major neurodegenerative diseases (Table 2), suggesting that the sustained expression levels of NTFs are critically involved in neuronal survival, protection, regeneration, repair, synaptic plasticity, inflammation, and glial modulation; therefore, disruption of NTFs may cause critical failure of neurons, disease progression, and clinical disorders (Table 3).

NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES AND THERAPEUTIC APPROACHES OF NEUROTROPHIC FACTORS

Therapeutic potential
The progression of neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD, PD, HD, ALS, and SCA2, is often accompanied by the progressive loss of specific neuronal populations. In addition, NTF expression levels are disrupted, and their functions are compromised in neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, it is interesting that introducing NTFs into the affected area as a beneficial therapeutic approach to restore neuronal homeostasis and even enhances the clearance of pathological proteins that accumulate during the progression of the disease. Moreover, many studies have reported that the delivery of NTFs not previously known to be involved in the specific disease also exhibits neuroprotection and restores neuronal functionality in the diseased area.

Therapeutic strategies and delivery methods
Numerous strategies have been developed to deliver NTFs to affected regions in patients with neurodegenerative diseases. Among these, direct infusion of recombinant NTFs has been widely used in early preclinical and clinical trials. Delivery methods include intracerebroventricular (ICV) infusion, peripheral injection, intranasal administration, or direct injection into the targeted brain regions. These approaches bypass issues related to gene expression by supplying active protein directly. However, due to the inability of most NTFs to cross the BBB, directly delivering NFTs often requires invasive stereotaxic procedures. Additionally, the short half-life of NTFs necessitates repeated administrations, and the risk of off-target effects may lead to undesirable side effects, limiting the clinical utility of NTFs.
Therefore, viral vector-based gene therapy has been explored to overcome these limitations. Viral vector-based gene therapy employs vectors such as AAV or the lentivirus to deliver NTF-related genes into specific brain regions, allowing localized, long-term expression after a single injection. Cell-type specificity can also be achieved by using targeted promoters, reducing the likelihood of off-target effects. Nevertheless, challenges remain in gene therapy, such as poor dose control, potential overexpression, and safety risks. Specifically for vectors, AAV has a limited loading capacity, and lentiviral vectors carry a risk of insertional mutagenesis.
Cell-based therapies represent another promising approach. Engineered cells, including NSCs, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), NTF-secreting cells, and encapsulated cell systems (e.g., NT-501 for CNTF delivery), can be transplanted to provide sustained NTF production. Meanwhile, in addition to trophic support, these cells may offer immunomodulatory and regenerative benefits, whereby the multipotency of these cells allows for the potential replacement of lost neurons or glial cells; many cell types also exhibit low immunogenicity. However, challenges include difficulties in sourcing, scaling, and standardizing cells, as well as ensuring cell survival post-transplantation. Tumorigenicity and other safety concerns also remain.
Alternatively, small molecules, drugs, and peptide-based mimetics can activate neurotrophic signaling pathways without the need for protein infusion. These include VEGFR agonists (e.g., VEGF-A/B/C), BDNF mimetics, such as 7,8-DHF, CNTF analogues such as Axokine, and various expression enhancers (e.g., selective serotonin reuptake Inhibitors (SSRI)s, histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors, CREB modulators). These compounds are often designed to cross the BBB and can be formulated for improved biocompatibility and lower toxicity. Moreover, the advantages of these compounds include noninvasive delivery, easier dose regulation, and suitability for long-term, large-scale application. Nonetheless, similar to direct protein infusion, small molecules typically have short half-lives and require repeated administration to maintain therapeutic levels.
Overall, while diverse delivery strategies have been explored in both animal models and clinical studies, each comes with specific benefits and limitations; examples of these approaches will be presented in the following sections.

Alzheimer’s disease
Since AD is characterized by neuronal loss, synaptic degeneration, and impaired neural plasticity, NTFs are being investigated as therapeutic agents to enhance neuronal survival, mitigate degeneration, and restore cognitive function, particularly targeting vulnerable brain regions, such as the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, parietal cortex, and basal forebrain.
Multiple delivery strategies for BDNF have been investigated, including direct infusion, viral vectors (e.g., AAVs), stem cell-based methods, and small molecules that either activate TrkB receptors or enhance endogenous BDNF expression. In animal models of AD, direct BDNF infusion into regions, such as the entorhinal cortex or hippocampus, has reduced neuronal loss and improved cognitive function. Intranasal administration, which bypasses the BBB, has also promoted memory improvement in AD11 mice. When administered intravenously with a BBB-modulating agent (Ac-CDTPPVC-NH2, or ADTC5), BDNF significantly enhanced cognition in amyloid precursor protein (APP)/presenilin 1 (PS1) mice compared to BDNF alone. AAV-mediated BDNF expression in the ventricular system or hippocampus reduced neuronal degeneration and behavioral deficits in transgenic AD mice. BDNF also prevented Aβ-induced neurotoxicity in vitro. Other strategies include BDNF delivery via a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-derived membrane-penetrating peptide or genetically engineered astrocyte-expressing BDNF in a 5xFAD model, both of which improved AD-like symptoms and cognition. Additionally, small molecules, such as 7,8-dihydrocannabinol (7,8-DHC), 7,8-dihydroxyflavone (7,8-DHF), neuropep-1, and peptide 021, as well as the viral delivery of CREB-binding protein, have all been shown to elevate BDNF levels and yield similar benefits. Clinical trials are currently underway for AAV-BDNF (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT05040217) and a BDNF mimetic NP03 (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT05423522), although the results of these trials have yet to be released. While human data remain limited, extensive preclinical studies support the therapeutic potential of BDNF.
NGF-based therapies have also been tested in AD models. For example, AAV-mediated NGF expression targeted to basal forebrain cholinergic neurons in a fimbria–fornix lesion model promoted neuroprotection and functional recovery. Liposomal nanoparticle delivery successfully crossed the BBB in vitro and reduced soluble and insoluble Aβ while increasing synaptic markers in vivo in APP/PS1 mice. Small molecules, such as BNN27 and J147, have further enhanced cognition in AD models. Clinical trials involving direct intraventricular infusion of NGF in AD patients have presented some cognitive benefit but also led to adverse effects, highlighting the limitations of this approach. AAV-mediated NGF delivery has produced mixed outcomes; some studies showed benefit, while others reported no improvement despite successful transduction, suggesting that refinement in delivery technique is needed. Encapsulated NGF-secreting cell implants demonstrated successful delivery without side effects, but did not yield further functional benefits. While NGF has shown promise in preclinical models, safety and efficacy concerns are currently limiting clinical applications.
Low serum IGF-1 levels have been linked to brain atrophy and increased AD risk, suggesting that IGF-1 supplementation could be beneficial. However, paradoxically, higher IGF1R activity has also been associated with increased dementia prevalence, complicating the therapeutic use of IGF-1. In AD animal models, intracerebroventricular IGF-1 administration in a streptozotocin-induced model reduced inflammation and Aβ accumulation, improving spatial memory. Subcutaneous injection of IGF-1-loaded microspheres in APP/ presenilin 2 (PS2) mice similarly improved cognition and reduced Aβ burden. However, some studies reported no effect on Aβ clearance or cognitive improvement. Notably, an IGF1R inhibitor reduced neuroinflammation in another AD model. Clinical trials remain sparse, and the inconsistent preclinical findings make IGF-1 a more complex and less validated therapeutic candidate.
Although CNTF is not directly implicated in AD pathology, the expression of CNTF has been inversely correlated with cognitive function in diabetic patients, suggesting relevance in dementia. CNTF is known to exhibit neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory properties. Meanwhile, delivery approaches include encapsulated cell therapy and CNTF-mimetic peptides. In preclinical models, encapsulated CNTF-secreting cell transplantation into Tg2576 AD mice preserved cognition and prevented neuronal and synaptic degeneration. Active CNTF fragments (peptides 6 and 6A) have also promoted neurogenesis in APP transgenic mice. However, clinical research on CNTF in AD remains lacking, while limited animal studies suggest that more extensive investigations are required before CNTF can be validated as a therapeutic option.
Rheb expression is reduced in the prefrontal cortex of AD patients and negatively correlates with BACE1, which is involved in Aβ production. Notably, disruption of downstream mTOR signaling, where Rheb plays a key role, is considered a risk factor in AD. As Rheb and the subsequent downstream mTOR signaling are involved in AD, the benefits of both have been investigated in relation to AD. Interestingly, hippocampal delivery of AAV-Rheb (S16H) in 5xFAD mice enhanced the expression of BDNF, CNTF, TrkB, and CNTFRα, while also suppressing Aβ production and improving LTP and cognitive outcomes. Another study showed that activating the Rheb–mTOR pathway in Aβ-injected rats reversed memory deficits. However, clinical studies on Rheb-based therapies remain limited, and further validation in animal models is necessary before advancing to human trials.
There are many promising results from animal model studies utilizing NTFs on AD pathology; however, caution remains required when applying the results to clinical aspects, as some cases have shown that NTFs were well-delivered but failed to exhibit beneficial effects. Further refinement is essential.

Parkinson’s disease
In PD, NTFs have been studied for their potential to protect, restore, or regenerate dopaminergic neurons, to slow disease progression or reverse neuronal loss—primarily targeting the dopaminergic pathways in the substantia nigra and striatum of the midbrain.
Preclinical studies have demonstrated that inducing GDNF expression through AAV or lentiviral vectors in PD rodent models leads to behavioral improvements and neuroprotection. Moreover, intracerebral delivery of recombinant GDNF in 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-lesioned rhesus monkeys alleviated core PD symptoms. Additionally, delivering GDNF via macrophage/microglia-based stem cells in MPTP mice preserved nigral dopaminergic neurons and their striatal projections. A modified GDNF protein fused to destabilizing domains enhanced motor function in the 6-hydroxydopamine hydrobromide (6-OHDA) mouse model. However, clinical trials involving ICV-mediated GDNF infusion did not yield functional improvements. In contrast, AAV-GDNF delivery in PD patients resulted in increased GDNF expression, enhanced tyrosine hydroxylase activity, elevated catecholamine levels, and improved PET imaging signals, indicating regenerative potential. Together, these findings suggest that gene or cell-based delivery of GDNF may offer more therapeutic benefit than direct protein infusion.
Though not directly implicated in PD pathology, neurturin shows similar therapeutic potential. In rodent models, AAV-mediated neurturin delivery (e.g., CERE-120 or AAV2) into the striatum conferred dopaminergic neuron protection in 6-OHDA-lesioned rats. NSCs engineered to secrete neurturin also exhibited neuroprotective effects in similar models. Clinically, AAV-based delivery (primarily CERE-120) represents the main method of application. However, while some human studies showed modest benefit, others failed to demonstrate significant improvements, suggesting that delivery methods require further optimization for clinical efficacy.
Several approaches have been applied to enhance BDNF signaling in PD models, including viral delivery, mimetics, and stem cell therapy. Meanwhile, AAV-BDNF injection into the lateral ventricles of MPTP-treated mice has been shown to mitigate both motor and cognitive deficits. Lentiviral-mediated BDNF overexpression in MPTP mice activated the signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways, promoting autophagy, reducing α-synuclein aggregation, and decreasing neuronal damage. Exosomes derived from human umbilical cord MSCs (hUC-MSCs) carrying BDNF protected neurons from ferroptosis in both in vitro and in vivo PD models. Small molecules, such as the TrkB agonist CF3CN and the natural compound sericin, also activated BDNF signaling and improved motor outcomes. However, clinical trials specifically targeting BDNF in PD are limited, despite strong preclinical support.
While direct application of CNTF in PD models is sparse, activation of astrocytic CNTF production via transient receptor potential vanilloid 1 (TRPV1) channel has been shown to enhance neuroprotection in PD rat models. Nonetheless, despite the potential of CNTF, this protein has yet to be evaluated in clinical PD trials, and more research is needed to validate its therapeutic relevance and optimize its delivery.
IGF-1 has been delivered through direct infusion, viral vectors, and cell transplantation in PD models. In MPTP-injected mice, IGF-1 infusion into the lateral ventricle reduced autophagy and protected against motor dysfunction and dopaminergic neuronal loss. Moreover, adenoviral-mediated IGF-1 delivery into the caudate-putamen (CPu) improved cognitive performance and increased tyrosine hydroxylase expression in the 6-OHDA model. However, lentiviral IGF-1 delivery into the striatum did not yield neuroprotection or behavioral improvements. Transplantation of human neural progenitor cells secreting IGF-1 protected substantia nigra neurons and alleviated behavioral symptoms. Although no clinical trials have been conducted in PD patients, animal studies suggest IGF-1 has therapeutic potential, pending refinement in delivery methods.
While Rheb has yet to be studied clinically in PD patients, the therapeutic potential of Rheb is supported by preclinical research. AAV-mediated delivery of Rheb into the substantia nigra activates mTOR signaling, providing neuroprotective effects. Constitutively active Rheb (AAV1-Rheb (S16H)) has been shown to counteract PD-like pathology induced by 6-OHDA or prothrombin kringle-2 (pKr-2). These results highlight Rheb as a promising candidate for future clinical trials targeting mTOR-related neurodegeneration in PD.
Overall, preclinical evidence supports the potential of several NTFs in PD, but clinical translation remains limited, and delivery methods need further optimization.

Huntington’s disease
Since HD involves disruptions in neurotrophic signaling, synaptic integrity, and cellular metabolism, NTFs have been applied to address these deficits, primarily targeting neurons in the striatum and cortex.
Various strategies to enhance BDNF signaling in HD include long-term expression via viral vectors, epigenetic regulators, and BDNF-secreting cell transplants to provide localized trophic support. Recombinant BDNF delivered subcutaneously, AAV-BDNF injected into the striatum, cortical transplantation of BDNF-expressing NSCs, and transplantations of MSCs, striatal progenitor cells, or dopamine D1 receptor (D1R)/dopamine D2 receptor (D2R) neurons all produced neuroprotective effects and improved disease phenotypes in HD rodent models (R6/2, YAC128, and QA-lesioned). Meanwhile, striatal neurons were preserved, and motor deficits were reduced in double-transgenic models (YAC128, R6/2) overexpressing BDNF. Pridopidine, a selective sigma-1 receptor (S1R) agonist developed for HD, has been shown to restore BDNF and TrkB trafficking in HD neurons. While clinical data remain limited, studies using BDNF-secreting MSCs reported no adverse effects. Despite the lack of robust clinical evidence, animal studies strongly support BDNF-based approaches as promising treatments for HD.
Although CNTF has not been shown to change with HD progression, CNTF supports striatal neuron survival, astrocyte differentiation, and glial regulation, making CNTF a potential therapeutic candidate. Investigated delivery methods include gene therapy via viral vectors and encapsulated cell systems (e.g., NT-501). In animal studies, CNTF expression via viral vectors reduced striatal damage in QA-lesioned models, and transplantation of CNTF-secreting stem cells or encapsulated cells protected striatal neurons in rodent and non-human primate models. Although clinical trials for CNTF in HD have yet to be performed, a delivery platform has been designed for future use, and preclinical data on CNTF support the continued development of its delivery.
While there is no direct evidence of decreased GDNF in HD, GDNF plays a key role in the survival and function of striatal medium spiny neurons and dopaminergic circuits. Delivery options include viral vectors, plasmid-liposome infusion, and cell-based transplantation. In rodent HD models, AAV-GDNF delivered into the striatum provided neuronal protection, with one study also reporting reduced mHTT inclusions in N171-82Q mice. Furthermore, GDNF-expressing neural progenitor cell transplantation improved motor behavior in the same model. A GDNF plasmid–liposome complex delivered with focused ultrasound enhanced gene transfer and neuronal survival. Although clinical trials are lacking, these findings suggest GDNF has therapeutic value in HD.
Given reports of insulin and IGF-1 resistance in HD, direct infusion of recombinant protein has been explored. Intranasal administration of recombinant IGF-1 in YAC128 mice improved motor performance and corrected metabolic imbalances. Peripheral IGF-1 infusion in R6/2 mice offered protection against diabetes-like features, though the infusion method did not significantly improve motor outcomes. Despite the absence of clinical trials, these research results suggest that IGF-1, even when delivered systemically or intranasally, may offer therapeutic benefit.
Although FGF-2 is not directly altered in HD, the role of FGF-2 in neurogenesis and cell proliferation makes this protein a candidate for therapeutic exploration. Subcutaneous FGF-2 administration in R6/2 mice promoted enhanced cell proliferation, motor function, and lifespan. However, no clinical trials on FGF-2 administration have been conducted, and additional research is necessary to evaluate the therapeutic potential of FGF-2 in HD.
Interestingly, Rheb has not specifically been directly implicated in HD pathology, but as a key activator of mTOR—which is downregulated in HD brains —Rheb presents a promising therapeutic target. Gene therapy using constitutively active Rheb (S16H) via AAV delivery improved striatal function and reversed disease phenotypes in the N171-82Q mouse model. However, despite these promising findings, clinical validation remains required.
Overall, BDNF, GDNF, and CNTF represent the most promising NTFs in HD, with solid preclinical support, although clinical translation remains a major challenge across all candidates.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
NTFs have been explored in ALS research for their ability to protect motor neurons, support axonal regeneration, and slow disease progression, primarily targeting the motor cortex, brainstem, and spinal cord.
Therapeutic strategies involving CNTF aim to deliver it to regions affected by motor neuron degeneration. While CNTF has not been directly evaluated in standard ALS models, studies using the progressive motor neuronopathy (PMN) mouse model—characterized by lower motor neuron loss—showed that intraperitoneal injection of CNTF-expressing embryonic stem cells reduced disease progression and extended survival. Clinically, subcutaneous rhCNTF injections did not improve symptoms or survival in ALS patients and instead caused side effects, including anorexia, weight loss, and coughing. Another approach included using encapsulated baby hamster kidney cells engineered to release CNTF into CSF via intrathecal implantation, which showed safe delivery without reported side effects. However, the therapeutic effects of CNTF were not assessed. Thus, the short half-life and inability of CNTF to cross the BBB remain key obstacles, emphasizing the need for optimized delivery strategies.
GDNF delivery is considered beneficial for ALS but faces challenges when injected intrathecally, such as limited tissue diffusion and a short half-life. In animal models, expressing GDNF in skeletal muscles of SOD1G93A mice slowed disease progression and improved locomotion. Meanwhile, intramuscular or intravenous injection of AAV-GDNF in SOD1G93A rats improved motor neuron survival and delayed disease progression. Transplants of GDNF-secreting neural progenitor cells and human MSCs (hMSCs) also showed therapeutic effects in ALS models. Clinically, human neural progenitor cells engineered to produce GDNF (CNS10-NPC-GDNF) were transplanted into the lumbar spinal cords of ALS patients. Although the procedure safely resulted in continuous GDNF production, no changes in disease symptoms were reported. While animal studies are promising, clinical applications may require dose optimization and strategies to improve CNS distribution.
Although direct intrathecal or intramuscular injection of BDNF is possible, the administration of BDNF is limited by poor BBB permeability and a short half-life. Gene therapy using AAV vectors or cell transplantation with BDNF-secreting MSCs or neural progenitors offers sustained delivery at the site of need. TrkB receptor agonists, such as 7,8-DHF, provide an alternative approach, as these agonists can cross the BBB and activate BDNF signaling. Notably, viral delivery of BDNF prevented motor neuron death in axotomy ALS models, and transplantation of BDNF-expressing neural progenitor cells protected motor neurons in SOD1G93A mice. BDNF-overexpressing hUC-MSC-derived motor neuron transplantation also enhanced motor function and extended survival. Additionally, 7,8-DHF improved motor function and supported lower motor neuron survival. Clinical trials involving intrathecal or subcutaneous BDNF administration have been conducted, although only one study reported positive effects. Nonetheless, BDNF remains a promising target, but current challenges, such as reduced TrkB expression and delivery limitations, need to be addressed in future studies.
In preclinical ALS models, IGF-1 delivered via AAV vectors to cerebellar nuclei, muscle, or the ventricular system delayed disease progression. Genetic crossbreeding of SOD1G93A mice with transgenic mice overexpressing IGF-1 in muscle yielded mixed results, with some models showing delayed onset and progression, whereas others reported no significant benefits. Clinical trials have also shown mixed outcomes: subcutaneous IGF-1 injections failed to improve symptoms, whereas intrathecal IGF-1 delivery showed significant benefits without serious side effects. The use of IGF-1 remains promising, but further investigations are needed to overcome limitations related to BBB penetration, short half-life, and reduced receptor sensitivity in ALS patients.
Therapeutic VEGF delivery options include recombinant proteins, gene therapy, and cell transplantation. In ALS models, VEGF expression induced by viral vectors into the intrathecal space, ventricles, spinal cord, or muscles improved motor neuron survival and delayed disease progression. The transplantation of VEGF-expressing hMSCs extended lifespan and preserved motor function in SOD1G93A rats. Moreover, double-transgenic mice overexpressing VEGF showed reduced motor neuron loss and extended survival. Clinically, intracerebroventricular VEGF delivery was well tolerated for up to six years, although no functional benefits were observed. Transplants of MSCs and NSCs have promoted some clinical improvements. However, despite the potential of VEGF therapy, this treatment method carries risks related to unwanted angiogenesis, including blood pressure changes, retinal effects, and tumor vascularization—necessitating careful dose regulation.
Although Rheb has not been directly studied in ALS, Rheb plays a central role in activating mTOR signaling, which is impaired in ALS. Meanwhile, mTOR inhibition accelerates motor neuron degeneration and reduces lifespan in ALS models, whereas the activation of mTOR provides neuroprotection. Enhancing Rheb activity could help restore mTOR function, potentially supporting motor neuron survival, axon regeneration, and autophagy regulation.
While clinical trials involving NTFs in ALS have been limited and often yield inconsistent results due to challenges in dosing, delivery, and side effects, a wealth of animal model data supports the therapeutic potential of targeting neurotrophic pathways. Continued research and refinement in delivery technologies and treatment strategies are essential to translate these findings into effective clinical therapies.
Clinical trials on ALS with NTFs also exhibited limited trials and mixed results due to the variable roles of NTFs and optimization issues due to the dose and side effects. However, numerous animal studies have demonstrated the benefits of utilizing NTFs for treating ALS, which makes it worthwhile to continue efforts on the therapeutic approaches.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2
NTFs have been investigated to rescue mainly Purkinje cells in the cerebellum and also, in some cases, motor neurons. Due to the rarity of SCA2, relatively few efforts have been made in animal model studies and therapeutic approaches for SCA2 remain limited in clinical studies.
Therapeutic strategies for SCA2 should prioritize the targeted delivery of BDNF and GDNF into the cerebellum, where neuronal vulnerability is prominent. Transplantation of neural progenitor cells or MSCs engineered to secrete BDNF or GDNF may offer sustained paracrine neurotrophic support. In a preclinical SCA2 mouse model, administration of hMSCs led to the rescue of Purkinje neurons, elevated cerebellar levels of both BDNF and GDNF, and a concurrent reduction in neuroinflammation, ultimately preserving locomotor function. Similar to BDNF and GDNF, CNTF levels are also diminished in the cerebellum of SCA2 models. In the same animal study using hMSCs, cerebellar CNTF levels were restored, supporting CNTF’s therapeutic influence in SCA2.
While Rheb has not been directly linked to SCA2 pathogenesis, Rheb remains a promising therapeutic target due to its role in activating the mTORC1 pathway. Thus, delivering AAV-Rheb into cerebellar Purkinje neurons or deep nuclei may stimulate mTORC1 activity, especially through the suppression of the tuberous sclerosis protein (TSC) 1/2 complex by IGF-1 or CNTF, thereby enhancing Rheb signaling. A recent study using a genetic SCA2 model demonstrated that AAV-mediated expression of a constitutively active Rheb mutant, Rheb (S16H), successfully reactivated mTORC1 signaling, preserved Purkinje cell integrity, and improved motor coordination.
While clinical research on SCA2 is limited, such preclinical findings provide a strong foundation for future therapeutic development.

CURRENT OBSTACLES AND PROSPECTS IN NTF-BASED THERAPIES FOR NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES
No clinical study has yet been approved for clinical applications and achieved commercialization, as prior studies have not proven sufficient to restore neuronal degeneration and/or improve cognitive or motor functionality in patients. These data may be attributed to the following factors.
1) The NTF doses are not high enough. As most NTFs have very short half-lives, even if they are introduced to the right region, they are quickly degraded without promoting any significant disease-modifying effects. Indirect application may also cause this issue. 2) The introduced region is not accurate or appropriate. The direct introduction of NTFs to the diseased region has failed in some cases due to difficulties with stereotaxic surgery on human patients. Hence, it has been suggested that the application of real-time magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) can improve the accuracy of the surgery. Indirect applications (e.g., peritoneal, intraventricular injection) have also exhibited issues with delivery accuracy and may encounter difficulties crossing the BBB if injected peripherally. 3) The continuity of the supply of NTFs is not enough. Most of the earlier studies utilized the delivery of recombinant NTFs, which is typically a one-time application of NTFs and does not last long. Therefore, multiple invasive surgeries are required to sustain NTFs for a long period, which is not favorable in clinical practices.
Overcoming those factors will guarantee the effective application of NTFs to modify the progression of neurodegenerative diseases. Notably, efforts are already underway to bypass the limitations in animal models, as introduced throughout this review (Table 4); thus, we need to pay attention to and learn from any successful cases. For instance, the application of viral injections (e.g., AAV, lentivirus) as a gene therapy and the transplantations of NTF-expressing cells (e.g., encapsulated stem cells) will provide area-specific and continuous expression of target NTFs, thereby minimizing the requirements for invasive stereotaxic surgeries on patients. Application of certain drugs, processed to pass through the BBB, will make peripheral injections a more valid option when targeting the CNS. However, these positive results from animal studies have not been well translated into clinical trials; hence, these delivery methods require further refinement. Of course, a caveat of successful results from animal studies is that the various adverse side effects reported in clinical studies cannot be simply translated and monitored in animal models; therefore, this raises the necessity of conducting safety tests on the application of NTFs.
Additionally, many NTFs exist in both precursor (pro-form) and mature forms, and these two distinct forms have opposite effects on cellular signaling, which is a crucial aspect to consider when evaluating the therapeutic efficiency of neurotrophic factors in neurodegenerative diseases. Specifically, proBDNF preferentially binds to the p75NTR/sortilin receptor complex to initiate pro-apoptotic signaling cascades, whereas mature BDNF activates TrkB receptors to promote neuronal survival and synaptic plasticity. Similarly, proNGF functions as a high-affinity ligand for the p75NTR/sortilin complex, triggering neuronal apoptosis through JNK3 and caspase activation, while mature NGF binds to TrkA receptors to mediate neuroprotective effects. Importantly, transgenic mouse studies have demonstrated that elevated proNGF/NGF ratios serve as upstream drivers of cholinergic neurodegeneration and amyloid β pathology in AD models. Consistent with these preclinical findings, post-mortem analysis of human AD brains revealed increased proNGF accumulation concurrent with reduced TrkA expression, indicating a pathological shift toward pro-apoptotic signaling. The therapeutic implications of these opposing effects necessitate sophisticated treatment strategies that target total neurotrophin levels and the pro/mature neurotrophin balance through multiple mechanisms. These approaches include modulation of processing enzymes such as furin and plasmin that convert precursor forms to mature neurotrophins, development of selective antagonists targeting p75NTR/sortilin receptor complexes, and establishment of preferential delivery systems for mature neurotrophins to restore physiological signaling balance. Recent clinical trials have begun to validate this approach, with the p75NTR modulator LM11A-31 demonstrating safety and biomarker efficacy in patients with mild-to-moderate AD.

CONCLUSION
In summary, NTFs play crucial roles in neuronal growth, proliferation, functionality, and survival; therefore, altered expression, protein levels, and activities in specific areas of the CNS or PNS may impact neuronal homeostasis and lead to deleterious consequences (Fig. 2). Each neurodegenerative disease has a distinct profile of NTFs that are affected by the progression of the disease, either directly by pathological protein oligomers or indirectly through altered signaling pathways. This suggests that introducing the impacted NTFs into the region can be potentially utilized as a therapeutic approach to these diseases. Numerous studies have demonstrated that supplementing NTFs in the impacted area successfully improved neuronal survival and eventually restored cognitive and/or motor functions in the animal models of these neurodegenerative diseases by utilizing various delivery methods, including direct infusion of the recombinant NTFs, gene therapy with delivery of AAV or lentivirus, transplantation of NTF-expressing cells, and small molecules that mimic NTFs. However, many hurdles exist that must be overcome in relation to the actual application of those delivery methods in clinical trials. Delivery efficiency, adverse side effects, and dose optimization may require further refinements. A major issue identified in the clinical studies was that the delivery of the NTFs into the region of interest was successful in most cases, but did not significantly restore or protect the neurons or cognitive and motor functions. As multiple NTFs are impacted in each neurodegenerative disease, it raises the idea that the combined introduction of multiple NTFs or other signaling enhancers through combinations of various AAVs as cocktail, with stem cells, can supplement multiple NTFs, as well as combinations of agonists/enhancers, or combinations of any delivery methods that can promote synergistic improvements on rectifying the progression of neurodegenerative diseases.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
Pathology of neurodegenerative diseases
Alzheimer's disease
Filamentous nerve cell inclusions in neurodegenerative diseases
Huntington's disease: from molecular pathogenesis to clinical treatment
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a neurodegenerative disorder poised for successful therapeutic translation
Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2: clinicogenetic aspects, mechanistic insights, and management approaches
Hallmarks of neurodegenerative diseases
The expanding universe of neurotrophic factors: therapeutic potential in aging and age-associated disorders
Patterson C (2018) World Alzheimer report 2018-the state of the art of dementia research: new frontiers. Alzheimer's Disease International, London.
Current and future treatments in Alzheimer disease: an update
Comprehensive review on Alzheimer's disease: causes and treatment
Glia-neurotrophic factor relationships: possible role in pathobiology of neuroinflammation-related brain disorders
Neurotrophic factors in Parkinson's disease: clinical trials, open challenges and nanoparticle-mediated delivery to the brain
Therapeutic potential of neurotrophic factors in neurodegenerative diseases
Intranasal delivery of BDNF rescues memory deficits in AD11 mice and reduces brain microgliosis
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor in neurodegenerative diseases
Neurotrophic factors in neurodegeneration
From lab bench to hope: emerging gene therapies in clinical trials for Alzheimer's disease
Growth factor gene therapy for Alzheimer's disease
Neurotrophins: roles in neuronal development and function
Neurotrophin signalling in the human nervous system
Neurotrophins and their receptors: a convergence point for many signalling pathways
Mechanisms and regulation of neurotrophin synthesis and secretion
Optimizing neurotrophic factor combinations for neurite outgrowth
Fingolimod (FTY720) enhances hippocampal synaptic plasticity and memory in Huntington's disease by preventing p75NTR up-regulation and astrocyte-mediated inflammation
Trophic factors in inflammation and regeneration: the role of MANF and CDNF
Upregulation of neuronal Rheb (S16H) for hippocampal protection in the adult brain
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor induces mammalian target of rapamycin-dependent local activation of translation machinery and protein synthesis in neuronal dendrites
Programmed cell death and the control of cell survival: lessons from the nervous system
Physiology of the neurotrophins
Nerve growth factor: the first molecule of the neurotrophin family
Nerve growth factor and the basal forebrain cholinergic system: a link in the etiopathology of neurodegenerative dementias?
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor: a key molecule for memory in the healthy and the pathological brain
Neurotrophin-3 as an essential signal for the developing nervous system
Neurotrophin-4/5 is required for the early growth of regenerating axons in peripheral nerves
The neurotrophin family of neurotrophic factors: an overview
Neurotrophic factors: an overview
GDNF, NGF and BDNF as therapeutic options for neurodegeneration
The biology of neurotrophins, signalling pathways, and functional peptide mimetics of neurotrophins and their receptors
A simple role for BDNF in learning and memory?
Role of neurotrophins in synapse development and plasticity
Neurotrophic factors and their potential applications in tissue regeneration
c-Src is required for glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family ligand-mediated neuronal survival via a phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI-3K)-dependent pathway
Artemin, a novel member of the GDNF ligand family, supports peripheral and central neurons and signals through the GFRalpha3-RET receptor complex
The GDNF family ligands and receptors - implications for neural development
The GDNF family: signalling, biological functions and therapeutic value
Neuropoietic cytokines in the hematopoietic fold
Ciliary neurotrophic factor induces cholinergic differentiation of rat sympathetic neurons in culture
Purification of the chick eye ciliary neuronotrophic factor
Role of IL-6 in the regulation of neuronal development, survival and function
Beyond trophic factors: exploiting the intrinsic regenerative properties of adult neurons
Oncostatin M: a love-hate relationship in neuroinflammation
Cardiotrophin-like cytokine factor 1 (CLCF1) and neuropoietin (NP) signalling and their roles in development, adulthood, cancer and degenerative disorders
LIFR beta and gp130 as heterodimerizing signal transducers of the tripartite CNTF receptor
The tripartite CNTF receptor complex: activation and signaling involves components shared with other cytokines
Insulin-like growth factors: ligands, binding proteins, and receptors
The neuroprotective function of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
Fibroblast growth factors and neuroprotection
The ephrins and Eph receptors in neural development
Neuregulins: functions, forms, and signaling strategies
Mechanisms of mTORC1 activation by RHEB and inhibition by PRAS40
Induction of GDNF and BDNF by hRheb (S16H) transduction of SNpc neurons: neuroprotective mechanisms of hRheb (S16H) in a model of Parkinson's disease
Activation of CNTF/CNTFRα signaling pathway by hRheb (S16H) transduction of dopaminergic neurons in vivo
Neurotrophic interactions between neurons and astrocytes following AAV1-Rheb (S16H) transduction in the hippocampus in vivo
mTORC1 drives HIF-1α and VEGF-A signalling via multiple mechanisms involving 4E-BP1, S6K1 and STAT3
mTORC2 promotes type I insulin-like growth factor receptor and insulin receptor activation through the tyrosine kinase activity of mTOR
DNMT1, a novel regulator mediating mTORC1/mTORC2 pathway-induced NGF expression in schwann cells
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease
Rate of brain aging and APOE ε4 are synergistic risk factors for Alzheimer's disease
Alzheimer's disease: initial report of the purification and characterization of a novel cerebrovascular amyloid protein
Abnormal phosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) in Alzheimer cytoskeletal pathology
The neuropathological diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor is reduced in Alzheimer's disease
Involvement of brain-derived neurotrophic factor signaling in the pathogenesis of stress-related brain diseases
β-Amyloid (Aβ) oligomers impair brain-derived neurotrophic factor retrograde trafficking by down-regulating ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase, UCH-L1
Tau downregulates BDNF expression in animal and cellular models of Alzheimer's disease
The BDNF val66met polymorphism affects activity-dependent secretion of BDNF and human memory and hippocampal function
The human brain NGF metabolic pathway is impaired in the pre-clinical and clinical continuum of Alzheimers disease
Age-induced nitrative stress decreases retrograde transport of proNGF via TrkA and increases proNGF retrograde transport and neurodegeneration via p75NTR
Decreased TrkA gene expression in cholinergic neurons of the striatum and basal forebrain of patients with Alzheimer's disease
ProNGF and neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease
Loss of serum IGF-I input to the brain as an early biomarker of disease onset in Alzheimer mice
Insulin-like growth factor-1 and risk of Alzheimer dementia and brain atrophy
Loss of IGF1R in human astrocytes alters complex I activity and support for neurons
Defects in IGF-1 receptor, insulin receptor and IRS-1/2 in Alzheimer's disease indicate possible resistance to IGF-1 and insulin signalling
Demonstrated brain insulin resistance in Alzheimer's disease patients is associated with IGF-1 resistance, IRS-1 dysregulation, and cognitive decline
Guardians of neurons: the cntf gene and ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) in the genetic landscape of Alzheimer's disease neuroprotection
The role of the JAK/STAT signaling pathway in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease: new potential treatment target
Rheb GTPase regulates β-secretase levels and amyloid β generation
In vivo AAV1 transduction with hRheb (S16H) protects hippocampal neurons by BDNF production
Dysfunction of the mTOR pathway is a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease
Parkinson's disease
Depletion of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor in substantia nigra neurons of Parkinson's disease brain
Retrograde transport of neurotrophic factor signaling: implications in neuronal development and pathogenesis
Differential expression of RET and GDNF family receptor, GFR-α1, between striatum and substantia nigra following nigrostriatal lesion: a case for diminished GDNF-signaling
Mechanistic Insight from Preclinical Models of Parkinson's Disease Could Help Redirect Clinical Trial Efforts in GDNF Therapy
Brain-derived growth factor and nerve growth factor concentrations are decreased in the substantia nigra in Parkinson's disease
Regulation of BDNF-TrkB signaling and potential therapeutic strategies for Parkinson's disease
Alpha-synuclein fibrils inhibit activation of the BDNF/ERK signaling loop in the mPFC to induce Parkinson's disease-like alterations with depression
Role of astrocytes in Parkinson's disease associated with genetic mutations and neurotoxicants
JAK-STAT signaling in inflammation and stress-related diseases: implications for therapeutic interventions
Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) in Parkinson's disease: potential as Trait-, progression- and prediction marker and confounding factors
Serum insulinlike growth factor 1 as possible marker for risk and early diagnosis of Parkinson disease
Expression of insulin-like growth factor-1 and insulin-like growth factor binding proteins in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Parkinson's disease
Clinical correlates of serum insulin-like growth factor-1 in patients with Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy and progressive supranuclear palsy
Leptin and ghrelin concentrations and weight loss in Parkinson's disease
Serum insulin-like growth factor-1 and nitric oxide levels in Parkinson's disease
Insulin-like growth factor-1 predicts cognitive functions at 2-year follow-up in early, drug-naïve Parkinson's disease
Insulin-like growth factor-1 and progression of motor symptoms in early, drug-naïve Parkinson's disease
Serum IGF-1 is associated with cognitive functions in early, drug-naïve Parkinson's disease
Serum insulin-like growth factor-1 in patients with de novo, drug naïve Parkinson's disease: a meta-analysis
Is insulin-like growth factor-1 involved in Parkinson's disease development?
Serum insulin-like growth factor-1 in Parkinson's disease; study of cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and white matter microstructure
Increased serum insulin-like growth factor 1 in early idiopathic Parkinson's disease
Insulin-like growth factor in Parkinson's disease is related to nonmotor symptoms and the volume of specific brain areas
Brain insulin-like growth factor and neurotrophin resistance in Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies: potential role of manganese neurotoxicity
The role of insulin/IGF-1/PI3K/Akt/GSK3β signaling in Parkinson's disease dementia
Huntington disease
Loss of huntingtin-mediated BDNF gene transcription in Huntington's disease
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor in Huntington disease
Huntington disease: advances in the understanding of its mechanisms
Compromised IGF signaling causes caspase-6 activation in Huntington disease
Growth hormone response to arginine test differentiates between two subgroups of Huntington's disease patients
Dietary anaplerotic therapy improves peripheral tissue energy metabolism in patients with Huntington's disease
Early energy deficit in Huntington disease: identification of a plasma biomarker traceable during disease progression
Insulin-like growth factor-1 but not insulin predicts cognitive decline in Huntington's disease
The IGF-1/Akt pathway is neuroprotective in Huntington's disease and involves Huntingtin phosphorylation by Akt
Oxidative stress and inflammation in the pathogenesis of neurological disorders: mechanisms and implications
Reinstating aberrant mTORC1 activity in Huntington's disease mice improves disease phenotypes
Cardiac mTORC1 dysregulation impacts stress adaptation and survival in Huntington's disease
Modulation of mTOR and CREB pathways following mGluR5 blockade contribute to improved Huntington's pathology in zQ175 mice
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
A comprehensive review of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Molecular pathways of motor neuron injury in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Decrease in the ciliary neurotrophic factor of the spinal cord in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Regional changes of ciliary neurotrophic factor and nerve growth factor levels in post mortem spinal cord and cerebral cortex from patients with motor disease
Neurotrophic factors in the physiology of motor neurons and their role in the pathobiology and therapeutic approach to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
A role for GDNF and soluble APP as biomarkers of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis pathophysiology
Disruption of the astrocytic TNFR1-GDNF axis accelerates motor neuron degeneration and disease progression in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
BDNF serum levels with respect to multidimensional assessment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
TrkB truncated isoform receptors as transducers and determinants of BDNF functions
The peripheral insulin-like growth factor system in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and in multiple sclerosis
Comparison of the growth hormone, IGF-1 and insulin in cerebrospinal fluid and serum between patients with motor neuron disease and healthy controls
Cerebrospinal fluid insulin-like growth factor-1, insulin growth factor binding protein-2 or nitric oxide are not increased in MS or ALS
Paradoxical response of VEGF expression to hypoxia in CSF of patients with ALS
Low levels of the vascular endothelial growth factor in CSF from early ALS patients
Expression of vascular endothelial growth factor and its receptors in the central nervous system in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
The Multiple Faces of Spinocerebellar Ataxia type 2
Post-symptomatic administration of hMSCs exerts therapeutic effects in SCA2 mice
RNA toxicity and perturbation of rRNA processing in spinocerebellar ataxia Type 2
Compromised survival of cerebellar molecular layer interneurons lacking GDNF receptors GFRα1 or RET impairs normal cerebellar motor learning
Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) and its receptors signal regulate cementoblasts apoptosis through a mechanism of ERK1/2 and caspases signaling
Nerve growth factor: from the early discoveries to the potential clinical use
Nerve growth factor: early studies and recent clinical trials
Neurotrophic factors as regenerative therapy for neurodegenerative diseases: current status, challenges and future perspectives
Novel gene therapy approaches for targeting neurodegenerative disorders: focusing on delivering neurotrophic genes
Current advances in using neurotrophic factors to treat neurodegenerative disorders
Neuroprotective effects of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in rodent and primate models of Alzheimer's disease
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor ameliorates learning deficits in a rat model of Alzheimer's disease induced by aβ1-42
Non-invasive brain delivery and efficacy of BDNF in APP/PS1 transgenic mice as a model of Alzheimer's disease
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor protects against tau-related neurodegeneration of Alzheimer's disease
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) preserves the functional integrity of neural networks in the β-Amyloidopathy model in vitro
Intraperitoneal administration of a novel TAT-BDNF peptide ameliorates cognitive impairments via modulating multiple pathways in two Alzheimer's rodent models
Conditional BDNF delivery from astrocytes rescues memory deficits, spine density, and synaptic properties in the 5xFAD mouse model of Alzheimer disease
7,8-Dihydroxycoumarin alleviates synaptic loss by activated PI3K-Akt-CREB-BDNF signaling in Alzheimer's disease model mice
Social interaction rescues memory deficit in an animal model of Alzheimer's disease by increasing BDNF-dependent hippocampal neurogenesis
Neuropep-1 ameliorates learning and memory deficits in an Alzheimer's disease mouse model, increases brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression in the brain, and causes reduction of amyloid beta plaques
Neurotrophic factor small-molecule mimetics mediated neuroregeneration and synaptic repair: emerging therapeutic modality for Alzheimer's disease
Therapeutic potential of CERE-110 (AAV2-NGF): targeted, stable, and sustained NGF delivery and trophic activity on rodent basal forebrain cholinergic neurons
Nerve growth factor gene delivery across the blood-brain barrier to reduce beta amyloid accumulation in AD mice
Multimodal beneficial effects of BNN27, a nerve growth factor synthetic mimetic, in the 5xFAD mouse model of Alzheimer's disease
The neurotrophic compound J147 reverses cognitive impairment in aged Alzheimer's disease mice
Nerve growth factor affects 11C-nicotine binding, blood flow, EEG, and verbal episodic memory in an Alzheimer patient (case report)
Intracerebroventricular infusion of nerve growth factor in three patients with Alzheimer's disease
A phase 1 clinical trial of nerve growth factor gene therapy for Alzheimer disease
Nerve growth factor gene therapy: activation of neuronal responses in Alzheimer disease
A phase1 study of stereotactic gene delivery of AAV2-NGF for Alzheimer's disease
Adeno-associated viral vector (serotype 2)-nerve growth factor for patients with Alzheimer disease: a randomized clinical trial
Postmortem analysis in a clinical trial of AAV2-NGF gene therapy for Alzheimer's disease identifies a need for improved vector delivery
Insulin-like growth factor-I receptor stimulating activity is associated with dementia
Central insulin-like growth factor-1 treatment enhances working and reference memory by reducing neuroinflammation and amyloid beta deposition in a rat model of sporadic Alzheimer's disease
Peripheral elevation of IGF-1 fails to alter Abeta clearance in multiple in vivo models
Intranasal long R3 insulin-like growth factor-1 treatment promotes amyloid plaque remodeling in cerebral cortex but fails to preserve cognitive function in male 5XFAD mice
IGF-1R inhibitor ameliorates neuroinflammation in an Alzheimer's disease transgenic mouse model
Ciliary neurotrophic factor cell-based delivery prevents synaptic impairment and improves memory in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease
Regional comparison of the neurogenic effects of CNTF-derived peptides and cerebrolysin in AβPP transgenic mice
Therapeutic potential of AAV1-Rheb (S16H) transduction against Alzheimer's disease
Rheb-mTOR activation rescues Aβ-induced cognitive impairment and memory function by restoring miR-146 activity in glial cells
GDNF improves the cognitive ability of PD mice by promoting glycosylation and membrane distribution of DAT
Adenoviral vector-mediated GDNF gene therapy in a rodent lesion model of late stage Parkinson's disease
A model of GDNF gene therapy in mice with 6-Hydroxydopamine lesions: time course of neurorestorative effects and ERK1/2 activation
Functional recovery in parkinsonian monkeys treated with GDNF
Long-term benefits of hematopoietic stem cell-based macrophage/microglia delivery of GDNF to the CNS in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease
Functional neuroprotection and efficient regulation of GDNF using destabilizing domains in a rodent model of Parkinson's disease
Implanted intracerebroventricular. Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor. Randomized, double-blind trial of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) in PD
Persistent GDNF expression 45 months after putaminal infusion of AAV2-GDNF in a patient with Parkinson's disease
Striatal delivery of neurturin by CERE-120, an AAV2 vector for the treatment of dopaminergic neuron degeneration in Parkinson's disease
Properly scaled and targeted AAV2-NRTN (neurturin) to the substantia nigra is safe, effective and causes no weight loss: support for nigral targeting in Parkinson's disease
Dopaminergic neuroprotection by neurturin-expressing c17.2 neural stem cells in a rat model of Parkinson's disease
Long-term post-mortem studies following neurturin gene therapy in patients with advanced Parkinson's disease
Post-mortem studies of neurturin gene therapy for Parkinson's disease: two subjects with 10 years CERE120 delivery
Gene delivery of AAV2-neurturin for Parkinson's disease: a double-blind, randomised, controlled trial
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor attenuates cognitive impairment and motor deficits in a mouse model of Parkinson's disease
BDNF alleviates Parkinson's disease by promoting STAT3 phosphorylation and regulating neuronal autophagy
Treatment of Parkinson's disease model with human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes loaded with BDNF
Treating Parkinson's disease via activation of BDNF/TrkB signaling pathways and inhibition of delta-secretase
Sericin alleviates motor dysfunction by modulating inflammation and TrkB/BDNF signaling pathway in the rotenone-induced Parkinson's disease model
Neuroprotective and symptomatic effects of cannabidiol in an animal model of Parkinson's disease
TRPV1 on astrocytes rescues nigral dopamine neurons in Parkinson's disease via CNTF
IGF-1 inhibits MPTP/MPP+-induced autophagy on dopaminergic neurons through the IGF-1R/PI3K-Akt-mTOR pathway and GPER
IGF-1 gene therapy prevents spatial memory deficits and modulates dopaminergic neurodegeneration and inflammation in a parkinsonism model
Efficient expression of Igf-1 from lentiviral vectors protects in vitro but does not mediate behavioral recovery of a Parkinsonian lesion in rats
Human neural progenitor cells over-expressing IGF-1 protect dopamine neurons and restore function in a rat model of Parkinson's disease
Dopaminergic pathway reconstruction by Akt/Rheb-induced axon regeneration
Protection of nigral dopaminergic neurons by AAV1 transduction with Rheb (S16H) against neurotoxic inflammation in vivo
Cerebral dopamine neurotrophic factor (CDNF) protects against quinolinic acid-induced toxicity in in vitro and in vivo models of Huntington's disease
Beneficial behavioral effects of chronic cerebral dopamine neurotrophic factor (CDNF) infusion in the N171-82Q transgenic model of Huntington's disease
Cellular delivery of CNTF but not NT-4/5 prevents degeneration of striatal neurons in a rodent model of Huntington's disease
Systemic delivery of recombinant brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington's disease
AAV-mediated gene delivery of BDNF or GDNF is neuroprotective in a model of Huntington disease
Intracerebral transplantation of BDNF-overexpressing human neural stem cells (HB1.F3.BDNF) promotes migration, differentiation and functional recovery in a rodent model of Huntington's disease
Human mesenchymal stem cells genetically engineered to overexpress brain-derived neurotrophic factor improve outcomes in Huntington's disease mouse models
Human striatal progenitor cells that contain inducible safeguards and overexpress BDNF rescue Huntington's disease phenotypes
Newly generated striatal neurons rescue motor circuitry in a Huntington's disease mouse model
BDNF overexpression in the forebrain rescues Huntington's disease phenotypes in YAC128 mice
Conditional BDNF release under pathological conditions improves Huntington's disease pathology by delaying neuronal dysfunction
Pridopidine rescues BDNF/TrkB trafficking dynamics and synapse homeostasis in a Huntington disease brain-on-a-chip model
PRE-CELL: clinical and novel biomarker measures of disease progression in a lead-in-observational study for a planned phase 1 trial of genetically-modified mesenchymal stem cells over-expressing BDNF in patients with Huntington's disease (S25.004)
Clinical trial perspective for adult and juvenile Huntington's disease using genetically-engineered mesenchymal stem cells
Ciliary neurotrophic factor
Neuroprotective effect of a CNTF-expressing lentiviral vector in the quinolinic acid rat model of Huntington's disease
Human neural stem cell transplants improve motor function in a rat model of Huntington's disease
Cellular delivery of human CNTF prevents motor and cognitive dysfunction in a rodent model of Huntington's disease
Implants of encapsulated human CNTF-producing fibroblasts prevent behavioral deficits and striatal degeneration in a rodent model of Huntington's disease
Neuroprotective effects of encapsulated CNTF-producing cells in a rodent model of Huntington's disease are dependent on the proximity of the implant to the lesioned striatum
Protective effect of encapsulated cells producing neurotrophic factor CNTF in a monkey model of Huntington's disease
Neuroprotective gene therapy for Huntington's disease using a polymer encapsulated BHK cell line engineered to secrete human CNTF
Viral delivery of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor improves behavior and protects striatal neurons in a mouse model of Huntington's disease
Structural and functional neuroprotection in a rat model of Huntington's disease by viral gene transfer of GDNF
Ex vivo delivery of GDNF maintains motor function and prevents neuronal loss in a transgenic mouse model of Huntington's disease
Focused ultrasound-induced blood brain-barrier opening enhanced vascular permeability for GDNF delivery in Huntington's disease mouse model
IGF-1 intranasal administration rescues Huntington's disease phenotypes in YAC128 mice
IGF-1 protects against diabetic features in an in vivo model of Huntington's disease
FGF-2 promotes neurogenesis and neuroprotection and prolongs survival in a transgenic mouse model of Huntington's disease
Ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/motor neuron disease
Intrathecal delivery of CNTF using encapsulated genetically modified xenogeneic cells in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients
Muscle-derived but not centrally derived transgene GDNF is neuroprotective in G93A-SOD1 mouse model of ALS
Neuroprotective effects of glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor mediated by an adeno-associated virus vector in a transgenic animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Specific expression of glial-derived neurotrophic factor in muscles as gene therapy strategy for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Systemic injection of AAV9-GDNF provides modest functional improvements in the SOD1G93A ALS rat but has adverse side effects
GDNF secreting human neural progenitor cells protect dying motor neurons, but not their projection to muscle, in a rat model of familial ALS
GDNF delivery using human neural progenitor cells in a rat model of ALS
Human iPSC-derived neural progenitor cells secreting GDNF provide protection in rodent models of ALS and retinal degeneration
Direct muscle delivery of GDNF with human mesenchymal stem cells improves motor neuron survival and function in a rat model of familial ALS
Transplantation of human neural progenitor cells secreting GDNF into the spinal cord of patients with ALS: a phase 1/2a trial
Prevention of motoneuron death by adenovirus-mediated neurotrophic factors
Growth factor-expressing human neural progenitor cell grafts protect motor neurons but do not ameliorate motor performance and survival in ALS mice
BDNF-overexpressing human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell-derived motor neurons improve motor function and prolong survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mice
7,8-Dihydroxyflavone improves motor performance and enhances lower motor neuronal survival in a mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Autonomic dysfunction in ALS: a preliminary study on the effects of intrathecal BDNF
A phase I/II trial of recombinant methionyl human brain derived neurotrophic factor administered by intrathecal infusion to patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Delivery of AAV-IGF-1 to the CNS extends survival in ALS mice through modification of aberrant glial cell activity
The role of insulin-like growth factor 1 in ALS cell and mouse models: a mitochondrial protector
AAV4-mediated expression of IGF-1 and VEGF within cellular components of the ventricular system improves survival outcome in familial ALS mice
Muscle expression of a local Igf-1 isoform protects motor neurons in an ALS mouse model
The lack of effect of specific overexpression of IGF-1 in the central nervous system or skeletal muscle on pathophysiology in the G93A SOD-1 mouse model of ALS
A placebo-controlled trial of insulin-like growth factor-I in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. European ALS/IGF-I Study Group
Subcutaneous IGF-1 is not beneficial in 2-year ALS trial
Beneficial effects of intrathecal IGF-1 administration in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
scAAV9-VEGF alleviates symptoms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mice through regulating aromatase
VEGF delivery with retrogradely transported lentivector prolongs survival in a mouse ALS model
Synergistic effects of GDNF and VEGF on lifespan and disease progression in a familial ALS rat model
Vascular endothelial growth factor overexpression delays neurodegeneration and prolongs survival in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mice
Intracerebroventricular delivery of vascular endothelial growth factor in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a phase I study
NurOwn, phase 2, randomized, clinical trial in patients with ALS: safety, clinical, and biomarker results
Results from phase I clinical trial with intraspinal injection of neural stem cells in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a long-term outcome
Rapamycin treatment augments motor neuron degeneration in SOD1(G93A) mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Neuroprotection through excitability and mTOR required in ALS motoneurons to delay disease and extend survival
Intracerebellar upregulation of Rheb (S16H) ameliorates motor dysfunction in mice with SCA2
ProBDNF and brain-derived neurotrophic factor prodomain differently modulate acetylcholine release in regenerating and mature mouse motor synapses
Altered expression of BDNF, BDNF pro-peptide and their precursor proBDNF in brain and liver tissues from psychiatric disorders: rethinking the brain-liver axis
Functional switch from pro-neurotrophins to mature neurotrophins
ProBDNF induces neuronal apoptosis via activation of a receptor complex of p75NTR and sortilin
p75 neurotrophin receptor mediates apoptosis in transit-amplifying cells and its overexpression restores cell death in psoriatic keratinocytes
2,5-Hexanedione induced apoptosis in rat spinal cord neurons and VSC4.1 cells via the proNGF/p75NTR and JNK pathways
Pro-NGF, sortilin, and p75NTR: potential mediators of injury-induced apoptosis in the mouse dorsal root ganglion
ProNGF/NGF imbalance triggers learning and memory deficits, neurodegeneration and spontaneous epileptic-like discharges in transgenic mice
proNGF measurement in cerebrospinal fluid samples of a large cohort of living patients with Alzheimer's disease by a new automated immunoassay
ProNGF, but Not NGF, switches from neurotrophic to apoptotic activity in response to reductions in TrkA receptor levels
The emerging role of furin in neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric diseases
Activation of pro-BDNF by the pericellular serine protease plasmin
p75 neurotrophin receptor modulation in mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: a randomized, placebo-controlled phase 2a trial
Neuron–astrocyte interplay through Rheb–mTORC1 activation promotes neuroprotection. Upregulation of neurotrophic factors (NTFs) has strong potential in neuroprotection through activation of the Rheb–mTOR signaling pathway. Sustained activation of Rheb–mTOR signaling via AAV-Rheb (S16H) delivery in adult neurons enhances the production of BDNF, GDNF, and CNTF. These NTFs exert autocrine neuroprotective effects, while BDNF and GDNF released from neurons further act on neighboring astrocytes. In astrocytes, mTORC1 activation drives additional production of CNTF and GDNF, reinforcing neuronal survival. This reciprocal exchange of NTFs between neurons and astrocytes establishes a supportive microenvironment that promotes the rescue and long-term maintenance of neurons. Such bidirectional communication underscores the importance of intercellular signaling through Rheb–mTORC1 as a fundamental mechanism of tissue-level neuroprotection. In addition, other NTFs such as VEGF, IGF-1, and NGF have been reported to be upregulated through mTOR signaling, though their direct involvement in neurons remains to be confirmed (Created and modified using BioRender.com license no: HJ28OP6O6D).
Summary of therapeutic approaches on neurodegenerative diseases utilizing NTFs. NTFs are secreted proteins that are crucial in neuronal growth, survival, and function. Individuals with neurodegenerative diseases, characterized by neuronal loss and various functional disorders, have been reported to exhibit altered levels of NTFs (Created and modified using BioRender.com license no: UB28EO2ON2).
Types and characteristics of neurotrophic factors
NTF category	Members	Main roles (from text)	Primary target neurons	Main receptors	 	Neurotrophins	NGF, BDNF, NT-3, NT-4/5	• Development, survival, maintenance, plasticity of neurons in CNS and PNS• Neuronal survival/differentiation• Axon/dendrite growth; synaptic plasticity and memory• Neurotransmitter release; neural repair/regeneration	NGF: sympathetic, sensory, basal forebrain cholinergicBDNF: cortical, dopaminergicNT-3: spinal cord, proprioceptive sensoryNT-4/5: PNS maintenance	TrkA, p75NTRTrkB, p75NTRTrkC, p75NTRTrkB, p75NTR	 	GDNF family	GDNF, neurturin, artemin, persephin	• Survival, development, function of dopaminergic and motor neurons• Axonal regeneration• Neuromuscular junction maintenance• Pain modulation	GDNF: dopaminergic, motor, peripheralNeurturin: parasympathetic, sensory, entericArtemin: sensory, sympathetic, motorPersephin: motor, GABAergic	GFRα1GFRα2GFRα3GFRα4, RET kinase	 	Neurokines	CNTF, LIF, IL-6, IL-11, CT-1, OSM, CLC, neuropoietin	• Neuronal survival• Glial differentiation• Regulation of neuroinflammation• Influence neural stem cell fate• Synaptic activity/plasticity• Repair after CNS injury	CNTF: motor neurons, gliaLIF: astrocyte development, neural stem cellsIL-6: neuroinflammation, synaptic plasticity, neuroprotectionIL-11: anti-inflammatoryCT-1: motor, sensoryOSM: astrocyte activityCLC: motor, autonomicNeuropoietin: oligodendrocyte precursor differentiation	CNTFRα, LIFRβ, gp130	 	Other NTFs	IGF-1, IGF-2, VEGF, FGFs, ephrins, neuregulins	IGF-1/2: neurogenesis, survival, physiologyVEGF: angiogenesis, neuroprotection, neurotrophic function in CNSFGFs: stem cell proliferation, neurodevelopment Ephrins, neuregulins: axonal guidance, synaptogenesis, plasticity	IGF1R, VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2 FGFRs
Summary of NTFs impacted in neurodegenerative diseases
Neurodegenerative diseases	Neurotrophic factor	Impact	Impact on signaling pathways	Impacted area	References	 	Alzheimer’s disease	BDNF	Decreased	↓ TrkB signaling	Hippocampus, temporal cortex		 		NGF	Disrupted proNGF maturation, degeneration of mature NGF	Impaired transport, ↑ proNGF, ↓ TrkA	Frontal cortex		 		IGF-1	Decreased	IGF1R resistance, ↓ PI3K/Akt signaling	CSF, serum		 		Rheb	Decreased	↓ mTORC1 activation	Prefrontal cortex		 	Parkinson’s disease	GDNF	Decreased	↓ retrograde transport, ↓ GFRα1/RET	Substantia nigra		 		BDNF	Decreased	↓ TrkB, α-synuclein-induced transcriptional suppression	Substantia nigra		 		CNTF	Decreased	Astrocyte dysfunction, ↓ receptor signaling	Substantia nigra		 		IGF-1	Increased	↓ IGF1R, impaired PI3K/Akt/mTOR	Serum, CSF		 	Huntington’s disease	BDNF	Decreased	Impaired transport, ↓ TrkB	Cortex, caudate, putamen, serum		 		IGF-1	Decreased	↓ PI3K/Akt activity	Serum, plasma		 		mTOR	Decreased	↓ activity	Brain		 	Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis	CNTF	Decreased	Astrocyte dysfunction, ↓ receptor signaling	Spinal cord		 		GDNF	Decreased	Impaired retrograde transport, ↓ GFRα1/RET	Serum		 		BDNF	Decreased/increased	↑ TrkB.T1, impaired release	Serum		 		IGF-1	Decreased/no change	IGF1R signaling	Serum		 		VEGF	Decreased	↓ VEGFR-2 signaling	CSF, spinal cord		 	Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (animal study)	BDNFGDNF	DecreasedDecreased	Impaired transport↓ GFRα1/RET signaling	CerebellumCerebellum		 		CNTF	Decreased	↓ receptor signaling	Cerebellum
Summary of consequences of impaired NTFs in neurodegenerative diseases
Neurodegenerative diseases	Neurotrophic factor	Impaired NTF signaling	Impacted cell types	Consequences of the impairment	 	Alzheimer’s disease	BDNF	↓ expression, ↓ TrkB signaling	Hippocampal and cortical neurons	Synaptic loss, memory decline	 		NGF	Impaired transport, ↑ proNGF, ↓ TrkA	Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons	Cholinergic loss, cognitive deficits	 		IGF-1	↓ levels, ↑ IGF1R resistance,↓ PI3K/Akt signaling	Hippocampal neurons	Reduced survival, impaired Aβ clearance	 		Rheb	↓ expression, ↓ mTORC1 activation	Hippocampal and cortical neurons	Reduced BDNF synthesis, protein synthesis deficits	 	Parkinson’s disease	GDNF	↓ expression and retrograde transport; ↓ GFRα1/RET	Dopaminergic neurons (SNpc), striatal neurons	Loss of dopamine neurons, reduced dopamine release	 		BDNF	↓ levels; ↓ TrkB; α-synuclein-induced transcriptional suppression	Dopaminergic neurons	Synaptic dysfunction, neuron loss	 		CNTF	↓ levels; astrocyte dysfunction; ↓ receptor signaling	Dopaminergic neurons, astrocytes	Reduced neuroprotection, higher stress vulnerability	 		IGF-1	↑ levels; ↓ IGF1R; impaired PI3K/Akt/mTOR	Dopaminergic neurons	Mitochondrial dysfunction, reduced survival	 	Huntington’s disease	BDNF	↓ expression in cortex, impaired transport, ↓ TrkB	Cortical and striatal neurons	Loss of trophic support, synaptic failure, neurodegeneration	 		IGF-1	↓ levels; ↓ PI3K/Akt activity	Striatal neurons	Mitochondrial failure, impaired repair, apoptosis	 		mTOR	↓ activity	Striatal neurons	Impaired autophagy/protein synthesis, aggregate buildup	 	Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis	CNTF	↓ levels, astrocyte dysfunction,↓ receptor signaling	Motor neurons, astrocytes	Reduced neuroprotection, higher stress vulnerability	 		GDNF	↓ production, impaired retrograde transport, ↓ GFRα1/RET	Motor neurons, astrocytes	NMJ degeneration, neuron loss	 		BDNF	↓ levels, ↑ TrkB.T1, impaired release	Motor neurons	Synaptic loss, axonal degeneration	 		IGF-1	↓ levels and IGF1R signaling	Motor neurons, glia	Mitochondrial dysfunction, apoptosis	 		VEGF	↓ levels, ↓ VEGFR2 signaling	Motor neurons	BSCB breakdown, hypoxia	 	Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (animal study)	BDNF	↓ expression, impaired transport	Purkinje cells, cerebellar neurons	Synaptic loss, Purkinje cell death, motor deficits	 		GDNF	↓ expression, ↓ GFRα1/RET signaling	Brainstem and spinal motor neurons	NMJ instability, muscle denervation	 		CNTF	↓ levels, ↓ receptor signaling	Motor neurons, glia	Reduced neuroprotection, increased degeneration
In vivo animal model studies: Reports on NTFs-induced therapeutic effects in various neurodegenerative diseases
Neurodegenerative diseases	Neurotrophic factor	Delivery methods	Beneficial effect	Side effect/limitations/mixed outcomes	References	 	Alzheimer’s disease	BDNF	Intranasal delivery, intravenous injection with BBB modulator (Ac-CDTPPVC-NH2 (ADTC5)), AAV-BDNF, HIV-encoded transactivator of transcription, BDNF-transgenic mice, small molecules (7,8-DHC, 7,8-DHF, neuropep-1, peptide 021, viral delivery of CREB-binding protein	↓ memory deficits, ↑ cognitive function, ↓ neuronal loss, ↓ behavioral deficits, ↓ AD-like phenotypes, ↑ cognitive function, ↑ BDNF expression	N/A		 		NGF	AAV-NGF, liposomal nanoparticles, neurotrophic molecules (BNN27, J147)	↑ neuroprotection, ↑ neurorestoration, ↑ synaptic markers, ↑ cognitive performance	N/A		 		IGF-1	ICV injection, subcutaneous injection of IGF-1 microspheres	↓ spatial memory deficits, ↓ neuroinflammation, ↓ Aβ accumulation in the hippocampus, ↑ cognitive performance, ↓ Aβ load in the brain	IGF-1 administration did not alter Aβ clearance or clear low-molecular-weight Aβ oligomers, did not affect any cognitive or behavioral functionality; administering an IGF1R inhibitor ameliorated neuroinflammation		 		CNTF	Encapsulated cells transplantation, active region in CNTF (peptides 6 and 6A)	↓ cognitive functionality, ↓ synaptic and neuronal degeneration, ↑ neurogenesis	N/A		 		Rheb	AAV-Rheb (S16H), Rheb-myc	↑ BDNF, ↑ CNTF, ↑ TrkB, ↑ CNTFRα, ↓ Aβ production, ↑ LTP protection, ↓ cognitive impairments, ↑ memory function	N/A		 	Parkinson’s disease	GDNF	ICV injection, AAV-GDNF, lentivirus, stem cell-based macrophage/microglia, destabilizing domains from E. coli combined with GDNF at the C-terminal	↑ behavioral tests, ↑ provide neuroprotection, ↓ cardinal symptoms, ↑ nigral dopaminergic neurons and striatal terminals protection, ↑ motor behavior	N/A		 		Neurturin	AAV-mediated striatal delivery of neurturin (CERE-120 and AAV2), c17.2 neural stem cells transplantation	↑ neuroprotection	N/A		 		BDNF	AAV-BDNF into the lateral ventricle, lentivirus via intraperitoneal injection, hUC-MSC-derived exosomes loaded with BDNF, TrkB agonist (CF3CN), anti-inflammatory natural polymer (sericin)	↓ motor deficits, ↓ cognitive impairment, ↑ p-STAT3, ↑ autophagy, ↓ α-syn aggregation, ↓ neuronal damage, ↑ neuronal protection against ferroptosis, ↑ TrkB/BDNF pathway modulation, ↑ motor functions	N/A		 		CNTF	Astrocytic transient receptor potential vanilloid 1	↑ neuroprotective response of CNTF	N/A		 		IGF-1	ICV injection, adenovirus, human neural progenitor cells transplantation	↓ excessive autophagy, ↓ movement disorders, ↓ dopaminergic neuron injury, ↓ cognitive deficits, ↑ tyrosine hydroxylase expression levels in the Cpu, ↑ dopaminergic neuron protection in the substantia nigra, ↓ behavioral abnormalities	IGF-1 delivery via lentivirus did not significantly change neuroprotection of the substantia nigra or animal behavior		 		Rheb	AAV-Rheb (S16H)	↑ neuroprotective effects on PD-like pathogenesis	N/A		 	Huntington’s disease	BDNF	Subcutaneous delivery, intrastriatal injection of AAV-BDNF, cortical transplantation of neural stem cells, intrastriatal transplantation of striatal progenitor cells, MSCs, D1R and D2R neurons, BDNF-transgenic mouse, selective S1R agonist (pridopidine)	↓ HD-related phenotypes, ↑ neuroprotection on striatal neurons, ↓ motor symptoms, ↑ BDNF and TrkB trafficking	N/A		 		CNTF	Viral expressions, stem cells or encapsulated cells transplantation	↓ striatal damage, ↓ degeneration of striatal neurons	N/A		 		GDNF	AAV-GDNF into the striatum, N171-82Q transgenic mice, neural progenitor cells transplantation, GDNF plasmid DNA–liposome complex combined with focused ultrasound	↑ striatal neuron protection, ↓ pathologic inclusion bodies of mutant huntingtin, ↑ motor function, ↑ effectiveness of gene therapy, ↑ neuronal survival	N/A		 		IGF-1	Intranasal administration	↑ motor activity, ↓ metabolic abnormalities, ↑ protection against diabetic features	Peripheral injection did not significantly change motor functions		 		FGF-2	Subcutaneous administration	↑ cell proliferation, ↑ motor performance, ↑ lifespan	N/A		 		Rheb	AAV-Rheb (S16H)	↓ HD phenotypes, ↑ striatal cell function in the brains	N/A		 	Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis	GDNF	Skeletal muscular transgenic mice, AAV-GDNF via intramuscular or intravenous injection, neural progenitor cells and hMSCs transplantation	↓ disease progression, ↑ locomotor performance, ↓ progression of the disease, ↑ survival and function of motor neurons, ↓ ALS phenotypes	N/A		 		BDNF	Viral injection, neural progenitor cells transplantation, hUC-MSC-derived motor neuron transplantation, TrkB agonist (7,8-DHF)	↓ death of motoneurons, ↑ motoneuron protection, ↑ motor performance, ↑ lower motoneuron survival	N/A		 		IGF-1	Muscular IGF-1-transgenic mice	↓ progression and onset of the disease	No significant change in ALS phenotypes		 		VEGF	Viral induction of VEGF via intrathecal injection, ventricular system, spinal cord, gastrocnemius, facial muscles, hMSCs transplantation, VEGF-transgenic mice	↑ motoneuronal survival, ↓ phenotypes, ↑ prolonged survival, ↓ loss of motor functions, ↓ motoneuronal loss, ↓ motor impairment	N/A		 		mTOR	Muscarinic receptor agonist (Oxotremorine)	Neuroprotection	N/A		 	Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2	BDNF	hMSC transplantation	↑ Purkinje cells, ↑ BDNF and GDNF levels in the cerebellum, ↓ inflammation, ↑ locomotor function	N/A		 		GDNF	hMSC transplantation	↑ Purkinje cells, ↑ BDNF and GDNF levels in the cerebellum, ↓ inflammation, ↑ locomotor function	N/A		 		CNTF	hMSC transplantation	↑ CNTF	N/A		 		Rheb	AAV-Rheb (S16H)	↑ mTORC1 activation, ↑ Purkinje cell preservation, ↑ motor function	N/A