Nanomedicine mediated thyroid cancer diagnosis and treatment: an approach from generalized to personalized medicine
Thyroid cancer (TC) being the common endocrine malignancy is glooming steadily due to its poor prognosis. The treatment strategies of surgery, radiotherapy, and conventional chemotherapy are providing unsatisfactory output. However, combination therapy can negotiate the worse prognosis to the better, where chemoradiotherapy, radiotherapy with surgery, or dual chemotherapeutic drugs are being glorified. Chemotherapy includes the use of doxorubicin or taxanes generally with platinum-based drugs viz. cisplatin or carboplatin that are administered alone or along with multitarget tyrosine kinase inhibitors viz. Lenvatinib, Sorafenib, Sunitinib, Vandetanib, Pyrazolo-pyrimidine compounds, etc., single target tyrosine kinase inhibitors like Dabrafenib plus Trametinib and Vemurafenib against BRAF, Gefitinib against EGFR, Everolimus against mTOR, vascular disruptors like Fosbretabulin, and immunotherapy with viz. Spartalizumab and Pembrolizumab, are anti-PD-1/PD-L1 molecules. Hence, several trials are currently evaluating the possible beneficial role of combinatorial therapy in TC. Since TC is the outcome of multiple genetic alterations, it necessitates targeting the multiple factors in a single shot. These combination strategies for systemically delivering therapeutic drugs seem feasible only with the help of theranostic. To date, nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems (NDDS) have devoted themselves to diagnosis, bioimaging, imaging-assisted surgery, and therapy with high success rates. The ease of handling hybrid technologies is also selectively admirable. However, in this review, we have summarized the sequential progression of chemotherapeutic drugs to NDDS designed for Personalized Medicine (PM) against TC. Personalized medicine is an ever-growing field that will be explored in future discoveries in biomedicine, particularly cancer theranostics. Hence, our review presents a closer view of NDDS as a personalized treatment for TC. We have also discussed the primary challenges facing NDDS in meeting excellence in PM.

Introduction
Thyroid cancer (TC) is mainly referred to as the cancerous growth of parafollicular C cells and follicular epithelium in the butterfly-shaped thyroid gland. It comprises four histological variants, namely, follicular, papillary, anaplastic, and medullary cancers, with multiple molecular and clinical features. The prognosis of differentiated TC is excellent, and in patients younger than 50 years, both papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) and follicular thyroid cancer (FTC) have a cure rate of more than 98%. MTC has a worse prognosis because it metastasizes to lymph nodes at an early stage and requires extensive surgery. Anaplastic thyroid cancer (ATC) is usually diagnosed after it has already spread and is one of the most incurable cancers. Although the survival rate is the most promising in differentiated thyroid carcinomas (DTCs), the mortality rate is increasing in poorly differentiated thyroid cancers (PDTCs) and ATCs. Irrespective of the present modalities, the management of PDTCs and ATCs is partially tricky, and the outcomes are unsatisfactory because the various treatment approaches remain disputed and unclear. Therefore, to relieve thyroid cancer patients, a sensitive diagnostic tool and effective treatment are in demand. In stipulation, VEGFR-targeted radiolabeled ligands, such as bevacizumab, with the assistance of PET (positron emission tomography) and SPECT (single-photon emission computed tomography) are severely exploited for the early diagnosis of thyroid cancer. However, preclinical studies on thyroid cancer are limited to different degrees of success. Although the fractional population of patients with thyroid cancer showed improved survival rates following surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy, the heterogeneity of cancer cells warrants an effective therapeutic approach to screen the disease burden. The advanced microenvironment of tumor cells affects the efficacy of therapeutic drugs and degrades conventional approaches according to anatomical adaptations and induced resistance, which is a leading factor of metastasis and secondary primary tumor.
The nanostructures are often decorated with biocompatible polymeric layers or targeting species or fine-tuned by external stimuli such as ultrasound, chemical (pH variation), or thermal factors, to achieve optimal drug release. Moreover, the bioavailability of nanoparticles depends on the mode of administration and dosage, size, resultant charge on the surface, porosity, density, stability, protein adsorption, electrophoretic mobility, and surface characteristics of the nanoparticle. Because of these parameters, effective treatment is only useful for a certain subpopulation. Moreover, the growing complexity of the disorder during progression does not support the strategies of ‘one size fits all cases’ of medical approaches. Hence, the rising concern gave birth to personalized medicine, where therapeutic drugs were combined with diagnostic molecules based on molecular and nuclear imaging and delivered together with the assistance of nanotheranostic. For the first time, the term theranostic was coined by John Funkhouser in 2002. The concept of nanotheranostic was exploited in the imaging and treatment of thyroid cancer using radioactive iodine, where I131 elicited a therapeutic approach and I123 served as a diagnostic tool. Selective groups of theranostic probes enable physicians to monitor the location and size of the disease target and select appropriate methods to control or uproot it. In the broader spectrum, these probes are modulated to personalized medicine by integrating specific therapeutic drugs that are substantially encouraged for clinical trials. This clearly illustrates the intersection between theranostic and personalized medicine. A triumphant course is determined by disease lesions, genetic parameters, and disease-specific factors to control the severity of the disease and to record the pattern of therapeutic response. Thus, it is fair to evaluate the ‘personalized medicine’ more appropriately as an actual therapeutic index and host factor to pre-decide the efficacy of the drug. However, it is none other than theranostic that translates the concept of personalized medicine into virtual utility. The motif of the present review does not concentrate on the preview of the established nanostructures for treating thyroid cancer; indeed, it is wishful to illustrate the wide approaches of short-listed nanotheranostic candidates in the diagnosis of molecular markers, tracking assisted surgery, and nanotherapy and conventional progression towards personalized medicine for the management of thyroid cancer. This briefs a compact recap to the learner about the renovation of nanotheranostic from diagnosis to personalized medicine in the management of TC, where multiple targeting and imaging modalities are encased into a single carrier to achieve optimized biodistribution with increased efficacy of active agents. Thus, we are specific about the advancement of theranostic as personalized medicine to overcome TC. Finally, we will evaluate the true proximal feasibility of personalized/précised medicine to overcome TC soon.

Adapted therapeutic modalities for TC
Different treatment regimens for the management of thyroid cancer
Despite an array of preventive measures for the treatment of thyroid cancer, the mortality rate is striking because of the unexpected increase. The obvious reason for this is the limitations of available therapeutic measures. Adopted modalities for treating patients with thyroid cancer include surgery, radiation therapy, thyroid hormone therapy, chemotherapy, and targeted drug delivery (Fig. 1). Surgery is a very quick and reliable procedure and it is performed in nearly all cases with the assistance of fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy, except for ATC. Lobectomy, i.e., removal of lobes along with the isthmus, is preferred in cases of PTC or FTC. Thyroidectomy, partial or complete removal of the thyroid gland upon diagnosis of thyroid cancer, allows the clinician to check the recurrence of cancer via radioiodine scan and thyroglobulin blood test. Lymph node removal from the thyroid gland is selected for medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) and ATC and is selectively employed for PTC or FTC. After all, surgery is cordially invited with side effects such as hoarseness or loss of voice, damaged parathyroid gland leading to muscle spasms, numbness, and major blood clots, i.e., hematoma. The thyroid gland acts as a reservoir of iodine molecules in our body that forms the basis of radioactive iodine (RAI) therapy for thyroid cancer using I131, a radioisotope of iodine. RAI therapy is selectively used if lymph node metastasis of thyroid cancer occurs, particularly in FTC or PTC. However, RAI therapy fails to treat MTC and ATC because they do not take up iodine. In patients undergoing thyroidectomy and thyroid hormone therapy, the intake of thyroid hormones at levels greater than the required basic level may lead to an irregular heartbeat. In addition, excessive TSH dosage is associated with osteoporosis. Chemotherapy is seldom effective for selective types of cancer, and it is often assisted with external beam radiation therapy, particularly for ATC. It is often opted for advanced types of cancer that no longer respond to other therapeutic modalities. The common anticancer drugs used to treat MTC and ATC are Vincristine, Doxorubicin, Docetaxel, Streptozocin, Cyclophosphamide, Fluorouracil, Paclitaxel, and Carboplatin. However, the failure or undesirable effects of other approaches require targeted therapy to address the diseased condition. In papillary or follicular carcinoma, the most promising oral kinase inhibitors are Sorafenib, Lenvatinib, Vandetanib, and Cabonzantinib, which either prevent angiogenesis or restrict medullary thyroid cancer cell proliferation. Mutated RET gene of PTC/FTC causes translation of abnormal RET kinase protein that induces proliferation of cancer cells. Oral administration of Selpercatinib masks the production of abnormal RET kinase proteins to treat even advanced cases of ATC. Alteration of NTRK (natural tyrosine receptor kinase) genes promotes cancer cell growth. Eventually, Larotrectinib and Entrectinib target TRK to prevent the abnormal transformation of TRK proteins by NTRK genes. Dabrafenib and trametinib are promising targets of BRAF and MEK proteins. These oral drugs (pills/capsules) are even used in combination to treat patients with ATC.

Chemotherapeutic drugs serve as personalized medicine
Personalized medicine (PM) is a novel strategy for the welfare of patients and offers clinicians the opportunity to select potent treatment skills based on a genetic understanding of their disease. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) and array-based comparative genomic hybridization array (CGH) have paved the way for scientists to conduct high-throughput mutation screening and genomic copy number analysis. The genetic status of thyroid cancer defines the code or composition of personalized medicine and hence, it is being explored on basic demand. An extensive analysis was performed to trace the genetic alternations in advanced differentiated and ATC to identify genetic mutations with potential diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic implications. Here, theranostic plays an important role by providing innovative aspects of medicine in which targeted therapy is accomplished against a specific diagnostic target. Theranostic induces a transitional change from conventional medicine to a contemporary précised or personalized medicine in accordance with the genetic data book. The distinction of radioiodine as the first theranostic agent has provided a distinctive example of personalized medicine for the potent management of ductal thyroid cancer. 7 Although patients with ductal thyroid cancer show a satisfactory prognostic response to treatment with I131, probably because of the successful treatment of unresectable distant metastasis, 65% of the population with distant metastases adapted to radioiodine-refractory disease. This adaptation is clinically related to the sodium/iodide symporter (NIS), which is an alternative molecular target. In addition, the loss of iodine avidity in ductal thyroid cancer is associated with epigenetic or genetic alterations, MAPK, and PI3K-AKT signaling pathways. Eventually, some compounds are being firmly recommended to induce NIS expression to improve iodine uptake in both in vitro and in vivo conditions of the thyroid. For instance, HDAC inhibitors (valproic acid and carbamazepine), MEK/ERK inhibitors, PI3K/AKT inhibitors, retinoic acid, and PPARγ agonist induce satisfactory overexpression of NIS. Dabrafenib, the most promising inhibitor of BRAF mutation, promotes radioiodine uptake in patients with PTC BRAFV600E-mutant iodine-refractory disease. Larotrectinib (LOXO-101), a selective inhibitor of tropomyosin receptor kinase (TRK), is highly recommended for the treatment of neurotrophin receptor coding gene (NTRK) fusion-positive patients. In addition, a group of molecular markers that act as sharp indicators to reveal the aggressive behavior of tumors associated with tumor dedifferentiation includes p53 (25–30%), PIK3CA (15–20%), CTNNB1 (10–20%), and AKT-1 (5–10%). Genetic alterations in the telomerase reverse transcriptase (TRET) promoter, found in 7–22% of PTC cases and approximately 35% of FTC cases, indicate a malignant state. TRET mutation is frequently found in concurrence with BRAF or RAS mutation. DTC (15–20%) patients are often encountered with distant metastasis to lung or bone disease, which is responsible for steeping the refractory to RAI cases.
Hence, for the benefit of patients with thyroid cancer, innovative personalized strategies have been developed in haste. Personalized medicine is often named précised medicine as they are designed according to the specific genetic anomalies of different cases. Appropriate candidates for thyroid cancer treatment include tyrosine kinases and small molecule inhibitors that target iodine reuptake pathways. However, some non-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), such as Motesanib, Doxorubicin, Sunitinib, and Sorafenib, have been well-adapted for treating thyroid cancer. Vemurafenib (inhibitor of BRAF V600E mutation), and Selumetinib (MEK inhibitors) are effective inducers of iodine re-uptake in TC cells. Even on a sort notice of advantage, it has been reported that TKIs non-specifically target pro-oncogenic kinases, viz. VEGFR-1, VEGFR-2, EGFR, RAF, MET, FGFR, PDGFR, and RET. The submission of motesanib in a phase II clinical trial for progressive cases of DTC showed 14% partial respons, whereas 35% had disease stability. Moreover, Axitinib acts on VEGF receptors and induced 30% partial response in a phase II trial of patients diagnosed with advanced or metastatic TC. Sunitinib, RET, and RET/PTC 1 and 3 targeting molecules were extensively scrutinized for the betterment of patients with FDG-avid metastatic TC. An extensive study on Vemurafenib, a small molecular inhibitor of BRAF V600E, on 51 PTC showed a progressive transition from PTC refractory to radioactive iodine (RAI) without the involvement of a multikinase inhibitor. The genetic alteration-assisted amplification of KIT, KDR, and PDGFRA increases the efficiency of ATC treatment in the presence of Lenvatinib. Similarly, the amplification of JAK2, PDCD1LG2, CD274, and DNA mismatch repair scarcity contribute to the induction of positive responses to immune checkpoint inhibitors such as pembrolizumab and nivolumab. However, there is always a possibility of ‘yes’ and ‘but’ with every aspect of clinical possibility.

Advancing nanotheranostic for personalized medicine
Personalized medicine finds great appeal in nanotheranostic, the integration of therapeutic and diagnostic functions into a single system through the use of nanotechnology. To dynamically optimize treatment operations in a tailored way in real-time, it might be very helpful to visualize the biodistributions of nano-drug carriers, drug release processes, and therapeutic responses. Diagnosis can be better understood using biomarker identification, leading to targeted treatment of the corresponding condition. Through the primary use of the distinct characteristics of nanoparticles for drug administration and biomarker detection, nanotheranostic can be used to noninvasively identify and target imaging biomarkers, as well as to administer treatment in response to the distribution of biomarkers.
Overview of different theranostic nanomaterials for thyroid cancer diagnosis and treatment
Despite the availability of supreme classes of chemotherapeutic drugs, their efficacy is deliberately reduced with major side effects because treating cancer is not a one-size-fits-all scenario, and the therapeutic agent must be compatible with the patient’s specific biomolecules. Therefore, nanotheranostic seems extremely attractive because of the simplicity of diagnostic imaging and therapy in one system. Perfect simulation of molecular imaging with molecular therapy enables theranostic to deal with different aspects such as the early detection of disorders, staging and therapy selection, treatment planning, recognizing adverse effects at the primitive stage of the treatment, and follow-up of planned therapy. Nanotheranostic, a growing subtype of nanotechnology, undergoes conformational changes to adapt itself at the nanoscale for the development of nanomedicine. Nanomedicine covers the areas of drug delivery, biosensors, and tissue engineering. Nanotheranostic is thought to bridge the barricade of biological and physical science by applying nanostructures featuring advanced drug formulation, targeted arena, and optimized drug release kinetics with an amplified delivery potential ranging from 1–100 nm. Nanoparticles can be exploited to the fullest as nanocarriers in different configurations to safely deliver therapeutic drugs. However, under the influence of nanoparticles, they are delineated for bio-imaging, clinical diagnosis, and hence image-guided surgery upon fine-tuning of the fluorescence property. These valuable properties of the nanoparticles are strictly attributed to their excellent bioavailability and biodegradability. The advantages of nanoparticles are based on their high surface-to-volume ratio, which enables the decoration of nanostructures with different species of active compounds and targeting ligands to provide a stable configuration. To our knowledge, nanoparticles can accumulate in the surroundings of solid tumors by taking advantage of the leaky vasculature of neoplastic tissue; enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect. Because of their nano size, these nanocarriers can perform free motion in the human body compared with larger materials, as they have unique structural, chemical, mechanical, electrical, magnetic, and biological properties (Fig. 2).
Nanotheranostic is fully devoted to the benefit of clinical therapeutics for treating different types of cancer to date. Moreover, nanotheranostic is fully engrossed in implementing the knowledge and techniques of nanoscience in the medical field for disease prevention and remediation, which involves several nondimensional species such as nanorobots and nanosensors for diagnosis, delivery, and actuation of materials in live cells. For instance, cognizant awareness of cancer diagnosis has driven the development of nanoparticle-based moiety that combines both treatment and imaging. Lipid systems such as liposomes and micelles can be exploited to synthesize lipid-based therapeutic nanoparticles that show greater potential for loading or encapsulating inorganic anticancer drugs for safe delivery and imaging and increase the water solubility of sparingly soluble drugs. The system also protects the therapeutic agent from being tarnished in the gastrointestinal region. Moreover, nanodrugs increase the oral bioavailability of the drugs because they mimic the typical uptake mechanism of ‘absorptive endocytosis. The nanoformulations exhibit a prolonged circulatory time that facilitates the slow release of combined drugs as per the defined dose, which is significantly assisted with low adverse effects. Promptly, we got the idea that nanocarriers offer numerous advantages over free drugs where they not only protect the drug from non-specific degradation and premature interaction with the biological environment, but they also improve penetration and tissue distribution of the drug.

Clinical intervention of theranostic as personalized medicine to treat TC
Conventional chemotherapy often causes systemic toxicity, limiting the effective dose that can be used. Targeted therapies, using aptamers single-stranded oligonucleotides that specifically bind to tumor cells offer a way to deliver cancer drugs directly to tumors, minimizing damage to healthy tissue. When combined with polymeric nanoparticles, which protect and control drug release, this approach can further enhance treatment precision and reduce side effects. The two main methods for using aptamers in targeted chemotherapy drug delivery are aptamer-drug systems (aptamers deliver drugs as carriers and ligands) and aptamer-nanoparticle systems (where nanoparticles aid aptamers in drug delivery). For siRNA delivery, aptamers can enhance targeting by (1) connecting via a linker, (2) forming a chimera, or (3) combining with nanoparticles.
Since ATC is an undifferentiated and aggressive type of thyroid cancer that is resistant to radioactive iodine therapy and surgical resection, thereby novel aptamer–drug conjugate therapies are in trend to improve the outcome of ATC patients. Recently, a study has been reported in which the CD133-targeted aptamer AP-1-M, developed via cell-based SELEX, binds strongly to CD133 and accumulates in anaplastic thyroid cancer tumors. When conjugated with doxorubicin, AP-1-M effectively inhibits CD133-positive cell proliferation, induces apoptosis in vitro, and suppresses tumor growth in vivo, showing promise as a targeted therapy for ATC. Similarly, an aptamer called TC-6 generated from tissue-SELEX by using sections of papillary thyroid carcinoma and a normal thyroid gland could specifically target intracellular components of PTC with high affinity. Even, TC-6d, a truncated aptamer of TC-6, maintained its specificity toward PTC In another study, chitosan-coated (isobutyl cyanoacrylate) nanoparticles were used to deliver siRNA with a complementary sequence to the fusion oncogene ret/PTC1 and this high ret/PTC1 inhibition has triggered a phenotypic reversion of the transformed cells. The protection of ret/PTC1 siRNA from in vivo degradation led to significant tumor growth inhibition.
Apart from aptamer-based targeted therapy, thyroid cancer can also be treated with antibody conjugates, as in a study it has been reported that targeting CD47 alone or in combination with PD-1 could enhance ATC patient outcomes and supplement current treatments as blocking CD47 enhanced the macrophage-mediated phagocytosis of ATC cell lines (in-vitro) and also there was an enhanced macrophage activation markers, increased tumour cell phagocytosis, and decreased tumour growth in ATC xenotransplanted mice. In another study, targeting STAT3 with cucurbitacin I offered a potential therapeutic strategy for ATC as the treatment reduced the CSC-like properties of ATC-CD133 + cells, inhibited their stemness gene signature, and promoted differentiation into ATC-CD133⁻ cells. Additionally, cucurbitacin I enhanced the sensitivity of ATC-CD133 + cells to radiation and chemotherapy by inducing apoptosis and also suppressed tumorigenesis and improved survival in immunocompromised mice. In a recent study, intercellular adhesion molecule-1(ICAM1) antibody–drug conjugates (I1-MMAE and I1-DXd) showed promising results as an ADC target for advanced PTC and ATC, validated by its tumor specificity, expression levels, receptor-mediated internalization, ADC efficacy, and potential in MRI-guided molecular imaging. The study demonstrated the anti-tumor effectiveness of I1-MMAE and I1-DXd in preclinical ATC and PTC models. Additionally, an MRI-based molecular imaging probe, Gd-DTPA-ICAM1, enhances ICAM1 ADC precision as a targeted therapy.
Patients with advanced Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma may find Tyrosine Kinase Inhibitors (TKIs) to be an integral part of their treatment. With the increasing usage of selective RET TKIs, there has been a paradigm shift in the pharmacological effectiveness of targeted therapy. Considering MTC's relatively low genetic heterogeneity and high frequency of RET alterations, it is a prime candidate for precision medicine. Targeted therapies are expected to considerably lower the burden of the disease, aiming at disease control or even complete remission. Molecular profiling of FNAB cytology enhances diagnostic accuracy in uncertain cases and supports personalized thyroid cancer treatment. Linking genetic mutations to treatment resistance allows for more precise prognostic and therapeutic strategies, enabling treatment choices tailored to each patient’s genetic profile.
Comparison between conventional therapy and personalized nanomedicine in thyroid cancer treatment
As mentioned earlier conventional therapy may not account for individual patient differences, such as genetic makeup, lifestyle, or specific disease characteristics, potentially leading to less effective outcomes or increased side effects for some patients. In contrast, personalized medicine is an emerging field that offers more precise, patient-specific treatment strategies. It uses genetic, molecular, and environmental information to customize therapies, optimizing efficacy and minimizing side effects. Personalized medicine aims to identify the best therapeutic options based on a patient’s unique genetic profile, allowing for more targeted interventions (Fig. 3). The following subsections list various nanotheranostic approaches for thyroid cancer treatment and imaging, highlighting potential personalized medicine options for future thyroid cancer management.

Nanotheranostic in the treatment of TC
Nanocarrier systems for targeted treatment and diagnosis of thyroid cancer
Type of Nanocarrier	Nano-formulations	Application in thyroid cancer	Experimentation model	References	 	Gold Nanoparticles	AuNPs were designed and functionalized with ATC-specific ligands (holo-transferrin, epidermal growth factor (EGF), and lapatinib	Optimized in situ administration and NIR-PTT (Photothermal therapy) for ATC	In vitro: Human ATC cell line 8505cIn vivo: Male CD1 mice		 	Nano-assemblies	Cetuximab-conjugated perfluoro hexane/gold nanoparticles(C-Au-PFH-NAs)	Low intensity focused ultrasound diagnosis ablation of anaplastic thyroid cancer treatment	Nude mice injected with the human anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cell line (C643)		 	Metal – Organic frameworks	I131 radioisotope modified Zr-MOF (PEG coated into Zr-MOF)	Improved radiation sensitization and promoted apoptosis by activating Caspase-3 pathway	BALB/c nude mice bearing refractory differentiated thyroid cancer cells (ARO)		 	Nano-assemblies	Self-assembly of tyrosine (Tyr)—hyaluronic acid (HA)—polyethyleneimine (PEI)	131I-labeled NPs show remarkable anti-ATC tumour effects in vitro and in vivo, due to radio sensitization of Prima-1 by reactivation of the p53 mutant	In vitro: ATC cell lines 8305c and C643In vivo: Mice injected with 8305c cells		 	Magnetic nanoparticle	Dextran-polymer	MRI using dextran-coated magnetic nanoparticle ferumoxytol quantified tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) levels in mouse models of anaplastic thyroid cancer	B6129SF1/J mice were inoculated with TBP-3743		 	Nanoparticles	Chitosan nanocarrier containing double suicide genes driven by a ‘gene switch’ (a cascade of radiation enhancer E9 and a hTERTp)	Labelled I131 can operate as a low-dose radiation source to induce CD/TK expression, but it also directly kills host cells to some extent, improving the efficiency and specificity of suicide gene expression in cancer cells	In vitro: dedifferentiated FTC-133 (dFTC-133) cells		 	Nanoparticles	Extracellular vesicles isolated from primary ADSCs loaded with Tyrosine Kinase inhibitors	TKI-loaded EV treatment is more effective than free TKI treatment for restoring RAI uptake in ATC cells	ADSCs cultured with the human ATC cell line SW1736		 	Gold Nanoparticles	Gold Nanoparticles (AuNPs)	AuNPs downregulate the mRNA expression of CCT3 in PTC cells to exhibit antitumor effects	In vitro: PTC cells; BCPAP and TPC-1		 	Graphene Nanoparticles	Graphene nanocarrier (in situ GIOPMPC) and PEGMA monomers in the presence of IONPs (iron oxide nanoparticles) loaded with Doxorubicin	DOX-loaded nanocarriers demonstrated therapeutic efficacy by activating apoptosis, DNA damage and inhibiting the anti-apoptotic pathway and cell proliferation	In vitro: Anaplastic thyroid cell line Cal62		 	Selenium Nanoparticles	Fingolimod-loaded heptapeptide-functionalized silk fibroin-coated selenium nanoparticles (FTY720@T7-SF-Se NPs)	Tumour cell-specific cytotoxicity and tumour size reduction in mice K1 xenografts	In vitro: Human TPC cell lines (K1 cells)Murine BALB/c 3T3 fibroblast cell lines (3T3 cells		 	Nano assemblies	Cetuximab-conjugated perfluoro hexane/Gadollium nanoparticles (C-Gd-PFH-NAs)	Low-intensity focused ultrasound diagnosis imaging (LIFUS) to examine the apoptotic and antitumor efficacy in xenograft model	Nude mice injected with human anaplastic thyroid carcinoma cell line (C643)		 	Organic–Inorganic Nanoparticles	Human serum albumin coated with manganese dioxide labelled with Na131 (HSA-MnO2-I131)	Dual-mode imaging and radioiodine therapy combined with SPECT/CT /MR imaging	In vitro: PTC cells (K1, BCPAP, KTC-1)ATC cells (Cal62, THJ16T, and ARO)In vivo: BALB\c-nu mice are injected with ARO cells		 	Nanoparticles	mRNA-loaded lipid-peptide NPs (LPm NP)	Restored iodine affinity and enhanced the therapeutic efficacy of radioactive iodine uptake in ATC cells and mice	In vitro: ATC cells (8505c, Cal62, KHM-5)In vivo: BALB\c- mice injected with 8505c cells		 	Nanoclay drug delivery system (DDSs)	Methoxy-intercalated kaolinite NPs loaded with Doxorubicin (KI@DOX-Kaolin MeOH)	Improved dispersion and enhanced autophagy via caveolae-mediated endocytosis	In vitro: ATC cells (8305C)In vivo: BALB/c bearing 8305C cells		 	Nanoclay drug delivery system (DDSs)	Methoxy-intercalated kaolinite NPs loaded with Doxorubicin (KI@DOX-Kaolin MeOH)	Targeted DDSs showed dose-dependent cytotoxic effects in-vitro and accumulation of drug molecules in-vivo	In vitro: TPC-1 cellsIn-vivo: Female mini-pigs and rabbits		 	Nanoparticles	PLGA encapsulated iodine-131 nanoparticles fabricated with rhTSH (I131-PLGA-rhTSH NPs)	Augmented apoptotic activity and immobilization by attenuating the F-actin assembly of thyroid cancer cells	In vitro: FTC-133 cellsIn vivo: BALB/c nude mice bearing FTC-133 tumour		 	Nanoparticles	I131 loaded with Human serum albumin [HAS] and indocyanine green [ICG] nanoparticles (I131-HSA-ICG NPs)	Synergistic multimodal imaging and radioiodine therapy photothermal therapy	In vitro: Undifferentiated thyroid cells (ARO)In vivo: BALB/c nude mice are injected with ARO cells		 	Nanoparticles	miRNA338-3p loaded phase – transition nanoparticles (PFP@IR780/PLGA-bPEI-miRNA338-3p)	Sonodynamic gene therapy of PTC inhibits tumour proliferation and ROS production under LIFUS irradiation	In vitro: TPC-1In-vivo: BALB/c mice bearing TPC-1 cells		 	Liposomal Nanoparticles	Hydration-of-freeze-dried-matrix (HFDM) formulated liposomes loaded with miR-34b-5p	Targeted RNA delivery of miR-34b inhibited ATC cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis in vitro and in vivo	In vitro: 8505c, BHT-101 and Nthy-ori-3–1In vivo: NU/NU nude mouse bearing BHT-101 ATC cells		 	Nanoparticles	Resveratrol-loaded pegylated polycaprolactone (PCL4k) particles coated with nonapeptide PEP-1 (Pep-1-PEG3.5 k-PCL4k@Res)	Improved anti-ATC effects in THJ-16 T xenograft mice via sustained drug release of Docetaxel and Doxorubicin	In vitro: Human THJ-16 T ATC cellsIn-vivo: BALB/c mice bearing THJ-16 T cells		 	Silver Nanoparticles	Pseudomonas aeruginosa synthesised AgNPs (Ps-AgNPs)	Intracellular ROS generation via increased lipid peroxidation and decreased antioxidant activity, decreased MMP levels and increased condensation of TPC-1 cells	In vitro: TPC-1 cell line		 	Nanoparticles	TSH-functionalized silicon dioxide nanoparticles loaded with doxorubicin (TSH -SiO2@Dox)	Enhanced anticancer efficacy in-vitro and in-vivo by inhibiting colony forming ability and increased apoptotic activity	In vitro: FTC-133 cellsIn vivo: NOD SCID mice were injected with FTC-133		 	Nanoparticles	anti-hTERT oligonucleotides encapsulated in chitosan-modified PLGA NPs	Reduced viability and migration abilities of human ATC Cal-62 and 8505C cells and growth inhibition in Cal-62 bearing xenograft mice	In-vitro: 8505C and Cal-62 cellsIn-vivo: NOD SCID mice bearing Cal-62 tumor		 	Carbon Nanotubes	Purified TSH (Thyrotropin) conjugated to functionalized BioNanoFluid	Selective ablation of BCPAP cell (TSHR positive cells)	In vitro: BCPAP cells		 	Mesoporous silica Nanoparticles (MSNs)	Sorafenib was loaded into hollow mesoporous silica nanoparticles (HMSNs) with transferrin modification (Sora@Tf-HMSNs)	Increased anticancer and apoptotic activity in the resistant BCPAP and TPC-1 cells	In vitro: TPC-1 and BCPAP cells		 	Mesoporous silica Nanoparticles (MSNs)	MSNs co-loaded with 17-AAG and Torin2 targeted to VEGFR2 (17‑AAG + Torin2)@MSNs‑anti‑VEGFR2)	Selective killing and prolonged median survival time of FRO cells in both in-vivo and In-vitro conditions	In vitro: ATC cells (FRO)In vivo: BALB/c nude mice bearing FRO cells		 	Polymeric nanomaterials	Sorafenib and all-trans retinoic acid loaded Pegylated PLGA Nanoparticles	Reduced general toxicity in FTC-133 xenograft mice along with increased expression of Tg and NIS	In vitro: FTC-133In vivo: BALB/c nude mice bearing FTC-133 cells		 	Nanoparticles	Dopamine-Melanin Nanoparticles loaded with Doxorubicin	Enhanced therapeutic efficacy and increased cellular uptake by HTh74 resistant cells	In vitro: ATC cell HTh74 and HTh74R		 	Nanobubbles	Doxorubicin-loaded perfluoro pentane-cored glycol chitosan NBs	The combined treatment of doxorubicin-loaded nanobubbles with extracorporeal shock waves (ESWs) decreased proliferation and induced apoptosis in CAL-62 xenografts	In vitro: CAL-62 cellsIn vivo: NOD SCID Gamma (NSG) mice injected with CAL-62 cells		 	Liposomes	DPPC: Chol: DSPE-mPEG2000 formulated liposomes loaded with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)	The liposomes shielded the ATRA from photodegradation and enhanced its antiproliferative effects in FRO cells more as compared to other cells	In vitro: PTC-1, BCPAP and FRO cells		 	Polymeric Nanoparticles	Gemcitabine conjugated with linoleic acid complexes (GEM-NPs)	Significant cytotoxic effects were associated with apoptotic activity in BCPAP and FTC-133 cells	In vitro: BCPAP and FTC-133 cells		 	Nanoparticles	Sorafenib and fluorescent dye indocyanine green (ICG) encapsulated within Human Serum Albumin (HSA)—manganese dioxide (MnO2) NPs targeting antibody pertuzumab [SRF/ICG/MnO2@HSA-pertuzumab (HISMP) NPs	High cytotoxic and apoptosis were induced in thyroid cancer cells by HISMP MPs. They have potent anti-tumor action and strong imaging capabilities, especially accumulating at tumor locations, as validated by in vivo MR/NIRF imaging	In vitro and In vivo
Nanoparticle associated Clinical Trials for the management of TC
Title	Trial Number	Registration Date	Study Overview	 	Carbon Nanoparticle-Loaded Iron [CNSI-Fe (II)] in the treatment of advanced solid tumor (CNSI-Fe (II))	NCT06048367 (Phase I)	24 August 2023	The safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetics (PK) profile, and preliminary efficacy of intratumoral injection of Carbon Nanoparticle-Loaded Iron [CNSI-Fe (II)] was assayed in patients with advanced solid tumoursTo determine the highest injectable dose or maximum tolerated dose (MTD) for humans, the dose-limiting toxicities of CNSI-Fe (II) (DLT) were monitored	 	Trained immunity of myeloid cells and their progenitors in patients with non-medullary thyroid carcinoma and colon carcinoma	NCT05280379	24 February 2022	The study aims to investigate how myeloid cells or their progenitors will experience functional reprogramming to produce a tumor-suppressive phenotype upon exposure to different agents that induce trained immunity, such as high-density lipoprotein-methylene diphosphonate nanoparticles, recombinant, and synthetic cytokines	 	Atezolizumab with chemotherapy in treating patients with Anaplastic or Poorly Differentiated Thyroid Cancer	NCT03181100 (Phase II)	06 June 2017	The phase II trial studies show atezolizumab in combination with chemotherapy works in treating patients with anaplastic or poorly differentiated thyroid cancer	 	Lateral Neck Lymph Node Mapping in Thyroid Cancer	NCT04312087	14 March 2020	The tracer used for mapping the lateral neck lymph nodes is carbon nanoparticles for patients with papillary thyroid carcinoma whose lateral neck lymph nodes are not palpable but are worrisome on ultrasound and/or CT	 	Preoperative Nodal Staging of Thyroid Cancer Using USPIO MRI: Preliminary Study	NCT01927887	20 August 2013	Ultra-small superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Magnetic Resonance Imaging (USPIO MRI) combined with Ferumoxytol is used to explore the undetectable aberrant lymph nodes in thyroid cancer patients receiving surgery	 	Potential Role for Carbon Nanoparticles to Guide Central Neck Dissection in Patients with Papillary Thyroid Cancer	NCT02724176	18 March 2016	Carbon nanoparticles improve lymph node detection to accurately reflect the central neck's metastatic state, and could safeguard the parathyroid glands
(Source: https://clinicaltrials.gov)
The field of nanocarrier-assisted drug delivery strategies has been growing in recent years. To suit different aspects, nanocarriers have evolved to fulfill these requirements. Substantial efforts have been made to implement nanotechnology in cancer treatment and diagnosis in pre-clinical situations, with the field continuing to mature while awaiting the full realization of its impact. The modulation of theranostic platforms to extract sensitive diagnostic tools, engage in accurate targeting, and effectively control the delivery of materials. Recent research on advanced theranostic nanomedicine platforms has generated different nano models such as solid-lipid nanoparticles, polymeric/magnetic nanoparticles, drug-polymer conjugates, liposome-dendrimers, micelles, carbon nanoparticles, and gold nanoparticles. The multifunctional features of nanotheranostic facilitate the simultaneous diagnosis and delivery of therapeutic drugs to diseased cells by targeting ligands and biomarkers. Advances in theranostic nanomedicine have perfectly served the bench work to accomplish a) intracellular diagnosis and in vivo biodistribution, b) advanced therapy, and c) computed monitoring followed by treatment in various types of cancers including thyroid cancer. This review discusses the use of nanotheranostic in treating TC through cancer cell targeting, enhancing 131I sensitivity, chemotherapy, and phototherapy, offering insights for developing new treatment approaches for the management of thyroid cancer. While nanoparticles improve drug solubility, therapeutic index, half-life, and reduce immunogenicity, challenges remain due to limited understanding of their interactions with target cells and tissues. Controlling drug release kinetics is crucial for effective outcomes. Hybrid nanotheranostic systems, which combine organic, inorganic, and targeting materials, address these challenges by enabling versatile applications in drug/gene delivery, laser-assisted therapies (like PTT and PDT), and imaging (e.g., MRI and PET). These hybrid nanoparticles enhance tumor accumulation, controlled drug release, and imaging, optimizing therapeutic results. The details of chemotherapeutic drugs conjugated/encapsulated with different types of nanomaterials with their therapeutic and diagnostic potential against TC have been enlisted in (Table 1). We have also enlisted the recent development in nanoparticle-associated Clinical Trials for the management of TC (Table 2). The obvious outcomes of stimuli-assisted drug release (smart delivery), multimodal diagnosis with or without therapies, and quality performance (as in oral delivery, run away from multidrug resistance protein (MDRp), inhibition of autophagy, etc.. Moreover, si-RNA co-delivery frequently quenches aspiration. To overcome this limitation, it is always preferable to support the development of multimodality nanotheranostic where multiple diagnostic and therapeutic modes are encapsulated through the platform of nanotechnology instead of single diagnostic or therapeutic agents. To our knowledge, si-RNA, as an integral part, has joined the theranostic nanomedicine and acts as an inhibitor of theranostic resistance. The siRNA-based theranostic nanomedicine is becoming widely accepted as a multimodality therapy with improved diagnosis and therapeutic outcomes. Theranostic nanomedicine has had an acceptable influence on oral chemotherapy. It has been reported that D-α-tocopheryl polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate (TPGS) based nanomedicine along with docetaxel and paclitaxel, enhances oral bioavailability. Auto phagocytosis or autophagy is a typical catabolic phenomenon in which junk cellular components or foreign invaders are destroyed in lysosomes via intracellular degradation. Thus, it is believed to be the prime factor affecting the pharmacokinetics of nanomedicine, such as its bioavailability after absorption, metabolism, and excretion of nanomedicine. Therefore, the idea of tagging autophagy inhibitors into the theranostic system was hitched, which eventually enhanced the potential of diagnostic/therapeutic agents. Therapeutic agents incorporated in theranostic nanomedicine may include proteins, peptides, organic drugs, and genetic materials, whereas commonly accepted diagnostic agents include fluorescent dye or quantum dots (optical imaging), radionuclides (nuclear imaging), superparamagnetic metals such as iron oxides (magnetic resonance imaging; MRI), and heavy elements such as iodine (computed tomography). Moreover, quantum dots, as semiconductor crystals, have a larger absorption coefficient, emit intensive signals upon bombardment with external energy resources, show high brightness, and are enormously photostable. This eventually outdated the application of organic dye. Any clinical disorder, if diagnosed at an earlier stage, is susceptible to cure or at least treatable.
By bombarding light to raise tissue temperature and induce hyperthermia, Photothermal Therapy (PTT) kills cells by inducing this condition. Heat cannot be dissipated by tumors, making them more heat-sensitive. AuNPs designed and functionalized with ATC-specific ligands (holo-transferrin, epidermal growth factor (EGF), and lapatinib [HAOA-coated AuNPs] were proved to be safe as per the toxicity and biodistribution point of view after the intratumorally administration into CD1 mice. This innovative formulation possessed all the physical properties needed for optimal in situ delivery and NIR-PTT, and they also showed extremely encouraging preliminary results for selectivity and efficacy in vitro, as well as in vivo and in vitro safety, for the PTT of ATC.

Nanotheranostic in bioimaging of TC
To enable quicker and more accurate early assessment and continued monitoring of cancer care for patients, nanotechnology offers additional molecular imaging techniques and nanostructured materials. Nanotheranostic with bioimaging aspects are listed in (Table 1). Ultrasound, CT, and MRI are common technologies used in the diagnosis, and imaging for the management of TC. Imaging methods have particular benefits and drawbacks, thus combining two approaches of imaging and therapeutics is typically advised. 131/123 Whole-body scans can be utilized to find distant metastases and any remaining locoregional illness in the neck. It is best paired with 3D conventional imaging employing single photon emission SPECT in conjunction with CT. Core-needle biopsy (CNB) of the primary tumor is additionally performed in cases of ATC together with FDG PET/CT with CE-CT and PET/MR of the neck and mediastinum for histological confirmation prior to surgery. The two most commonly used tracers for MTC are FDOPA and DOTATOC. Iodinated gold nanoclusters (AuNCs@BSA-I) coated with Bovine serum albumin (BSA) and chloramine-T were used for dual imaging and detection of implanted human TC as small as 2 mm2 in an orthotopic human thyroid cancer patient tissue-derived xenograft (PDX) mouse model.
However, the clinical disadvantages of metallic, polymeric, and lipid-based nano-systems, such as toxification of surrounding healthy cells, slow invasiveness, high precision, deeper tissue penetration, and repetitive dose adjustment, require real-time settings. This drawback is fortunately replenished by multifunctional hybrid nanoparticles, consisting of various nanomaterials and skillfully decorated with targeting moieties and/or therapeutic drugs, demonstrating the best characteristics for theranostic. Surface-located cancers can be imaged and treated simultaneously using low-intensity focused ultrasound (LIFUS) which includes anti-vascular ultrasound therapy, sonodynamic therapy, ultrasound-mediated chemotherapy, and ultrasound-mediated gene delivery. In a xenograft mouse carrying ATC cells C643, low-intensity focused ultrasound diagnosis (LIFUS) ablation of anaplastic thyroid cancer was possible with the formation of Nano assemblies (NAs) comprising C225 conjugates Au-PFH-Nas (C-Au-PFH-NAs) along with the enhanced antitumor efficacy in human thyroid carcinoma xenografts, suggesting a different therapeutic setting that can be extensively used for future biomedical applications.

The major roadblocks in the translation of nanotheranostic into précised medicine
Instead of reaching the edge of victory after dismissing hurdles such as concentration optimization of drugs, low-bioavailability of drugs, non-targeted drug-delivery, designing suitable nanocarriers for different chemo-drugs, immunogenic barriers, and neutralization of drugs, we were still lagging in the uprooting of cancer disease. Thus, the era of nanomedicine-oriented précised medicine began. Few well-established chemo drugs are getting widely accepted as precision medicine, as discussed in Sect. 3. The chemo-drugs were incorporated into nanocarriers to get precision medicine, unfortunately, the development of effective nanomedicine-oriented précised/personalized medicine seemed too far owing to the following reasons and this means research and disclosure of the probable factors to come across win and win policy.

Genetic hindrance
In the Middle Ages, thyrocytes were thought to be the source of thyroid cancer, but this view couldn't fully explain clinical patterns. Later, studies, including data from the Japan Society of Pathology, showed that thyroid cancer prevalence rises sharply from ages 15 to 34, and then stabilizes. Williams introduced a multistep carcinogenesis model, suggesting that thyroid cancer originates from early genetic mutations in thyrocytes, which accumulate further mutations with age, increasing cancer severity. This model, however, faced challenges due to mismatches with clinical data, such as the effects of radioactive iodine therapy and discrepancies in thyroid cancer risk and thyrocyte proliferation rates. According to the model, additional mutations in thyrocytes lead to malignancy, explaining age-related differences in cancer aggressiveness. Younger patients often experience rapid cell proliferation and metastasis but have better prognoses, while older patients with metastasis face poorer outcomes.
The recent fetal cell carcinogenesis model of thyroid cancer rejects the role of thyrocytes, proposing that thyroid cancer originates from fetal thyroid cells that only exist in early development. This model identifies two types of thyroid cancer: "mature" cancers, derived from thyroblasts, which grow quickly in youth but have limited proliferation, and "immature" cancers, from undifferentiated thyroid stem cells, which grow slowly initially but accelerate in middle age. Mature cancers, while limited in growth, may still be deadly and often present as papillary microcarcinomas (PMCs), which rarely metastasize. The model suggests differences in origins and behavior between these cancer types, yet questions remain about why some thyroid stem cells remain inactive for years. Furthermore, Takano T. et al. demonstrated that some differentiated thyroid cancer tissues contain undifferentiated cells, with aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) as an expression marker. Moreover, these differentiated cells do not switch into undifferentiated ones; rather, the reverse occurs to form a solid tumor. The genetic alterations form the basis of tumor transformation where flipping in genes encoding cell signaling pathways leads to an overdue between cell proliferation and apoptosis. Added to this, the genetic mutations equally participate in increasing tumor aggressiveness, metastatic lymph node spread, tendency to dedifferentiate, and/or reduced efficiency of radioiodine therapy. Till now the reported genetic cause of thyroid cancer includes point mutation in BRAF, RET, TRET, RAS, and TP53 genes and the fusion genes RET/PTC, PAX8/PPAR-γ, and NTRK. Thus, these genetic markers not only serve as diagnostic but prognostic markers too at the same time and act as predeterminants for deciding between surgical or nonsurgical treatments. Genetic advances in familial thyroid cancer primarily involve MTC, while mutations in isolated NMFTC remain less defined, likely autosomal dominant with reduced penetrance. Patients with familial syndromes often carry a susceptibility gene, increasing thyroid cancer risk, especially for papillary thyroid carcinoma in NMFTC. Many cases show a familial syndrome with a known thyroid cancer risk profile. Additional research should be done on genes associated with TC as possible risk or prediction variables for this malignancy. TC genetic and comorbidity investigations should be the main focus of future studies. The results may be enhanced by comorbidity control, prevention, and early identification. Decision-making for more individualized and efficient treatment may be guided by knowledge of the genetic alterations causing thyroid cancer.

Nanotherapeutic drawback
The main hurdle of therapeutic approaches is related to low bioavailability and inefficient conveyance of therapeutic drugs to the target site, which is well understood by the hydrophobic nature of the anticancer drug. In addition, the intensive reliability of chemotherapy for cancer cure renders unwanted side effects owing to non-targeted delivery. Nanocarriers are delivered either passively or actively to cancer cells. Nanocarriers can extravasate into tumor tissues via a leaky vasculature network or be recognized as dysfunctional lymphatic drainage systems owing to enhanced permeability and retention effect; passive targeting. The nanocarriers eventually take advantage of the poor permeability of the lymphatic drainage system to accumulate inside the tumor tissue. Unfortunately, passive targeting of nanocarriers is restricted because of the induction of multidrug resistance (MDR). Instead, active targeting is accomplished by nanocarriers attached/tagged with targeting ligands such as proteins, nucleic acids, and receptor-ligand proteins, which facilitate quick internalization of nanoparticles by cells before drug release. Thus, the application of nanocarriers confers a versatile and flexible means of designing drugs for better efficacy.

Lack of justification for nanoparticle-mediated tumor biology
Nanomedicine has been improved in terms of toxicity and clinical outcomes, a vote of thanks to nanotechnology with the crucial aim of concentrating drugs to targeted populations and controlling drug release and their long-term effects. Furthermore, emerging immunotherapies (treatments based on siRNA, mRNA, and gene editing) integrated with nanotechnology will have a great impact on the survival of cancer patients shortly. However, more clarity on the interaction pattern between nanoparticles and biomolecules is still in demand for a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved and their outcome, therefore, to achieve better clinical outcomes. Moreover, quick research is yet required to elaborate on the phenomenon of ‘tumor nanoparticle permeability’, as the ‘EPR effect’ is under tight scrutiny with many questions.

Heterogeneity in thyroid cancer: single-cell point of view
The major histological types of TCs are categorized as papillary, follicular (differentiated form), poorly differentiated, anaplastic, medullary TC, and thyroid C cell-oriented. All TC subtypes account for huge variability, both among and within tumors. The evolution of thyroid carcinogenesis and TC heterogeneity cancer can be explained with the ‘clonal evaluation model’ and ‘stem cell model’. The hypothesis of ‘clonal evolution’ is applicable to explain TC heterogeneity: the classical (stochastic) multistep carcinogenesis model. The multistep model/clonal evaluation model states that genome instability within somatic cells generates more aggressive clones that are blessed to endure the selection pressure of the microenvironment and hence induce tumor formation. The further mutation causes the divergence of a new subclone, which can rule over or outcompete neighboring cells to form a homogenous tumour until the start of a new, significant, and more versatile mutation. According to this theory, FTC is considered to be the outcome of follicular adenoma, whereas PTCs result from thyrocytes after BRAF V600E mutation or rearranged during transfection (RET) gene rearrangements. However, defining adenoma as a “premalignant” lesion lacks justification. PDTC and undifferentiated TCs may develop from both DTC types on subsequent alterations in phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) and WNT pathway genes or in suppressor genes (mainly TP53 mutations). In contrast, the multistep theory supports the concept of aggregating multiple insults to an ATC genomic profile. In contrast, thyrocytes in adults proliferate poorly; thus, there is a lower probability of acquiring PDTC features via accumulated mutations. However, the most desired explanation for the multistep theory in TC is those genetic alterations such as RET/PTC and PAX8/PPRγ gene rearrangements, are not present in ATC as well as NTRK rearrangements, which are rarely observed in ATC. The TC stem cell model states that a small subpopulation of stem cells undergoes genetic and epigenetic transformations to produce phenotypically different cancer cells. More specifically, thyroid stem cells in the influence of genetic/epigenetic changes cause ATC, whereas non-transforming thyroid stem cells give rise to a multipotent progenitor cell type termed thyroblasts, which can readily develop into PTC or FTC, whereas benign tumours are formed from the thyrocyte precursor cells (prothyrocytes). Noticeably, this heterogeneity is not only restricted to histopathological diversity but also accounts for genetic and/or epigenetic changes owing to diverse and repetitive interactions between the tumor and surrounding microenvironment, and interpatient differences. All these factors contribute to the great complexity in the development of a tumor from cancer cells. Interestingly, although a single type of cell leads to heterogeneity in thyroid malignancies, non-MTCs represent a very heterogeneous group of tumors with significant variation in terms of histopathology, biological behavior, oncogenic events, and clinical course. Moreover, TC diversity is not the effect of a particular type of histopathological subtype but interpatient variability and intra-tumor heterogeneity. Thus, the situation can actually explain one of the probable reasons that challenges personalized cancer medicine, since the type of cancer treatment is opted according to the diagnosed samples, excised during surgical cure. In such situations, it is worth noting that the excised sample from a particular region cannot define the status of variation within a tumor as a whole.
In conclusion, cell heterogeneity in cancers appears to be one of the biggest issues in enhancing cancer diagnosis and treatment for the development of effective personalized therapies. In addition, single-cell studies of nanotechnology-based treatments along with radiotherapy and phototherapy demand a better understanding of the mechanism of interaction between radiation and nanoparticles from a single-cell point of view. Because TC presents heterogeneous clinical behavior and diverse responses to therapeutic approaches, the power of single-cell technologies and the creation of new model systems can perfectly address the complexity of TC by improvising treatment strategies.

Shortage of a perfect clinical model
Before clinical trials in human patients, we cannot assess the significance of an animal model supposed to exactly mimic the clinical status of the disease. Instead of using different types of mammalian clinical models, we are still short of reaching this goal. This can be explained by the role model being inefficient in recapitulating the patient situation nearby, retaining intra-tumor heterogeneity and the tumour environment. In addition, not all cancer types can be induced in mice or as tumour organoids. Although TC cell lines derived from neoplastic cells have served as role models for preclinical trials in recent decades, it has been demonstrated that, rather than adapting to an in-vitro growth environment, these cells are unable to maintain the characteristic features of TC cells and their signalling behaviour. This was eventually justified as misidentification or cross-contamination with other cells. Furthermore, monolayer culture was produced by employing human primary tumoral cells from patients to screen targeted medications with a 60% positive predictive value of the clinical response. Furthermore, unlike surgical biopsies, human primary cell cultures can be produced using fine needle aspiration cytology from DTC or ATC.
This primary culture trend could save the lives of TC patients who are using inefficient and potentially deadly medicines. It is similarly beneficial in developing individualized treatment in favor of TC patients.
To set up PDTO (patient-derived tumor organoid) models, it is necessary to be aware of the optimal in vitro growth conditions that allow tumor cells to grow while generating as high heterogeneity as possible. However, selection pressure is prevalent in both patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDTX) and patient-derived tumor organoid (PDTO) model systems. Moreover, there are large differences in the response pattern between 2 and 3D models for both radiotherapy and photothermal therapy, highlighting the importance of proper selection of an experimental model to obtain a qualitative treatment outcome in vivo and future clinical applications.

Side effects of combined therapy
In most cases of thyroid cancer, the patient is highly recommended for radiation therapy in combination with other treatment modalities. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) projects a beam of radiation from outside the body at cancerous tissues inside the body, whereas radioactive iodine (RAI) treatment is often recommended in post-thyroidectomy for early-stage cancers (T1 or T2), but the cure rate with surgery predominates. In cancer recurrence, RAI seems to be the only option left for more advanced cancers, such as T3 or T4 tumors, or cancers that have spread to lymph nodes or distant areas. Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) uses computer-assisted linear acceleration to design treatments that specifically target the tumor’s 3-D shape. Proton therapy uses energy from positively charged particles (protons) and is now recommended over X-ray therapy. Likewise, stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT) is specially equipped for précised delivery of a dose of radiation to a tumor while minimizing damage to surrounding tissues and organs. However, a sincere survey has introduced the idea that pre-exposure of cancer patients to radiation causes damage to cancer cells and tissue or more often becomes radioresistant, which weakens the response of these cells to other treatment moieties owing to the metabolic shift. Calculating the iodine uptake rate of ATC cells is crucial to improving the effectiveness of internal radiotherapy when combining nanomaterials with 131I radioiodine therapy. Unlike papillary thyroid cancer cells, ATC cells show very low iodine uptake due to NIS downregulation and loss of affinity for 131I, which cannot be resolved by drug delivery systems that enhance cellular uptake.

Ethical clearance
Instead of addressing every challenge of nanomedicines in terms of drug optimization, selection of suitable nanocarriers, release kinetics, thermodynamical aspects, clinical outcomes, the fate of the nanomedicine in vivo system (excretion mechanism), etc., the implementation of nanomedicine in clinical practice is waiting for ‘green signals’ from insurance companies and regulatory agencies. Nanoparticle drug delivery systems for treating ATCs have been validated in in vitro cell models and in vivo animal models, but further investigation in clinical trials is needed. Additionally, the potential of these systems to predict ATC outcomes remains unexplored. The anti-tumor effectiveness of intratumoral versus intravenous injection is also not comparable due to a lack of ethical clearance for clinical trials. Despite challenges in fully analyzing the conditions for successful translational approaches, several key factors for implementing PCM are evident. These include addressing funding, infrastructure, and regulatory process development. Overcoming these hurdles requires collaboration among governments, healthcare systems, research institutions, and the pharmaceutical industry to make PCM accessible to patients. Translating PCM into clinical practice depends on strong scientific leadership, effective communication, and collaborative team science. Aligning scientific and educational efforts with patient needs and regulatory policies, along with effective data management, is crucial for PCM’s success. Head and neck cancers represents a significant challenge to oncologists particularly with respect to screening, diagnosis, treatment as well as rehabilitation, and more so the oncologists who do not have any training in medical ethics. In the prior ten years, the bioethics department has also been collecting data to quantify the extent of particular ethical concerns among healthcare providers in India. Thyroid cancer overdiagnosis has negative repercussions on the individuals who suffer from a cancer label, and undergo unnecessary interventions, such as total or subtotal thyroidectomy, lifelong hormone replacement therapy, the monotony of follow-up, and possibilities of surgical complex and side effects. More often than not, these harms outweigh any advantage that would be associated with now diagnosing a cancer, which would otherwise not have been troublesome. On top of this, overdiagnosis increases the burden on the healthcare system in terms of costs incurred from diagnosis and management. Up to now, thyroid cancer is an exception among other cancers in that it is possible to properly assess the risk, which could help in decision-making and possibly avoid unnecessary diagnoses and treatment.

Selection of suitable nanocarrier
Besides this, the stability of phytochemicals/chemo drugs is remaining a major concern for all the time while scaling-up in bulk and needs recurrent revision for combination therapy with synthetic chemotherapeutic agents. Hence, it seems little challenging for the scientist to design nanocarriers for the delivery of multiple moieties like phytochemicals and/or chemotherapeutic agent with optimized dose of drug. So, the most important decision researcher must made on the choice of nanocarrier for each phytochemical. It is important to address that nanoparticles not only allow the safe release of drug but also have a big role in imparting stability to drug inside them. For example, thymoquinone, a well-established phytochemical provides excellent effect in treating lung cancer, when encapsulated in micelles rather than mesoporous nanoparticles. Similarly, loading efficiency of a drug varies with different types of nanocarriers and their surface modification. Thus, it is very important to select best match of nanocarriers for each different phytochemical. Inorganic nanomaterials, such as silica, are ideal for delivering conventional chemotherapeutic drugs due to their large surface area and PTT/PDT properties. However, it is unclear whether chemotherapy or PTT/PDT offers greater clinical benefits. Surface modifications and precise drug loading of these nanomaterials have been minimally explored, and potential adverse effects from in vivo accumulation require careful consideration.

Limitation of the computational data
Process Flow of Data Collection, Processing, and Integration in Personalized Medicine Development
Flow chart outlining the steps of drug development for personalized medicine
Development of Precision Medicine is strongly knotted with data intensive approaches, machine learning, and artificial intelligence prior to clinical assessment of samples of TC patients. In development of PM, it is necessary to embrace diversity, heterogeneity, biases, class imbalance, and other intrinsic features of individuals. The universe of diverse data sources is processed, modeled, and integrated to get a constructive coherent framework useful for development of precision medicine (Figs. 4, 5). However, this is much easier said than done. Even it is needed to develop methodologies to rigorously operate under these constraints. However, development, implementation, optimization, and improvement on these methods calls in a number of limitations including computational aspects (software/hardware infrastructure), mathematical and modeling issues.

Discussion and conclusion
The broad heterogeneity of TCs makes them one of the most spectacular references of variability among all malignancies. The heterogeneity/intratumor variability of TCs demonstrates a wide spectrum of genetic alterations that cause major roadblocks to clinical cures. However, altered markers often represent “drivers” and “passengers” that may be exploited as molecular targets in targeted therapies. To date, research has documented contradictory evidence of these alterations and the coexistence of various mutations within a single tumor. Hence, the acquisition of deeper insights into tumor heterogeneity and underlying molecular events will promote new possibilities to properly stratify patient risk, choose appropriate markers for more effective therapeutic approaches, and bring individualized/précised treatment to the forefront as the standard management approach for cancer patients. The development of PM demands the incorporation and integration of vast corpora on various databases based on molecular and environmental disorders, into different analytical frameworks that finally leads to context-related diagnosis and therapeutic approaches. The analytical frameworks are constructed with the help of artificial intelligence and machine-oriented approaches that are aimed at the prediction of personalized healthcare and outcomes. Thus, the analytical framework deals with the wide heterogeneity of individuals showing their genetic predisposition and their social and environmental determinants. Hence, during the development of personalized medicine, computational approaches should be constrained by different levels of confidentiality within a unified analytical structure with effective management, visualization, and the potential of integrating a large database of combined structures and unstructured formats. However, this is not as easy as expected and thereby challenges arise in designing clinical data analytics under current demanding conditions of performance in PM. Nanocarriers are escorted in a new epoch, where nanomedicine-based targeted-design structures can deliver multipurpose freight with favorable pharmacokinetics and capitalized to enhance drug specificity, usefulness, and safety with negligible side effects of traditional medicines. In the near future, this nanoscale technology will be incorporated into the medical system to serve different clinical aspects from diagnosis to therapy for several clinical disorders. Moreover, nanotechnology is evolving to share the platform of medicine to generate drugs with high activity, less toxicity, and sustained release to the target tissue. Therefore, personalized medicine and nanomedicine are on the verge of sustainable development to cure TC and other upcoming diseases. At the same time, it is hard to negotiate the hardship of clinical assessment of the patient’s samples and drug development for personalized medicine, summarized stepwise in (Figs. 4 and 5), at the cost of unpredictive terminal output at the end. Thus, it is very clear that extensive dedication is still required to step closer to ‘personalized/précised medicine’.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Deepak Gulwani and Priyanka Upadhyay have equally contributed to this work.

Author contributions
Deepak Gulwani and Priyanka Upadhyay have equally contributed to this work. Conception and Design: T.D.S; Analysis and Interpretation: D.G, V.S, P.U, R.G; Writer: T.D.S; Critical review: T.D.S; Funding: T.D.S; Supervision: T.D.S. All authors have read and agreed to the submitted version of the manuscript.

Funding
This work was supported by the Department of Health Research (DHR), India: (File No.R.11012/06/2021-GIA/HR), Anusandhan National Research Foundation (ANRF), India: (CRG/2023/001373), and Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), New Delhi, India: IIRP-2023-0914.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Management of low-risk thyroid cancers: is active surveillance a valid option? a systematic review of the literature
Dissecting anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: a comprehensive clinical, histologic, immunophenotypic, and molecular study of 360 cases
Radiopharmaceuticals for PET and SPECT Imaging: a literature review over the last decade
Therapeutic efficacy of nanoparticles and routes of administration
Role of nanoparticle size, shape and surface chemistry in oral drug delivery
The influence of protein adsorption on nanoparticle association with cultured endothelial cells
Activatable hybrid nanotheranostics for tetramodal imaging and synergistic photothermal/photodynamic therapy
Clinical history of the theranostic radionuclide approach to neuroendocrine tumors and other types of cancer: historical review based on an interview of eric P. Krenning by Rachel Levine
Theranostics: combining imaging and therapy
Metastatic medullary thyroid cancer: a dramatic response to a systemic chemotherapy (temozolomide and capecitabine) regimen
Combining radioimmunotherapy and chemotherapy for treatment of medullary thyroid carcinoma
Diagnosis and treatment of patients with thyroid cancer
Differentiated thyroid cancer theranostics: radioiodine and beyond
The biology of the sodium iodide symporter and its potential for targeted gene delivery
Enhancement of sodium/iodide symporter expression in thyroid and breast cancer
An inverse agonist of estrogen-related receptor gamma, GSK5182, Enhances Na+/I- symporter function in radioiodine-refractory papillary thyroid cancer cells
A comprehensive review on pharmacological applications and drug-induced toxicity of valproic acid
The acute inhibitory effect of iodide excess on sodium/iodide symporter expression and activity involves the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway
Combination of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma and retinoid X receptor agonists induces sodium/iodide symporter expression and inhibits cell growth of human thyroid cancer cells
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors for radioactive iodine refractory differentiated thyroid cancer
Larotrectinib, a highly selective tropomyosin receptor kinase (TRK) inhibitor for the treatment of TRK fusion cancer
The p53 pathway as a target in cancer therapeutics: obstacles and promise
Treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors for patients with differentiated thyroid cancer: the M. D Anderson experience
BRAF inhibitors in thyroid cancer: clinical impact, mechanisms of resistance and future perspectives
Kinase-targeted cancer therapies: progress, challenges and future directions
Phase II study of safety and efficacy of motesanib in patients with progressive or symptomatic, advanced or metastatic medullary thyroid cancer
A phase II study of axitinib in advanced neuroendocrine tumors
Phase II study of daily sunitinib in FDG-PET-positive, iodine-refractory differentiated thyroid cancer and metastatic medullary carcinoma of the thyroid with functional imaging correlation
Vemurafenib in patients with BRAF(V600E)-positive metastatic or unresectable papillary thyroid cancer refractory to radioactive iodine: a non-randomised, multicentre, open-label, phase 2 trial
Personalized treatment options for thyroid cancer: current perspectives
Comprehensive analysis of cancers of unknown primary for the biomarkers of response to immune checkpoint blockade therapy
Nanotheranostics for personalized medicine
Nanotheranostics for personalized medicine
Targeted nanotheranostics for future personalized medicine: recent progress in cancer therapy
Theranostics: a treasured tailor for tomorrow
Nanomedicine–challenge and perspectives
Nanoparticles: properties, applications and toxicities
Girdhar, V., Patil, S., Banerjee, S. & Singhvi, G. Nanocarriers For Drug Delivery: Mini Review. http://www.eurekaselect.com.
Aptamer-functionalized nanoparticles as ‘smart bombs’: the unrealized potential for personalized medicine and targeted cancer treatment
Smart ligand: aptamer-mediated targeted delivery of chemotherapeutic drugs and siRNA for cancer therapy
Applications of cancer cell-specific aptamers in targeted delivery of anticancer therapeutic agents
Synthesis and characterization of CD133 targeted aptamer-drug conjugates for precision therapy of anaplastic thyroid cancer
Identification and application of an aptamer targeting papillary thyroid carcinoma using tissue-SELEX
siRNA nanoformulation against the Ret/PTC1 junction oncogene is efficient in an in vivo model of papillary thyroid carcinoma
Targeting CD47 in anaplastic thyroid carcinoma enhances tumor phagocytosis by macrophages and is a promising therapeutic strategy
Targeting signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 pathway by cucurbitacin I diminishes self-renewing and radiochemoresistant abilities in thyroid cancer-derived CD133+ cells
ICAM1 antibody drug conjugates exert potent antitumor activity in papillary and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma
Personalized medicine in medullary thyroid carcinoma: a broad review of emerging treatments
Solid lipid nanoparticles: could they help to improve the efficacy of pharmacologic treatments for brain tumors?
Hybrid polymeric-magnetic nanoparticles in cancer treatments
Polymer-drug conjugates in inflammation treatment
Dendrimer, liposomes, carbon nanotubes and PLGA nanoparticles: one platform assessment of drug delivery potential
The role of micelle size in tumor accumulation, penetration, and treatment
The advantages of carbon nanoparticles in level VII lymph node dissection in patients with papillary thyroid cancer
The basic properties of gold nanoparticles and their applications in tumor diagnosis and treatment
Nanomaterials as promising theranostic tools in nanomedicine and their applications in clinical disease diagnosis and treatment
Challenges and recent progress in oral drug delivery systems for biopharmaceuticals
Nanocarriers for delivery of siRNA and co-delivery of siRNA and other therapeutic agents
Delivery of dual miRNA through CD44-targeted mesoporous silica nanoparticles for enhanced and effective triple-negative breast cancer therapy
Delivery of novel coumarin-dihydropyrimidinone conjugates through mixed polymeric nanoparticles to potentiate therapeutic efficacy against triple-negative breast cancer
Docetaxel-loaded D-α-tocopheryl polyethylene glycol-1000 succinate liposomes improve lung cancer chemotherapy and reverse multidrug resistance
Lysosomes as a therapeutic target
Nanotheranostics - application and further development of nanomedicine strategies for advanced theranostics
Semiconductor quantum dots as fluorescent probes for in vitro and in vivo bio-molecular and cellular imaging
Gold nanoparticle based photothermal therapy: Development and application for effective cancer treatment
Gold-based nanoplataform for the treatment of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma: a step forward
Imaging for staging and management of thyroid cancer
Multimodal imaging of thyroid cancer
Preoperative diagnostic algorithm of primary thyroid lymphoma using ultrasound, aspiration cytology, and flow cytometry
Novel iodinated gold nanoclusters for precise diagnosis of thyroid cancer
A review of low-intensity ultrasound for cancer therapy
Cetuximab-conjugated perfluorohexane/gold nanoparticles for low intensity focused ultrasound diagnosis ablation of thyroid cancer treatment
131I-radioisotope modified in PEGylation metal organic frameworks for sensitization in refractory differentiated thyroid cancer treatment
Co-delivery of 131 I and prima-1 by self-assembled CD44-targeted nanoparticles for anaplastic thyroid carcinoma theranostics
Detecting immune response to therapies targeting PDL1 and BRAF by using ferumoxytol MRI and macrin in anaplastic thyroid cancer
Enhancement of nanoparticle-mediated double suicide gene expression driven by ‘E9-hTERT promoter’ switch in dedifferentiated thyroid cancer cells
Extracellular vesicles act as nano-transporters of tyrosine kinase inhibitors to revert iodine avidity in thyroid cancer
Gold nanoparticles suppressed proliferation, migration, and invasion in papillary thyroid carcinoma cells via downregulation of CCT3
Noncovalent functionalized graphene nanocarriers from graphite for treating thyroid cancer cells
Selenium nanoparticles coated with pH responsive silk fibroin complex for fingolimod release and enhanced targeting in thyroid cancer
Precise engineering of cetuximab encapsulated gadollium nanoassemblies: in vitro ultrasound diagnosis and in vivo thyroid cancer therapy
HSA-MnO2-131I combined imaging and treatment of anaplastic thyroid carcinoma
Lipid-Peptide-mRNA Nanoparticles augment radioiodine uptake in anaplastic thyroid cancer
Nanoclay drug-delivery system loading potassium iodide promotes endocytosis and targeted therapy in anaplastic thyroid cancer
Emerging integrated nanoclay-facilitated drug delivery system for papillary thyroid cancer therapy
Poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid)-encapsulated iodine-131 nanoparticles fabricated with rhTSH induce apoptosis and immobilization of thyroid cancer cells
Radionuclide 131I-labeled albumin-indocyanine green nanoparticles for synergistic combined radio-photothermal therapy of anaplastic thyroid cancer
Multifunctional phase-transition nanoparticles for effective targeted sonodynamic-gene therapy against thyroid papillary carcinoma
Liposomal delivery of miR-34b-5p Induced cancer cell death in thyroid carcinoma
Resveratrol and its nanoparticle suppress doxorubicin/docetaxel-resistant anaplastic thyroid cancer cells in vitro and in vivo
Pseudomonas aeruginosa synthesized silver nanoparticles inhibit cell proliferation and induce ROS mediated apoptosis in thyroid cancer cell line (TPC1)
Targeting thyroid cancer with acid-triggered release of doxorubicin from silicon dioxide nanoparticles
Anti-hTERT siRNA-loaded nanoparticles block the growth of anaplastic thyroid cancer xenograft
Engineering multi-walled carbon nanotube therapeutic bionanofluids to selectively target papillary thyroid cancer cells
Transferrin receptor-targeted HMSN for sorafenib delivery in refractory differentiated thyroid cancer therapy
Effect of mesoporous silica nanoparticles co-loading with 17-AAG and Torin2 on anaplastic thyroid carcinoma by targeting VEGFR2
Polymer nanoformulation of sorafenib and all-trans retinoic acid for synergistic inhibition of thyroid cancer
Doxorubicin-loaded melanin particles for enhanced chemotherapy in drug-resistant anaplastic thyroid cancer cells
Combining doxorubicin-nanobubbles and shockwaves for anaplastic thyroid cancer treatment: preclinical study in a xenograft mouse model
Anticancer activity of all-trans retinoic acid-loaded liposomes on human thyroid carcinoma cells
Precise engineering of gemcitabine prodrug cocktails into single polymeric nanoparticles delivery for metastatic thyroid cancer cells
Human epidermal growth factor receptor 2(Her2)-targeted pH-responsive MR/NIRF bimodal imaging-mediated nano-delivery system for the diagnosis and treatment of undifferentiated thyroid cancer
Natural history of thyroid cancer
Genetic changes in thyroid cancers and the importance of their preoperative detection in relation to the general treatment and determination of the extent of surgical intervention—a review
Familial syndromes associated with thyroid cancer in the era of personalized medicine
Extracellularly activated nanocarriers: a new paradigm of tumor targeted drug delivery
Cancer active targeting by nanoparticles: a comprehensive review of literature
Chapter 11—interaction of nanoparticles with biomolecules, protein, enzymes, and its applications
The enhanced permeability and retention (epr) effect: the significance of the concept and methods to enhance its application
Single-cell transcriptome analysis reveals inter-tumor heterogeneity in bilateral papillary thyroid carcinoma
Deoxyribonucleic acid profiling analysis of 40 human thyroid cancer cell lines reveals cross-contamination resulting in cell line redundancy and misidentification
Flasks, fibres and flanks—pre-clinical tumour models for predicting clinical antitumour activity
Validation of clinical predictive value of in vitro colorimetric chemosensitivity assay in head and neck cancer
Molecular targets of tyrosine kinase inhibitors in thyroid cancer
Primary cell cultures for the personalized therapy in aggressive thyroid cancer of follicular origin
Xenograft and organoid model systems in cancer research
Therapeutic response differences between 2D and 3D tumor models of magnetic hyperthermia
The impact of thyroid cancer and post-surgical radioactive iodine treatment on the lives of thyroid cancer survivors: a qualitative study
Accelerated drug approval: meeting the ethical yardstick
Bridging the divide: a review on the implementation of personalized cancer medicine
Social, ethical and treatment related problems faced by healthcare workers in the care of head and neck cancer patients: a narrative review from the bioethics consortium from India
Ethical issues raised by thyroid cancer overdiagnosis: a matter for public health?
Recent findings on thymoquinone and its applications as a nanocarrier for the treatment of cancer and rheumatoid arthritis
Delivery of gefitinib in synergism with thymoquinone via transferrin-conjugated nanoparticle sensitizes gefitinib-resistant non-small cell lung carcinoma to control metastasis and stemness
Analysis of patient preferences in lung cancer—estimating acceptable tradeoffs between treatment benefit and side effects
Data integration challenges for machine learning in precision medicine