Medication-induced causes of delirium in patients with and without dementia: a systematic review of published neurology guidelines
Background
While medication is a recognized risk factor of delirium, there is currently a lack of detailed information on managing and preventing medication-induced cases.
Aim
This review summarizes the information provided in neurology guidelines on medication-induced delirium in patients with and without dementia to inform guidance on prevention and management strategies.
Method
A systematic literature review was conducted across 114 neurological and medical organisations, Guideline Central and PubMed. Guidelines, consensus guidelines, white papers, frameworks, protocols, standard procedures, action plans and strategic documents detailing the prevention and management of medication-induced delirium in adults with or without dementia were included. Title and full-text screening was completed independently by two reviewers using PICOS. AGREE II was used to assess reporting quality. A data extraction tool was designed based on the Cochrane Effective Practice and Organization of Care Review Group (EPOC) checklist and a mixed methods approach to synthesis adopted. The systematic review protocol was registered with International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) [ID: CRD42022366025].
Results
Out of 143 guidelines identified, 30 were included. Information for 140 individual medications was extracted. Medications most frequently cited included sedatives (n = 24/80%), opioids (n = 22/73,3%), psychoactive drugs (n = 21/70%) + anti-convulsants (n = 14/46,7%), anti-cholinergic agents (n = 20/66,7%), antihistamines (n = 18/60%), and steroids (n = 16/53,3%). Despite a consistently high-quality rating (n = 19, 63,3%), the detail provided often lacks specificity about pharmacological mechanisms, individual risk, dosing instructions, associated symptoms, therapeutic alternatives and avoidable drug-drug combinations. In relation to dementia, detailed information on the use of antipsychotics, cholinesterase inhibitors and benzodiazepines was extracted. No papers were excluded based on their quality.
Conclusion
No single guideline contains enough information on the risk, prevention, and management of medication-induced delirium to sufficiently support clinical decision making.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s11096-024-01861-4.

Impact statements
No single comprehensive guideline currently provides sufficient information to guide the prescribing and management of medication induced delirium in adult patients.
The limited understanding of medication-associated risks in the causation, treatment and prevention of delirium calls for clinical pharmacists to play a more central role in the multidisciplinary management of these patients.

Introduction
Delirium is an acute disturbance in attention and cognition associated with significant functional decline and distress to the patient. The overall prevalence of delirium in older adults is low (1–2%) but increases with age, rising to 64% by the age of 85 years. Delirium impacts up to 30% of hospitalized patients with advanced age, cognitive decline, and medical or surgical comorbidity rising to 70% in mechanically ventilated patients. A recent scoping review summarized that delirium resulted in increased adjusted healthcare costs ranging from $1,532 to $22,269 per patient depending on included cost categories, country, and the type of hospital department. Delirium Superimposed on Dementia (DSD) occurs when a person with pre-existing dementia develops delirium, it is much more common than delirium alone. Differentiating between delirium and dementia can be challenging, especially when both conditions coexist, and the clinicians do not know the patient’s baseline cognitive status. DSD is associated with higher rates of mortality and institutionalization, compared to inpatients with delirium or dementia alone.
Literature reports that any stressors to the baseline homeostasis are a vital cause in the development of delirium in older adults and dementia patients. These include but are not limited to substance intoxication or withdrawal, medication side effects, infection, surgery, metabolic derangements, pain, or common conditions such as constipation or urinary retention. Despite the heterogeneity in causative factors, delirium is often treated as a common end point attempting to treat all instances of delirium similarly. A systematic review published a comprehensive list of 33 predisposing, and 112 precipitating factors associated with delirium across all settings in a bid to improve the management and prevention success for patients. From a patient safety point of view medication-associated factors are of particular relevance as they present a key strategy in the management of delirium. However, no further detail is provided that would allow their correct dosing and management. Published literature provides evidence that any medication that increases the anticholinergic burden, exhibits a sedative- or antimuscarinic property; precipitates a serotonin syndrome or sleep disturbances is thought to carry a substantial and cumulative risk. In addition, age-related pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic changes as well as kidney and liver changes present a risk due to the effects on drug metabolism and a possible increase in blood–brain barrier permeability. Considering the unique challenges to patient safety pharmacological measures pose in the precipitation and treatment of delirium, there seems to be a paucity of comprehensive medication information to support clinical decision making.

Aim
This study aims to review and summarise the information provided in neurology guidelines on medication-induced delirium in patients with and without dementia to inform guidance on prevention and management strategies.

Method

Protocol and registration
The systematic review protocol was registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) [ID: CRD42022366025] and was reported following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The Population Intervention Control Outcomes and Study Design (PICOS) criteria were used to assess study eligibility. Protocols, standard procedures, guidelines, consensus guidelines, white papers, frameworks, toolkits, action plans, and strategic documents were included (referred to as “guidelines” throughout). Included were all documents detailing the prevention and management of medication-induced delirium in patients with and without dementia across all clinical settings, except for the peri-operative setting. No geographical exclusions applied (Table S1).

Searches and study selection
A comprehensive list of 114 Neurological and Medical Societies of interest was compiled (Table S2). All websites were hand searched systematically. To complement the search, Guideline Central and PubMed database searches were included. A database search strategy was developed with the help of a research librarian at Innsbruck University (delirium [MeSH], medication therapy management [MeSH], Hallucin*, altered mental status; confusion [MeSH], Encephalopathy*, Cognitive*; Drug induced; Guidelines; Consensus). Additional manual searches of related studies listed in the references, footnotes and citations were carried out to include any relevant additional guidelines. All searches were re-run prior to the final analysis on the 2nd September, 2023. Only full-text publications in English published since 2000 were included to capture any prescribing practice changes. No unpublished studies were sought (Table S3).

Quality assessment
Title, abstract and full-text screening was carried out by two researchers (GBP/RM) independently with discrepancies resolved by discussion. A third reviewer was consulted for any unresolved discrepancies (AEW). During the screening process reviewers were blinded to the other’s decisions. Excel® (Microsoft 365) Software was used to manage the screening process. The Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II (AGREE II) for qualitative studies was used to conduct the quality assessment of all included papers. This was performed independently by two reviewers (GBP/AEW) for all papers and any discrepancies resolved by consultation with a third (FJ). No papers were excluded based on their quality as suggested by Dixon-Woods et al. (2006).

Data extraction
A data extraction tool was designed based on the Cochrane Effective Practice and Organization of Care Review Group (EPOC) checklist. The tool was piloted by three reviewers (GBP/RM/AEW) independently on two articles. All inconsistencies were resolved by discussion and the data extraction form finalized. All three assessors (AW/ASH/DD) extracted data independently.

Data synthesis
Medication causes of delirium were extracted and a mixed approach to synthesis used (quantitative analysis by drug class combined with narrative synthesis for guideline characteristics). To minimize bias, extraction was undertaken independently by two researchers (GBP/IT) with discrepancies resolved by a third (AEW).

Reflexivity
All authors are pharmacists. Four researchers have an extensive background in research and practice with the other two being assistant pharmacists. All researchers have experience in counseling patients and highlighting potential unwanted drug-related problems to prescribers in relation to impaired cognition and confusion.

Results

Guideline characteristics

Selection of guidelines
PRISMA flowchart showing the identification, screening and selection of delirium guidelines across neurological and medical professional organizations, Pubmed and Guideline Central.
Adapted from: Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC, Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ, 2021;372:n71. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n71
The literature search yielded 143 guidelines. After screening, 30 guidelines were included (Fig. 1). Guidelines were published between 2003 and 2023 the majority of which originated from North-America (n = 11), UK (n = 8), Australia and New-Zealand (n = 5), with one paper each from Denmark, Switzerland, Iceland, Japan, India and one from a global expert group.

Guideline characteristics
: Summary of guideline characteristics and quality
Publishing Organisation	References	Year	Type of guideline	Healthcare setting	AGREE II	 	Canada	Registered Nurses Association of Ontario (RNAO)		2003	Guidelines	Range of Healthcare settings	***	 		Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health (CCSMH)		2006	Guidelines	Range of Healthcare settings	***	 		Fraser Health		2006	Guidelines	Hospice palliative care	**	 		Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health (CCSMH)		2010	Guidelines	Not stated	***	 		Registered Nurses Association of Ontario (RNAO)		2016	Guidelines	Range of Healthcare settings	***	 		BC Centre for palliative care		2019	Guidelines	Hospice palliative care	***	 	North-America							 		The American Psychiatric Association Practice (APA)		2016	Guidelines	Range of Healthcare settings	***	 		International Expert opinion		2018	Guidelines	Adults in ICU	***	 		Vanderbilt University Medical Center		2021	Guidelines	Adults in ICU	*	 		NYU Long Island School of Medicine		2021	Algorithm	Hospital	*	 		Hartford HealthCare		2022	Care Pathway	Hospital	Not assessable	 	UK	Intensive Care Society/ UKCPA		2006	Toolkit	Adults in ICU	***	 		British Geriatrics Society / Royal College of Physicians		2006	Guidelines	Not stated	***	 		The Mid Yorkshire Hospital NHS Trust		2015	Guideline	Hospital	**	 		University Hospital Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust		2018	Guideline	Hospital	**	 		The British Association for Psychopharmacology and the National Association of Psychiatric (BAP NAPICU)		2018	Consensus Guideline	Hospital	***	 		Tayside (NHS)		2020	Guidelines	Not stated	*	 		Scottish Intercollegiate Guideline Network		2019	Guidelines	Not stated	***	 		National Institute of Clinical Excellence		2023	Guidelines	Hospital and long-term residential care or nursing home	***	 	Australia							 		Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council (AHMAC)		2006	Guidelines	Acute, subacute, residential care & community care settings	***	 		Australian Government: Department of Health & Ageing		2010	Care Pathway	Range of healthcare settings	***	 		NSW Agency for Clinical Innovation		2015	Key Principles	Hospital	**	 		Australian and New Zealand Society for Geriatric Medicine		2012	Position Statement	Not stated	Not assessable	 		Australian Commission of Safety & quality in healthcare		2021	Factsheet	Range of Healthcare settings	*	 	Denmark	Danish Health Authority		2021	Quick guide	Not stated	***	 	Switzerland	European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO)		2018	Guidelines	Adults with cancer	***	 	Iceland	Landspitali Hospital		2015	Guidelines	Hospital	***	 	Japan	Japanese Society of Neurology		2017	Guidelines	Range of Healthcare settings	***	 	India	Indian Psychiatric Society		2018	Guidelines	Range of Healthcare settings	**	 	Other	Global Council on Brain Health (GCBH)		2020	Consensus Guidelines	Range of Healthcare settings	***
[High quality 70% ***, Moderate quality > 40% and < 70% **, Low quality < 40%*.] (The AGREE Research Trust, 2009)
Guidelines are either published by national and global professional organizations (n = 21; 70%) or hospitals (n = 8; 26,7%), with one published by American and Australian experts (n = 1; 3,3%). As a result, publications are applicable to a range of primary (n = 19; 63,7%) or secondary (n = 11; 36,3%) healthcare practices (Table 1).

Guideline quality
Most guidelines were deemed to be designed, conducted, and reported with a high quality based on the AGREE II instrument (n = 19, 63,3%). Only two guidelines could not be assessed as they are single-page care pathways or position statements. No guideline was excluded based on quality (Table 1).

Medication at risk of inducing delirium

Causative medication mechanism
Summary of reported mechanism or risk through which medication can contribute to the development of a delirium in adults
Medication risk	References	 	Drug interaction		 	Drug withdrawal		 	Adverse effects (e.g. anticholinergic; sedative)		 	The addition of three or more medications		 	Polypharmacy*		 	Drug intoxication		 	Renal impairment		 	Drug poisoning (esp. pethidine, promethazine, illicit substances)		 	Pharmacodynamic & Pharmacokinetic changes
While all guidelines clearly stated that multiple pathogenic mechanisms contribute to the development of delirium, medication is inconsistently presented as pre-disposing or precipitating factor, with no specific categorization given. A variety of risks through which medication can contribute to the development of a delirium have been suggested above. Medications that cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), increase BBB permeability (e.g. in renal failure) or have anticholinergic or dopaminergic activity are most likely to cause a delirium. Any medication that contributes to a serotonin syndrome such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (e.g. linezolid, tramadol, and amphetamines) also increase the risk. Age-related biological changes in the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties were mentioned alongside disease- related kidney and liver impairment and resultant drug toxicities
*No exact definition of polypharmacy is given
A summary of reported mechanisms through which medication can contribute to the development of delirium in adults is summarised in Table 2

Medication at risk of causing a delirium
Summary of all 140 individual medication reported to carry a risk of causing a delirium in adults organised by ATC Code
Delirium				 	ATC Code	Drugs at risk of causing a delirium	Risk	Treatment	Comment	References	 	A	Alimentary Tract and Metabolism					 	A02BA	H2-receptor antagonists					 		Cimetidine	(✓)		Cimetidine carries the highest delirogenic potential		 					Overall evidence for the delirogenic potential of H2-Antagonists is inconclusive		 					Check dose adjustments in patients with renal impairment		 	A03B	Semisynthetic Derivatives					 		Atropine	✓		Avoid due to antimuscarinic effect		 		Belladonna alkaloids	✓		Avoid due to anticholinergic (cumulative) effect		 		Butylscopolamine	✓		Avoid due to antimuscarinic effect		 	A03F						 		Promotility (kinetic) agents	✓		Avoid due to anticholinergic (cumulative) effect		 	A04A						 		Prochlorperazines, Scopolamine, Metoclopramide	✓		Directly delirogenic		 					Anticholinergic drugs with the highest potential of causing symptoms of delirium		 					Metoclopramide should be avoided in high-risk patients		 	A07AA	Antibiotics					 		Fludrochinolones	✓		Fludrochinolones carry the highest risk		 		Metronidazole; Oxazolidinone, Benzylpenicillin i.m/ Penicillin G; cephalosporins	✓		Antibiotics other than Fludrochinolones have been cautioned to cause cognitive impairment		 	B	Blood and Blood forming organs					 	C	Cardiovascular System					 	C01B	Antiarrhythmics					 		Digoxin; Disopyramide; Amiodarone; Lidocain; Quinidine and Tocainide	✓		Careful monitor renal function to avoid toxicity		 					Disopyramide has a high anticholinergic effect		 					Amiodarone induced sleep disturbances		 	C02A	Antiadrenergic Agents, Centrally Acting					 		Clonidine, Methyldopa	(✓)		Causes changes in mental state		 					Methyldopa has severe CNS side effects		 	C02C	Antiadrenergic Agents, Peripherally Acting					 		Prazosin	(✓)		Causes cognitive impairment		 	C03C						 		Furosemide	✓		Avoid due to anticholinergic (cumulative) effect		 	C07A	Beta Blocking Agents					 		Propranolol, Metoprolol, Atenolol, Elenolol, Timolol	✓		Propranolol & Metoprolol carry the highest delirogenic potential		 	C08	Calcium Channel Blockers					 		Dihydropyridines, Verapamil and Diltiazem	✓		Dihydropyridines have the highest delirium risk		 					Other Calcium Channel Blockers cause cognitive impairment		 	D	Dermatologicals					 	D01	Antifungals					 		Amphotericin B, Ketoconazole	(✓)		An indirect risk factor for delirium		 	G	Genito Urinary System and Sex hormones					 	G04B						 		Oxybutinin	✓		Avoid due to anticholinergic (cumulative) effect		 		Tolterodine	✓		Avoid due to anticholinergic (cumulative) effect		 	H	Systemic Hormonal Preparations, Excl. Sex Hormones and Insulins					 	H02	Corticosteroids					 		Hydrocortisone sodium succinate; prednisolone; prednisone; Methylprednisolone and Dexamethasone	✓		Idiosyncratic effects of corticosteroids, level of evidence is inconclusive		 					Individual tendencies of causing sleep disturbances, anticholinergic side effects, hypothalamicpituitary-adrenal axis abnormalities		 					Avoid high doses, long-term therapy, and premature or abrupt discontinuation		 	J	Anti-infectives for Systemic Use					 	J05	Antivirals					 		Ganciclovir, Acyclovir	(✓)		An indirect risk factor for delirium		 	L	Antineoplastic and Immunomodulating Agents					 	M	Musculo-Skeletal System					 	M01A						 		Aspirin, Ibuprofen, Naproxen, Difflunisal and Sulindac	(✓)		NSAIDs can cause acute renal failure		 					They pose an indirect risk factor for delirium		 	Indomethacin		✓				 					They are all associated with cognitive impairment		 					Indomethacin is toxic that can induce delirium		 	M03B						 		Baclofen, Orphenadrin (+ Paracetamol), Orphenadrin (+ Diclofenac), Methocarbamol, Chlorzoxazone, Carisoprodol, Cyclobenzaprine and Trihexyphenidyl	(✓)		Have all been associated with cause cognitive Impairment		 	N	Nervous System					 	N02A	Opioids					 		Pethidione, Meperidine, Codeine,Hydrocodein, Propoxyohene, Hydromorphone, (Buprenorphine), Tramadol	✓		Pain treatment should be multimodal		 					If pain is not the cause of delirium opioid dose should be decreased		 					Caution: cognitive dysfunction, and hemodynamic/respiratory impairments, anticholinergic effect, opioid withdrawl and opioid induced neurotoxicty		 					Morphine & Fentanyl no significant risk		 					Avoid Transdermal fentanyl for non-cancer pain in opioid naïve patients		 	N02B	Other Analgesics and Antipyretics					 		Nefopam	✓		Inhibits the reuptake of serotonin, dopamine, and noradrenaline		 	N03	Antiepileptics					 		Phenobarbitol, Primidone and Clonazepam, Valproic acid, Carbamazepine and Phenytoin, Mysoline	✓		Anticonvulsants are frequently associated with deteriorating cognitive impairment		 					Ongoing need and dose of anti-convulsants should be carefully considered		 		Pregabalin, Gabapentin, Lamotrigine, Topiramat and Vaplproate	N/A				 					One causative mechanism could be the impact on REM sleep		 					Mysoline is cautioned in palliative care patients		 	N04						 		Bromocriptine, pergolide, amantadine, selegiline, pramipexole, ropinirole, Biperiden, Levodopa/ Carbidopa Procyclidin, Rotigotin, Benztropine	✓		High-risk medication due to their dopamine agonist and anticholinergic effects		 					Levodopa should not be stopped		 		Levodopa	X				 		Rivastigmine and donepezil	✓				 	N05A	Antipsychotics					 		Haloperidol, Quetiapine, Risperidone,	✓	✓	Risk is dose dependent; age of patient		 					Lowest effective dose Haloperidol, Quetiapine or Risperidone may be used as pharmacological treatment		 		Olanzapine, Thioridazin, Fluphenazine, Prochlorperazine, Perphenazine, Trifluperazine and Chlorpromazine, Phenothiazine	✓	X			 					Avoid in Parkinson’s disease & Palliative care		 					Caution: extrapyramidal symptoms, sedation, anticholinergic effects including increased confusion, cardiovascular effects and tardive dyskinesia		 		Lithium	✓		Poisoning in combination with other antispychotics		 	N05C(D)	Hypnotics Sedatives (Benzodiazepines)					 		Triazolam, Midazolam, Lorazepam, Alprazolam, Oxazepam, Diazepam, Clobazam and Chlordiazepoxide	✓	X	Markedly increase the odds of delirium; aggravate delirium; morbidity & mortality		 					Risk is dose dependent		 					Should never be used as a first choice to treat insomnia, agitation or delirium		 					Do not use unless management of alcohol withdrawal, acute seizure management, palliative sedation to reduce seizure risk, myoclonus, muscle tension, acute agitation crisis or terminal delirium		 		Zolpidem	✓		No other Z-drugs have been described		 		Dexmedetomidine			Superior to all other agents, including midazolam and placebo, showing a significant reduction in the incidence of agitation, confusion and delirium		 					Unclear if can inherently reduce delirium or merely reduce the need for delirogenic drugs		 					Is not recommended for the prevention of delirium		 	N06AA	Non-selective monamine reuptake inhibitors (Tricyclic)					 		Amitryptiline, Imipramine, Clomipramine, Opipramol, Doxepin, Imipramine & Desipramine	✓		Antidepressants that carry the highest delirogenic potential		 					Have a considerable anticholinergic potential		 	N06AB	Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors					 		Paroxetine	✓		Antidepressants that carry the highest delirogenic potential		 		Citalopram, Escitalopram, Fluoxetine, Fluvoxamine and Sertraline	(✓)		SSRI’s and Tricyclic antidepressants both have the potential to cause REM sleep disturbances		 					Can cause electrolyte imbalances such as hyponatremia		 	N06AX	Other antidepressants					 		Duloxetine, Milnacipran, Venlafaxin	✓		Likely to cause symptoms of serotonin syndrome		 					Taper off SSRI/SNRI, don’t stop abruptly		 	P	Antiparasitic Products, Insectecides and Repellents					 	R	Respiratory System					 	R03B						 		Glycopyrronium Bromide	✓		Avoid due to anticholinergic (cumulative) effect		 	R03DA	Xanthines					 		Aminophylline	✓		Anticholinergic effects and can affect sleep		 	R06	Antihistamines					 		Brompheniramine, Hydroxyzine, Promethazine	✓		First generation antihistamines carry a higher delirogenic potential compared to newer generations of antihistamines		 					Carefully consider the ongoing need		 		Diphenhydramine	✓	X	Diphenhydramine in particular should not be administered		 		Loratadine, Meclazine	✓		Loratadine and Meclazine exhibit an anticholinergic potential		 	S	Sensory Organs					 	S01	Opthalmologicals					 		Homatropine	✓		Avoid due to anticholinergic (cumulative) effect		 	V	Various
A total of 140 individual medication were listed across 30 guidelines. The medication classes who are cited most often (> 60% of the time) included sedatives (n = 24/80%), opioids (n = 22/73,3%), psychoactive drugs (n = 21/70%) + anti-convulsants (n = 14/46,7%), anti-cholinergic agents (n = 20/66,7%) and anti-histamines (n = 18/60%) (Table 3).
Steroids (n = 16/53,3%) anti-depressants (n = 12/40%), H2-Antagonists (n = 12/40%), anti-hypertensives (n = 11/36,7%), anti-parkinsonian (n = 11/36,7%), anti-arrhythmics (n = 10/33%), antibiotics (n = 9/30%) and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) (n = 8/26,7%) were also mentioned (Supplementary Table 4).

Sedatives

Antipsychotics:
Delirium caused by antipsychotics depends on the dose of the drug and the age of the patient. While antipsychotics are considered a direct risk factor especially in palliative care, low dose haloperidol, quetiapine or risperidone may be used as pharmacological treatment for hyperactive delirium where behavioral problems (e.g. severe agitation) and emotional disturbance (e.g. severe anxiety) persist. In older people, caution must be observed due to their side-effect profile, including extrapyramidal symptoms, sedation, anticholinergic effects including increased confusion, cardiovascular effects, and tardive dyskinesia. Antipsychotics reduce the efficacy of anticholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs) and may trigger or aggravate delirium.
Due to the potential for harm and insufficient evidence for the efficacy of antipsychotics in the prevention and treatment of delirium, these medications should be administered at the lowest effective dose and for the shortest period of time in patients who are severely agitated and/or at risk of harming themselves and/or others. The use of first-generation antipsychotics can be associated with neurological side effects and QTc prolongation. The use of haloperidol and risperidone for agitation/psychosis in a dosage of 0.25–4 mg/day and 0.5–2 mg/day respectively carries the following cautions: EPS symptoms (+ + +), QTc prolongation (+ + , more with IV use) and orthostatic hypotension ( +). The use of haloperidol and risperidone should be avoided when treating mild delirium in palliative patients should be avoided. Olanzapine, thioridazine, fluphenazine, prochlorperazine, perphenazine, trifluoperazine and chlorpromazine were all identified as medications that carry a risk of inducing cognitive impairment and/ or delirium.

Benzodiazepines:
Benzodiazepines markedly increase the odds of developing delirium in hospital/surgical wards, in residential/ community care (OR 3.0 95% CI 1.3 to 6.8) and palliative patients. The higher the dose and the longer acting the benzodiazepine, the greater the risk. Benzodiazepines should only be used for alcohol withdrawal, acute seizure management and in palliative sedation to reduce seizure risk, myoclonus, muscle tension, or acute agitation crisis.
In addition to evidence that benzodiazepines can trigger or aggravate delirium in older adults, benzodiazepines and other sedative-hypnotics significantly increase the risk of morbidity (e.g. falls, delirium and hip fractures) and mortality. They should never be used as a first choice to treat insomnia, agitation, or delirium. Dementia patients taking benzodiazepines have an increased risk of developing a delirium, falls, worsening agitation, disorientation, stroke, and premature death.
Short-acting benzodiazepines can cause cognitive impairment. Lorazepam (medium acting) should only be used in patients with alcohol withdrawal or terminal delirium, while alprazolam and oxazepam (medium acting) are not flagged as toxic as lorazepam. Diazepam, clobazam and chlordiazepoxide (long acting) are all considered directly delirogenic drugs.

Z-substances/ hypnotics:
Zolpidem, a non-benzodiazepine Z-drug was shown to cause confusion, disorientation, and delirium. No other Z-drugs were described.

Psychoactive drugs and antimanic agents:
Most guidelines stated that haloperidol is the treatment of choice to manage delirium, however long-term haloperidol use is considered a delirium risk factor. The guideline from the Registered Nurses Association of Ontario (2003), states that thioridazine, fluphenazine, prochlorperazine, trifluoperazine, and perphenazine cause cognitive impairment in older patients. So do chlorpromazine, olanzapine and phenothiazine. Since lithium has a narrow therapeutic window, serum lithium levels should always be monitored especially in patients with renal impairment. Lithium poisoning should be suspected if the patient is on combined treatment of lithium and other antipsychotics. Lithium is therefore considered an indirect risk factor for delirium.

Opioids
Pethidine and meperidine are the opioids most likely to precipitate a delirium while oxycodone seems least likely. Morphine or fentanyl were not significantly associated with delirium. However transdermal fentanyl patches are contraindicated for non-cancer pain in opioid naïve patients as they pose a significant risk in the precipitation of delirium. Codeine, dihydrocodeine, propoxyphene and hydromorphone all carry a reported delirogenic risk, with buprenorphine causing excessive drowsiness when combined with alcohol or central nervous system depressants. Combining tramadol with other drugs that affect serotonin levels should be avoided.

Psychoactive drugs

Anti-convulsants
Phenobarbital, primidone, and clonazepam cause more cognitive impairment than valproic acid, carbamazepine, and phenytoin. One causative mechanism could be the impact on rapid eye movement (REM) sleep or sleep fragmentation of carbamazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbital. Mysoline is cautioned in palliative care patients, while the effects of pregabalin, gabapentin, lamotrigine, topiramate, and valproate are not mentioned.

Anti-cholinergic and antimuscarinic medications
Most guidelines state that drugs with anticholinergic activity increase the risk of delirium in older patients. They reduce the efficacy of AChEIs while also causing sedation, cognitive impairment, delirium, and falls.
Reported anticholinergic medication included belladonna alkaloids, homatropine, glycopyrrolate
, promotility agents, and tolterodine. Only two antimuscarinic agents with an increased risk of precipitating a delirium were reported, atropine and hyoscine.

Antihistamines
First-generation antihistamines such as brompheniramine, hydroxyzine, promethazine and dimenhydrinate carry a higher delirogenic potential compared to newer generations of antihistamines, as they cross the blood–brain barrier more readily. Diphenhydramine, in particular should not be administered to prevent or treat delirium. Loratadine and meclizine also exhibit an anticholinergic potential.

Therapeutic Alternatives
Suggested alternative medication provided in patients with a high risk of delirium
Drug class	Medication	Therapeutic alternative	References	 	Opioid Analgesics	Fentanyl	Alternatives are Hydromorphone, Acetaminophen, or Tramadol		 		Morphine	Oxycodone seems to have the least chance of causing delirium. Fentanyl can also be used		 	Antiemetic	Metoclopramide	Ondansetron		 		Prochlorperazine	Ondansetron		 	Antihistamine	Diphenhydramine	Alternative for allergic Rhinitis is Loratadine		 		Promethazine	Loratadine		 		Hydroxyzine	Loratadine		 	H2 receptor antagonist	Cimetidine	Ranitidine or Famotidine		 		Famotidine	Alternative is PPI except with Plavix, or Pantoprazole		 	Antipsychotics		Use lorazepam 0.5 mg PO /IM (if available)/sublingual where antipsychotics are contraindicated		 		Haloperidol	Methotrimeprazine is a more sedating alternative to haloperidol; dosing 12.5 to 25 mg SC, IV or PO Q1-2H until calming occurs		 	Tricyclic Antidepressants		Most tricyclic antidepressants are anticholinergic and can cause delirium, for example amitriptyline (other than nortriptyline), SSRIs are less known for causing delirium symptoms, but cases have been recorded where fluoxetine and citalopram were associated with delirium
Therapeutic alternatives were only provided by three publications. Only one comprehensive best practice guideline published by the Nurses’ Association of Ontario (2016) offers more comprehensive suggestions. In most cases a switch to a newer generation drug is suggested. Specific dosing recommendations are never provided (Table 4).

Delirium in dementia patients
Summary of drugs and cautions for medication used in delirium and dementia. Adapted from University Hospital Birmingham NHS, 2015 & James C. et al., 2020)
Drug	Dose	Route	Indication	Cautions	 	Typical Antipsychotics	 	Haloperidol	0.5-1 mg PRN to a max of 10 mg in 24 h. Give in 0.5 mg alliquots up to 10 mg	Oral IM	Agitation/aggression when patient is at risk of harming self or staff	Avoid in patients with Parkinson’s Disease or Lewy Body Dementia. Risk of over sedation. Use atypical antipsychotics instead	 	Stress and Distress in Alzheimer’s Disease and/or delirium	 	Acute delirium when non-pharmacological treatments ineffective [licensed use]	QTc prolongation and/or ventricular arrhythmias, in addition to sudden death, have been reported with haloperidol at high doses, high plasma concentrations, in predisposed patients or with parenteral useIncreased risk of stroke in people with dementiaMonitor for extra-pyramidal and cardiac side-effects	 	Atypical Antipsychotics	 	Quetiapine	25 mg PRN/BD	Oral	An alternative to haloperidol in patients with Parkinson’s Disease or Lewy Body Dementia	Moderate effect on QTc prolongation	 	12.5 mg-25 mg daily; up to 25-100 mg daily		Increased risk of stroke in people with dementia	 	Psychosis, aggression, or severe agitation/anxiety in Dementia with Lewy Bodies [unlicensed use ‘off-label’]	Monitor for sedation and postural hypotension	 	Risperidone	Short term (1d—6 weeks) severe/persistent anxiety/aggression: 0.25mcg BD max. of 1 mg in 24 h on alternate days	Oral	Should be used with specialist guidance for certain patients with psychosis, short-term treatment (up to 6 weeks) of persistent aggression in patients with moderate to severe Alzheimer’s dementia unresponsive to non-pharmacological interventions and when there is a risk of harm to self or others [licensed indication]	Dementia with Lewy bodiesLow effect on QTc prolongationIncrease risk of stroke in people with dementiaMonitor for extra-pyramidal and cardiac side-effectsMonitor for hypotension	 	Psychosis or severe agitation/anxiety in Alzheimer’s Disease [unlicensed use ‘off-label’]		 	Olanzapine	4.5 to 8.2 mg/day			Dementia is predictive of a poor response to olanzapine	 	Cholinesterase inhibitors	 	Donepezil			Treatment of delirium in dementia		 	Rivastigmine	Prevention of delirium in vascular dementiaVisual hallucinations in LBD	 	Benzodiazepines	 	Lorazepam	0.5 – 1 mg PRN up to two hourly (maximum 3 mg in 24 h) 	Oral IM or IV	2nd line for short term management of agitation e.g. if urgent scans needed	Can cause or worsen respiratory depression	 	An alternative to haloperidol in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies and those with Parkinson’s disease	Benzodiazepines markedly increase the probability of delirium developing in a variety of settings	 	Management of delirium in Parkinsonism or Lewy Body dementia as an alternative to quetiapine [unlicensed use ‘off-label’]	 	Short-term treatment (typically 1–2 days) of severe agitation/ anxiety in delirium [unlicensed use ‘off-label’]	 	Midazolam	1.25 – 5 mg	Oral or IV	Same as other benzodiazepines	Very quick acting but short-lived
Pharmacological measures for the management of delirium in dementia patients must not be considered unless the patient’s behavior has been assessed as posing a danger to themselves or others and if non-pharmacological interventions have failed to be effective. The emphasis should be on regular rather than when required medication (Table 5).

Discussion
This systematic review provides a unique summary of the specific medication related information available to support prescribing and management of delirium patients in practice which extends beyond the advice provided in any one specific practice guideline. All 140 identified drugs across 30 drug classes span all but four ATC Codes. Overall, there is a distinct lack of specifc medication related detail on mechanism of action, dosage, route of administration, indication, cautions and therapeutic alternatives provided on medication-induced delirium in patients with and without dementia to guide safe prescribing in practice. Nervous System Drugs (ATC N) such as sedatives, opioids and psychoactive drugs carry the highest risk alongside antihistamines (ATC R) and steroids (ATC H). Medication affecting the alimentary tract (ATC A) and the cardiovascular system (ATC C) are also frequently mentioned. The advice in relation to these drug classes is mostly generic and lacks specificity which could be reflective of our general lack of understanding of the underlying pathophysiology of delirium. Challenges in the management of delirium are reflected in the advice on the use of benzodiazepines and antipsychotics. While Benzodiazepines are reported to markedly increase the odds of delirium, aggravated delirium, morbidity, and mortality, dexmedetomidine is stated as being superior to all other agents in significantly reducing the incidence of agitation, confusion, and delirium itself. The lowest effective dose of haloperidol, quetiapine and risperidone are recommended for use as treatment of delirium but carry a caution of extrapyramidal and anticholinergic side effects. Few alternative treatment suggestions are provided relating mainly to newer generations of drugs within drug classes. While very few documents provide specific guidance on the management of delirium in dementia patients it was possible to extract quite detailed information on the use antipsychotics (typical/ atypical), cholinesterase inhibitors and benzodiazepines including dosing instructions from one very detailed regional NHS guideline.

Medication risk
The inherent lack of understanding of medication risk associated with the causation and treatment of delirium in adult patients with and without dementia is reflective of the general lack of understanding of the pathophysiology of delirium. Considering the heterogeneity of symptoms associated with delirium, none of the guidelines specify the most common delirium symptoms associated with the different medications/ medication classes. Merely terms such as “delirium” and “cognitive impairment” are reported, not however hallucination, confusion, disorientation, neuroleptic malignant, syndrome or encephalopathy. Therefore, it is unclear which symptom profile each individual medication contributes to. A further gap identified is the paucity of reported potentially cumulative drug combinations. While some combinations are provided e.g. orphenadrine + paracetamol or diclofenac + orphenadrine there is no clear indication of which drug combinations to avoid. Australian guidelines reference a more generalized measure quoting the addition of three or more medications during inpatient stay. This seems to date back to a single study from 1996 which in turn, does not provide evidence for this claim. Other guidelines state the occurrence of “polypharmacy” as a contributing risk factor without a definition for polypharmacy. The same is true for a lack of standardized methodology to quantify the risk of individual drugs.

Treatment of delirium
It is commonly accepted that pharmacotherapy should not be used as a treatment for delirium as medication could be an indirect risk factors for the development of delirium. Laurentani proposes that non-pharmacological approaches should be first line with the main goal being the identification of the underlying cause. Should medication treatment be needed, when behaviors pose a safety risk, or when there is a risk of interrupting essential medical care, the lowest effective dose of haloperidol, quetiapine, and risperidone should be used. A meta-analysis published in 2016, concluded that there is insufficient evidence to support the routine use of antipsychotics to prevent and treat delirium with a call for more rigorous well-powered randomized-controlled trials (RCTs) in high-risk populations. The same is true for other strategies such as cholinesterase inhibitors, alpha-2 agonists, and melatonin receptor agonists (including melatonin itself). None show a clear benefit for the use of pharmacotherapy to prevent delirium, which may explain why these have not been included in the guidelines. Orexin antagonists, suvorexant and lemborexant, while having been suggested to have a preventative effect on delirium are also not mentioned. Dexmedetomidine, a highly selective alpha-2 adrenoreceptor agonist, used to manage pain and sedation in the intensive care unit (ICU), is the only reported medication known to reduce the incidence of delirium and agitation in intensive care patients. While the exact mechanisms for this is not fully understood, several publications seem to point towards a downregulation of the HMGB1-TLR4-NF-κB signaling pathway by activating alpha-2 adrenergic receptors and stimulation of the vagus nerve via a vagal- and alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor-dependent mechanism .

Delirium and dementia
Dementia is a predisposing factor for delirium [relative risk (RR):2.3–4.7]. Cholinesterase inhibitors, commonly used in the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease and dementia have been recommended in the treatment and prevention of delirium in this patient group and critically ill patients without dementia. A recent comment by Liebermann O., et al. (2023) detailed that when older adults with preexisting dementia were stratified based on whether they were prescribed donepezil before admission, those receiving donepezil had lower rates of delirium incidence, in-hospital mortality, 90-day post-discharge mortality, lengths of stay and duration of mechanical ventilation, despite similar illness severity and comorbidities on admission. As with pharmacological treatment of delirium above, high-quality evidence is lacking.

Limitations
The lack of consistent terminology in delirium research and the need to hand search the websites of all identified professional organizations may have resulted in missed publications. Limiting the search strategy for the database searches (Guideline Central and PubMed) to only include “guidelines” will not have captured other types of practice guidance. The heterogeneity of included guidelines limited the synthesis to a mixed method combining quantitative and narrative elements. Exclusion of non-English language documents may have resulted in further loss of local guidelines. Databases such as web of science, embase, cochrance library were not included in the search as they focus on original research on this topic, this may have resulted in guideline omissions. The content of original research on this topic is published in a separate systematic review.

Future research
The results from this systematic review should form the basis for the development of clear and detailed medication related management guideline aimed at providing specific prescribing advice for the medication-related risks related to the causation, treatment and prevention of delirium, despite the identified gaps within the present neurology guidelines. The lack of our pathophysiological understanding of the causes for delirium calls for a categorization of delirium into distinct aetiological subgroups to facilitate high quality research into the effect of medication related risk in delirium within different patient groups. This would also support the development of existing and future multicomponent treatment approaches to improve patient safety. Analysis of large epidemiological and real-world databases are required to identify pertinent associations between medication, delirium, and other confounding factors.

Conclusion
A uniquely comprehensive summary of the specific medication related information available to support prescribing and management of delirium in practice is provided. This extends beyond the advice conventionally found in any single resource. The overall paucity of detailed medication related information reflects the lack of our inherent understanding relating to the pathophysiology of delirium in different patient groups. There is an urgent need for research into risks and causes in distinct aetiological subgroups to support the development of clear and detailed holistic multicomponent approaches to delirium management.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Funding
Open access funding provided by University of Innsbruck and Medical University of Innsbruck. This work was carried out as part of an ERASMUS + scholarship. The funders had no role in the study design, interpretation of the data, or preparation of the manuscript.

Conflicts of interest
AEW, is an Associate Editor of the International Journal of Clinical Pharmacy. She had no role in handling the manuscript, specifically the processes of editorial review, peer review and decision making. GBP, RM, IT, PSG and FJ declare that they have no potential conflicts of interest that might be relevant to the contents of this manuscript.

References
Delirium in the Elderly
Lourdes Ramirez Echeverria M, Schoo C, Paul M. StatPearls: Delirium. 2022; https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK470399/ Accessed 07 Aug 2024.
Delirium in the elderly: Current problems with increasing geriatric age
Zhang M, Zhang X, Gao L. et al. Incidence, predictors and health outcomes of delirium in very old hospitalized patients: a prospective cohort study. BMC Geriatr. 2022;22:262.
Epidemiology, Mechanisms, Diagnosis, and Treatment of delirium: A narrative Review
Hospitalisation costs and health related quality of life in delirious patients: a scoping review
The economic cost of delirium: A systemtic review and quality assessment
Delirium superimposed on dementia: a systematic review
Current Challenges in the Recognition and Management of delirium superimposed on dementia
Predisposing and Precipitating Factors Associated with delirium: A Systematic Review
National Institute of Health Research, International prospective register of systematic reviews (PROSPERO). https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/.
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
How to write a systematic review
The language of delirium: Key words for identifying delirium from medical records
Slooter AJC, Otte WM, Devlin JW, et al. Updated nomenclature of delirium and acute encephalopathy: statement of ten Societies. 2020. Intensive Care Med. 2020; 46:1020–1022.
The AGREE Research Trust. Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation II (AGREE II) Instrument. 2013. https://www.agreetrust.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/AGREE-II-Users-Manual-and-23-item-Instrument_2009_UPDATE_2013.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
How can systematic reviews incorporate qualitative research?
Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care Group (EPOC). Data Collection Checklist. 2023 https://methods.cochrane.org/ Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
National Institutes for Health and Care Excellence [NICE]. Delirium: prevention, diagnosis, and management (CG103). 2023. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg103 Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
The AGREE Reporting Checklist: a tool to improve reporting of clinical practice guidelines
Delirium in Older Persons
UKCPA: Detection, prevention and treatment of delirium in critically ill patients version 1.2. 2006. https://www.wyccn.org/uploads/6/5/1/9/65199375/ukcpa_delirium_2006_1%5b1%5d.pdf Accessed 12 Jan 2024.
Australian and New Zealand Society for Geriatric Medicine. Position Statement 13. Derlirium in Older People. Revised 2012. Australas J Ageing. 2016; 35(4):292–292.
Boyer EW, Liebelt WL, Ganetsky M. Serotonin syndrome (serotonin toxicity). 2023. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/serotonin-syndrome-serotonin-toxicity#:~:text=Serotonin%20syndrome%20encompasses%20a%20spectrum,Patients%20may%20startle%20easily Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Australian Government. Department of Health and Ageing. Delirium Care Pathways. 2010. https://www.swslhd.health.nsw.gov.au/btf/pdfs/Education/Delirium_pathway.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Potter J, George J, Turner-Stokes L on behalf of British geriatrics Society. The prevention, diagnosis and management of delirium in older people: A concise guideline. 2006. Clin Med, 6:303–308.
Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health [CCSMH]. Guideline on the Assessment and Treatment of Delirium in Older Adults at the End of Life. 2010. https://ccsmh.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/NatlGuideline_DeliriumEOLC.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
NSW Agency for Clinical Innovation (ACI). ACI Aged Health Network. Key Principles for Care of Confused Hospitalised Older Persons. 2015. https://aci.health.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/249171/ACI-CHOPs-Key-principles-care-confused-hospitalised-older-persons.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Registered Nurses Association of Ontario [British C]. Delirium, Dementia, and Depression in Older Adults: Assessment and Care. 2016. https://rnao.ca/bpg/guidelines/assessment-and-care-older-adults-delirium-dementia-and-depression Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
BC Centre for Palliative Care [BCCPA]. B.C. Inter-professional palliative symptom management guidelines. 2019. https://bc-cpc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/SMGs-interactive-final-Nov-30-compressed.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Vanderbilt University Medical Center [VUMC]. Trauma Delirium Management Guideline. 2021. https://www.vumc.org/trauma-and scc/sites/default/files/public_files/Protocols/Trauma%20Delirium%20PMG%202021.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Hartford HealthCare. Post-Acute Care Delirium and Acute Encephalopathy Pathway. 2022. https://americandeliriumsociety.org/assets/documents/post-acute-delirlum-and-acute-encephalopathy.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Landspitali. Clinical guidelines for the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of delirium. 2015. https://www.landspitali.is/um-landspitala/fjolmidlatorg/frettir/stok-frett/2015/05/13/Kliniskar-leidbeiningar-um-greiningu-forvarnir-og-medferd-vid-oradi/ Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Bush SH, Lawlor PG, Ryan K, et al. on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee. Ann Onc, 2018; 29 (Supplement 4): iv143 – iv165.
NYU Long Island School of Medicine. Manual for Delirium Assessment and Intervention Version 1.5. 2021. https://americandeliriumsociety.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/Manual-for-Delirium-Assessment-and-Intervention.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
James C, Wood K, Fitzroy-Kelly F, Morton C. Tayside guidance – Antipsychitics and Benzodiazepines in older adults with dementia and/or delirium – inpatient settings. 2020. https://www.nhstaysideadtc.scot.nhs.uk/approved/treat/dementia/Tayside_guidance_on_Antipsychotics_dementia.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Hertfordshire Partnership NHS (HPFT). Guidelines for the Pharmacological Management of Dementia. 2020. https://www.hpft.nhs.uk/media/5079/guidelines-pharmacological-management-of-dementia-220920.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Danish Health Authority. National Clinical Guideline for prevention and treatment of organic delirium. 2021. https://www.sst.dk/-/media/Udgivelser/2021/NKR-delirium/Eng-quick-guide_Forebyggelse-og-behandling-af-organisk-delirium.ashx Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Australian Health ministers’ Advisory Council (AHMAC). Clinical Practice guidelines for the Management of Delirium in older people. 2006. https://content.health.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/migrated/files/collections/policies-and-guidelines/d/delirium-cpg---pdf.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Trust. Guidelines for the Assessment and Care of patients with Known or Suspected dementia or delirium. 2018. https://hgs.uhb.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/DementiaOrDeliriumPatientsGuidelines.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
American Academy of Nursing (AAN). Twenty-five things nurses and patients should question. 2018. https://aann.org/uploads/about/AANursing-Choosing-Wisely-List_4_19_18__1.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Registered Nurses Association of Ontario [RNAO]. Screening for Delirium, Dementia and Depression in Older Adults. 2003. https://www.workingwitholderpeople.edu.au/sites/rnao-ca/files/Screening_for_Delirium_Dementia_and_Depression_in_the_Older_Adult.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Scottish Intercollegiate Guideline Network. SIGN 157: Risk reduction and management of delirium. A national clinical guideline. 2019. https://www.sign.ac.uk/media/1423/sign157.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Management of Delirium in Elderly
Canadian Society for Hospital Medicine. Hospital Medicine. Five things physicians and patients should question. 2020. https://choosingwiselycanada.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/Hospital-medicine_EN.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
American Geriatrics Society. Ten things clinicians and patients should question. 2015. https://cme.dmu.edu/sites/default/files/Choosing%20Wisely%20-%20American%20Geriatrics%20Society.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
The effect of two benzodiazepine receptor agonist hypnotics on sleep-dependent memory consolidation
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Delirium: prevention, diagnosis and management in hospital and long-term care. Clinical guideline [CG103]. 2023. https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg103 Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
The Fraser Health Authority [FHA]. Hospice Palliative care symptom guidelines: Delirium/ Restlessness. 2006.https://www.fraserhealth.ca/-/media/Project/FraserHealth/FraserHealth/Health-Professionals/Professionals-Resources/Hospice-palliative-care/07FHSymptomGuidelinesDelirium.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Canadian Coalition for Seniors’ Mental Health [CCSMH]. Guideline on the Assessment and Treatment of Delirium in Older Adults at the End of Life. 2006. https://baycrest.echoontario.ca/wp-content/uploads/2021/03/National-Guidelines-for-Seniors-Mental-Health_Delirium-2006.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
The Mid Yorkshire Hospitals NHS Trust. Delirium Guidelines. 2015. https://www.yhscn.nhs.uk/media/PDFs/mhdn/Dementia/Delirium/Delirium-Care-Pathway%20mid%20yorks.pdf Accessed 07 Aug 2024.
Joint BAP NAPICU evidence-based consensus guidelines for the clinical management of acute disturbance: De-escalation and rapid tranquillisation
Japanese Society of Neurology. Clinical Practice Guideline for Dementia. 2017. https://www.neurology-jp.org/guidelinem/dementia/documents/preface.pdf Accessed 11 Dec 2023.
Reus VI, Fichtmann LJ, Eyler AE, et al. The American Psychiatric Association Practice Guideline on the use of antipsychotics to treat agitation or psychosis in patients with dementia. American Psychiatric Association. 2016.
Clinical Practice Guidelines for the prevention and management of pain, agitation/ sedation, delirium, Immobility, and sleep disruption in adult patients in the ICU
Global Council of Brain health (GCBH) . Preserving Your Brain Health During illness or Surgery:GCBH recommendations to prevent and treat delirium. 2020. https://www.aarp.org/content/dam/aarp/health/brain_health/2020/03/gcbh-delirium-report-english.doi.10.26419-2Fpia.00101.001.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Australian Commission on safety and quality in health care. Delirium: Fact Sheet for clinicians. 2021. https://www.safetyandquality.gov.au/sites/default/files/2021-09/acsqhc_ccs_delirium_clinicians_fact_sheet_d2.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Which medications to avoid in people at risk of delirium: a systematic review
Dual mode of action of Dihydropyridine calcium antagonists
L-type calcium channel blockers and Parkinson disease in Denmark
Mena MA, Garcia de Yébenes MJ, Tabernero C, et al. Effects of calcium antagonists on the dopamine system. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1995;18(5):410–26.
Implications of dopaminergic medication withdrawal in Parkinson's disease
Soileu MJ, Furr-Simming EE. Inpatient Management of Parkinson’s Disease. Practical Neurology. 2014; 29–31. https://practicalneurology.com/articles/2014-oct/inpatient-management-of-parkinsons-disease. Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
The many faces of apomorphine: lessons from the past and challenges for the future
Underdiagnosis of delirium in the elderly in acute care hospital settings: lessons not learned
Precipitating factors for delirium in hospitalized elderly persons: predictive model and interrelationship with baseline vulnerability
Delirium
Lauretani F, Bellelli G, Pelà G et al. Treatment of Delirium in Older Persons: What We Should Not Do! Int J Mol Sci. 2020; 21(7):2397.
Soiza RL, Myint PK. The Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) 157: guidelines on risk reduction and management of delirium. 2019; https://www.sign.ac.uk/media/1423/sign157.pdf Accessed 19 Sep 2024.
Antipsychotic Medication for Prevention and Treatment of Delirium in Hospitalized Adults: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Faeder M, Hale E, Hedayati D et al. Preventing and treating delirium in clinical settings for older adults. Ther Adv Psychopharmacol. 2023;13.
Suvorexant for the prevention of delirium: A meta-analysis
Evaluation of the delirium preventive effect of dual orexin receptor antagonist (DORA) in critically ill adult patients requiring ventilation with tracheal intubation at an advanced emergency center: A single-center, retrospective, observational study
The effect of dexmedetomidine on delirium and agitation in patients in intensive care: systematic review and meta-analysis with trial sequential analysis
Dexmedetomidine controls systemic cytokine levels through the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway
Dexmedetomidine preconditioning for myocardial protection in ischaemia-reperfusion injury in rats by downregulation of the high mobility group box 1-toll-like receptor 4-nuclear factor kappaB signalling pathway
Dexmedetomidine in Prevention of Postoperative Delirium: A Systematic Review
Dexmedetomidine: a magic bullet on its way into palliative care – a narrative review and practice recommendations
The role of inflammation in the pathogenesis of delirium and dementia in older adults: a review
The inter-relationship between delirium and dementia: the importance of delirium prevention
Acute systematic inflammation exacerbates neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease: IL-1b derives amplified responses in primed astrocytes and neuronal network dysfunction
The interface between delirium and dementia in elderly adults
Preventing and treating delirium in clinical settings for older adults
Reexamining cholinesterase inhibitors for the prevention and treatment of delirium in high-risk populations
Chiolinesterase inhibitors for delirium: What is the evidence?
Delirium
Delirium phenomenology: what can we learn from the symptoms of delirium?
Medikamenten-induzierte Delirien älterer Menschen