Analysis of the causes of medical evacuation of injured and sick soldiers of the Polish Military Contingent in the Islamic State of Afghanistan taking part in International Security Assistance Force operations
Summary
Background
Military casualties in Afghanistan arise in part from climatic and natural conditions that are difficult for European soldiers to endure, as well as from intense guerrilla combat with mass use of IEDs (improvised explosive devices), thus posing numerous and diverse medical problems requiring evacuation to the home country. A search of the literature revealed no comprehensive studies of the causes of medical evacuation from this theater of operations.
Material/Methods
This article is a review of medical reports of the Polish Military Contingent taking part in Operation Enduring Freedom during the period from 01 January 2010 to 31 December 2011, including an analysis of causes of all ROLE 4 medical evacuations (to the military base in Germany or to the home country).
Results
As many as 565 (5.49%) of the total of 10 294 contingent soldiers were evacuated during the analyzed period. Of these, 29% of evacuation cases were due to combat injuries, 23% to complications of respiratory tract infection, 11% to mental health problems, 11% to chronic neuralgias, 12% to complications of acute gastrointestinal infections, 4% to non-combat injuries, 3% to dental and maxillofacial problems, 2% to dermatological problems and 2% to leishmaniasis. The remaining causes included chronic organic/systemic diseases manifested during service.
Conclusions
The main causes of medical evacuations to the home country were the consequences of combat injuries, mainly due to IED attacks. Appropriate diagnosis and early treatment of infections is also an important problem in the face of a significant number of complications resulting in evacuation of soldiers to their home country.

Background
Climate and environmental conditions of the current military operations in the Middle East, Central Asia and Africa are very challenging for soldiers from Europe or North America. In the case of Central Asia, including Afghanistan, the problem consists mainly in high temperature amplitudes, both diurnal and annual, and high insolation. Other problems are due to the generally difficult hygiene and sanitary conditions in these countries, as well as the presence of fundamentally different bacterial flora and exotic species of parasites and venomous animals.
High spring and summer temperatures, combined with a lack of cloud cover, causes problems associated with heat stroke, eye glare, sunburned skin and sunstrokes. Another unfavorable environmental factor is cold temperatures in winter, particularly in the highland and mountain areas predominant in Afghanistan. The most common health problems related to low temperatures are mild, moderate or severe hypothermia, frostbite and chilblains, photokeratitis, trench foot and dehydration.
Infectious diseases are a serious medical problem. Etiological factors of URT and LRT diseases among military personnel include Str. pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, H. influenzae and Legionella pneumophila, causing severe infections. Acute gastrointestinal tract diseases are also relatively common among military personnel in Afghanistan, due both to poor sanitary conditions in mission areas and pathogens to which the subjects had never been previously exposed. Most cases pertain to soldiers eating food purchased at local marketplaces and drinking water from uncontrolled sources. Acute diarrheas usually develop within the first week after arrival to the region of military operations. Besides Salmonella and Shigella bacilli, which are common also in Europe, pathogens include such infectious agents as Campylobacter, Cryptosporidium, Giardia intestinalis, Entamoeba histolytica and Rotaviridae. Diarrheas are recurrent in more than half of soldiers.
Soldiers are also troubled by skin diseases. Predominant problems are of an allergic nature, but bacterial, viral and fungal infections are also observed.
Another serious problem is non-combat injuries, including injuries among the support personnel. These occur during individual or organized sports and recreational activities, as well as in military transport accidents (vehicles, airplanes, helicopters). The usually poor condition of roads in mission areas, particularly in Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as the high density of military equipment per unit area are a significant cause of transport accidents.
As regards combat injuries, the specific characteristics of stabilization missions of recent years are numerous limb injuries, accounting for more than 75% of combat injuries and often necessitating amputation. This is due to numerous bomb attacks, in which bodies are hit by shrapnel which, owing to good protection of the head and the torso (helmet, obligatory bulletproof vest), afflict mostly the limbs. Due to the significant strength of planted mines, external injuries are often accompanied by limb fractures and numerous burns and multiorgan injuries.
An important, albeit not always adequately estimated, problem includes dental and periodontal diseases in soldiers stationed at foreign missions, reducing their combat proficiency and sometimes leading to medical evacuation to the home country.
The above problems result not only in the reduction of the number of service-capable soldiers, but are also quite often associated with the necessity of medical evacuation to the home country.
Medical evacuation is based on structures and procedures of particular levels of medical support of the military operations based on the Tactical Combat Casualty Care (TCCC) doctrine. According to the medical support standards, a 4-level structure of medical support is assumed for land military personnel of peace-keeping and stabilization missions. These levels are designated as roles (ROLE 1–4). ROLE 1 premedical first care is offered by medics directly in the battlefield and consists in restitution and maintenance of basic life functions. ROLE 2 care includes first medical help obtained from the medical platoon setting up the battalion wound dressing point and includes, among others, procedures to stabilize life functions, life-saving surgical treatment and preparation for further evacuation. ROLE 3 tasks are performed by the medical company or, depending on the needs, the medical battalion at the level of brigade/division. Qualified stationary medical help offered at this level includes specialist surgery procedures. ROLE 4 tasks are performed outside the theater of operations, in the territory of one of the coalition states – in the case of Afghanistan, this is Landstuhl, Germany.
Medical evacuation is conducted according to the so-called priority categories, according to indications, with division of injuries into physical and mental, and to their severity (BSD3, TRIAGE START systems).
Responsibility for comprehensive medical care of PMC participants is held by the Medical Support Group (MSG) permanently stationed in Ghazni base and responsible for ROLE 2 medical support, including the hospital base. The Ghazni MSG is also responsible for coordination of medical support at ROLEs 1–3, prophylactic actions and specialist trainings. The ROLE 3 unit for the PMC in Afghanistan is the U.S. Combat Support Hospital in the Bagram Air Base.
The remaining 5 Polish bases (FOB Warrior, FB Giro, COP Qarabagh, FB Vulcan, FOB Bagram) host smaller medical teams including outpatient medical points, medical evacuation team(s), and POMLT/MLT teams.
ROLE 1 personnel should provide the injured subject with premedical care within 1 hour from the incident. Medical help should be available as soon as possible, but not later than within 2 hours from the incident, while the basic surgical procedures should be performed within 4 hours from the injury. Complete, qualified medical care (including surgery) should be available as soon as possible, but within six hours from the incident. ROLE 1 treatment should last no longer that 3 days, and ROLE 2 treatment no longer than 7 days. Total acceptable time of ROLE 1–3 treatment is up to 21 days. After this period, medical repatriation follows in necessary cases (Landstuhl Regional Medical Center, Germany and, later, medical care in the home country).
Medical evacuations are governed by a unit located directly at PCM command quarters, known as Tactical and Operation Center cooperating with the U.S. Patient Evacuation Coordination Cell (PECC).
The problem of medical evacuation is important from both the military, logistic and economic standpoints, as 20% to 98% of evacuated soldiers or civilians never return to service at the same theater of operations. The prognosis of return to service depends on the nature and importance of the medical problem and on the stage of medical evacuation – the higher the level of medical evacuation of the soldier, the less probable is the return to service. Among those wounded in action (WIA), about 50% of soldiers return to service within 72 hours; return to service becomes less likely for patients remaining ill for more than 3 days. Final medical evacuation was required by 27% of soldiers with combat injuries in Iraq. The number of soldiers evacuated from the theater of operations in Iraq and Afghanistan is approximately 4.5 times higher than the number of soldiers killed in action or dying from injuries; this ratio was about 3.3–3.5 during World War II and the Vietnam War. This necessitates the availability of trained replacement personnel and also generates costs.
The most common causes of ROLE 4 medical evacuations include non-combat traumatic injuries, combat eye injuries and mental disorders.

Material and Methods
Medical reports of the Polish Military Contingent taking part in Operation Enduring Freedom during the period from 01 January 2010 to 31 December 2011 (rotations 7–10), available from the Operational Command of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Poland were reviewed. As many as 10 294 soldiers were in service during the period of analysis.
All cases of ROLE 4 medical evacuations and home country evacuations of soldiers were analyzed, excluding the support service and civilian personnel. Evacuation causes were divided into injury- and non-injury-related. The injuries were divided into combat and non-combat injuries. Combat injuries involved all cases in which the injury was suffered during a military operation: site patrol, fighting off attacks in the base or in the field, or activities aimed at actively fighting the enemy. All the remaining injuries were classified as non-combat injuries. Cases of death in the battlefield or death prior to evacuation were excluded from the analysis.
The analysis was performed using the STATISTICA software package and included descriptive statistics and significance tests for differences between mean values (chi-squared test, significance level p<0.01).

Results
The analysis showed that diverse medical incidents occurred among the PMC soldiers that either directly, or due to subsequent complications, were the final causes of ROLE 4 evacuation, which encompassed a total of 565 soldiers (5.49%), including 531 males (5.3% of the total male population in service), and 34 females (11.8% of the total female population in service, the difference between females and males being statistically significant at p<0.01). The most common events included combat injuries, non-combat injuries, complications of acute infectious diseases, psychological and mental disorders. A detailed list of medical problems leading to ROLE 4 medical evacuation is presented in Table 1.
During the PMC mission in the analyzed period, bodily injuries were sustained by a total of 380 soldiers. Of these, combat injuries accounted for 87.1% (331 soldiers), and non-combat injuries for 12.9% (49 soldiers). Injuries sustained by 291 soldiers (76.6%) caused service disability longer than 7 days, with 190 (50.0%) wounded soldiers requiring final evacuation to the home country for medical reasons.
Acute diarrheas, mostly dysentery, were observed in 5234 soldiers. Of these, 67 soldiers (1.3% of patients) were finally evacuated, mostly due to complications. Complications included hepatitis, liver abscesses, large joint inflammation and colitis.
Acute respiratory tract disorders were observed in 6135 soldiers, of whom 131 (2.1% of patients) were finally evacuated, mostly due to complications. Diagnosed infections included acute rhinitis, acute paranasal sinusitis, acute laryngitis, tonsillitis, acute pharyngitis, acute bronchitis, pneumonia (mycoplasmal, bacterial, legionellosis). Among these patients, evacuation was required in soldiers with complications that could not be treated in ROLE 3 conditions, including orbital or intracranial complications of paranasal sinusitis, parapharyngeal phlegmon, endocarditis, arthritis, and respiratory and circulatory insufficiency.
Acute inflammations of teeth or periodontium and complications of these inflammations were a problem in 3278 soldiers; the following required a more serious intervention: pulpitis, exacerbation of chronic conditions, prosthetic problems, and tooth fractures. The causes of evacuation of 18 of these patients (0.5% of patients) included some more serious conditions such as dental osteomyelitis, segmental mandibular/maxillary necrosis, and persistent inflammation of the masticatory apparatus.
Mental problems were the case in 778 soldiers. They included maladaptation syndrome, chronic depression, and personality disorders. Of this group, 63 soldiers (8.1% of patients) were evacuated.
Dermatological problems were observed in 2017 soldiers, of whom 8 were evacuated (0.4% of patients); these were patients with persistent contact allergies of the hands and feet.
A total of 101 soldiers were diagnosed with dermal, visceral or mixed form of leishmaniasis. Finally, 9 soldiers (8.9%) were evacuated due to visceral leishmaniasis complications.
Other diseases, summarized in Table 1, were individual cases of manifestation of chronic diseases. These included: viral hepatitis, chronic glomerulonephritis, leukemias and lymphomas, systemic lupus erythematosus, exercise-induced asthma, and valvular cardiac defects. Nearly all patients of this group (94.1%) were evacuated. A list of these patients is presented in the scheme in Figure 1.
Evacuations due to injuries or manifestation of chronic diseases were significantly more common than evacuations due to other diseases and complications thereof (p<0.001).
Detailed analysis of bodily injuries finally leading to ROLE 4 evacuation showed that the most common combat injuries included limb injuries, followed by facial injuries and bony face trauma, injuries of the organs of hearing, balance and vision and, less frequently, injuries of body cavities and cerebrocranial injuries. In an unquestionable majority of cases the injuries were of multiple character (ie, they encompassed more than 1 body region or more than 1 internal organ). Bilateral injuries of binate regions/organs were also relatively common.
Non-combat injuries most commonly led to relatively mild trauma of the skeletal and muscular systems, traumatic amputations of single digits and spinal injuries such as spondylolistheses or compression fractures.
Significant differentiation of combat injuries was observed, depending on the type of attack – attacks with IEDs or grenade launchers on infantry transported in wheeled armored transporters by means of were significantly more often the causes of multiple injuries, including multiorgan injuries, than were attacks on infantry stationed at bases or moving in the open field.
IED attacks on wheeled armored transporters commonly resulted in multiple limb injuries, including multiple fractures of a single bone and/or multiple fractures (including open fractures) of 1 limb, accompanied by injuries of 1 of the bodily cavities, pelvis, spine or head. Abdominal injuries were often accompanied by spleen, liver or kidney damage. Fractures in the pelvic region were accompanied by rupture of the urinary bladder and/or urethra. Head injuries were mostly cerebrocranial injuries, often accompanied by injuries to the organs of hearing, balance and vision. Particularly common were orbital penetrating wounds with eyeball opening or foreign bodies in the eyeballs. Ear injuries were manifested as acoustic trauma and/or tympanic membrane rupture. Chest organ injuries were most commonly manifested as burns of the upper respiratory tracts, uni- or bilateral pleural edema, pulmonary contusion/crushing, and grand vessel rupture. Spinal injuries included compression fractures, spondylolistheses and fractures of individual vertebral fragments. Most exposed were the cervical, cervicothoracic and thoracolumbar regions. Details are presented in Table 2.
A list of groups of causes of medical evacuations, with corresponding percentage values, is presented in Figure 2.

Discussion
Combat injuries were the most common cause of medical evacuations of soldiers of the PMC in Afghanistan. According to the literature data, consequences of injuries account for about 1/4 of all evacuations, which is in nearly perfect agreement with the obtained results. Among the injuries, of special note is the significant number of amputations, with every amputation being a cause for evacuation. In general, the number of traumatic amputations or amputations following an injury is very high in conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan – twice as high as in other contemporary conflicts.
The predominant cause was combat injuries, particularly due to IED attacks, which are the dominant cause of combat injuries in Afghanistan. Very often these attacks led to injuries of the limbs and the spine, as well as to acoustic injuries; however, the latter were rarely a cause of evacuation. Combat and non-combat eye injuries were also relatively common. About 15% of medical evacuations were due to combat and non-combat eye injuries.
The relatively low number of evacuations due to non-combat injuries may raise doubts, as it is known that non-combat injuries were one of the most important causes of evacuations to date. This might be due to a change in the character of the missions in recent years, as the PMC soldiers virtually never translocate outside bases for purposes not related to combat missions.
Data on file and in literature reviews show that diarrhea is a common ailment among the participants in Iraqi and Afghan missions, affecting from 50% to more than 75% of soldiers. Just as common are acute infections of the upper and lower respiratory tracts, affecting approximately 70% of soldiers. In the case of soldiers stationed in the central-south zone in Iraq during the years 2003–2004, acute gastrointestinal inflammations were observed with similar frequencies, with the most common cause being the enterotoxic form of E. coli, accounting for more than 50% of cases. Besides this pathogen, a number of Shigella bacilli infections, leading to dysentery, were observed.
Leishmaniasis is also a relatively common ailment, observed in 2% of soldiers. Data collected in this study confirm these values.
The percentage of evacuated soldiers was particularly high in cases of persistent pain and psychological or mental problems. Chronic pain-related problems in patients evacuated from Iraq or Afghanistan are generally similar to those observed in civilian health care practice. Neuralgias and other neurological pain syndromes were relatively common causes of evacuations. Data from the literature show that neuropathies account for about 10% of medical evacuations of participants in the Iraqi and Afghan missions, while spinal pain syndromes account for about 7%.
Mental disorders are a typical problem of contemporary military operations due to the character of these operations. The soldiers must be strongly motivated, as they do not defend their own countries, are not being threatened by any direct external enemies, and they and their families are not in any real danger. In addition, the soldiers serve in extremely challenging conditions – not only geographical and climatic, but also psychological, as they are far from home and family, in countries of different customs and culture. Data from the literature show that this problem affects both military and civilian personnel. Mental problems affect 11% of individuals taking part in foreign missions, and are the cause of 6–9% of evacuations, with evacuations for this cause being more common in women. More than 80% of medical evacuations for mental reasons occur during the first 6 months of a mission. Specific causes include maladjustment (subclinical nervous breakdown), obsessive-compulsive disorders, panic attacks, mood disorders (depression, bipolar disorder), personality disorders (including schizophrenia), or anxiety disorders.
Medical evacuations of participants of Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom (OEF and OIF) due to mental causes were among the 5 most common causes of medical evacuations from these theaters of operations. In our study, mental problems were reported by a slightly lower number of soldiers, but the percentage of evacuated soldiers (11% of all evacuations) was similar, with most evacuations for mental reasons occurring also during the first 6 months of service.
In most soldiers, dental problems consisted of exacerbation of chronic conditions of teeth and periodontium, and inflammatory complications of these conditions. This shows that the preliminary qualification conducted in the home country with regard to dental health is insufficient. Poor dental status of PMC soldiers must be identified before deployment, as the intensity coefficient that defined the number of interventions per 1000 soldiers was 318.4. According to other authors who analyzed this problem in soldiers serving in foreign missions, the frequency of acute dental cases is from 259 to 293 incidents per 1000 personnel members. Evacuation causes related to dental or, more broadly, maxillofacial problems, comprised about 3% of all evacuations in the study material. The cumulative index was 1.7/10 000. Comparing this with the data of other researchers, who estimated the value of this index to be 21.6/10 000 soldiers/year, the index obtained after summing the values was 3.6.
Dermatoses were the cause of an insignificant number of evacuations. However, this problem was observed in Afghanistan since the mission start, as nearly 22% of soldiers suffered from skin diseases in years 2003–2005, one-third of whom had allergic conditions.
Injuries of the face, skull and eyes are relatively common events leading to final evacuation of a soldier from the theater of operations. Breeze et al. note that although skull injuries account for 21% of combat injuries, they are the cause of 30% of all medical evacuations. A relatively common cause (16%) is eye injuries. In the study material, injuries of the face, skull, eyes and ears were the cause of 10.2% of medical evacuations.
No serious cases of frostbite or heat strokes that could be considered standalone reasons for evacuations were reported and no cases of venomous animal bites were observed in the study period.

Conclusions
Consequences of combat injuries, mainly due to IED attacks, were the main cause of medical evacuations to the home country.
Appropriate diagnosis and early treatment of infections is also an important problem in the face of a significant number of complications resulting in evacuation of soldiers to their home country.
As evidenced by numerous dental problems among the PMC soldiers, preliminary dental qualification for participation in the mission is insufficient.
Source of support: Self financing

References
Environmental Health Hazards on the Territory of Iraq Among Soldiers of Stabilization
Self-reported incidence of snake, spider and scorpion encounters among deployed US military in Iraq and Afghanistan
Heat illness on Operation Telic In Sumer 2003: the experience of the Heat Illness Treatment Unit in northern Kuwait
Fatal rhabdomyolisis presenting as mild heat illness in military training
Exertional heat illness in Marine Corps recruit training
Heat illness and soldier
In Harm’s Way: Infections in deployed American military forces
Respiratory diseases among US military personnel: countering emerging threats
The impact of infectious diseases on the health of US troops deployed to the Persian Gulf during operations Desert Shield and Desert Strom
Self-reported description of diarrhea among military populations in operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom
Military importance of diarrhea: lessons from The Middle East
Prevalence of allergic dermatoses and other skin problems in the population of military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan
Frequency and causes of nonbattleinjuries air evacuated from Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom, U.S. Army, 2001–2006
Diagnoses and factors associated with medical evacuation and return to duty among nonmilitary personnel participating in military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan
Drowning deaths of US service personnel associated with motor vehicle accidents occurring in Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom, 2003–2005
Military training-related injuries: surveillance, research, and prevention
Non-battle injury casualties during the Persian Gulf war and other deployments
Combat-related pelvis fractures in nonsurvivors
Frequency and causes of nonbattleinjuries air evacuated from Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom, US Army, 2001–2006
Wartime amputations
War injuries of the extremities: twelve-year follow-up data
Impact of illness and non-combat injury during operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom (Afghanistan)
Burns sustained in combat explosions in Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom: implications for research and practice
Dental epidemiology of military operations
Dental emergency rates at an expeditionary medical support facility supporting Operation Enduring Freedom
Air medical evacuations of soldiers for oral-facial disease and injuries, 2005, Operations Enduring Freedom/Iraqi Freedom
Dental emergencies occurring among United States Army recruits
Tactical combat casualty care in special operations
Medical support of military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan
Comparative analysis of multiple-casualty incident triage algorithm
Triage: Principles and Pressures
Understanding Combat Casualty Care Statistics
Demographics of and diagnoses in Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom personnel who were psychiatrically evacuated from the theater of operations
Return-to-duty Rates among Coalition Forces Treated in a Forward-deployed Pain Treatment Center: A Prospective Observational Study
Out-of-hospital combat casualty care in the current war in Iraq
Combat duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, mental health problems and barriers to care
Prewar factors in combat related posttraumatic stress disorder: structural equation modeling with a national sample of female and male Vietnam veterans
Psychiatric diagnoses as a cause of medical evacuation
Mechanisms of injury, and treatment of soldiers injured in Operation Iraqi Freedom: An epidemiological study conducted at two military pain management centers
Spinal injuries after improvised explosive device incidents: implications for Tactical Combat Casualty Care
Eye injuries on the battlefields of Iraq and Afghanistan: Public health implications
The rate of dental emergencies in French Armed forces deployed to Afghanistan
Management of maxillofacial wounds sustained by British service personnel in Afghanistan
Number of soldiers with chronic diseases manifested during the mission.
List of groups of causes of medical evacuation.
Detailed list of causes of ROLE 4 medical evacuations relative to the entire contingent and to the number of injured/sick soldiers.
Causes of evacuations to the home country	Number of injured/sick	Percent relative to contingent population (10,294)	Number of evacuations to the home country	Percent relative to the number of injured/sick soldiers	Percent relative to contingent population (10,294)	 	Combat injuries	331	3.2%	166	50.2%	1.61%	 	Non-combat injuries	49	0.5%	24	49.0%	0.23%	 	Acute diarrhea and its complications	5234	50.8%	67	1.3%	0.65%	 	Acute respiratory tract infections and their complications	6135	59.6%	131	2.1%	1.27%	 	Neuralgias and other neurological pain syndromes	1024	9.9%	63	6.2%	0.61%	 	Dermatoses	2017	19.6%	8	0.4%	0.08%	 	Dental and periodontal diseases and their complications	3278	31.8%	18	0.5%	0.17%	 	Mental problems	778	7.6%	63	8.1%	0.61%	 	Leishmaniasis	101	1.0%	9	8.9%	0.16%	 	Other	17	0.17%	16	94.1%	0.09%	 	Total	18964	184.2%	565	2.98%	5.49%
A detailed list of cases of ROLE 4 medical evacuations for post-traumatic causes for combat injuries.
Injury site/nature	Combat injury	Non-combat injury	 	IED attack	Other attacks	 	Number of injuries	including the cause of evacuation in%	Number of injuries	including the cause of evacuation in%	Number of injuries	including the cause of evacuation in%	 	Limb bone fracture	501	261	52.1%	12	8	66.7%	33	27	81.8%	 	Muscle contusion/rupture	142	53	37.3%	8	5	62.5%	23	23	100.0%	 	Limb amputation/partial amputation	36	36	100.0%	2	2	100.0%	2	1	50.0%	 	Limb vessel rupture	12	11	91.7%	1	1	100.0%	1	1	100.0%	 	Spinal injury	34	30	91.7%	3	0	0.0%	7	1	14.3%	 	Eye injury	31	27	87.1%	4	1	25.0%	2	1	50.0%	 	Acoustic injury/tympanic membrane rupture	21	9	42.9%	2	0	0.0%	0	0	0.0%	 	Facial injuries	42	3	7.1%	1	0	0.0%	0	0	0.0%	 	Bony face injuries	24	17	70.8%	1	0	0.0%	0	0	0.0%	 	Cerebrocranial injuries	34	23	67.6%	2	0	0.0%	0	0	0.0%	 	Chest injuries	19	12	63.2%	3	1	33.3%	1	1	100.0%	 	Abdominal injuries	19	17	89.5%	1	1	100.0%	0	0	0.0%	 	Pelvic injuries	19	19	100.0%	0	0	0.0%	0	0	0.0%	 	Burns	61	12	19.7%	2	0	0.0%	1	1	100.0%	 	Total	995	530	51.2%	42	19	45.2%	70	56	80.0%