A Data-Driven Perspective on Bioisostere Evaluation: Mapping the Benzene Bioisostere Landscape with BioSTAR
The bioisostere landscape is continually expanding, with new scaffolds emerging as alternatives in drug design. Increasingly, medicinal chemists face the challenge of selecting and prioritising these bioisosteres, often relying on personal experience and anecdotal evidence. In this Perspective, we lay out a data-driven approach to analyze the bioisostere landscape, using benzene bioisosteres as a representative example, and quantitatively compare replacements based on their impact on bioactivity, solubility, and metabolic stability. To support the findings of the analysis, we highlight recent and particularly elegant examples of benzene bioisostere applications while identifying areas where further development could significantly benefit the community. By providing this Perspective and associated data-mining workflow (BioSTAR), we aim to support more informed decision-making in bioisosteric replacement selection in drug design and inspire future innovations in bioisostere design.

Significance
The expanding bioisostere landscape poses a central challenge in medicinal chemistry: how to systematically compare and prioritize scaffolds.
This Perspective advocates for a data-driven approach and provides a data-mining workflow (BioSTAR) to evaluate bioisosteric replacements.
Using benzene bioisosteres as a case study, we assess their impact on bioactivity, solubility, and metabolic stability.
The workflow serves as a practical tool for medicinal chemists and a foundation for collaborative, data-driven progress in molecular design.

Introduction
Over the past two decades, particularly following the landmark publication of the “Escape from Flatland” paper by Lovering et al., the medicinal chemistry community has sought to increase the three-dimensionality of lead compounds. This is because a higher Fsp3 correlates with better progression from discovery through preclinical and clinical development and to the market, as well as improved physicochemical and absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination (ADME) properties. Fsp3, as well as number of chiral centers, is also linked to decreased promiscuity, and thus may help address toxicity, a leading cause of attrition in the clinic. More recent analyses suggest that the utility of Fsp3 as a predictive metric for clinical trial progression may have been overstated, as the trends observed in 2009 have not persisted. Notwithstanding, other metrics related to compound three-dimensionality also correlate with improved developability. For example, Ritchie and Macdonald elegantly showed that an increased aromatic ring count correlates with lower solubility, higher serum albumin binding, and higher clogP, leading to overall poorer developability.These results align with Leeson’s findings, which highlight reduced carboaromaticity as a key feature distinguishing approved drugs from other molecules acting on the same target. In line with these analyses, a common strategy in medicinal chemistry to improve molecular properties has been the use of arene bioisosteres to replace sp2-rich aromatic rings with sp3-rich alternative motifs. This has led to the development and rediscovery of scaffolds designed to serve as arene bioisosteres.
The growing interest in this area is evident from the surging number of publications referencing the term ″bioisostere″ since 2009. Caged hydrocarbons have received particular attention, as exemplified by bicyclo[1.1.1]­pentanes (BCPs), −   bicyclo[2.1.1]­hexanes (BCHs), −   bicyclo[3.1.1]­heptanes (BCHeps),   cubanes, −   and other, less common scaffolds such as cuneanes −    and stellanes. Their popularity can be attributed to their well-defined exit vectors, which can closely mimic those of arenes, along with their high sp3 character and rigidity, which minimizes entropic penalties upon target binding. Several excellent reviews have examined the benzene bioisostere field. −
Medicinal chemists are increasingly incorporating these scaffolds into their compound designs. By replacing a benzene ring with a potentially bioisosteric group, the designer aims to improve a molecule’s overall profile, for example, increasing its solubility or metabolic stability, while preserving bioactivity. Nonetheless, the impact of such replacements on bioactivity and other molecular properties is often context-dependent, making their impact challenging to predict. Compounding this, the growing number of benzene bioisosteres in the literature raises a new challenge: selecting which isosteric scaffolds to prioritise for synthesis.
In this perspective, we have employed a data-driven approach to evaluate and compare benzene bioisosteres in order to address these challenges. To achieve this, we developed a data-mining workflow, which we have made publicly available and offers a versatile, user-friendly framework for evaluating other bioisosteric replacements.

Bioisosteres: Definition and Evaluation

Isostere and Bioisostere Definitions
The concept of isosterism was first introduced by Irving Langmuir in 1919, building on earlier work by James Moir in 1909. Initially, the definition was restricted to pairs of molecules or atomic groups with similar electron configurations, such as N2O and CO2. In 1932, Erlenmeyer broadened this definition to include ″elements, molecules, or ions in which the peripheral layers of electrons may be considered identical.″
The term bioisosterism was introduced by Friedman in 1950, who defined bioisosteres as structural moieties that ″fit the broadest definition of isosteres and exhibit the same type of biological activity.″ In this seminal work, Friedman emphasized that while isosterism was a necessary condition for bioisosterism, it was not sufficient due to the complexity of biological systems and the characteristics of molecular recognition. The publication also presented an early example of matched molecular pair (MMP) analysis.
Thornber later expanded Friedman’s definition to include nonclassical bioisosteres, describing bioisosteres as ″groups or molecules with chemical and physical similarities that result in broadly similar biological properties.″ This expanded definition is widely accepted today.

Data-Mining Approaches for Bioisostere Evaluation
Potential bioisosteric replacements can be evaluated through data-mining methods that identify MMPs in the literature and analyze the effects of the replacements on properties such as bioactivity, solubility, or metabolic stability.
EMIL, the first database of this kind manually curated by Fujita and colleagues in the early 1990s, collated examples of MMPs and summarized the effect the molecular scaffold had on activity, toxicity, metabolic stability and other parameters. BIOSTER, developed at the same time by Ujváry, is a similar database containing over 28,000 bioisosteric transformations manually curated from the literature, although patents are excluded.
In silico methods were later developed to perform comprehensive analyses of the literature. These employ fragmentation and clustering algorithms to mine bioactivity databases and identify bioisosteric replacements. Sheridan and Miller’s maximum common substructure (MCS) algorithm, and Hussain and Rea’s fragmentation and indexing (F+I) algorithm are common methods employed to achieve this.
An example of an in silico-curated bioisostere database is SwissBioisostere, a web-based, freely accessible resource that enables users to search for bioisosteric replacements of specific scaffolds and provides a summary of their effects on activity, LogP, topological polar surface area (tPSA), and molecular weight.   SwissBioisostere uses data from the ChEMBL database, processed through a fragmentation and indexing algorithm, and is a powerful, user-friendly tool; however, it was last updated in 2021 (ChEMBL version: 28) and its algorithm is not open-access.
A complementary, in silico-curated tool, the Ring Replacement Recommender, was developed by Ertl et al. This web-based resource suggests alternative ring systems for the 245 most frequently used rings, prioritising those associated with at least a 2-fold increase in potency. The recommendations are derived from MMP analysis of data from ChEMBL (version 29).
Data-mining approaches have also been successfully applied to protein–ligand complexes. These are hybrid methods that compare interaction pattern graphs of published crystal structures and identify alternative molecular scaffolds capable of achieving similar interactions with the protein. sc-PDB-frag is an online tool that identifies bioisosteric replacements for specific fragments bound to a protein through mining of the protein data bank (PDB). The scarcity of cocrystal structures available limits the application of these methods to well-precedented scaffolds.

An Open-Source Data-Mining Workflow for Bioisostere Evaluation
To evaluate and compare potential benzene bioisosteres, we quantified the overall effect of these molecular replacements on the key properties of bioactivity, solubility, metabolic stability, and membrane permeability. This analysis was conducted using an open-access data-mining workflow, which we termed BioSTAR (BioiSosTere Analysis and Ranking). The BioSTAR workflow employs free, open-source software and can be run on a single benchtop computer by users with no computational experience. It uses Knime as the data-processing software and ChEMBL (version 35, released December 2024) as the open-access database, but it can also be applied to other databases. The output files are visualized with the open-source program DataWarrior. These characteristics allow others to repeat the bioisostere evaluation over time and as more data becomes available, and apply it to any molecular transformation of interest.
Employing the BioSTAR workflow we identified MMPs in ChEMBL differing only by the bioisostere investigated and compared all of their available data (bioactivity, solubility, clearance and membrane permeability). Only homogeneous pairs, i.e., pairs of data points obtained from the same assay in the same publication, were included in the analysis. This was informed by the studies of Kramer and co-workers who showed that many fewer data points are required to reach statistical significance when using homogeneous pairs, when compared to a combination of homogeneous and heterogeneous pairs. This condition for homogeneity also allowed a more computationally efficient workflow, since only structures within the same document were included in the MMP-searching algorithm.
Structure preparation by removal of salts and stereocenters. The F+I algorithm employed in the workflow cannot handle defined stereocenters or double bond geometries, which is an important limitation. Nonetheless, the workflow output can be later processed to extract this information.
Substructure search in ChEMBL for the identification of molecules containing the scaffold of interest.
Extraction of documents containing the scaffold of interest.
Mining of all structures within the identified documents.
Mining of all data associated with these structures. Only exact values, without qualifiers such as < or >, were included in the analysis.
Processing of the resulting structures with a fragmentation algorithm. The fragmentation algorithm (Hussain and Rea) was applied for 1 and 2 cuts for acyclic single bonds to rings, although the selection of alternative fragmentation patterns is possible to explore other replacements. Filtering based on the number of heavy atoms in the investigated scaffolds was applied to streamline processing.
Filtering for homogeneous pairs. Only MMPs with molecules originating from the same document and data derived from the same assay were retained for analysis.
Calculation of differences in properties.
Substructure search to filter results by transformation.
The data-mining workflow employed is summarized below and in Figure  :
Schematic representation
of the BioSTAR workflow and results obtained
when performing search on BCP scaffold. In red, time required to complete
each process.
The workflow described above allowed us to collate all the data available on ChEMBL for a list of scaffolds of interest. This process could be performed on a benchtop computer with no need for parallel processing or extended times. For example, the data-mining required to evaluate the replacement of a para-substituted benzene ring for a disubstituted BCP was completed in 16 min and 57 s. The BioSTAR workflow was designed for use by medicinal chemists with no previous computational experience, requiring as input solely the structure of the scaffold being replaced and the potential bioisostere investigated.

Quantitative Evaluation of Benzene Bioisosteres
The BioSTAR workflow was used to evaluate and compare benzene bioisosteres. This was motivated by the increasing number of scaffolds described as such, which often leads to challenges in prioritisation of designed compounds for synthesis.

Summary of the Matched Molecular Pair Analysis
We initiated the data-mining analysis by selecting the benzene bioisosteres to be investigated. The selection was guided by previous reports of bioisosterism from both the primary literature and review articles, with a focus on saturated mono- and polycyclic scaffolds.   The selected scaffolds are compiled in Figure  . Heteroaromatic ring systems, often used as benzene bioisosteres, were excluded from this analysis in favor of nonclassical bioisosteres. Nonetheless, the general applicability of the BioSTAR workflow allows it to be extended to the analysis of such substitutions. The role of heteroaromatics as benzene bioisosteres has previously been reviewed by Ritchie and Macdonald, and Subbaiah and Meanwell.
Scaffolds investigated
as potential benzene bioisosteres. No homogeneous
MMPs were found in ChEMBL (version 35) for the scaffolds colored red.
Using the BioSTAR workflow on the ChEMBL database (version 35), we extracted bioactivity data for 21,868 homogeneous MMPs containing the scaffolds shown in Figure  . The molecular replacements with the highest number of homogeneous pairs were monosubstituted benzene ring to cyclohexane (N = 9672), cyclopropane (N = 3982), cyclopentane (N = 2551) or cyclobutene (N = 1075). For para-substituted benzene rings, replacement by a 1,4-cyclohexane was the most precedented substitution (N = 876), which was also true for meta- (1,3-cyclohexane, N = 112) and ortho-substituted benzenes (1,2-cyclohexane, N = 116). On the other hand, no MMPs were found containing oxabicyclo[2.2.2]­octane (13), azabicyclo[2.2.2]­octane (14), oxabicyclo[2.1.1]­hexane (23), BCHep (24), cuneane (28) or stellane (29).
The available data on physicochemical and ADME properties in ChEMBL was considerably more limited. For the bioisosteres investigated, we obtained a total of 202 solubility, 198 clearance, and 132 permeability data points. Similar to the bioactivity data, MMPs involving the replacement of a monosubstituted benzene with a cyclohexane ring were the most frequently observed across all three properties. At this time, for many of the investigated scaffolds no data beyond bioactivity was available.
A key limitation of this data-driven approach is the positive bias introduced by the under-reporting of unsuccessful experiments. This bias is likely more pronounced for less-precedented scaffolds, thus requiring cautious interpretation of the results obtained with these cases. Additionally, the partial coverage of the patent literature in ChEMBL is another important factor to consider when evaluating the outcomes of this analysis.

Effects on Bioactivity
The change in bioactivity resulting from a molecular transformation defines its bioisosteric nature; consequently, analyzing this effect is central to evaluating bioisosteres. The results of the MMP analysis are summarized in Figure  , which illustrates the impact that each molecular transformation had on bioactivity, solubility, and clearance. Figure   includes transformations with 5 or more data points in ChEMBL, but all of the results from the analysis, including descriptive statistics, can be found in the Supporting Information (Tables S1–S4).
Summary of the impact of potentially bioisosteric replacements
on bioactivity, solubility, and clearance (Clint). Mean
values are plotted with error bars representing 95% confidence intervals.
(A) Terminal benzene; (B) para-substituted benzene; (C) meta-substituted
benzene; (D) ortho-substituted benzene. ‡Indicates
substitutions with nonsignificant context dependency (see Supporting
Information, Tables S1–S7 for details).
A key aspect of bioisosterism is its inherent context dependency. Despite its significance, this consideration has not been explicitly incorporated into the analysis thus far. To evaluate the generality of the results obtained, we classified each bioactivity data point according to its biological target, based on ChEMBL’s protein classification (level 3). The effect of the molecular replacements on bioactivity (Δ­(−log­(bioactivity))) against each target family were measured. Subsequently, we employed a Welch’s one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to assess whether the target family influenced the observed Δ­(−log­(bioactivity)). A statistically significant result would indicate that the effect of the molecular replacement depended on the context of the target family, underscoring the context-dependent nature of bioisosterism. Conversely, a nonsignificant result would suggest that the target family did not have a significant impact on the observed effect, implying that the bioisostere can be considered more general in its applicability. This approach therefore allowed the assessment of the context-dependency of the investigated bioisosteric replacements. The transformations that showed no statistically significant context dependency are highlighted in Figure  . Detailed results of this analysis are included in the Supporting Information (Tables S1–S4).
Among the scaffolds investigated as monosubstituted benzene bioisosteres, cyclopentane, BCP, cyclopropane, and cyclohexane showed the smallest effect on bioactivity (Figure  A, rows 9–12). For cyclohexane, this was in line with Gunaydin and Bartberger’s analysis, which showed that 36–45% of terminal phenyl to cyclohexyl substitutions lead to ΔpIC50 ≤ 0.3 (≤2-fold change). In our analysis, this condition was true for 39% of the pairs adjudicated. Nonetheless, the bioisosteric nature of cyclohexane, cyclopentane, and cyclopropane was strongly context dependent, with effects on bioactivity varying across target families. A more general replacement based on our analysis, with similarly small effect on bioactivity, was 1-cyclohexene (row 13). Both bicyclo[2.2.2]­octane (BCO) and cubane showed significantly positive effects on bioactivity compared to benzene (Figure  A, rows 1–2), which may be due to entropy-driven effects.
Figure  B shows the results for para-substituted benzene rings. The replacements leading to smallest changes in bioactivity were 1,4-substituted cyclohexene, 1,3-substituted cyclobutane, 1,3-substituted cyclopentane, and 1,4-substituted cyclohexane (Figure  B, rows 4–7). Among these, 1,4-substituted cyclohexene and 1,3-substituted cyclopentane showed nonsignificant effects of context, and thus were the most general replacements. The context-dependency of the replacement of a para-substituted benzene by 1,2-substituted cyclopentane could not be assessed due to the limited data available (2 target families). Based on our analysis, a more generally bioisosteric replacement of para-substituted benzene rings is the 1,3-substituted BCP moiety (Figure  B, row 8).
The impact of potentially bioisosteric replacements for meta- and ortho-substituted benzene rings are summarized in Figure  C,D. In both cases, 1,2- and 1,3-disubstituted monocycloalkanes emerged as the most frequently reported replacements.
For a meta-substituted benzene, 1,3-substituted cyclohexane and 1,3-substituted cyclobutane exhibited the smallest effects on bioactivity (Figure  C, rows 4–5), with context having no significant impact on the effects derived from the former. Although less precedented, the use of 1,3-substituted cyclopentane as a meta-substituted benzene bioisostere was supported by our analysis, which showed that this replacement led to no significant impact on bioactivity across target families (Figure  C, row 6).
For ortho-substituted benzene, 1,2-substituted cyclohexane and 1,2-substituted cyclohexene resulted in the smallest changes in bioactivity, although the observed effects were strongly context-dependent (Figure  D, rows 5–6).
These findings underscore the scarcity of effective bioisosteric replacements for meta- and ortho-substituted benzene rings. Recent studies have highlighted the potential of 2-oxabicyclo[2.1.1]­hexanes, BCHeps, and 1,3-cubanes as meta-benzene bioisosteres, and of BCHs as ortho-benzene bioisosteres. Nonetheless, additional data are needed to further validate their bioisosteric behavior and impact on solubility, clearance, and other molecular properties. Developing further methods to synthesize appropriately substituted carbocyclic scaffolds, such as BCHs, BCHeps and cubanes, and incorporating these into bioactive molecules will be crucial to address this gap in the literature.
An important consideration when interpreting Figure   is the influence of lipophilicity on the effect of bioisosteric replacements. Increased lipophilicity often correlates with enhanced bioactivity, largely due to favorable desolvation and associated entropic gains during binding. Nonetheless, as noted by Hann, such potency gains may come at the expense of overall developability, due to poorer physicochemical properties of structures suffering from “molecular obesity”. In this data set, there was no overall correlation between Δlog­(bioactivity) and ΔclogP when aggregating all bioisosteric replacements, suggesting that lipophilicity is not the primary driver of the observed bioactivity changes (see Supporting Information, Figure S2 for details). However, when focusing on the replacement of mono-substituted benzene, a weak but statistically significant correlation was detected, indicating that lipophilicity is contributing to the bioactivity changes observed in this subset of transformations. No significant correlation between Δlog­(bioactivity) and ΔclogP was detected for the replacement of para-, meta-, or ortho-substituted benzene.
The BioSTAR workflow cannot handle stereocenters, and thus the aforementioned results did not distinguish between cis and trans isomers of disubstituted rings. The workflow outputs could, however, be analyzed based on the relative configuration of stereocenters (see Supporting Information, Figure S1 for details). The only replacement where the impact on bioactivity was significantly different between stereoisomers was the replacement of a para-substituted benzene ring with a 1,4-substituted cyclohexane. In this instance, trans-1,4-substituted cyclohexane was a better bioisostere than its cis stereoisomer, leading to a smaller change in bioactivity (Figure  ). The closer geometric similarity between the exit vectors of the trans isomer and the para-substituted benzene may account for this difference in behavior (Figure  ).
Effect of relative stereochemistry on 1,4-cyclohexanes
as para-substituted
benzene bioisosteres. Data are presented as mean ± 95% confidence
interval. Welch’s t test was used to assess
whether the mean bioactivity changes differed significantly between
cis and trans isomers, accounting for unequal variances. Significance
is indicated as follows: p < 0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**). Summary of the exit vector geometries
for 1,4-dimethylbenzene, trans- and cis-1,4-dimethylcyclohexane.

Effects on Solubility
The bioisosteric replacement of benzene rings is often used in compound design to improve the physicochemical properties of the molecules, including their solubility. The BioSTAR workflow has allowed a comprehensive analysis of the literature to evaluate whether these replacements have a significant impact on solubility, as well as ADME properties such as metabolic stability and cell permeability.
Solubility measurements are highly condition-dependent; however, the data filtering process in the BioSTAR workflow, restricted to homogeneous pairs (i.e., data points from the same publication measured under identical conditions), mitigates this source of variability. The results of this solubility analysis, which includes kinetic and thermodynamic measures, are also included in Figure   (see Supporting Information, Table S5 for details). Significant increases in solubility were observed when a monosubstituted benzene was replaced with a cyclopropyl, an N-methyl piperazine, and a 4-tetrahydropyran (4-THP) ring (Figure  A, rows 11, 15, 17). These improvements were likely due to reduced hydrophobicity and/or disrupted crystal packing. Indeed, a statistically significant correlation was detected between Δlog­(solubility) and ΔclogP, linking increases in solubility to decreased clogP (see Supporting Information, Figure S2 for details). Substitution of a phenyl ring by piperazine and 3-THP heterocycles also resulted in enhanced solubility, albeit not to a statistically significant extent (Figure  A, rows 18–19). The replacement of a phenyl group with other hydrophobic moieties, such as adamantyl, cyclobutyl, cyclopentyl, and cyclohexyl resulted in no substantial changes in solubility, as is evident from the data presented in Figure  A, rows 7–9 and 12.
Our analysis confirmed that the use of 1,4-substituted cyclohexane and BCP as para-substituted benzene bioisosteres leads to a statistically significant increase in solubility (Figure  B, rows 7–8). Notably, the incorporation of BCP produced the largest effect in the data set, resulting in a mean solubility increase of over an order of magnitude. These findings were in line with earlier reports in the literature.
Solubility data in ChEMBL for meta- and ortho-substituted benzene derivatives are limited. Nevertheless, significant solubility enhancements were observed when replacing a meta-substituted benzene with a 1,3-substituted cyclopentane (Figure  C, row 6) and an ortho- substituted benzene with a 1,2-substituted cyclohexane (Figure  D, row 6).

Effects on Metabolic Stability
Benzene rings are susceptible to oxidative metabolism to give phenols and dihydroxybenzenes, with the latter subject to further oxidation to afford quinone-based species that can form glutathione adducts. In order to avoid this, and to improve the metabolic stability of compounds, practitioners often replace these aromatic rings with saturated bioisosteres. We employed the BioSTAR workflow to evaluate the effect these replacements had on metabolic stability across the ChEMBL database. Homogenous pairs of both hepatocyte and liver microsome clearance data were pooled, as well as in vivo measures of clearance. Despite these broad inclusion criteria, the clearance data available are rather scarce, which limited the number of replacements that could be evaluated. The results of this analysis are summarized in Figure   (see Supporting Information, Table S6 for details).
For monosubstituted benzene rings, the only replacement that led to a statistically significant reduction in clearance was the substitution of a phenyl group with a 4-THP heterocycle (Figure  A, row 17). This effect was regioisomer-dependent, since replacement by a 3-THP had no impact on clearance (Figure  A, row 19). Further examples are, however, required to confirm this difference in behavior. On the other hand, the use of cyclohexyl as a phenyl bioisostere had a small but detrimental effect on metabolic stability (Figure  A, row 12).
The para-substituted benzene bioisosteres that could be assessed showed no significant impact on metabolic stability (Figure  B, rows 5, 7, 10). Nonetheless, the number of examples reported is limited and this conclusion is thus preliminary. Conversely, the replacement of a meta-substituted benzene with a 1,3-disubstituted cyclohexane led to a decrease in clearance (Figure  C, row 4) that is supportive of its incorporation when the objective is to increase the metabolic stability of lead compounds.
The next sections highlight recent, as well as particularly notable applications of benzene bioisosteres in drug design. These specific examples complement the general results of the data-mining analysis and showcase the utility of benzene bioisosteres in multiparameter optimization during drug optimization.

Replacement of Terminal Benzene Rings
Among the scaffolds investigated, there were 23 different replacements for terminal benzene rings with five or more examples in ChEMBL (Figure  A). Minimal effects on bioactivity were observed when using small carbocycles such as cyclopropane, cyclopentane, cyclohexane, as well as BCP as phenyl bioisosteres.
An example of the use of a cyclohexane as a phenyl bioisostere is demonstrated by Kitamura et al. in their development of noncovalent SARS-CoV-2 Mpro inhibitors. Their design was informed by the X-ray cocrystal structure of the protease bound to ML188 (30), which supported the addition of lipophilic groups to fill the S2 pocket (Figure  ). Indeed, the addition of either a phenyl or cyclohexyl group led to similar improvements in potency, showing the bioisosteric nature of these substituents. Nonetheless, the cyclohexane-based inhibitor 32 was cytotoxic and thus 31 was selected for further development. The proposed binding of the modified inhibitors was later confirmed through X-ray crystallography of compound 30 bound to SARS-CoV-2 Mpro (PDB: 3 V3M), which showed the phenyl group partaking in favorable hydrophobic interactions.
Schematic
representation of the interactions between ML188 (30)
and Mpro and impact on Mpro inhibition
and cytotoxicity of the replacement of a phenyl substituent by a cyclohexyl
ring.
The effect of the replacement of a phenyl by a cyclohexyl ring on bioactivity is, nonetheless, context dependent. This is illustrated in Figure  , which depicts the impact this substitution has on bioactivity across common target families (kinases, proteases, and family A GPCRs). The data show how proteases tend to tolerate this kind of substitution, as exemplified by SARS-CoV-2 Mpro cysteine protease inhibitors depicted in Figure  , while in protein kinases this replacement has a significantly deleterious impact on bioactivity.
Impact of the substitution of a phenyl ring with a cyclohexane
across target families. Data are presented as mean ± 95% confidence
interval. Statistical significance was determined using one-way ANOVA
followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. Significance
is indicated as follows: p < 0.05 (*), p < 0.01 (**), p < 0.001 (***), p < 0.0001 (****).
The common negative impact of cyclohexane as a phenyl bioisostere in the context of protein kinase inhibition was exemplified by Pollard and colleagues at Vertex during their development of ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Rad3 related (ATR) protein kinase inhibitors (Figure  ). During their lead-optimization efforts, the authors sought to replace the anilide moiety in 33 with a bioisostere in order to avoid the formation of potentially toxic anilines in vivo. The replacement of the anilide with a cyclohexyl amide (34), nonetheless, resulted in a significant reduction in potency. A clash with the gatekeeper Tyr2365 residue may subtend this difference in bioactivity.
Effect of the replacement of a phenyl
group with a cyclohexane
on ATR inhibition.
The replacement of a benzene ring by small aliphatic rings can lead to increased solubility, often due to reduced aromatic stacking in the solid state. This effect was most significant in our data-mining analysis for cyclopropane, as exemplified by Tear and co-workers in their optimization of small molecules for the treatment of human African trypanosomiasis (Figure  ). This transformation led to a small reduction in the pEC50 value but resulted in much improved solubility and a lower LogD. Opposing effects on metabolic stability were also observed that were species-dependent.
Impact
of the replacement of a phenyl ring by a cyclopropyl group
on T. brucei inhibitory potency, solubility, LogD, and clearance in rat hepatocytes and human microsomes.
Partially saturated carbocycles may sometimes offer advantages as phenyl bioisosteres. This was showcased by Konteatis et al. in the discovery of AG-270, an oral methionine adenosyltransferase 2A (MAT2A) inhibitor for the treatment of tumors with homozygous methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) deletion (Figure  ). Among the small rings explored, 1-substituted cyclohexene led to the biggest improvement in potency and was ultimately an element of the clinical candidate AG-270 (42).
Impact of the replacement of a monosubstituted
benzene with saturated
and partially saturated carbocycles on MAT2A inhibition. Structure
of the clinical candidate AG-270 (42).
Bicyclic scaffolds such as BCPs, BCHs, BCHeps, and their heteroatom-containing analogues have recently experienced a resurgence in the literature, driven by the increase in methodologies for their synthesis and functionalization. So far, examples of their incorporation into bioactive molecules are scarce and thus their role as benzene bioisosteres remains tentative. Roecker and colleagues at Merck reported an example of the use of BCP as phenyl bioisostere as part of their development of NaV1.7 inhibitors (Figure  ). To improve the ADME properties of lead inhibitor 43, the authors prepared a number of analogues 44–46 incorporating small alkyl motifs. Replacement of the phenyl moiety with cyclobutane (44) and cyclopropane (45) was detrimental to bioactivity, while incorporation of BCP (46) resulted in increased inhibitory potency toward Nav1.7. This replacement led to similar membrane permeability and reduced clearance when compared to the prototype 43. Further development, informed by this series of small aliphatic replacements, led to the identification of 47 as an inhibitor with similar inhibitory potency to 43 and 46 but with more balanced properties that showed efficacy in rodent models of pain.
Impact of the switch from a phenyl to cyclobutane, cyclopropane,
and BCP rings on the inhibition of Nav1.7, membrane permeability
and clearance. Structure of the optimized compound 47.
Larger, hydrophobic groups have also been successfully employed as phenyl bioisosteres, as demonstrated by Roy et al. in their development of BCL-XL and BCL-2 inhibitors (Figure  ). Their crystallography-guided approach led to the discovery of adamantyl-containing compound 49, one of the most potent binders for this challenging PPI. The substitution of a phenyl group with adamantyl was designed to enhance hydrophobic interactions within a cryptic P5 pocket (highlighted in green in Figure  ), leading to improved potency toward BCL-XL and MCL-1. Compounds 48 and 49 exhibited similar selectivity profiles against the BCL-2 family proteins, showing low binding to BCL-W or MCL-1, whereas the adamantyl-containing 49 demonstrated increased binding affinity for A1. The proposed binding mode of 49 to BCL-XL was subsequently confirmed through X-ray cocrystallography (PDB: 6UVG) using the using the analogous but truncated inhibitor 50 (Figure  ).
Effect of phenyl-to-adamantyl substitution on the inhibition
of
BCL-XL and related BCL-2 family proteins. X-ray cocrystal
structure of 50 (an analogue of 49) bound
to BCL-XL shown in orange (PDB: 6UVG). Hydrophobic regions are highlighted
in green and hydrophilic regions in purple.
Todd and colleagues conducted a particularly elegant study exploring larger phenyl bioisosteres in a series of antimalarial agents incorporating carboranes, scaffolds that have found seldom use by medicinal chemists (Figure  ). In their effort to enhance the solubility and metabolic stability of a triazolopyrazine series, they replaced the phenyl ring with cubane, adamantane, and various closo-carboranes. Cubane substitution (53) preserved antimalarial activity whereas adamantane (52) was less well tolerated. Remarkably, incorporation of the rarely used 1,2- and 1,7-closo-carborane in 54 and 55, respectively, led to significantly enhanced activity, while the 1,12-isomer (56) resulted in a reduction in inhibitory potency. The authors hypothesized that compound potency inversely correlated with the hydrophobicity of the carborane isomers. However, despite the promising bioactivity data, analogues 54 and 55 did not produce the desired improvements in solubility and metabolic stability.
Effect of the replacement of a phenyl ring by adamantane,
cubane,
and carboranes on antimalarial activity, lipophilicity, solubility,
and metabolic stability.
The replacement of phenyl groups with heteroatom-containing ring systems such as THP, dioxanes, and piperazines, is less precedented and on average leads to reduced bioactivity. Thomas and co-workers replaced the phenyl ring in pyrazolopyrimidine 57 with a 4-substituted THP (58) as part of their development of treatments for visceral leishmaniasis (Figure  ). In this instance, the change resulted in a relatively small reduction in inhibitory potency, but was concomitant with a dramatic increase in solubility and much reduced mouse liver microsomal clearance.
Impact of the substitution
of a phenyl group by 4-THP as part of
the development of treatments against visceral leishmaniasis.

Replacement of Para-Substituted Benzene Rings
Based on our data-mining analysis, the replacements for a para-substituted benzene with the smallest impact on bioactivity were 1,3-substituted cyclopentane, 1,4-substituted cyclohexane, 1,4-substituted cyclohexene, and 1,3-substituted cyclobutane (Figure  ). Both 1,4-substituted cyclohexane and a disubstituted BCP led to significant increases in solubility, while none of the bioisosteres investigated had a significant impact on metabolic stability.
Huang et al. employed 1,4-substituted cyclohexane as a para-substituted benzene bioisostere in their development of tankyrase (TNKS) inhibitors (Figure  ). In line with our analysis, the trans isomer 60 outperformed the cis isomer 61 across all assays. The X-ray cocrystal structures of 59 and 60 complexed with TNKS1 showed good overlap between the para- substituted benzene in 59 and the trans-1,4-cyclohexane ring in 60, supporting the role of this scaffold as bioisosteric.
Impact on TNKS inhibitory
activity and clearance of the replacement
of a para-substituted benzene with cis- and trans-1,4-substituted
cyclohexane. X-ray cocrystal structures of 59 (blue,
PDB: 4N4T) and 60 (orange, PDB:4N4 V) with TNKS1. Exit vector analysis of
para- substituted benzene and trans-1,4-substituted cyclohexane (measurements
extracted from the cocrystal structures).
Pu and colleagues demonstrated the utility of a disubstituted BCP as a para-substituted benzene bioisostere in their development of indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) inhibitors (Figure  ). In their study, replacing the para-substituted benzene in 62 with a BCP reduced the ALogP value by over one logarithmic unit and resulted in a slight reduction in potency. X-ray cocrystallographic analysis of 62 and 63 bound to IDO1 highlighted the similar angles of the exit vectors of these scaffolds (ca. 180°), and the shorter distance between them in 63 (2.84 vs 1.93 Å). The shorter distance between hydrogen-bond acceptors may preclude their effective interaction with both water molecules in IDO1, thus providing a plausible explanation for the lower inhibitory potency of BCP-containing analogue 63. Further optimization of the BCP-containing series led to the discovery of the potent, orally available BCP analogue 64, which was equipotent to the initial hit 62 but with significantly lower clearance. The authors attributed this improvement to slower amide hydrolysis as a result of the incorporation of the BCP core.
Effect of the replacement
of a para-substituted benzene ring with
a disubstituted BCP on IDO1 inhibitory activity, ALogP, and Clint and further development toward a candidate
molecule 64. X-ray cocrystal structures of 62 (blue, PDB: 6 V52) and 63 (orange, PDB: 6WJY) with IDO1. Exit
vector analysis of para-substituted benzene and 1,3-BCP (measurements
extracted from the cocrystal structures).
Aguilar and co-workers demonstrated the utility of a [2.2.2]­BCO as a bulkier para-substituted benzene bioisostere in the development of murine double minute 2 (MDM2) inhibitors (Figure  ). The authors’ extensive SAR study included MMPs in which the benzene ring of 65 was replaced with various disubstituted aliphatic scaffolds. Replacement with trans-1,4-cyclohexane yielded equipotent compound 66 while the cis-isomer 67, consistent with our analysis, exhibited reduced bioactivity across assays. BCP-containing analogue 68 showed comparable in vitro binding affinity but was less potent in the cell-based assay (SJSA-1 xenograft model). Finally, the [2.2.2]­BCO-containing compound 69 maintained similar MDM2 affinity and growth inhibition to benzoic acid 65, and had much reduced clearance in liver microsomal preparations. However, despite its promising pharmacokinetic profile, compound 69 lacked in vivo efficacy, with no observed tumor regression – an outcome that the authors attributed to poor tissue penetration. N-Alkylation of the pyrrolidine ring in compound 69 circumvented this tissue penetration issue and led to 70, which showed 100% tumor regression in rat in vivo studies. Compound 70 has since advanced into phase II clinical trials for the treatment of relapsed/refractory T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia (R/R T-PLL) and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL).
Impact of replacing a para-substituted benzene ring with
several
disubstituted aliphatic scaffolds on MDM2 affinity, cellular activity,
pharmacokinetic parameters, and in vivo efficacy. Structure of the
resulting clinical candidate 70.
Partially saturated carbocycles can also be employed as para-substituted benzene bioisosteres, as showcased by Swidorski and co-workers in their development of broad-spectrum HIV-1 maturation inhibitors (Figure  ).   Aromatic ring-containing triterpenoid GSK3532795 (71) was a candidate that advanced into phase IIb clinical trials; however, development was halted due to gastrointestinal intolerability and treatment-emergent resistance. The replacement of the para-substituted benzene ring with nonaromatic motifs was explored as a strategy to ameliorate these issues. Indeed, incorporation of 1,4-substituted cyclohexene (72) or 2,6-substituted spiro[3.3]­hept-1-ene (73) resulted in improved potency across the HIV-1 mutant strains tested. Further development of cyclohexene 72 led to the discovery of GSK3640254 (74), a second clinical candidate to reach clinical trials, which did not show treatment-emergent resistance in early clinical studies. In 2024, the authors disclosed a third clinical candidate incorporating a cyclohexene ring with further improved antiviral properties and the potential for once-weekly dosing.
Effect of the replacement
of a para-substituted benzene with a
1,4-substituted cyclohexene and 2,6-substituted spiro[3.3]­hept-1-ene
in the development of broad spectrum HIV-1 maturation inhibitors.
Structure of the clinical candidate GSK3640254 (74).
1,4-Piperazine generally leads to a loss in bioactivity when employed as a para-substituted benzene bioisostere, as evidenced by our MMP analysis (Figure  ). This is often due to its basicity, which results in the ammonium ion being the predominant species in solution at physiological pH. Substitution of piperazines with electron withdrawing groups can, however, lower their pK a values and allow their productive application as para-substituted benzene bioisosteres. Klug and co-workers’ development of small-molecule treatments for human African trypanosomiasis, which is caused by the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma brucei (T. brucei), exemplifies this approach (Figure  ). The authors replaced the para-substituted benzene ring in azaindole 75 with the 1,4-piperazine in 76 which, due to the methanesulfonyl substituent, is associated with attenuated basicity. This replacement resulted in a small drop in bioactivity, but was accompanied by an increase in solubility.
Impact of the substitution of a para-substituted benzene with a
1,4-piperazine heterocycle in the context on inhibitory activity toward T. brucei, clearance, and solubility.

Replacement of Meta-Substituted Benzene Rings
Our analysis showed that carbocycles such as 1,3-substituted cyclobutane, 1,3-substituted cyclopentane, and 1,3-substituted cyclohexane had the smallest impact on bioactivity when used as meta-substituted benzene bioisosteres. Furthermore, 1,3-substituted cyclopentane led to a significant increase in solubility.
An elegant example of the utility of 1,3-cyclohexanes as meta-substituted benzene bioisosteres is their incorporation into SETD2 inhibitors, as demonstrated by Farrow and co-workers (Figure  ). The bis-aniline core in lead compound 77 led to poor pharmacokinetic properties and potential metabolism-derived toxicity, prompting the screening of alternative, saturated scaffolds to address these limitations. Substituting the problematic meta-substituted benzene ring with a 1,3-substituted cyclohexane yielded the clinical candidate EZM0414 (78), which retained similar potency in biochemical assays while demonstrating enhanced antiproliferative activity and an improved PK profile. The relative and absolute configuration of the stereocenters on the cyclohexane ring had a critical impact on bioactivity. X-ray cocrystal structures of 77, 78, and 80 bound to SETD2 revealed that the exit vectors of the cis-isomer, bearing the (1R,3S) configuration, closely mimicked those of the meta-substituted benzene ring, providing structural insight into its functional mimicry (Figure  ).
Effect on SETD2 inhibition, cLogP, and
clearance
of the replacement of a meta- substituted benzene with a 1,3-substituted
cyclohexane. X-ray cocrystal structures of an analogue of 77 (blue, PDB: 7LZD) and EZM0414 (78) (orange, PDB: 7TY2) with SETD2. Exit
vector analysis of meta-substituted benzene, cis- and trans-1,3-substituted
cyclohexane (measurements extracted from the cocrystal structures
(PDB: 7LZD,
7TY2, 7TY3)).
Munck af Rosenschö and colleagues at AstraZeneca showcased the bioisosteric nature of cyclopropanes in their development of leukotriene C4 synthase (LTC4S) inhibitors (Figure  ). The motivation behind this replacement strategy was to improve the properties of 82 to allow oral administration. Indeed, substitution of the meta-substituted benzene ring with a trans-cyclopropane to give carboxylic acid 83 resulted in the maintenance of inhibitory activity across both the enzyme and cell-based assays, along with reduced LogD and lower hepatic clearance. Further elaboration of 83 resulted in the invention of the clinical candidate 84, which was progressed into phase I clinical studies.
Impact of the switch from a meta-substituted a benzene to a cyclopropane
on LTC4S inhibition, LogD, and hepatic clearance.
Structure of the clinical candidate 84 resulting from
optimization of 83.
Scientists at Bristol Myers-Squibb reported the effects of the replacement of a meta-substituted benzene with a cyclopentane and a [2.2.1]­BCH as part of their development of interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4 (IRAK4) inhibitors (Figure  ). In this context, the three scaffolds led to similarly potent compounds in the biochemical assays, while in the cell-based assay the compound bearing a trans-1,2-cyclopentane (87) was less potent than 85, 86, and 88. The four diastereoisomers of the 1,3-substituted cyclopentane 86 were similarly active, with differences being more pronounced in the cell-based assay (data not shown).
Impact of the replacement of a meta-substituted benzene with cyclopentane
and [2.2.1]­BCH on IRAK4 inhibition.
Although less precedented, likely due to the scarcity of methods for the synthesis of disubstituted scaffolds, caged ring systems such as BCPs, BCHs, BCHeps and cubanes, have potential as meta-substituted benzene bioisosteres. This was exemplified by Caldwell et al. in the development of covalent Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (BTK) inhibitors (Figure  ). To improve the aqueous solubility and metabolic stability of acrylamide 89, the authors explored the replacement of the meta-substituted benzene ring with alternative alkyl linkers. This was supported by SAR and X-ray cocrystal structure data. Incorporation of a [2.1.1]­BCH linker (90) resulted in increased solubility and membrane permeability, and lower hepatic clearance, concomitant with a small reduction in inhibitory potency in both the enzyme and cell-based assays. Further exploration of the linkers led to the discovery of evobrutinib (91), a BTK inhibitor with higher solubility and membrane permeability that was progressed to clinical trials.
Effect
of replacing a meta-substituted benzene ring with a [2.1.1]­BCH
linker on BTK inhibition, solubility, hepatic clearance, and membrane
permeability. Structure of clinical candidate evobrutinib (91).

Replacement of ortho-Substituted Benzene Rings
There are limited data available in ChEMBL on the application of ortho-substituted benzene bioisosteres. Our workflow showed that 1,2-substituted cyclohexane and 1,2-substituted cyclohexene are the replacements that lead to smallest changes in bioactivity, although these effects were context dependent. The incorporation of a 1,2-substituted cyclohexane was associated with an increase in solubility.
Kuduk and co-workers aimed to replace the ortho-substituted benzene ring in the bradykinin B1 antagonist 92 with an alternative, nonaromatic scaffold to improve the physicochemical properties of their compounds (Figure  ). Toward this aim, compounds 93–97 were prepared. The replacement of the ortho-substituted benzene with a 1,2-substituted cyclohexene (93) or a bicyclo[2.2.1]­heptane (97) led to a significant reduction in inhibitory potency. On the other hand, the 4,5-substituted cyclohexenes 94–95 and the trans-1,2-substituted cyclohexane 96 showed improved binding affinity for the bradykinin B1 receptor, although this was concomitant with increased clearance in vivo. The authors speculated that the nonaromatic nature of the methyl ester in 94 and 96 resulted in faster hydrolysis, responsible for their lower metabolic stability compared to the ortho-substituted benzene 92.
Impact of the replacement of an ortho-substituted
benzene with
alternative nonaromatic scaffolds on antagonism of bradykinin B1 receptors,
LogP, and metabolic stability.
Smaller rings, such as cyclopropanes and cyclopentanes, can also be used to replace ortho-substituted benzenes, as demonstrated by Saleeb et al. in their development of inhibitors of Pseudomonas aeruginosa exoenzyme S ADP-ribosyltransferase activity (Figure  ). In this example, the relative configuration of the cyclopropane ring had a significant impact on bioactivity, with the trans isomer 99 outperforming the cis-isomer 100 by an order of magnitude.
Substitution
of an ortho-substituted benzene with cyclopropane
in inhibitors of Pseudomonas aeruginosa exoenzyme
S ADP-ribosyltransferase.

Summary and Outlook
In this perspective, we lay out a strategy to mapping the bioisostere landscape through a data-driven approach, exemplified by mapping benzene bioisosteres. This allowed us to evaluate the context-dependency of such bioisosteric substitutions while highlighting recent applications and identifying areas that would benefit from further research. This was achieved through the deployment of an open-access, data-mining workflow (BioSTAR).
The data-mining analysis performed enabled the ranking of 57 potential benzene bioisosteres based on their impact on bioactivity, solubility and clearance. We hope that these findings will assist practicing medicinal chemists in prioritizing potential bioisosteric replacements for benzene, and that the data-mining workflow employed will serve as a valuable, general tool for the quantitative evaluation of molecular replacements.
Examining the benzene bioisostere landscape revealed areas with limited available data, highlighting opportunities where additional research could significantly benefit the community. For example, bioactivity data for meta- and ortho-substituted benzene bioisosteres remains particularly scarce. The development of synthetic methodologies to access novel, and diversely functionalized carbocyclic scaffolds is therefore essential to advance this field and allow the evaluation of the impact of these replacements on bioactivity, solubility, and ADME properties.
The findings of this data-mining analysis are expected to evolve as more data becomes available. In line with this, the workflow developed only uses open-source software so others may reproduce and extend this analysis over time or apply it to different open access or even proprietary databases. Expanding this approach to include the extensive bioactivity and molecular property data from pharmaceutical companies holds great promise. A notable, relevant example is the work by Kramer et al., who conducted a MMP analysis to extract absorption, distribution, metabolism, elimination and toxicity (ADMET) knowledge from pooled data shared by AstraZeneca, Genentech, and Roche. This collaboration resulted in synergistic knowledge gains without compromising intellectual property, as full molecular structures were not disclosed. Applying a similar effort to bioactivity and bioisosterism could yield equally promising results, advancing the field while preserving proprietary information.

Supplementary Material
Extended results of the MMP analysis, analysis of the impact of stereochemistry on bioactivity, correlation analysis between compound properties and cLogP, and BioiSostere Analysis and Ranking (BioSTAR) workflow user guide (PDF)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5c01641.
The manuscript was written through contributions of all coauthors. All authors have given approval of the final version of the manuscript.
The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Abbreviations Used
ADME
absorption, distribution, metabolism and elimination
ADMET
absorption, distribution, metabolism, elimination and toxicity
ANOVA
analysis of variance
ATR
ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Rad3 related
BCH
bicyclo­[2.1.1]­hexane
BCHep
bicyclo­[3.1.1]­heptane
BCO
bicyclo­[2.2.2]­octane
BCP
bicyclo­[1.1.1]­pentane
BioSTAR
BioiSosTere Analysis and Ranking
BTK
Bruton’s tyrosine kinase
F+I
fragmentation and indexing algorithm
Fsp3
the fraction of carbon atoms in a molecule that are sp 3 hybridized
IDO
indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase
IRAK
interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase
LTC4S
leukotriene C4 synthase
MCS
maximum common substructure
MDM
murine double minute
MMP
matched molecular pair
MAT2A
methionine adenosyltransferase 2A
MTAP
methylthioadenosine phosphorylase
NHL
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
PDB
protein data bank
R/R T-PLL
relapsed/refractory T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia
T. brucei
Trypanosoma brucei
THP
tetrahydropyran
TNKS
tankyrase
tPSA
topological polar surface area
Escape from flatland: increasing saturation as an approach to improving clinical success
Escape from flatland 2: complexity and promiscuity
Return to flatland
The impact of aromatic ring count on compound developability – are too many aromatic rings a liability in drug design?
Target-based evaluation of “drug-like” properties and ligand efficiencies
Conquering the synthesis and functionalization of bicyclo[1.1.1]­pentanes
(S)-(+)-2-(3‘-Carboxybicyclo­[1.1.1]­pentyl)- glycine, a structurally new group I metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist
Application of the bicyclo[1.1.1]­pentane motif as a nonclassical phenyl ring bioisostere in the design of a potent and orally active γ-secretase inhibitor
Synthesis of polysubstituted bicyclo[2.1.1]­hexanes enabling access to new chemical space
A catalytic alkene insertion approach to bicyclo[2.1.1]­hexane bioisosteres
1,2-Disubstituted bicyclo[2.1.1]­hexanes as saturated bioisosteres of ortho-substituted benzene
Practical and facile access to bicyclo[3.1.1]­heptanes: potent bioisosteres of meta-substituted benzenes
Synthesis of meta-substituted arene bioisosteres from [3.1.1]­propellane
General access to cubanes as benzene bioisosteres
Validating Eaton’s hypothesis: cubane as a benzene bioisostere
Synthesis and preliminary evaluation of (S)-2-(4′-carboxycubyl)­glycine, a new selective mGluR1 antagonist
Exploring cuneanes as potential benzene isosteres and energetic materials: scope and mechanistic investigations into regioselective rearrangements from cubanes
Silver­(I)-catalyzed synthesis of cuneanes from cubanes and their investigation as isosteres
Biological evaluation of isosteric applicability of 1,3-substituted cuneanes as m-substituted benzenes enabled by selective isomerization of 1,4-substituted cubanes
Cuneanes as potential benzene bioisosteres having chirality
Stellane at the forefront: derivatization and reactivity studies of a promising saturated bioisostere of ortho-substituted benzenes
Three-dimensional saturated C­(sp3)-rich bioisosteres for benzene
Bioisosteres of the phenyl ring: recent strategic applications in lead optimization and drug design
Recent progress in accessing multi-functionalized caged hydrocarbons: en route to highly functionalized saturated (bio)­isosteres of benzene rings
Saturated bioisosteres of benzene: where to go next?
(Bio)­isosteres of ortho- and meta-substituted benzenes
Isomorphism, isosterism and covalence
Isosterism and bioisosterism in drug design
Über pseudoatome
Influence of isosteric replacements upon biological ctivity
Isosterism and molecular modification in drug design
Bioisosteric replacements extracted from high-quality structures in the protein databank
Bioisosteres and scaffolds
Background and features of emil, a system for database-aided bioanalogous structural transformation of bioactive compounds
Extended Summary: BIOSTERa database of structurally analogous compounds
A method for visualizing recurrent topological substructures in sets of active molecules
Computationally efficient algorithm to identify matched molecular pairs (MMPs) in large data sets
SwissBioisostere 2021: updated structural, bioactivity and physicochemical data delivered by a reshaped web interface
SwissBioisostere: a database of molecular replacements for ligand design
Ring replacement recommender: ring modifications for improving biological activity
Identification of target-specific bioisosteric fragments from ligand–protein crystallographic data
sc-PDB-Frag: A database of protein–ligand interaction patterns for bioisosteric replacements
The BioSTAR (BioiSosTere Analysis and Ranking) tool can be accessed via the KNIME Hub at: .
DataWarrior: an open-source program for chemistry aware data visualization and analysis
Matched Molecular Pair analysis: significance and the impact of experimental uncertainty
The calculation was performed on 12th Gen Intel­(R) Core­(TM) i5–12500, 3000 MHz, 6 Core(s), 12 Logical Processor(s)
Heterocyclic replacements for benzene: maximising ADME benefits by considering individual ring isomers
Stacking with no planarity?
Water-soluble non-classical benzene mimetics
Saturated bioisosteres of ortho-substituted benzenes
Thermodynamics guided lead discovery and optimization
Molecular obesity, potency and other addictions in drug discovery
Improvement in aqueous solubility in small molecule drug discovery programs by disruption of molecular planarity and symmetry
Synthesis and biopharmaceutical evaluation of imatinib analogues featuring unusual structural motifs
The toxicity of benzene and its metabolism and molecular pathology in human risk assessment
Expedited approach toward the rational design of noncovalent SARS-CoV-2 main protease inhibitors
Discovery of potent and selective inhibitors of ataxia telangiectasia mutated and Rad3 related (ATR) protein kinase as potential anticancer agents
Tactics to Improve Solubility
Selectivity and physicochemical optimization of repurposed pyrazolo­[1,5-b]­pyridazines for the treatment of human african trypanosomiasis
Discovery of AG-270, a first-in-class oral MAT2A inhibitor for the treatment of tumors with homozygous MTAP deletion
Discovery of arylsulfonamide Nav1.7 inhibitors: IVIVC, MPO methods, and optimization of selectivity profile
Structure-guided development of potent benzoylurea inhibitors of BCL-XL and BCL-2
Nonclassical phenyl bioisosteres as effective replacements in a series of novel open-source antimalarials
Identification of 6-amino-1H-pyrazolo­[3,4-d]­pyrimidines with in vivo efficacy against visceral leishmaniasis
Structure-based design of 2-aminopyridine oxazolidinones as potent and selective tankyrase inhibitors
Discovery of potent and orally available bicyclo[1.1.1]­pentane-derived indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) inhibitors
Discovery of 4-((3′R,4′S,5′R)-6″-chloro-4′-(3-chloro-2-fluorophenyl)-1′-ethyl-2″-oxodispiro­[cyclohexane-1,2′-pyrrolidine-3′,3″-indoline]-5′-carboxamido)­bicyclo[2.2.2]­octane-1-carboxylic Acid (AA-115/APG-115): a potent and orally active Murine Double Minute 2 (MDM2) inhibitor in clinical development
A phase IIa study evaluating the pharmacokinetics, safety and efficacy of APG-115 as a single agent or in combination with APG-2575 in subjects with relapsed/refractory T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia (R/R T-PLL) or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL)
Design and exploration of C-3 benzoic acid bioisosteres and alkyl replacements in the context of GSK3532795 (BMS-955176) that exhibit broad spectrum HIV-1 maturation inhibition
The discovery of GSK3640254, a next-generation inhibitor of HIV-1 maturation
Invention of VH-937, a potent HIV-1 maturation inhibitor with the potential for infrequent oral dosing in humans
Lead optimization of 3,5-disubstituted-7-azaindoles for the treatment of human African trypanosomiasis
Conformational-design-driven discovery of EZM0414: a selective, potent SETD2 inhibitor for clinical studies
Discovery of the oral leukotriene C4 synthase inhibitor (1S,2S)-2-({5-[(5-chloro-2,4-difluorophenyl)­(2-fluoro-2-methylpropyl)­amino]-3-methoxypyrazin-2-yl}­carbonyl)­cyclopropanecarboxylic acid (AZD9898) as a new treatment for asthma
P138 Urinary leukotriene E4 (uLTE4) pharmacodynamic biomarker for early decision making in the AZD9898 adaptive phase i study
Heteroaryl substituted nicotinamide compounds
Discovery of evobrutinib: an oral, potent, and highly selective, covalent Bruton’s Tyrosine Kinase (BTK) Inhibitor for the treatment of immunological diseases
Bradykinin B1 antagonists: SAR studies in the 2,3-diaminopyridine series
Structure–activity relationships for inhibitors of Pseudomonas aeruginosa exoenzyme S ADP-ribosyltransferase activity
Learning medicinal chemistry Absorption, Distribution, Metabolism, Excretion, and Toxicity (ADMET) rules from cross-company Matched Molecular Pairs Analysis (MMPA)