Innovative Processing Technologies for Clean‐Label Liquid Foods With High Protein Content: Advances in Process Development and Quality Evaluation
ABSTRACT
The demand for protein‐based liquid foods is increasing due to growing awareness of the impact of diet on human health. This trend has prompted the food industry to explore minimal processing technologies that ensure both safety and clean‐label appeal. This review presents a comprehensive assessment of selected innovative nonthermal technologies—based on high pressure, electromagnetic, acoustic, plasma fields, and membrane filtration principles—to process protein‐based liquid foods. Key engineering considerations for designing process conditions suitable for protein systems are discussed. The review also examines the effects of these technologies on microbiological safety and quality attributes, including structural (particle size and microstructure), functional (solubility, rheology, emulsification, and foaming properties), and nutritional aspects (digestibility and allergenicity), along with possible underlying mechanisms. Findings highlight the importance of uniform application of the lethal agent (e.g., pressure, temperature, and electrical field) and thermal effects within the processed volume to validate microbial safety. Product‐specific factors such as composition including fat and protein, pH, and water activity must also be carefully considered. Evidence suggests that nonthermal technologies can induce diverse structural and conformational changes in proteins, thereby altering their interactions with other food components and leading to variable impacts on quality attributes such as viscosity and emulsion stability. Increasing thermal intensity in combination with nonthermal agents generally degrade product quality. Future research should aim to optimize nonthermal processing parameters for a variety of protein‐based foods by integrating both process and product factors to ensure microbial safety and enhanced product quality. The strategic application of nonthermal technologies—alone or in combination with mild thermal treatments—offers significant potential for developing sustainable, high‐quality, and tailor‐made protein‐based food products.

Abbreviations
ACP
atmospheric pressure cold plasma
BG
bovine gelatin
BNB
bulk nanobubble
BSA
bovine serum albumin
CAPP
cold atmospheric pressure plasma
CFU
colony‐forming unit
CIP
clean‐in‐place
CLSM
confocal laser scanning microscopy
CP
cold plasma
DBD
dielectric barrier discharge
DF
diafiltration
EWP
egg white protein
FG
fish gelatin
HIPEF
high intensity pulsed electric field
HPH
high‐pressure homogenization
HPP
high‐pressure processing
IFT
Institute of Food Technologists
IgE
immunoglobulin E
LWE
liquid whole egg
MCC
micellar casein concentrate
MF
microfiltration
MPC
milk protein concentrate
PAF
pressure assisted freezing
PATP
pressure‐assisted thermal processing
PEF
pulsed electric field
PL
pulsed light
PPI
pea protein isolate
PSF
pressure shift freezing
RPI
rice protein isolate
SCC
somatic cell count
SEM
scanning electron microscope
SPI
soybean protein isolate
TEM
transmission electron microscopy
UF
ultrafiltration
UHPH
ultra high‐pressure homogenization
UHT
ultra high temperature
UST
ultra‐shear technology
UV
ultraviolet
WPC
whey protein concentrate
WPI
whey protein isolate
α‐La
α‐lactalbumin
β‐Lg
β‐lactoglobulin

Introduction
Food proteins, apart from being a source of energy, help regulation of physiological processes, inhibition of inflammatory substances, and sustain the overall growth of body (Shevkani and Chourasia). Proteins for human health are obtained from animal‐based sources like milk, meat, egg, whey, and seafood and plant‐based sources like legumes, cereals and pseudocereals, nuts, and some fruits and vegetables. Few emerging protein sources with limited use are insects and algae, including microalgae such as spirulina and macroalgae such as seaweed (Lv et al.; Wu et al.).
Conventional thermal processes like canning, pasteurization, and ultrahigh temperature treatments are used to process protein‐based liquid foods such as milk, whey‐based drinks, yogurt‐based drinks, cheese sauces, cheese substitutes, protein shakes, soups, or meal replacement beverages. Although thermal processing is efficient in inactivating microbes and enzymes, it causes undesirable modifications to quality attributes and affects the overall acceptance of the processed products. Protein gets denatured at high temperatures and destabilizes the food matrix. Therefore, alternative nonthermal technologies like pulsed electric field (PEF), high‐pressure processing (HPP), cold plasma (CP), membrane processing, and ultraviolet (UV) light processing are being investigated.
A plethora of previous studies has reported that nonthermal technologies, in addition to achieving microbial inactivation, can also modify the physicochemical properties of foods and serve broader purposes such as blending plant and animal proteins, extracting bioactive compounds, enhancing stability, improving gelling and foaming properties, increasing digestibility, and reducing allergenicity (Briviba et al.; Xiong et al.; Jadhav et al.; Janahar et al.; Melchior et al.). Despite these numerous advantages, the commercial adoption of nonthermal technologies remains limited due to a lack of comprehensive understanding of process design and techno‐economic feasibility that effectively integrates process and product factors to ensure both safety and quality. Most prior studies have primarily examined the general effects of these technologies on various protein‐based foods. However, a systematic evaluation that elucidates the influence of specific process parameters across different protein‐based systems is still lacking. There is no “one‐process‐fits‐all” approach for nonthermal technologies, as the optimal processing parameters must be carefully tailored to individual product compositions—particularly for protein‐rich liquid foods—making process design and optimization highly challenging.
In protein‐based foods, proteins are responsible for the product characteristics such as texture, mouth feel, appearance, and taste (Asgar et al.). Proteins can decide the characteristics in foods due to their structural versatility and interaction with other food components such as other fat, carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals through hydrogen bonds and electrostatic and/or hydrophobic interactions (Quintero et al.). Depending on the processing technology used and the induced changes in protein interactions can alter the functional properties of a product such as stability, blending characteristics, foaming, gelling, and emulsion properties (Pizones Ruiz‐Henestrosa et al.; Quintero et al.). Therefore, it is essential to understand the theory of different nonthermal processing technologies and study the influence of the processes on the quality characteristics of liquid foods. Understanding the mechanism of these processing methods and identifying the critical processing parameters allow for selection of appropriate technology for desired product characteristics in the liquid foods.
This article provides an overview of the advancements in nonthermal processing methods and engineering principles to process protein‐based liquid foods. The review also features the changes in the quality attributes of the protein‐based liquid foods under different nonthermal processes.

Scope and Research
This review focused on peer‐reviewed studies that investigated the effects of selected nonthermal processing technologies on protein‐based liquid foods. A comprehensive literature search was conducted across multiple scientific databases, including Web of Science, Google Scholar, Scopus, ScienceDirect, and Wiley Online Library, using appropriate keywords. Predetermined exclusion criteria were applied to omit studies involving solid foods, products containing synthetic additives or preservatives, and processing technologies specific to solid matrices. The review included studies examining process development of innovative nonthermal processes. These technologies utilize lethal agents based on physical‐mechanical process including high pressure HPP, pressure‐assisted thermal processing (PATP), and ultra‐shear technology (UST) (also known as high‐pressure homogenization [HPH]) and acoustic and mechanical wave field (ultrasound), electromagnetic and light field (PEF, UV light, and pulsed light [PL]), physical separation (membrane processing), and gas/plasma (CP) to process protein‐based liquid foods (Figure 1). From the selected studies, process parameters (e.g., temperature, pressure, electric field intensity, and time) and intrinsic product factors (e.g., pH, product composition, and water activity) were systematically evaluated. The influence of these process and product parameters on food safety and quality attributes—including particle size, microstructure, viscosity, solubility, digestibility, allergenicity, and emulsifying and foaming properties—was comprehensively assessed. For brevity, this review primarily focused on food safety and quality aspects of the technology and did not discuss sustainability (such as energy and water conservation) and relevant techno‐economic analysis. Readers are encouraged to refer to other relevant sources for related details (Younis et al.; Zhang et al.).
Schematic representation of nonthermal technologies based on principles of action.

Drivers for Emergence of Novel Protein‐Based Liquid Foods
The present world population is projected to attain 9.7 billion in 2050 as per the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs report (United Nations). Developing sustainable food systems is essential to feed the increasing population and to eliminate malnutrition (Fasolin et al.). The population expansion implies increasing demand for animal‐based protein foods, which in turn raises the concerns of greenhouse gas emission, land and water usage, and environmental pollution. Producing 1 kg of milk or meat requires about 7 kg of vegetable food, highlighting a significant inefficiency in conversion of vegetable matter into animal‐derived proteins (Nadathur et al.; Fasolin et al.). Therefore, industrial efforts are focused on transitioning from animal‐based to plant‐based protein sources for sustainable food production (Aiking; Leip et al.; Lamb et al.). A category of consumers called flexitarians prefer to reduce animal proteins but do not remove it completely from their diets (De Backer and Hudders). Further, more people in recent times show apparent inclination toward reducing consumption of animal‐sourced proteins and increasing plant‐based proteins due to perceived health benefits. Thus, consumer demand toward plant protein‐based liquid products such as drinks made of soy, oats, nuts, and peas is increasing (Aschemann‐Witzel and Peschel). However, there is limitation in wide acceptance due to the plant‐induced flavors and bitter taste.
Research is now also emphasis on  creation of blended hybrid plant–animal protein liquid foods (Chihi et al.; Mession et al.; Silva et al.; Janahar et al.). Although plant proteins are cost effective and have unique functionalities, blending plant and animal proteins in liquid foods, especially dairy milk, presents several challenges because plant proteins generally are less soluble and exhibit distinctive taste such as beany and malty (Day; Alves and Tavares). Therefore, it is essential to understand the physicochemical properties of the plant and animal proteins and to utilize appropriate processing interventions to achieve desired product characteristics.

Demand for Clean‐Label Products
As thermal processing at high thermal dosages deteriorates the quality attributes in foods, processors often include additives like colorants, flavoring agents, and stabilizers to thermally processed foods. However, the consumers require clean‐label foods with fresh‐like characteristics and close‐to‐natural attributes. Consumers choose foods that not only satiate their hunger but also promote health and well‐being. Consumer interest in clean‐label food increased driven by rising interest in foods that are minimally processed, free from synthetic ingredients, and generally with recognizable, simple, and natural ingredients (Roobab et al.). It is worth to note that currently there are no formal regulatory definition for clean‐label foods. Global sales of clean‐label foods were estimated at about $180 billion in 2020 by Euromonitor International. The June 2021 International Food Information Council's (IFIC) survey “From Chemical‐sounding to Clean: Consumer Perspectives on Food Ingredients” showed that 64% of survey takers reported that they would try to choose foods made with clean ingredients. Articles in “Food Technology Magazine” published by Institute of Food Technologists (IFT) have cited the term “clean label” 2, 18, and 77 times in 2000, 2011, and 2016, respectively, showcasing the increasing importance of the term over decades (Asioli et al.). As the nonthermal technology processed products have reduced thermal exposure, this subsequently reduces adverse quality degradation in processed foods. Thus, production of clean label and safe foods using nonthermal processing technologies has become a possibility.

Plant Protein‐Based Liquid Foods
Over the past decade, there has been increasing use of plant protein‐based drinks that are promoted as alternatives to dairy milk. Several plant protein sources like cereals, legumes, and nuts have been explored for use as plant‐based beverages or milk substitutes (Figure 2) and numerous liquid beverages are available in market (Sethi et al.; Paul et al.). Some brands, including Blue Diamond, Oatly, Ripple Dairy‐Free, and Silk, are available in the US market. Generally, plant‐protein beverages allow conceptualization of vegan diets at a relatively low cost (Paul et al.). The plant protein sources also contain selected functional and bioactive components (Figure 3). The advantages and limitations of plant protein‐based liquid foods are given in Table 1. The creation of good quality beverages with desirable functional attributes depends on gaining knowledge on their manufacture and properties. For instance, the inability of many plant‐based milk drinks to replicate the quality attributes of cow milk in terms of flavor, emulsion stability, and nutrition (Table 1) has restricted their wide adoption. This necessitates the use of appropriate processing techniques to overcome the challenges.
Novel plant protein‐based liquid foods from different sources.
Functional and bioactive components in plant‐protein sources.
Advantages and limitations of plant protein‐based liquid foods.
Advantages	Reference	 	It acts as an alternative protein source for people with lactose intolerance, which restricts adoption of milk and milk products as protein sources	Paul et al. 	 	It could supplement the limited availability of milk in some geographic locations, such as arid regions	Paul et al. 	 	Several plant ingredients are known to possess functional benefitsFor instance,	 	Soy isoflavones: protective effect against cancer and cardiovascular diseaseα‐Tocopherol in almond: powerful antioxidant; can prevent cow's milk allergy, cholesterol, and antibiotic residuesβ‐Glucan in oats: reduced blood glucose level and hypocholesterolemic effectPhenolic compounds in peanut milk: prevent cardiovascular disease and some cancer types	Sethi et al. 	 	Limitations	Reference	 	Beany and other off‐flavors due to action of lipoxygenase, e.g., bean‐based plant beverages	Giri and Mangaraj 	 	Astringency sensations in plant protein‐based beverages fortified with soy and pea protein	Norton et al. 	 	Allergies to plant ingredients, such as almond, soy, and gluten	Zuidmeer et al. 	 	Lack of calcium content, e.g., oat milk	Paul et al. 	 	Poor emulsion stability due to lesser fat and higher starch contents, e.g., rice milk	Koyama and Kitamura 	 	Separation of proteins, oil droplets (e.g., soy milk), cellular fragments (e.g., rice milk and oat milk) either by sedimentation, creaming, or syneresis	Gajdoš Kljusurić et al. 	 	Presence of inhibitors, e.g., trypsin inhibitors in soy milk	Mäkinen et al. 	 	Plant‐based proteins are typically lacking in one or two essential amino acids	Hoffman and Falvo

Animal Protein‐Based Liquid Foods
The main liquid food from an animal source is milk. The proteins derived from milk are classified as casein protein (80%) and whey protein (20%). Other vital proteins from animal sources are egg proteins and gelatin. The proteins are used in different food applications based on their functional properties and acceptability. The advantages and limitations of animal‐based proteins in foods are given in Table 2. The major animal proteins are discussed below.
Advantages and limitations of animal protein based‐liquid foods.
Advantages	Reference	 	Proteins from animal source are good sources of lysine, leucine, and methionine comparative to plant proteins	Hackney et al. 	 	Animal proteins appear to have greater anabolic potential than comparable plant protein doses	Wilkinson et al., Yang, Churchward‐Venne et al. 	 	Animal proteins possess high biological values	Asgar et al. 	 	Limitations	Reference	 	Some animal proteins may be related to chronic diseases such as colorectal, breast, and prostate cancers; heart disease; and bone demineralization	Hackney et al. 	 	Religious and lifestyle choices prohibit some groups of consumers from consuming animal proteins	Asgar et al. 	 	Various food proteins from animal origin can cause food allergies	Barros and Cosme 	 	A higher amount of energy, water, land, and environmental utilization is needed to produce animal proteins than is needed for plant‐based proteins	Pimentel and Pimentel

Casein Protein
Casein is a major contributor to the functionality of several dairy ingredients and dairy‐based food products. Casein in milk occurs as 4 casein molecules (αS1‐, αS2‐, β‐, and κ‐caseins). These molecules are associated together to form casein micelles with hydrodynamic diameter of about 200 nm and isoelectric point of 4.6 (Alves and Tavares; Broyard and Gaucheron). The casein micelles are thermally stable and aggregate at temperatures >140°C in normal milk pH (Dickinson). Casein proteins are used in foods to enhance the nutritional properties, improve viscosity, and stabilize foams and emulsions (Ranadheera et al.).

Whey Protein
In milk, the major whey proteins are α‐lactalbumin (α‐La) and β‐lactoglobulin (β‐Lg), which represent about 20% and 50% of total whey protein content, respectively. β‐Lg and α‐La are small globular proteins with a molecular mass of about 18.3 and 14.2 kDa and isoelectric points between 5.1–5.2 and 4.3–4.7, respectively. Although β‐Lg denatures at temperature of about 75°C, α‐La denatures at temperatures between 30°C and 60°C (Alves and Tavares). During thermal treatment, whey proteins undergo the following change: protein unfolding and irreversible aggregation by disulfide bonds and hydrophobic interactions (Wolz et al.). Despite being considered a by‐product in cheese‐making, due to its protein content, whey is used as a raw material for several value‐added products such as supplemented whey‐based beverages and probiotic beverages.

Egg Protein
The common proteins in egg are ovomucoid, ovalbumin, conalbumin, and lysozyme. In egg white, the proteins present are ovomucin (1.5%–3%), ovotransferrin (12%–13%), ovomucoid (11%), lysozyme (3.4%–3.5%), ovoglobulins (2%), and ovalbumin (54%) (Barros and Cosme; Alves and Tavares). One of the greatest advantages of using egg proteins in food products is its capability to form and stabilize foams, which is contributed by ovalbumin. The denaturation of ovalbumin occurs at around 84.5°C (at pH 7.0) in egg white when coagulated protein networks are formed at the air–water interface (Alves and Tavares). Egg proteins are used as ingredients in a variety of liquid food products such as premixes, soup, pourable dressing, sauce, gravy, and fortified beverages (Ekanayake et al.).

Gelatin
Gelatin is a water‐soluble protein obtained from the partial hydrolysis of collagen in animal skin, bones, tendons, offal meat, and skeletal muscle (Djagny et al.). This protein is of high interest in the food industry due to its ability to form transparent gels. These gels are thermo‐reversible due to coil‐to‐helix transition occurring by cooling to temperatures below 30°C. Moreover, the hydrolysis process of collagen can be controlled to obtain gelatin with different gel strength, solubility, and thermal stability (Gómez‐Guillén et al.). Gelatin is used as a clarifying agent, stabilizing agent, coating material, or a foaming agent in a variety of food products including high‐protein beverages (Hsieh and Ofori).
Thus, proteins derived from animal sources such as bovine milk (casein and whey), eggs, and meat (gelatin) are used as processing aids to eliminate the insoluble and unstable colloidal substances in beverages and thus improve their sensorial properties (Barros and Cosme).

Blended Plant and Animal Protein Liquid Foods
The interaction of plant and animal proteins could lead to synergistic influence on nutritional and functional properties (Comfort and Howell).
It is possible to design new protein foods of unique properties by taking advantage of the different functional properties of proteins from different sources (Roesch et al.).
The blend of plant and animal proteins can be utilized in preparing nutritional protein‐based foods like yogurt, coffee creamer, whipped topping, fat spreads, and novel beverages (Comfort and Howell).
The replacement of animal protein by plant protein partially could be an economic advantage in food systems (Pinho et al.).
The plant–animal protein blended foods could meet the demand to reduce environmental footprint as well as offer convenient, healthy, and palatable products with better value for money (Guyomarc'h et al.).
Blends of plant and animal proteins have been investigated by several researchers (Chronakis and Kasapis; Comfort and Howell; Roesch et al.; Salahi and Mohebbi; Janahar et al.). The blends of plant and animal proteins offer the following advantages:
Despite their numerous benefits, plant–animal protein blends present several challenges during processing and storage. These blends are prone to sedimentation due to fundamental differences in the structure, functionality, and interactions of plant and animal proteins, which can lead to poor emulsion stability. Furthermore, plant and animal proteins often exhibit different sensitivities to heat and nonthermal treatments, resulting in distinct patterns of denaturation and aggregation that may cause coagulation or graininess. Although the addition of hydrocolloids can partially alleviate these issues, it may, in turn, compromise the sensory quality of the final product. Characteristic beany flavors and mismatches in mouthfeel can also reduce consumer acceptance among certain populations. Additionally, some formulations may still cause gastrointestinal discomfort in lactose‐intolerant individuals. Processing steps may further induce protein modifications leading to aggregation, film formation, phase separation, foaming, and undesirable sensory changes. Therefore, careful selection of processing technology and formulation strategies is essential to overcome these limitations before clean‐label hybrid protein beverages are introduced to the market.

Limitations of Thermal Processing
Exposure of foods to thermal energy for extended periods can induce various chemical reactions such as Maillard reaction, nutrient degradation, protein denaturation, and aggregation. These reactions can lead to undesirable changes to quality attributes by causing sensorial and/or nutritional deterioration and affect the overall acceptance of the thermally processed products. On the other hand, nonthermal technologies use mild or minimal thermal exposure to the products and enable production of fresh‐like food products with minimal loss of sensorial and nutritional quality (Knorr et al.).

Process Development Considerations for Protein‐Based Liquid Foods
Process development of plant‐based liquid foods using novel nonthermal technologies requires an interdisciplinary approach that considers technology impact on food safety, quality, nutrition, techno‐economic analysis, and environmental sustainability. In the following sections, we will highlight the basic principles associated with various novel nonthermal technologies, technology impact on food safety, quality, and nutrition as well as future outlook on research needs.

High‐Pressure Processing
High pressure pasteurization involves use of high isostatic pressures in the range of 400–600 MPa typically at chilled temperatures to inactivate microorganisms like bacteria, yeast, and mold and to enhance the shelf life and safety of the food. The pre‐packaged food product is treated under target pressure conditions for specific duration. (Balasubramaniam et al.). Temperature of foods transiently increases during HPP due to compression of food material. However, the food materials return back to close to its initial temperature after decompression of the foods at the end of HPP treatment.
Such treatment minimizes thermally induced cooked off‐flavors (Janahar, Balasubramaniam et al.). Moreover, HPP has limited influence on the covalent bonds of low molecular‐mass compounds, so it does not deteriorate the flavor, color, texture, and nutritional attributes in foods (Gao et al.). Thus, HPP eliminates the need for synthetic additives and preservatives to attain food safety and desirable sensorial and nutritional attributes thereby enabling clean‐label products (Janahar, Balasubramaniam et al.).
Pressure treatment at ambient or chilled temperatures shows variable efficacy on enzymes and spores are not inactivated. Gram‐negative bacteria are more pressure‐sensitive than gram‐positive bacteria, and rod‐shaped bacteria are more pressure‐sensitive than cocci‐shaped bacteria. In addition, the strains differ significantly in their sensitivity to pressure (Janahar, Balasubramaniam et al.). Inactivation of bacterial spores in protein‐based liquid foods requires pressure in combination with elevated temperature. This process is called pressure‐assisted thermal processing (PATP).
The process and product considerations to process protein‐based foods by high pressure based technologies are described below.

Process Factors
Foods are high pressure pasteurized typically at chilled temperatures. Under these conditions, thermal uniformity is not a major concern. However, when foods are commercially sterilized using PATP, combined pressure and heat contribute to microbiological lethality, the thermal uniformity should be ensured, as temperature nonuniformity can lead to insufficient microbial inactivation. The temperature of the food under pressure is a function of initial product temperature, heat of compression of the food, and the dynamic heat transfer between the packaged food product with surrounding pressure transmitting fluid and the pressure vessel. Therefore, type of pressure‐transmitting fluid (water is commonly used as the pressure transmitting fluid for industrial applications), packaging material composition, ratio of food product to pressure‐transmitting fluid, sample basket, and insultation characteristics of pressure vessel can play a role in governing the temperature uniformity during PATP (Janahar, Balasubramaniam et al.).

Product Factors
The in situ engineering properties of the foods, including thermal conductivity, specific heat, compressibility, and density (Xu et al.; Park et al.), often vary as a function of both pressure and heat as well as food composition, packaging polymers, and pressure‐transmitting fluid. For instance, foods with high fats increase the heat of compression (up to 8.7°C per 100 MPa at 25°C) due to the higher compressibility with long‐chain unsaturated fatty acids and lower specific heat, whereas heat of compression of water is typically about 3°C per 100 MPa (Rasanayagam et al.). These engineering properties can also play an important role in establishing uniformity of pressure and heat within processed volume. Further product composition, acidity and water activity also influence microbiological safety and ɔuality of pressure treated foods.

Semicontinuous High Pressure Processing
Batch HPP treatment is used to pasteurize a variety of foods and several products like guacamole, salsa, seafood, juices, and beverages that are available in the market (Balasubramaniam et al.). This success prompted the industry to seek continuous methods of pressure treatment which led to the introduction of semicontinuous HPP systems, referred as high pressure homogenization (HPH) or ultrashear technology (UST). Although HPP is generally a batch process, HPH or UST is a semicontinuous process where the liquid food is processed by compression to a target pressure and subsequently depressurized by passing through a tiny gap in a shear valve. By suitable selection of initial product temperature, applied pressure, and shear valve geometry, HPH and UST can render both pasteurization or commercial sterilization treatment effect. Early HPH researchers employ pressures up to 200 (Dumay et al.) and 300 MPa (Mesa et al.). The developments in pressure‐resistant materials, valve geometries, and equipment capabilities led to attaining pressures up to 400 MPa or greater, and the process was referred to as ultrahigh‐pressure homogenization (UHPH) (Mesa et al.).
UST is an advanced version of HPH. The key difference between HPH and UST is summarized as follows. In a typical HPH system, food grade hydraulic oil is used to move a piston inside an intensifier cylinder to pressurize the food. During the motion of the piston, a thin film of oil could be deposited on the inside wall of the intensifier cylinder, which could mix with the food, thereby raising concerns for contamination. On the other hand, in a UST system, the pressure transmitting fluid is separated from the food by a flexible non‐permeable bladder, thus eliminating direct contact (or possible contamination) between the pressure transmitting fluid and the food product. Pressure discharge in UST shear valve can be computer controlled (Hu et al.). The processing considerations of protein‐based foods by these semicontinuous high‐pressure technologies are as described below.

Process Factors
As stated earlier, in the HPH or UST system, the product to be processed is typically pressurized to 400 MPa and subsequently depressurized by passage through the tiny clearance in the shear valve.   As the fluid passes through the shear valve, the fluid temperature increases instantaneously (∼20°C/100 MPa) and irreversibly as a result of conversion of potential pressure energy to kinetic energy, which is dissipated as heat energy to raise the temperature of the fluid and as heat loss to the surroundings (Janahar et al.). Further, like high pressure, engineering properties of HPH/UST‐treated foods such as thermal conductivity, specific heat, and density can also influence the pressure‐thermal uniformity. So, the relation between pressure, shear, and temperature and their combined efforts on food should be carefully considered to design an UST or HPH process. For mild pasteurization treatments at relatively low process temperatures (∼30°C), thermal insulation of the equipment components may not be critical; however, for severe sterilization treatments, adequate temperature control and insulation of the components are highly desirable to minimize heat loss (Hu et al.).

Product Factors
Part of the kinetic energy generated in the shear valve is expended on physical and structural modifications like emulsification, dispersion, mixing, particle size, and enzyme and microbial reduction in the treated food via intense shear, turbulence, or cavitation (Janahar, Xu, et al.). Microbial safety and quality of HPH products are influenced by acidity, water activity, and product composition. The food might experience shear thickening or shear thinning, which might influence the fluid flow behavior and temperature distribution, as well as pumping requirements for the food. The impact of the process also depends on the microbial strain. Generally, gram‐negative bacteria exhibit greater susceptibility than gram‐positive bacteria, due to thinner cell wall. Spores are relatively more resistant (Janahar, Xu, et al.). Fungi and yeasts have a susceptibility that is intermediate between gram‐positive and gram‐negative bacteria, due to their complex wall structure (Mesa et al.).

PEF Processing
PEF processing involves application of high voltage (20–80 kV/cm) as short pulses (microseconds to milliseconds) to treat liquid foods placed between two electrodes. The high voltage field causes breakdown of the microbial cell membrane through formation of pores, resulting in reversible or permanent damage to the microbial cells, in a process referred to as electroporation. At ambient or chilled temperatures, the lethal effect for the microbial inactivation occurs by the electric field rather than temperature (Salengke et al.). Therefore, PEF is reported to have minimal or no damaging effect on food quality attributes. This could help the food processors to eliminate use of chemical preservatives and produce clean‐label products (Lee et al.). At the moment, PEF treatment is primarily utilized as a pasteurization method, enhancing mass transfer of targeted substances of plant or animal tissue and wine processing (Barbosa‐Cánovas et al.). PEF has limited lethal effect on spores and is often combined with heat to enhance spore inactivation (Bermúdez‐Aguirre et al.; Alkhafaji and Farid; Siemer et al.). Limited research has been conducted to evaluate PEF efficacy on bacterial spores.
The parameters to be considered to process protein‐based foods by PEF are as described below.

Process Factors
The critical process factors during the PEF process include electric field strength, wave shape, process temperature, and treatment time. A higher electric field intensity leads to higher temperature rise in liquid‐based foods, resulting in better inactivation of the microorganisms and enzymes (Aghajanzadeh and Ziaiifar). The treatment time for PEF depends on the electric field intensity. It is mathematically calculated by multiplying the required number of pulses by the effective pulse duration. A longer treatment time could cause deteriorative effects on the liquid food due to the temperature rise. Square and exponential decay pulse shapes are predominantly used in PEF applications, and the square pulses provide better uniformity in electric field intensity than exponential decay pulses, resulting in better inactivation of microorganisms and energy efficiency (Mohamed and Eissa).

Product Factors
Product acidity, water activity, and composition influence the microbial safety and quality of PEF‐treated products. The efficiency of PEF is influenced by the both engineering as well as physicochemical properties of the food product being treated. Electrical conductivity of food materials can also influence uniformity of electrical field within processed volume. High electrical conductivity of the food product limits the current carrying capacity of the system and reduces the microbial inactivation ratio (Sharma et al.; Jeyamkondan et al.). In foods with high fat levels, the electric field undergoes distortion in the area close to the fat. Thus, the electroporation effect on microorganisms might be minimal in the area. Therefore, in protein‐based foods like whole milk with fat, extra pulsing is suggested (Sastry; D'Incecco et al.). Nabilah et al. evaluated data from 15 published articles that used between n ≤ 50 and n > 200 number of pulses (n) for PEF treatment of milk. The authors observed that n > 200 showed the highest reduction for gram‐positive and gram‐negative microbial groups and reported that the larger the number of pulses the higher the microbial inactivation. Further, the order of microbial resistance to PEF from the highest to lowest was bacterial spores, gram‐positive, followed by gram‐negative bacteria. Air is a poor conductor of electricity. Thus, the presence of air in the foods should be limited, as the presence or release of gas in the food during PEF could cause subsequent arc‐over, restricting the maximum electric field strength that could be applied during PEF (Sharma et al.).

Ultrasound Processing
Ultrasound refers to any sound waves of frequencies greater than 20 kHz. In liquid food processing, power ultrasound (also known as high intensity ultrasound) in the frequency range of 20–100 kHz is typically used and the process of application is generally referred as sonication, ultrasonication, or ultrasound processing. During ultrasound processing, the acoustic wave is propagated through the food medium as longitudinal waves, which create alternating compression and expansion cycles (Paniwnyk). When the frequency of acoustic wave is of sufficient intensity, some voids, referred to as cavities, are produced within the liquid food. The volatile gases present in the food liquid enter these cavities through a process called rectified diffusion, and the cavities grow. These cavities grow, eventually become unstable, and collapse. This collapse generates high temperatures and pressures, which results in extreme shear forces and microjets in the liquid food. These forces cause physical damage to microbial cell walls. In addition, the forces facilitate improved mass transfer, efficient mixing, and homogenization within the liquid food being processed (Tiwari and Mason). Liquid food processed by ultrasound is influenced by several factors like liquid composition, initial gas content, viscosity, temperature, pressure, flow rate, power and duration of ultrasound, and ultrasound frequency (Hielscher,). These factors are interrelated and should be carefully controlled to design an ultrasound process. Selected process and product factors are discussed below.

Process Factors
The pressure of the liquid determines the cavitation threshold. Elevation of external pressure increases the cavitation threshold, thereby reducing the amount of bubbles during cavitation (Muthukumaran et al.). In addition, the external pressure could increase the pressure of the bubble during collapse time, thus causing rapid and violent collapse. Hence, the pressure can be increased to intensify the ultrasound process. The temperature could significantly enhance the ultrasound treatment effect. When compared to thermal treatment at 70°C for 1.5 min, ultrasound treatment (24 kHz, 0.33 W/mL, and 70°C for 1.5 min) increased the inactivation of psychrotrophic Bacillus cereus spores significantly by 7, 6, and 4‐fold in rice porridge, beef slurry, and cheese slurry, respectively (Evelyn and Silva).
The liquid flow rate through the ultrasonic system determines the exposure time under ultrasound. The treatment time could influence the sensorial properties in protein‐based foods. Marchesini et al. showed that high intensity ultrasound treatment for longer than 100 s could cause unpleasant flavors in milk. High heat of cavitation generated during ultrasound treatment could lead to protein denaturation and cause unwanted aroma, taste, and flavor in protein‐based foods (Carrillo‐Lopez et al.).

Product Factors
Dissolved gases in the liquid help to build and grow the cavitation bubbles. The temperature of the liquid influences the product properties like surface tension, viscosity, and vapor pressure. In very viscous liquid foods, the formation of cavitation bubbles is lesser. Increasing the temperature generally reduces the viscosity and surface tension of the liquid (Zhu et al.). The type (spoilage, or pathogenic microbes) and characteristics of the microorganism (shape, gram negativity or positivity, and growth stage) influence the inactivation of microorganisms by ultrasound. For instance, gram‐negative bacteria are more sensible to ultrasound than gram‐positive bacteria (Lauteri et al.). Spores are more resistant to ultrasound and require to be combined with other hurdles like pressure or temperature for inactivation. Hence, it is typical for ultrasound to be used as a pasteurization treatment.

Membrane Processing
In protein dispersions, the membrane processes are mainly used for physical removal of microbes and recovery of components like milk proteins, plant proteins, animal proteins, peptides, and polyphenols (Table 3). The main mechanism of the membrane process is size exclusion and thus, removal of the pathogenic microorganisms using membranes eliminates use of chemicals and occurrence of chemical disinfection by‐products (Nasir et al.). It is worth note that while filtration does not typically have direct lethal effects on bacteria, but it is highly effective at physically removing them by creating a physical barrier. In protein‐based foods, the protein concentration close to the membrane interface could increase and eventually result in formation of a gel layer, referred to as “membrane fouling.” The adsorption of proteins on the membrane and plugging of pores can also result in membrane fouling. This phenomenon causes a long‐term decline in flux across the membrane. The membrane fouling is mostly reversible; however, proteins can result in very high and almost irreversible fouling. This almost irreversible fouling might be due to the hydrophobic interactions or electrostatic interactions between the proteins and the membrane material (Wen‐Qiong et al.) and protein–protein interactions (Charcosset).
Application of different membrane processes for protein‐based foods.
S. no.	Membrane process	Application	Reference	 	1.	Microfiltration (MF)	Removal of bacteria and spore from milkSeparation of casein micelles from soluble proteins	Charcosset 	 	Defatting of whey	Carter et al. 	 	Filtration of gelatin	Bretanha et al. 	 	2.	Ultrafiltration (UF)	Increase dry matter in milk and alter the rheological properties in dairy foods	Delgado et al. 	 	Concentration of gelatin	Bretanha et al. 	 	Concentration and fractionation of whey and milk	Kumar et al. 	 	Recovery of oligosaccharides from defatted soybean meal	Kim et al. 	 	Production of soy protein concentrate with high isoflavone content	Singh 	 	Recovery of protein from pea whey	Gao et al. 	 	Recovery of partially hydrolyzed rice bran proteins	Hamada 	 	Recovery of egg yolk immunoglobulin	Liu et al. 	 	3.	Nanofiltration (NF)	Concentration and demineralization of whey protein	Charcosset 	 	Recovery of proteins from microalgae	Fabre et al. 	 	4.	Reverse osmosis (RO)	Concentration and demineralization of whey protein	Charcosset 	 	5.	Electrodialysis (ED)	Production of soy protein isolates	Ali et al. 	 	Desalination of whey protein	Casademont et al.

Process Factors
Process parameters that influence membrane processing include operating pressure (or driving force), process temperature, and flow rate. The process parameters should be controlled with a view to maximize flux, minimize fouling, and ensure process uniformity to achive desired processing effect. Process temperature and flow rate are critical for maintaining the permeate flux to ensure product safety and quality. For instance, increase in temperature leads to decrease in liquid viscosity, resulting in higher permeate flux (Puri et al.). Increase in flow rate could lead to exertion of shear stress which clears the solids off the membrane surface, thus maintaining permeate flux. Membrane surface chemistry and transmembrane pressure could influence the extent of fouling (Wen‐Qiong et al.). The electrostatic interaction between the membrane surface and protein depends on the surface charge (van Reis et al.). The sign of the membrane charge should be the same as the product protein charge at a certain pH in order to improve the electrostatic repulsion between the product and the membrane pores (van Reis et al.). Increase in transmembrane pressure would increase the driving force, improve the flux, and eliminate membrane fouling (Jiang et al.).

Product Factors
Fouling in protein foods is also influenced by different product factors like pH, temperature, ionic strength, and protein particle size. The pH of the fluid is desired to be far from the protein isoelectric point to maximize the difference in effective hydrodynamic volume of the product components (Wen‐Qiong et al.). Increasing ionic strength is observed to increase the membrane fouling rate since the electric double layer compression caused by the presence of different charged ions leads to weak electrostatic repulsion (She et al.).
Navarro‐Lisboa et al. observed that at higher pH (i.e., pH 8) and lower ionic strength, the fluxes were higher. Exposure of proteins to high temperature leads to protein denaturation and aggregation, which results in fouling of the membrane (Pelegrine and Gasparetto). The efficiency of microbial removal by membranes is a function of the target microbe's size relative to the membrane's pore size. For instance, microfiltration (MF) (pore sizes ∼0.1–10 µm) and ultrafiltration (UF) (pore size ∼0.01–0.15 µm) show removal efficiency of 90%–100% each for bacteria. The efficiency reduces to 20%–40% and 60%–90%, respectively, for viruses (Nasir et al.). Therefore, it is necessary to design the process with consideration to size of target microorganism, membrane selectivity as well as fouling dynamics. Through appropriate design, membrane processes can be used to achieve various objectives such as concentration, clarification, purification, fractionation, extraction, pasteurization, and sterilization (Sarbatly et al.; Hu and Wu).

UV Light Processing
UV light is a radiation in the 100–400 nm range of the electromagnetic spectrum and it is categorized into subtypes, namely, UV‐vacuum (100–200 nm), UV‐C (200–280 nm), UV‐B (280–315 nm), and UV‐A (315–400 nm). Under controlled application, UV radiation is used as a nonthermal process to inactivate pathogenic microorganisms with no detrimental effects on the food quality attributes (Smith et al.). Generally, UV light is generated by mercury lamps at low or medium pressure in the form of continuous beam in a mono or polychromatic mode, respectively. More recently, UV LED technology is gaining more acceptance than mercury vapor lamps due to improved energy efficiency, instant on/off capabilities, longer lifespan, and lack of toxic mercury. The liquid food to be processed is transferred through a tube that allows UV transmission. The flow can be turbulent flow or as a thin film with laminar flow (Nasrabadi et al.). The underlying mechanism of UV light‐based technologies involves the capability of the UV radiation to stop transcription and replication of microbial DNA, resulting in cell death. UV light is a nonthermal and nonchemical technology and typically used as a pasteurization method (Koutchma et al.). Molds are more resistant to UV‐C light than bacteria, and gram‐positive bacteria are more resistant than the gram‐negative bacteria (Guerrero‐Beltrán and Barbosa‐Cánovas; Beauchamp and Lacroix). The most resistant forms appear to be bacterial spores and viruses (Koutchma). The factors that need to be considered to design a UV processing system are discussed below.

Process Factors
The process parameters that influence the UV treatment of fluids in continuous flow are emission source, UV wavelength, UV‐reactor design, the applied and absorbed UV dose, and flow rate (Simmons et al.; Kasahara et al.). Further engineering characteristics such as fluid UV transmittance, thickness of the light path, reflection and scattering of light, and penetration depth can also affect. The optical properties like absorbance, transmittance, and scattering based on the color and turbidity of the fluid food influence the UV light treatment efficiency (Guerrero‐Beltrán and Barbosa‐Cánovas; Ochoa‐Velasco et al.).

Product Factors
The UV treatment on the product is influenced by product characteristics like total solids, homogeneity, and viscosity (Koutchma). These characteristics can alter the scattering of the UV light beam or hinder the passage of light photons through the food, thereby reducing the effect of UV light on target components.

Cold Plasma
CP comprises highly energetic species like electrons, photons, ions, free radicals, atoms, and molecules in excited or nonexcited states at or near room temperature that are in permanent interaction. The CP is generated under atmospheric or reduced (vacuum) pressure at 30–60°C by subjecting a gas or gas‐mixture to electric field. The electric field accelerates the charged particles and promotes collisions with heavy species (e.g., ions and neutrals) (Segat et al.).
Depending on the CP system, the food could be exposed to the glow (direct plasma treatment) or afterglow (indirect plasma treatment). Direct plasma treatment applies CP directly onto the food's surface, whereas indirect plasma treatment involves exposing the food to the post‐plasma‐treated medium like air or water containing the reactive species generated by the plasma. A semidirect plasma uses a mesh between the source and sample (Warne et al.).
The germicidal effect of CP is attributed to UV radiation, excited atoms and molecules, and reactive free radicals. Plasma has germicidal effect on pathogens including bacteria, spores, viruses, and fungi in foods through damages to the microbial cell surface and changes to biological components like proteins, lipids, cytoplasm, and DNA (Akitsu et al.; Laroussi; Segat et al.; Los et al.). Bacterial cells are more sensitive to CP than fungi, due to the presence of rigid chitin in the fungi cell wall. Gram‐negative bacteria are more sensitive to CP than gram‐positive bacteria due to the lack of thick peptidoglycan on the cell wall (Liao et al.). In comparision to other nonthermal technologies, CP is relatively at an early stage of research. Most of the studies are done using bench scale equipment and very limited scale‐up studies have been done with pilot scale equipment. The parameters that need to be considered to design a CP processing system for protein‐based foods are discussed below.

Process Factors
The process factors include gas composition, gas flow, electrical input, mode of plasma exposure, electrode material, treatment time, and relative humidity. Plasma with a higher oxygen concentration could have high amounts of oxygen‐based active species, including ozone and atomic oxygen, which helps increased microbial inhibition (Misra and Jo). The increase in gas flow rate increases the possibilities of the collision and resulting reaction of the reactive species, thereby increasing the efficiency (Zhang et al.). The closer the electrodes to the target location, the more effective the treatment (Coutinho et al.). The material of electrode influences the bactericidal efficacy. Ragni et al. reported superior bactericidal efficacy of silver and brass electrodes against Listeria monocytogenes as compared to stainless steel and glass/brass electrodes. However, caution must be exercised to ensure that potential electrode material into foods during the treatment does not cause adverse toxicological effects. Increase in electrical input and CP exposure time enhances process efficiency and microbial inactivation (Liao et al.). Direct exposure of plasma is more efficient in microbial inactivation than indirect plasma exposure (Coutinho et al.). Increase in relative humidity through water vapor can increase peroxyl acid groups and OH production due to decomposition of water molecules and thus enhances the antimicrobial effect of CP (Liao et al.).

Product Factors
The product parameters include food composition, pH, and water activity. The penetration of plasma in the food depends on the type of reactive species and the type of food. For instance, the penetration depths of UV photon and plasma are 1 and 10 µm, respectively (Waghmare). Apparently, the penetration depth of the reactive species is more in liquid foods than in solid foods (Pankaj et al.). Treatment of irregularly shaped and bulky food by CP could be less efficient, as the microorganisms at numerous unreachable sites can potentially escape the treatment (Misra and Jo). In‐package CP treatment allows higher exposure of the reactive species to the microbes and prevents posttreatment contamination, thereby making it better than the through‐package, or open, treatment (Coutinho et al.).

Food Safety Requirement
The safety of food includes chemical, toxicological, and microbiological safety. For thermal pasteurization, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) regulation requires food pasteurization processes to accomplish a 5‐log reduction of the most resistant pathogenic microbes in the food product (Mahnot et al.; NACMCF). Most of the nonthermal lethal agents (at chilled or room temperature) can help to accomplish pasteurization effects. It is worth note that heat and nonthermal lethal agents may have different target mechanism for inactivation of microorganisms. Some enzymes in the liquid foods that show higher thermal resistance than the targeted pathogenic microorganism can also be used as pasteurization indicators. For instance, inactivation of pectin methyl esterase in citrus juices and alkaline phosphatase in milk are used as indices to test the efficiency of pasteurization. The resistance of these enzymes and the most‐resistant pathogenic microorganism to nonthermal process should be evaluated to design processes for protein‐based liquid foods. The innovative nonthermal technologies prevent deterioration of heat‐sensitive components in foods, such as nutrients, color, flavor, and more, thus eliminating or reducing the need for synthetic additives to compensate for these losses. Thus, nonthermal pasteurization technologies help to promote the development of clean‐label products.
For sterilization, conventional technologies typically employ certain time‐temperature combinations sufficient to inactivate the most heat‐resistant bacterial spores of concern in the product. Commercial sterilization is defined as the destruction of all pathogenic and spoilage organisms that can grow in food under normal storage and handling conditions. This includes both vegetative cells and spores. The thermal sterilization process usually targets inactivation of spores of Clostridium botulinum. Generally, spores of Clostridium sporogenes or Bacillus stearothermophilus are used as surrogates for C. botulinum in the canning industry to validate commercial sterility.
The bacterial spores appear to be resistant to most nonthermal processes at ambient or chilled temperature conditions. This resistance necessitates a combination of the nonthermal processes with high temperature to accomplish sterilization effects. For instance, combination of high pressure and temperature (600 MPa, 121°C, 3 min) in a process referred as pressure‐assisted thermal sterilization has been used to obtain commercial sterility in mashed potatoes (Stewart et al.). Further, it is essential to select the pathogen of concern carefully based on its resistance to process factors. Like thermal processing, C. sporogenes spores are used as surrogate organism for PATP (Stewart et al.).
The influence of nonthermal processes on the microbial inactivation in various food matrices is given in Table 4. The efficiency of treatments depends on type, concentration of the microorganism, and the intensity of treatment. Hurdle technologies are also proposed that combine nonthermal technologies in combination with heat and/or other nonthermal technologies and natural additives such as chitosan to enhance microbial inactivation efficiency.
Effect of nonthermal technologies on microbial inactivation of protein‐based liquid foods.
Product	Process condition	Microbial effect	Reference	 	High‐pressure processing	 	Raw milk	400–600 MPa, for 1–5 min at initial temperature of 18°C	Bacterial inactivation by 5 log CFU/mL in pathogenic Escherichia coli, Salmonella, and Listeria monocytogenes	Stratakos et al. 	 	Soy milk	400 MPa and 75°C for 5 min	Bacterial reduction by 4.5 logs, wherein viable cells were inactivated to <1 CFU/mL	Smith et al. 	 	Raw milk	300 MPa, 50 min, and 25°C	8 log cycles inactivation of Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 29213)	Yang et al. 	 	Milk buffer	600 MPa, 20 min, and 80°C	7.53 log reduction in Bacillus cereus (AS 1.1846) spores.6 log cycle reduction of B. cereus spores at 540 MPa, 71°C, and 16.8 min	Ju et al. 	 	UHT milk	900 MPa, 5 min, and 100°C	∼4 log reduction in Clostridium sporogenes (PA 3679) spores	Shao et al. 	 	Semicontinuous high pressure processing	 	UHT‐treated whole milk inoculated with spores	HPH treatmentPressure = 300 MPaInlet temperatures = 75°C and 85°C	Complete inactivation (>5 log CFU/mL) in spores of B. licheniformis, B. cereus, B. sporothermodurans, and B. coagulans	Amador Espejo et al. 	 	Raw bovine milk	HPH treatmentPressure = 300 MPaInlet temperatures = 30°C and 40°C	Both treatments produced >3 log reduction in total bacteria counts	Pereda et al. 	 	Brine used to salt cheeses	HPH treatmentPressure = 150 MPa, upto 11 passes at 75°C, brine inlet temperature = 13°C	About 7 log CFU/mL reduction after 5 and 4 passes, respectively, in L. monocytogenes and S. aureus	Innocente et al. 	 	Milk (0.3%, 3.6%, 10%, and 15% fat contents) inoculated with L. monocytogenes CCUG 15526	HPH treatmentPressure = 200, 300, and 400 MPaInlet temperature = 6°COutlet temperature = 16–18°C (external jacket between first and second homogenizing valves)	7.95 and 7.46 log reduction at 400 MPa with 10% and 15% fat, respectively	Roig‐Sagués et al. 	 	Egg white	HPH treatmentPressure = 150 MPa, and up to 17 passes at 10.8 L/h; outlet temperature = <35°C	5 log reduction in Salmonella enterica 9898 DSMZ after eight passes at 150 MPa	Panozzo et al. 	 	Pulsed electric field processing	 	Soy milk	Pulse electric strength = 40 kV/cm, treatment time = 547 µs, pulse frequency = 400 Hz, pulse width = 2 µs, final temperature of medium = <35°C	5.20 and 3.51 log cycles reduction in E. coli and S. aureus, respectively	Li et al. 	 	Soy milk enriched with hyperimmunized milk protein concentrate	Pulse electric strength = 41.1 kV/cm, treatment time = 54 µs, average sample temperature = <50°C	5.3 log inactivation of natural flora (total aerobic cells)	Li et al. 	 	5.7 log inactivation of E. coli 8739	Li and Zhang 	 	Liquid whole egg	26 kV/cm, processing temperature = 37.2°C ± 1.5°C, pulse duration = 2 µs, pulse rate = 1.25–2.5 Hz at flow rate (0.5 L/min)	5–6 log reduction in E. coli	Martín‐Belloso et al. 	 	Liquid whole egg	Treatment of 45 kV/cm for 30 µs, specific energy = 419 kJ/kg, Frequency = 0.5 Hz, Final temperature of medium = <35°C	4 log reduction in Salmonella typhimurium population	Monfort et al. 	 	Liquid whole egg	Treatment of 40 kV/cm for 15 µs, specific energy = 166 kJ/kg, frequency = 0.5 Hz, final temperature of medium = <35°C	3 log inactivation of S. aureus	Monfort et al. 	 	Milk	Treatment of 25.7 kV/cm for 34 µs, 20 Hz; preheating at 55°C	Total bacterial count (3.26 log CFU/mL) was reduced by 1.14 log significantly	Sharma et al. 	 	Ultrasound processing	 	UHT milk inoculated with foodborne pathogens, namely, S. aureus (ATCC 6538P), L. monocytogenes (ATCC 19115), and S. enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium (ATCC 13311) and spoilage organisms viz., E. coli (ATCC 25922), P. fluorescens (ATCC 13525), L. plantarum (LMG 6907), and L. pentosus (LMG 10755)	Sonication: 125 µm amplitude for 15 min, temperature = ∼62°C	Complete inactivation of all the bacterial strains with initial counts of about 6.7–8.1 log CFU/mL	Shamila‐Syuhada et al. 	 	Raw milk	Ultrasound at various combinations of amplitude (70% and 100%) and duration (50, 100, 200, and 300 s)	The most intense treatment (100% × 300 s) resulted in inactivation of 4.61, 2.75, 2.09, and 0.55 log for D. hansenii, P. fluorescens, E. coli, and S. aureus, respectively	Marchesini et al. 	 	UHT milk	Continuous flow ultrasound treatment (50 mL/min) at 57°C for 18 min	5‐log reduction of L. monocytogenes	D'amico et al. 	 	Membrane processing	 	Skim milk	Microfiltration (MF) with 1.2 and 1.4 µm pore size membranes (temperature = 6°C)	B. licheniformis spore inactivation was significantly greater in 1.2‐µm membrane (4.57 log) than 1.4‐µm membrane (2.17 log)Geobacillus spp. spore was almost completely inactivated (>6 log) in both membranes	Griep et al. 	 	Raw milk with low and high somatic cell counts (SCC)	Skim milk removed by MF (pore size = 1.4 µm, temperature = 50°C) and UHT treated (137°C/4 s)	Microfiltration resulted in 3.56 and 3.57 log reduction of total bacterial count in high‐ and low‐SSC raw skim milk, respectively	Zhang et al. 	 	UV/Pulsed light processing	 	Raw soy milk	UV dose of 11.9 mJ/cm2 at the Reynolds number of 1376 in 1.6 mm ID UV reactor	>5.6‐log reduction in E. coli W1485	Bandla et al. 	 	Egg white inoculated with S. enteritidis and Salmonella subterranea	UV dosage of 7.6 and 8.4 J/cm2	S. enteritidis and S. subterranea were reduced by 4.3 and 4.2 logs after applying dosage of 7.6 and 8.4 J/cm2, respectively	de Souza et al. 	 	Whole egg	UV‐C doses around 16.0 and 18.0 kJ/L using the MRI2010 reactor	5 log reduction in E. coli DH5α, S. subterranea DSM 16208, and Listeria innocua WS 2258	de Souza et al. 	 	Goat milk (inoculated with E. coli)	UV light pulse dose = 1300–10,000 mJ/cm2	The highest dose inactivated E. coli by 6 logs	Kasahara et al. 	 	Cold plasma	 	Whole, semi‐skimmed, and skimmed milk dispersed with E. coli ATCC 25922	Atmospheric corona discharge generated with 9 kV of AC power supply; time intervals = 0–20 min	After 20 min of treatment, initial bacterial population of 7.78 log CFU/mL was reduced to 3.63 log CFU/mL, regardless of milk fat level	Gurol et al. 	 	Milk	Dielectric barrier discharge (DBD) cold plasma with voltage of 80 V for 120 s	Bacterial inactivation was similar to UHT and better than pasteurization	Wu et al. 	 	Milk inoculated with E. coli, S. typhimurium, and L. monocytogenes	DBD with 250 W, 15 kHz, ambient air for periods of 5 and 10 min	10‐min treatment led to bacterial inactivation by about 2.40 log CFU/mL	Kim et al.
Abbreviations: CFU, colony‐forming unit; HPH, pressure homogenization; UV, ultraviolet.

Quality Characterization of Protein‐Based Liquid Foods

Physicochemical Properties
An understanding of the relationship between proteins in liquid foods and functionality of the food is important to design foods of high quality. The physicochemical properties of foods that are affected by nonthermal processes are discussed below.

Particle Size
Particle size affects the reactivity, stability, solubility, and flowability of the food components and the texture, mouthfeel, and processing of products. The influence of different nonthermal processing technologies on the particle size parameters in different protein foods is given in Table 5. Static pressure during HPP leads to alteration of intramolecular and protein–solvent interaction due to changes in the three‐dimensional structure of protein molecules induced by pressure (Boonyaratanakornkit et al.). Depending on the intensity, pressure leads to changes in the particle size, which eventually leads to changes in microstructure, rheological behavior, and stability characteristics.
Influence of nonthermal technologies on the particle size in high‐protein food matrices.
Product	Process condition	Observation	Suggested mechanism of functional effect	Reference	 	High‐pressure processing	 	Micellar casein concentrates (MCC) and milk protein concentrates (MPC) of 2.5% and 10% (w/v) protein concentration	Pressure: 150–450 MPa Holding time: 15 minInitial temperature: ∼13–15°CMaximum (process) temperature: ∼18–22°C	In 2.5% MCC and MPC, increase in pressure led to progressive reduction in particle size	Disintegration of casein micelles by pressure	Cadesky et al. 	 	In 10% MCC and MPC	 	At >150 MPa: slight decrease in particle sizeAt >250 MPa: increase in particle size	Aggregation phenomena in the HPP‐treated, high concentration sample	 	Milk	Pressure: 100–800 MPaHolding time: 0–60 minProcess temperature: 5–40°C	Decrease in size of casein particles at pressures above about 300 MPa	Disintegration of casein micelles	Huppertz et al., Anema et al. 	 	Increase in casein particle size at pressures between 200 and 300 MPa for 30 min	Formation of large casein aggregates	 	Almond milk	Pressure: 450 and 600 MPaHolding time: 0–600 sProcess temperature: 30°C	Pressure treatment led to increase in particle diameter as compared to untreated almond milkParticle diameter also increased with increasing pressure holding time	Aggregation of the particles driven by pressure‐promoted macroscopic compressibilityVarious mechanisms such as	 	Water diffusion into proteins cavities, also referred as hydration effectConformational changes due to decrease in electrostatic repulsion, and/orDisruption of hydrophobic interactions and exchange of disulfide bonds	Dhakal et al. 	 	Semicontinuous high pressure processing	 	Faba bean protein 1% (w/v) solution	HPH treatmentPressure = 207 MPa (6 cycles)Temperature = 45.5°C ± 2.0°C	Protein showed a monomodal size distribution after HPH treatment with one peak at 12 nm	Effect of HPH‐generated cavitation, impact, shear, and turbulence on protein molecules	Yang et al. 	 	Raw bovine milk	UST treatmentPressure = 400 MPaTemperature = 65°C, 35°C	The UST‐treated milk had a lesser average particle diameter of 335.89 nm (65°C UST) and 291.45 nm (35°C UST) compared with 3511.76 nm for raw milk samples	Intense physical forces such as shear, turbulence, and elongation stress experienced by milk components during UST (Figure 4)	Janahar et al. 	 	Milk:Pea protein dispersions with 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:3 protein ratios	UST treatmentPressure = 400 MPaTemperature = 70°C, 40°C	In milk:pea 1:0.5 and 1:1 samples, 40°C and 70°C UST reduced the mean diameter significantly, as compared to untreated dispersions	Pressure‐associated shear action in UST	Janahar et al. 	 	In milk:pea 1:3 samples, 70°C UST caused significantly higher particle size than 40°C UST	UST‐promoted protein denaturation and aggregation led to increased particle size	 	Pulsed electric field processing	 	Soybean protein isolate (SPI) dispersions (20 mg/mL)	OSU‐4L PEF unitPEF strength = 30 kV/cmFlow rate = 1 mL/sPulse width = 2 µsPulse frequency = 500 pulse per secondTreatment time = 288 and 547 µs	At 288 µs treatment, SPI dispersions exhibited mean particle size larger than untreated SPI dispersionAt 547 µs treatment, the phenomenon was apparent	PEF induced the dissociation and aggregation of SPI	Li et al. 	 	Reconstituted skim milk (10 wt%)	OSU‐4L PEF unitInitial temperature = ∼20°C 49 kV/cm for 19.36 µs (up to 70°C)	No effect on particle size of milk	Under the conditions used, PEF has no or minor effect on caseins and whey denaturation	Liu et al. 	 	Raw, skim, and whole milk	35 and 38 kV/cm, monopolar square wave pulses of 2 µs at 200 HzFlow rate = 60 mL/minTreatment time = 19.2 µsInlet temperature = 15°C and 45°COutlet temperature = 30°C and 60°C	Casein micelle size was not affected regardless of the field intensities and temperatures	The treatment intensities used were not sufficient to cause conformation changes in caseins	Shamsi 	 	Raw skim milk	45–55 kV/cm for 2.1–3.5 µsFlow rate = 83.3 mL/minInlet temperature = 10–20°C (rise = 3–18°C)	Decrease in casein micelle size	Intense electric field caused charge modification of casein and resulted in decrease of hydrodynamic volume of casein micelle	Floury et al. 	 	Ultrasound processing	 	Black‐bean protein isolate (BBPI) dispersion (10%, w/v)	Power output = 0–450 WFrequency = 20 kHzTime = 12 and 24 min (pulse duration: on‐time 4 s; off‐time 2 s)	All samples treated with ultrasound except 300 W + 24 min treatment, showed larger particle size than the untreated control sample	The turbulent forces and micro‐streaming generated by US increased collision speed and aggregation, which led to particle size increase	Jiang et al. 	 	Beef myofibrillar proteins with 3% concentration	High‐intensity ultrasoundFrequency = 20 kHzTime = 10, 20, and 30 minPower = 100 and 300 W	Increase in sonication power and time led to decrease in protein sizeThe 300 W + 30 min treatment had the most effect on particle size	Rupture of agglomerates and particles due to the turbulence from cavitation phenomenon	Amiri et al. 	 	Protein solutions (0.1–10 wt%)Animal proteinsBovine gelatin (BG)Fish gelatin (FG)Egg white protein (EWP)Vegetable proteinsPea protein isolate (PPI)Soy protein isolate (SPI)Rice protein isolate (RPI)	Power intensity = ∼34 W/cm2Time = 0–2 minInitial temperature = 5–10°CFinal temperature = ∼45°C	After 1 min sonication: minimal reduction in size of BG, FG, EWP, PPI, and SPI proteinsIncrease in sonication time led to significant reduction in size of protein	Due to disruption of hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions	O'Sullivan et al. 	 	No reduction in RPI agglomerate size, regardless of treatment	Highly aggregated structure of the insoluble component of RPI, attributed to carbohydrate within aggregate structure and protein denaturation during the preparation of protein isolate	 	Rapeseed protein isolate (protein solution: 25 mg/mL)	20 kHz, 50 W/L, 40°C, sonication time = 10 min (pulse on‐time 3 s and off‐time 3 s)pH shift = from 1.5, 2.5, 11.5, and 12.5 to 7.0	Particle size decreased	The cavitation and hydrodynamic shear forces disrupted the bonds such as hydrogen bonding and electrostatic interactions of protein	Li et al. 	 	10 wt% protein suspensions of	 	Whey protein concentrate (WPC)Whey protein isolate (WPI)	Ultrasound probe (20 kHz for 15 and 30 min)Intensity = 43–48 W/cm2	Reduction in particle size and increase in specific free surface in treated samples	The forces of cavitation cause particle size reduction, including the disruption of aggregates and agglomerates	Jambrak et al. 	 	Ultrasound bath (40 kHz for 15 and 30 min)Intensity = 1 W/cm2	Particle size reduced significantly, but not comparable to probe	 	Soybean protein isolate (SPI) dispersions (8%, w/v)	 	Heat moisture denatured SPINative SPI	High intensity (low‐frequency) ultrasound (HIUS, 80 W/cm2, 20 kHz for 0, 10, or 25 min)	HIUS treatment decreased the particle sizes of heat moisture denatured SPI	Cavitation and acoustic streaming caused by sonication dissociated the protein aggregate	Zheng et al. 	 	After 10 min of HIUS, native SPI particle size increasedAfter 25 min of HIUS, size reduced	HIUS promoted aggregates formation at shorter HIUS time; however, HIUS dissociated the formed aggregates with increasing time	 	Whey protein concentrate (WPC), soybean protein isolate (SPI), egg white powder (EW): protein solutions 10% w/w	Power output = 750 WFrequency = 20 kHzAmplitude = 20% (maximum amplitude 40%, 228 µm)	Significant reduction of particle size upon HIUS was observed in WPC and SPI solution	Cavitation, micro‐streaming, and turbulent forces exerted by the probe	Arzeni et al. 	 	EW showed a slight increase in particle size	Small aggregates formed by non‐covalent hydrophobic interactions	 	Peanut protein isolate dispersions: 8 g/L	Power output: 0–1020 WTemperature = 0–75°CTime = 0–30 min (pulse on‐time 9 s and off‐time 1 s)	At power >120 W: mean particle size of peanut protein isolate reduced significantlyFurther decrease in particle size at longer treatment time	Thermal, mechanical, and chemical effects by ultrasound	Zhang et al. 	 	Membrane processing	 	Skim milk– Fresh– UF retentate	UltrafiltrationPolyethersulfone membrane = 10 kDa cut‐offConstant transmembrane pressure = 137.9 kPa	Only minor changes in the average micelle sizes	Casein micelle size modifications caused by UF are minimal	Liu et al. 	 	Raw skim milk, milk protein concentrate produced from ultrafiltration/diafiltration (UF/DF) retentate	Molecular mass cut‐off = 10 kDaTemperature = 10°CConcentration up to 21% (w/w)	No significant change in casein micelle size by the membrane processes	Presumably the mineral removal by UF/DF prevents change in micelle size	Martin et al. 	 	UV/Pulsed light processing	 	Whey protein isolate (WPI) = 1% w/v solution	Pulsed light (PL): Xenon flash lamp—polychromatic light in range 200–1100 nm at pulse rate = 3 pulses/s and duration = 360 µsFluence = 4–16 J/cm2	Fluence of 4 J/cm2: no effect on particle size distribution	Modifications of intra and intermolecular protein–protein interactions induced by PL	Siddique et al. 	 	Fluence >4 J/cm2: the mean particle size shifted to larger particle diameters	PL‐induced WPI dissociation and aggregation	 	Egg white	PL: Xenon lamps with max. emission 200–1000 nmPulse duration and interval between pulses = 0.50 µsFluence = 1.75–31.5 J/cm2	Upon light exposure, the size of protein particles increased	PL‐promoted structural modifications of egg white proteins lead to aggregates formation	Manzocco et al. 	 	1% wheat gluten suspension	PL: Xenon lamps with max. emission 200–1000 nmFluence = 0–26.25 J/cm2	With increasing fluence, there was increasing percentage of medium‐size protein particles and detriment of larger and smaller ones	Structural modification in protein induced by PL and alteration of intra and intermolecular protein–protein interactions	Panozzo et al. 	 	Egg white	UV‐C light (max. emission 253.7 nm)Dose = 10.6 and 63.7 kJ/m2	Size of protein particles increased after light treatment	Protein aggregates formation due to structural modifications of proteins upon light treatment	Manzocco et al. 	 	Cold plasma	 	Whey protein isolate (WPI)—2% w/v solution	Atmospheric pressure cold plasma (ACP) treatmentVoltage = 70 kVTime = 1–60 minAmbient air at atmospheric pressure	<15 min treatment = ACP did not alter the mean particle size>15 min treatment = ACP increased the particle size and polydispersity index	Aggregation among proteins induced by ACP	Segat et al. 	 	Zein (3% w/v) in aqueous ethanol	Atmospheric cold plasmaVoltage groupFixed duration = 3 minVoltage = 0–70 VDuration groupFixed voltage = 60 VDuration = 0–5 minCurrent = 1 ± 0.2 A	Depending on the voltage level and treatment duration, average diameter of Zein micelles decreasedCompared with duration, the voltage groups produced apparent size reduction	The intermolecular forces between zein micelles might be broken by high‐energy plasma particles and shockwave generated during ACP, which result in smaller particle size	Dong et al. 	 	Chocolate milk drink	Cold plasma (CP) under vacuum conditionsNitrogen plasma flow rates = 10, 20, and 30 mL/minProcess time = 5, 10, and 15 minTemperature = 21–25°C	CP treatment resulted in increased particle size and/or increased volume of particles with greater diameter	New proteins formation by cross‐linkage of free amino acids to the protein and protein–protein aggregation caused by reactive oxygen and nitrogen species in CP, resulting in insoluble aggregates	Coutinho et al. 	 	Guava flavored whey‐beverage	CP under vacuum conditionsNitrogen plasma flow rates = 10, 20, and 30 mL/minProcess time = 5, 10, and 15 min	Cold plasma resulted in products with a greater number of larger particles depending on the intensity of treatment	Under extreme process conditions, degradation of ingredients in whey beverage result in decrease in the number of small particles	Silveira et al. 	 	SPI dispersion (20 mg/mL)	ACPFrequency = 80, 100, and 120 HzProcessing time = 1, 2, 5, and 10 min	The 80 Hz, 1–2 min treatment slightly reduced the particle size; with increasing time, the particle size increased	As the treatment intensity increased, the proteins started to aggregate	Zhang et al. 	 	Peanut protein isolate (PPI) solution = 50 g/kg	ACP by dielectric barrier dischargeVoltage = 35 VCurrent = 2 ± 0.2 ATime = 1–4 min45% ± 1% RH and 20°C ± 2°C	The particle size of PPI micelles increased after treatment	CP enhanced hydrophilic interactions and linkage of water with protein molecules	Ji et al.
Abbreviations: HPH, high‐pressure homogenization; PEF, pulsed electric field; UST, ultra‐shear technology.
Schematic diagram of shear valve in UST equipment. When the shear valve opens under high pressure, it allows liquid to exit through the tiny gap resulting in intense shear, turbulence, or cavitation (Adapted from Janahar et al.).
HPH or UST induces dissociation of large protein clusters to smaller sizes in liquid foods and results in conversion of multimodal particle size distribution to monomodal distribution due to the high pressure, temperature, and shear effects (Yang et al.; Janahar et al.). This helps to prevent creaming and sedimentation phenomena in liquid foods.
PEF processing generates electrical field stress that can ionize certain chemical groups and disturb the electrostatic interactions within a protein polypeptide chain and disrupt the secondary structures through interaction of electric field and dipole moments of peptide (Zhao et al.). The protein structural change can influence its particle size. Hemar et al. observed that PEF (45 kV/cm at 240 mL/min flow rate) treatment in various milk systems decreased the casein micelle size although the size reverted to that of the untreated sample upon overnight storage at 4°C. This reversible change in micelle size could be due to the high shear from the feed pump rather than the PEF treatment. Hence, the effect of shear from the feed pump without applying PEF and the time of measurement after PEF treatment should be considered (Sharma et al.).
Power ultrasound modifies the native form of protein to nano‐sized and well dispersed particles due to hydrodynamic shearing. Further, the cavitation forces along with micro‐streaming and turbulent force created during ultrasonication are related to degree of denaturation of protein and particle size changes in liquid foods. The particle size change is varied based on the food components. For instance, Astráin‐Redín et al. exposed commercial milk to three different ultrasonic energy densities (0.25, 0.5, and 1 kJ/mL) and reported that the higher ultrasonic intensity, the smaller the fat globule size. On the other hand, Chandrapala et al. sonicated fresh skim milk at 20 kHz for up to 60 min and noted no changes in the size of the casein micelles and no measurable changes in free casein content.
Membrane processing is used for processing liquid protein‐based foods based on particle size. In liquid protein foods like milk, the pre‐treatments performed in dairy plants using UF are known to alter the fat particle size and modify the milk fat globule membrane (Lopez and Dufour). UF retains particles of size range from 0.001 to 0.02 µm, and so, UF is commonly used in protein processing, such as production of functionality‐enhanced whey proteins isolate (WPI) and concentrate (WPC). MF using ceramic membranes with pore sizes of 0.05–0.2 µm is used for milk fractionation, a selective separation of skimmed milk into a permeate and a casein‐rich retentate or concentrate (Svanborg et al.). Cascade MF (with sequential pore sizes 0.2 and 0.1 µm) could produce casein concentrates with different casein micelle size distributions, which can be used to produce novel products such as low‐fat set yoghurt (Jørgensen et al.). Atmospheric CP processing could cause unfolding of proteins and possible aggregation among themselves, depending on the intensity (Segat et al.). Thus, it can modify the particle size of protein solutions.
Overall, the particle sizes in protein‐based foods could be a passive measure of the protein aggregation behaviors due to the processing treatment. Further, the particle sizes depend on different product parameters like type, composition, and concentration of protein and fat (Maresca et al.; Janahar et al.) and process parameters like processing time, pressure, electric field, light, temperature, and shear intensities.

Microstructure
Morphological analysis of proteins in foods gives us the information about the protein aggregate size and the extent of denaturation upon exposure to different nonthermal processes. Pressure is known to modify the microstructure of various foods. Janahar et al. observed aggregates in the samples with mixture of β‐Lg and pea lectin proteins upon HPP treatment at 400 MPa and 25°C with a 5 min holding time (Figure 5). In milk protein concentrate (MPC) and micellar casein concentrate (MCC), pressurization at 150 MPa led to more irregularly shaped micelles, whereas 450 MPa led to dense networks of small, spherical aggregates (Cadesky et al.). The microstructure could indicate the particle sizes in the food matrices (Table 5). The microstructure observed could also reflect the rheological data. The network formation by pressure could be related to increase in the storage modulus (G′) of the samples. Devi et al. performed pressure treatment of WPI and gelatin mixtures in the form of gels at 600 MPa for 15 min from initial temperatures of 5°C (cold) or 30°C (warm) or in the form of solutions at 600 MPa for 15 min at 30°C (initial temperature). From confocal laser microscopy, it was revealed that whey protein aggregates formed during warm HPP were sphere shaped, whereas the cold HPP counterparts were irregular. This might be because, during warm HPP, gelatin was at the vicinity of its transition point and the system's viscosity remained relatively high to impede self‐association of WPI (Devi et al.). The aggregates appeared as individual entities. Warm HPP of the mixtures in the form of solutions leads to higher values of G′ and relatively monodisperse whey protein.
Confocal microscopic images of (a) Unprocessed and (b) HPP at 400 MPa and 25°C with a 5 min holding time, for samples of the mixture of β‐lactoglobulin and pea lectin proteins (Adapted from Janahar et al., Supporting Information).
The high pressure, shear, and temperature during HPH and UST could cause morphological changes in liquid foods, depending on the composition of food and intensity of treatment. Bi et al. analyzed soy protein isolate treated by HPH (10–80 MPa) with confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) and found that with increasing pressure, the protein aggregate size was gradually decreased. With increased homogenization pressure, the fractal dimension varied from small to large, which meant closer sample structure. Thus, the observation in CLSM indicated that the HPH treatment promotes gelation in samples. Janahar et al. observed milk:pea samples of 1:3 protein ratio treated by UST at 400 MPa (40°C and 70°C) using scanning electron microscope (SEM) and noted that the observations corroborated the particle size measurements, sedimentation index, and rheological changes in the samples. Further, the authors proposed that the microstructural changes in the milk:pea suspensions induced by UST resulted in creation of stable blends through one or more pathways (Figure 6). The UST enables clean label products by eliminating addition of synthetic binding agents to prevent separation of pea and milk protein components.
Proposed pathways for creation of stable milk‐pea blends by UST treatment. (a) Size reduction of the pea protein and entrapment of the particles in the milk casein micelles. (b) Disintegration of the casein micelles into smaller submicelles or casein proteins. (c) Association of casein submicelles or proteins initially disintegrated by UST (Adapted from Janahar et al.). UST, ultra‐shear technology.
Ultrasonication was reported to make the protein structure more uniform and regular with small‐sized clusters as compared to untreated samples. Hu et al. observed a denser and more uniform gel network with homogenous pores in the calcium sulfate‐induced soy protein gel when treated with high power ultrasound. The findings were attributed to reduced particle size after ultrasonication. In contrast, Jiang et al. reported irregular structure in black bean protein isolate after ultrasonication. The authors envisaged that protein undergoes partial unfolding and forms a network, and this network forms small aggregates that are considered good for better solubility at high ultrasound power.
PEF affects the lipoprotein network and destabilizes the colloidal emulsion. Marco‐Molés et al. used cryo‐SEM technique to evaluate the interactions among the main structural components of high intensity pulsed electric field (HIPEF)‐treated (19 and 37 kV/cm) liquid whole egg (proteins and lipids) and its native water. At high‐intensity (37 kV/cm) pulses, the protein granules appeared to be deformed. Weakness of interactions between the components was observed in HIPEF‐treated samples, which produced breakdown of the lipoprotein network in some areas. Dong et al. reported that the myofibrillar protein gels treated by moderate PEF treatment intensity of 18 kV/cm showed uniform and compact microstructures of protein gel networks under SEM analysis. In contrast, the gels treated at 28 kV/cm PEF were prone to creating heterogeneous gel networks with irregular cavities.
Light processing could induce the protein aggregation of the protein‐based foods which could be assessed by their microstructures. Researchers have analyzed the microstructures of foams obtained from egg white proteins (EWPs). Manzocco et al. treated egg white samples by UV‐C light for increasing time (0, 5, and 30 min) and analyzed the microstructure of the foam prepared from treated samples. Foams from UV processed egg white showed a considerably higher percentage of small bubbles as compared to the untreated sample. Further the percentage of small bubbles increased with increasing UV intensity. Concomitantly, foams from UV‐treated egg white had significantly higher stability, attributed to the presence of high size protein aggregates. The authors reported similar observations in egg white samples treated by PL (Manzocco et al.).
CP treatment also causes severe effects on surface morphology due to etching effects at longer exposure time (Dong et al.). The surface topography of zein granules before and after CP treatment, recorded by SEM, demonstrated that smooth zein protein surface got ruptured with the effect of etching during CP treatment, and there is a proportional relation of voltage level with surface roughness (Dong et al.). Sharafodin and Soltanizadeh observed through field emission SEM (FESEM) that soy protein isolate protein compaction decreased and fragmentation increased at moderate plasma voltage of 16 and 18 kV which was attributed to free –SH group enhancement. However, at 20 kV the free –SH group is reduced as a result of S–S bond formation and as a consequence protein aggregation occurred. Wang et al. confirmed the above findings through SEM imaging. Sheep milk when subjected to CP treatment for 30–300 s induced etching through reactions such as ion, electron, and plasma bombardment on the protein surface and causes protein aggregation. Coutinho et al. analyzed the microstructure of CP‐treated chocolate milk using an optical microscope. The authors observed that the products processed in more drastic CP treatment conditions, the presence of agglomerates was evident. The microstructures analysis confirmed the particle size distribution results.
Membrane processing as a processing tool influences the microstructure of protein‐based foods and impacts their texture, stability, and sensory properties. Ozer et al. studied the microstructural properties of labneh produced by membrane techniques [both UF and reverse osmosis (RO)] using SEM. In the membrane‐treated samples, the casein clusters were thicker, possibly due to pressure forcing the casein aggregates to gather during the early stages of the membrane processes (Ozer et al.). Babu and Amamcharla studied the microstructure of control and bulk nanobubble (BNB) incorporated skim milk concentrate (SMC) dispersions after the UF (10‐KDa cut‐off polyethersulfone membrane and constant TMP of 0.2 MPa) using transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The microstructural characteristics of BNB incorporated SMC revealed change in structural configurations, and the observations reflected the changes in rheological characteristics of the dispersions. Thus, the microstructure of protein‐based foods could provide insights into the magnitude of protein conformational changes, stability, and rheological characteristics.

Solubility
Solubility of protein depends on the relative contents of hydrophilic and hydrophobic residues, surface charges, ionic strength of solvent, and pH (Lafarga). Hydrophobic groups from nonpolar amino acid residues on the surface of protein promote protein–protein aggregation, thereby reducing the solubility. Conversely, hydrophilic groups from charged amino acid residues promote hydration and repulsive forces between protein molecules, thereby increasing the solubility (Yang and Powers). The influence of different nonthermal processes on the solubility in different food matrices is given in Table 6.
Influence of nonthermal technologies on the protein solubility in high‐protein food matrices.
Product	Process condition	Observation	Suggested mechanism of functional effect	Reference	 	High‐pressure processing	 	Bovine milk	250 MPa, 30 min, 20°C	Milk protein solubility increased	Solubilization of colloidal Ca phosphate decreased casein cross linking, neutralized negatively charged ions, and disrupted hydrophobic bonds	Huppertz et al. 	 	400 or 600 MPa, 30 min, 20°C	Solubility decreased	Interaction of denatured β‐lactoglobulin with casein which forms aggregates	 	Almond milk	150 MPa, 300 s, 30°C	Protein solubility increased	Improved solvation of almond protein due to deprotonation of polar amino acids under pressure	Dhakal et al. 	 	300, 450, 600 MPa, 300 s, 30°C	Solubility decreased by 30%, 68%, and 70%, respectively	Unfolding of secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structure of almond protein	 	Protein solution extracted from an edible insect, Protaetia brevitarsis seulensis	0–500 MPa at 35°C	Solubility of protein extracted at 200 MPa was the highest among treatments; solubility decreased at pressure >200 MPa	Protein quaternary structure might be dissociated at moderate (100–200 MPa) pressures	Kim et al. 	 	Semicontinuous high pressure processing	 	Pea protein	HPH treatmentPressure = 70, 100 MPa, 3 passesMax. sample temperature = 30°C ± 2°C	Solubility increased	Reduced particle size favors dispersion and hydration of proteins	Melchior et al. 	 	HPH treatmentPressure = 150 MPa, 3 passes	Solubility decreased	Aggregation of proteins	 	Faba bean protein solution 1% (w/v)	HPH treatmentPressure = 207 MPa at 45.5°C ± 2.0°C (6 passes)	Solubility increased from 35% to 99%	Reduced particle size favors dispersion and hydration of proteins	Yang et al. 	 	Almond beverage	HPH treatmentPressure = 200, 300 MPa, final temperature >120°C	Solubility increased	Increased hydrophobicity caused increase in solubility	Valencia‐Flores et al. 	 	Whey protein—6% (w/w), at pH 4.7	HPH treatmentPressure = 100–200 MPa	Solubility increased	Native structure undisturbed at moderate pressure but above that protein aggregated	Grácia‐Juliá et al. 	 	Pressure = 250–300 MPa, Initial temperature = 24°C ± 1°C	Solubility decreased	 	Milk:Pea samples of 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:3 protein ratios	UST treatmentPressure = 400 MPa, at 70°C	Solubilities of samples were higher than untreated samples	UST caused decrease in protein particle size and rearrangement in the protein aggregates, which enabled protein–solvent interaction	Janahar et al. 	 	Dispersions with raw milk + pea protein, skim milk + pea protein, cream + pea protein	UST treatmentPressure = 400 MPa, at 70°C	UST treatment increased the soluble protein content and the solubilities of the dairy‐pea protein dispersions	Particle breakdown caused by high pressure‐associated shear during UST	Janahar et al. 	 	Pulsed electric field processing	 	Egg white protein	30 kV/cm, 800 µs	Solubility decreased	Exposure of more hydrophobic groups due to molecular unfolding	Zhao et al. 	 	Whey protein isolate	12–20 kV/cm, 30 pulse	Solubility decreased with intensity and number of pulses	More number of pulses or greater intensity increases the hydrophobicity and decreases solubility	Xiang, Ngadi, et al. 	 	Soy protein isolate	30 kV/cm, 288 µs	Solubility decreased	Denaturation and aggregation at severe treatment condition decreased solubility	Li et al. 	 	Ultrasound processing	 	Soy protein isolate (SPI) = 1% suspension	200 W and 20 kHzInitial temperature = 25°C ± 2°CTime = 0–30 min (pulse on‐time 2 s; off‐time 2 s)	Solubility increased with increasing treatment time from 0 to 10 minFurther increase in time did not increase or decrease the solubility	Unfolding of protein and conformational change caused exposure of the buried hydrophobic groups and led more hydrophilic amino acid residues to be oriented toward water, as represented in Figure 7	Huang et al. 	 	Rapeseed protein isolate (protein solution—25 mg/mL)	20 kHz, 50 W/L, 40°C, sonication time of 10 min (pulse on‐time 3 s, off‐time 3 s), pH shift from 1.5, 2.5, 11.5, and 12.5 to 7.0	Solubility increased	Unfolding and refolding of protein exposed some polar groups	Li et al. 	 	Reconstituted milk protein concentrate	12.5 W, 50% amplitude, 5 min treatment	Solubility increased from 35% to 88%	Reduced particle size favored solubility	Yanjun et al. 	 	Black‐bean protein isolate (BBPI) dispersion (10.0%, w/v)	Frequency = 20 kHzPower output = 0, 150, 300, 450 WTime = 12 and 24 min (pulse duration: on‐time 4 s; off‐time 2 s)	Increasing US intensity and time increased the protein solubilityThe solubility was highest in 300 W + 12 min treatment	Protein molecules partially unfolded, which enhanced interaction of the proteins and water molecules	Jiang et al. 	 	Further increase in power and treatment time decreased the solubility	Protein molecules reform macromolecular aggregates through non‐covalent interactions, resulting in reduction in solubility	 	Membrane processing	 	Bovine whey	Ultrafiltration (UF) in 50 kDa flat membrane of polyether sulfone with permeation area of 0.001134 m2	Increase in soluble protein from 41% (in nature) to 58% in the concentrate	Change in droplet size after ultrafiltration	Iltchenco et al. 	 	Lentil protein isolates (LPI) obtained by UF	Extraction of LPI by UF at 50°C by polysulfone membrane (molecular weight cut‐off = 10 kDa) and subsequent diafiltration with demineralized water	Protein solubility (48.3%; pH 7) of LPI obtained by ultrafiltration; increasing pH to nine leads to increase in solubility to 54.7%	Increased surface charge with increasing pH above isoelectric point	Alonso‐Miravalles et al. 	 	UV/Pulsed light processing	 	Whey protein concentrate (WPC) films	Dose = 12 J/cm2	Film solubility decreased as compared to untreated	Surface hydrophobicity along the matrices of films and occurrence of covalent bonds in the film structure	Díaz et al. 	 	Corn zein and egg albumin‐based protein films	UV radiation dosage = 51.8 J/m2 for 24 h	Significant decrease in total soluble mater from 27 to 25.8 g/100 g in corn zein and 33.9 to 32.7 g/100 g in egg albumin, respectively	Occurrence of cross‐linking in UV‐treated films	Rhim et al. 	 	Cold plasma	 	Grass pea protein isolate	9.4 and 18.6 kVpp for 30 and 60 s	Solubility increased at higher voltage and duration	Reduction of particle size and increase in protein surface charge increased the solubility	Mehr and Koocheki
Abbreviations: HPH, high‐pressure homogenization; UST, ultra‐shear technology; UV, ultraviolet.
HPP leads to increase or decrease of solubility depending on the intensity of pressure. Low or moderate pressures lead to increase the solubility, due to deprotonation of polar amino acids, whereas extreme pressure causes dissociation of protein subunits and reduces the protein solubility (Dhakal et al., see Table 6). Furthermore, the exposure of buried hydrophobic groups to the aqueous solution and formation of higher molecular weight protein–protein aggregation make the protein insoluble. Similar observations were reported in walnut protein (Qin et al.), soy protein isolate (Puppo et al.), soy protein gel (Apichartsrangkoon), rice bran protein (Zhu et al.), and quinoa protein concentrate suspension (De Carvalho Oliveira et al.).
HPH influences the solubility in protein‐based liquid foods due to its ability to reduce the particle size. The reduced particle size favors dispersion and hydration of proteins which enables increase in protein solubility (Melchior et al.; Yang et al.). However, there are reports on minimal or no effects of dynamic pressure on whey protein, which could be due to least effect of HPH at pressures up to 300 MPa on whey protein conformation (Bouaouina et al.). Solubility of protein can also be related to denaturation state, which depends on the pressure intensity (Grácia‐Juliá et al., see Table 6). The denaturation temperature of soy protein (index of β‐conglycinin) was found to increase after HPH, which means that protein remains stable or soluble at up to temperatures around 70°C (Keerati‐U‐Rai and Corredig). De Carvalho Oliveira et al. reported that quinoa protein concentrate showed reduced protein solubility when processed by HPH at pressures above 50 MPa, reaching the lowest value at 180 MPa.
PEF reduced the solubility in egg and whey proteins during treatment at increased PEF duration (Zhao et al.; Xiang, Ngadi, et al.). On the other hand, Li et al. reported that PEF intensity and duration increased the solubility of soy protein isolate, but there existed a threshold limit (30 kV/cm at constant time and duration of 288 µs at constant intensity) beyond which the solubility decreased, which could be due to the denaturation of protein and aggregation of particles.
Ultrasound induces a greater number of cavitation bubbles in foods which produces large increase in local pressure and temperature. This leads to protein unfolding and orientation of hydrophilic components toward water, which result in increased solubility (Huang et al.; Hu et al.; Jambrak et al., see Figure 7). Arzeni et al. reported contrasting results of solubility in WPC treated by ultrasound, which was attributed to the presence of lactose which works as protective cover. Fixed frequency is more effective than sweep, which could be due to the strong cavitation effect when the ultrasonic frequency was close to material's resonant frequency (Li et al.).
Schematic representation of influence of ultrasound on food proteins (Adapted from Antunez‐Medina et al.).
Membrane processes can have an effect on the structure of proteins, decrease surface hydrophobicity in proteins, and help improve solubility (Yousefi and Abbasi). Pulsed UV light treatment at an energy of 165.6 J/cm2 resulted in reduced protein solubility in liquid peanut butter (Chung et al.). Decrease of solubility in protein films after UV treatment has been reported by other researchers (Díaz et al.; Rhim et al.; Schmid et al.). The decrease has been attributed to the increase in surface hydrophobicity, formation of aggregates, and UV‐induced covalent bonds between the aromatic amino acids of the protein. CP treatment increases the solubility of protein despite the increase of hydrophobicity. This is attributed to the reduction in protein particle size and the increase in protein surface charge (Mehr and Koocheki).

Emulsion and Foaming Characteristics
Protein solubility has a major influence on emulsification and foaming characteristics of protein. Proteins are known for their amphiphilic nature and film forming properties and thus play a vital role in emulsion and foaming stability. Physicochemical properties like surface hydrophobicity or surface charges of proteins decide the overall effect on emulsion and foam stabilization. The influence of different nonthermal processes on the emulsion and foaming characteristics in different liquid foods is given in Table 7.
Influence of nonthermal technologies on the emulsion and foaming properties in high‐protein food matrices.
Product	Process condition	Observation	Suggested mechanism of functional effect	Reference	 	High‐pressure processing	 	α‐Lactalbumin at 5% (w/v) concentration (pH 7)	600 MPa, 10 min, 55°C	Positive effect on foam capacity and stability, emulsion activity index (EAI) and stability	Molten protein globules are formed, with flexibility to form a stable film on air–liquid interface and undergo conformational changes at oil–water interface, thus enhancing the foaming and emulsion properties	Rodiles‐López et al. 	 	Protein solution extracted from Protaetia brevitarsis seulensis (an edible insect)	0–500 MPa at 35°C	Foaming capacity of HPP‐treated samples was higher than untreatedUntreated and 100 MPa HPP treatment had highest emulsion stability, which decreased with increasing pressure	Foaming and emulsion capacity are influenced by solubility, protein concentration, and hydrophobicity	Kim et al. 	 	Whey protein solution, 2% (w/w)	Pressure = 500 MPaSurrounding temperatures = −15°C (pressure shift freezing, PSF), −35°C (pressure assisted freezing, PAF), or 25°C (room temperature, RT)Time = 20 min	All HPP treatments of emulsions from WPI solutions resulted in decreased emulsion stability	Due to sulfide–disulfide exchanges as well as protein aggregation leading to reduced protein flexibilityFurther, HPP causes increased surface hydrophobicity, that would only help the formation of an emulsion, not its stabilization	Baier et al. 	 	Quinoa protein concentrate (5% w/v, protein basis) suspension	Pressure = 200, 300, 400, 500, and 600 MPaSet temperature = 25°C Time = 20 min	Pressures of 300 MPa or higher resulted in a decrease in foaming capacity	The ability of quinoa proteins to reduce surface tension and trap air particles is compromised under these processing conditionsReduction in foaming capacity coincided with the decrease in protein solubility under these processing conditions	De Carvalho Oliveira et al. 	 	Semicontinuous high pressure processing	 	Faba bean protein 1% (w/v) solution	HPH treatmentPressure = 207 MPa at 45.5°C ± 2.0°C (6 passes)	Foaming capacity increased from 91% to 260%	Attributed to fast diffusion of protein and adsorption to the interface; HPH made the protein more surface hydrophobic	Yang et al. 	 	EAI reduced from 27.0 to 19.7 m2/g after HPH treatment	Due to decreased viscoelasticity of the interfacial film, and flocculation caused by soluble supramolecular aggregates	 	Whey protein isolate (3% w/w) solution	HPH treatmentPressure = 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, or 300 MPaInlet temperature = 20°C	Increasing pressure enhanced the foaming ability	Size reduction and enhanced surface hydrophobicity made adsorption of protein to air–water interface faster	Bouaouina et al. 	 	Increasing pressure enhanced the foam stability	Hydrophobic interactions support formation of viscoelastic adsorbed layer	 	Bovine serum albumin (BSA) solution (50 mg/mL)	HPH treatmentPressure = 100 MPa, 1 passInlet temperature = 20°C	Increase of foaming capacity compared to untreated control	Pressure causes slight structural modifications on proteins, favoring the foaming capacity	Maresca et al. 	 	Emulsion with 20 vol.% sunflower oil and 1 or 2 wt% aqueous solution of soybean 11S globulin protein	HPH treatmentPressure = 20–350 MPaInlet temperature = 10°C	At pressures >150 MPa creaming index decreased from 80% to 0%	Due to decrease of mean droplet diameters (d3,2 < 0.3 µm)Due to droplets aggregation leading to formation of a gel‐like particulate network	Floury et al. 	 	Pulsed electric field processing	 	Liquid whole egg (LWE)	High‐intensity pulsed electric fields (HIPEF) processingTreatment intensities19 kV/cm for 30 µs32 kV/cm for 30 µs37 kV/cm for 18 µs	19 and 32 kV/cm produced LWE with similar foaming capacity as untreated egg	These intensities did not influence the foaming properties	Marco‐Molés et al. 	 	37 kV/cm led to substantial decrease in foaming capacity than untreated liquid egg	Protein aggregation and denaturation induced at this intensity	 	Liquid egg white	PEF laboratory unit with bipolar pulse (2 µs wide)Intensity = 30 kV/cmFrequency = 100 HzTemperature = 40°CTreatment time = 800 µs	Nonsignificant increase in foaming capacity (1.4% increase) and foaming stability (1.6% increase) compared to control samplesSignificant increase in emulsifying ability (6.4% increase) and emulsion stability (11.3% increase)	PEF induced partial unfolding of ovalbumin and exposed the buried internal SH groups to surface. Enhancement in foaming and emulsifying properties may be related to partial unfolding of egg white protein	Zhao et al. 	 	Ultrasound processing	 	Soy protein isolate (SPI) treated by US and mixed with soybean oil to prepare emulsion	200 W and 20 kHzInitial temperature = 25°C ± 2°CTime = 10 min (pulsed US on‐time 2 s and off‐time 2 s)	Emulsions prepared by US‐treated SPI were stable for 10 days without coalescenceEmulsions from untreated SPI showed coalescence in 3 days	US treatment led to smaller emulsion droplets, faster adsorption of the protein at the water‐in‐oil interface, and decreased interfacial tension	Huang et al. 	 	Peanut protein powder (PPI) dispersions (8 g/L)	Power output = 0–1020 WTemperature = 0°C–75°CDuration = 0–30 min (pulse on‐time 9 s and off‐time 1 s)	EAI increased at power >660 WEAI increased with increasing temperatures	Intense temperatures and pressures produced by US influence the emulsifying properties of the PPI	Zhang et al. 	 	Membrane processing	 	Bovine whey	Ultrafiltration (UF) in 50 kDa flat membrane of polyether sulfonePermeation area: 0.001134 m2	Increase in emulsion stability	Reduction in droplet size	Iltchenco et al. 	 	Lentil protein isolates (LPI) obtained by UF	LPI extraction by UF using a polysulfone membrane with a 10 kDa molecular weight cut‐off at 50°C and subsequent diafiltration	Protein obtained by UF was superior to iso‐electric precipitation method on water holding capacity (3.96 g/g), fat‐binding capacity (2.24 g/g), foam‐forming capacity (69.6%), and gelling properties (11% w/w)	Attributed to difference in the methods of extraction, leading to varying compositions	Alonso‐Miravalles et al. 	 	UV/Pulsed light processing	 	Egg white protein: Proteins samples were UV treated and diluted to prepare dispersion (1% w/v)	Protein samples were exposed to UV light source (253.7 nm, 30 W) placed 30 cm apart in a laminar flow cabinet for 0–120 min	Foaming ability and foaming stability increased with time of UV exposure	Due to protein conformational changes, which increased surface hydrophobicity	Kuan et al. 	 	Improved emulsifying ability and emulsion stability on UV‐treated samples	Due to the decreased droplet size of UV‐treated samples	 	Cold plasma	 	Grass pea protein isolate treated by CP and used to prepare emulsion [protein (1% w/v)—corn oil]	DBD systemVoltage = 18.6 kVppTreatment time = 60 sAtmospheric air condition = 45% ± 5% RH; 25°C ± 2°C	Emulsion stability was higher with low creaming index	Increased absorption of protein on the oil droplets	Mehr and Koocheki 	 	Whey protein isolate (WPI), 2% (w/v) solution	Voltage = 70 kVTreatment time = 1, 5, 10, 15, 30, and 60 minAmbient air at atmospheric pressure conditions	Foaming ability improved by ACP within 15 min	Proteins unfolding allow creating flexible structure that arrange at the air–water interface	Segat et al. 	 	At 30 and 60 min ACP treatment, the foam ability drastically reduced	Formation of aggregates among proteins	 	Pea protein isolate solution (5% w/v)	High voltage sinusoidal signal at 20 kHz generated by two‐dimensional DBDTreatment time: 30 minDischarge conditions: atmospheric pressure in dry air as well as in argon (Ar) with 20% of O2(For Ar/O2 plasma, the dominant reactive species is O3. For air plasma, O3 could react with reactive nitrogen species to form NO2 and N2O5)	Enhanced emulsification capacity after treatment with O3 and OH	Due to good solubility and balance between surface charge and hydrophobicity, partially unfolded, flexible proteins with higher β‐sheet content and soluble protein aggregates that form a strong film at the interface	Bu et al.
Abbreviations: ACP, atmospheric pressure cold plasma; DBD, dielectric barrier discharge; HPH, high‐pressure homogenization; PEF, pulsed electric field.
The effect of high pressure on different proteins influences the emulsifying properties of foods. In milk processed by high pressure, β‐Lg undergoes conformational changes that affect emulsifying properties negatively, but HPP treatment of α‐La increases its emulsifying properties (Rodiles‐López et al., see Table 7). In WPI, the high pressure induced protein denaturation helps foam stability due to formation of thick film by protein aggregates. But, at pressure above 300 MPa, film viscoelasticity decreases as a result of reduced number of protein interactions and hence less foam stability was observed (İbanoǧlu and Karataş).
HPH increases the foaming ability of foods, which is attributed to the ability of high pressure‐associated shear to dissociate of large protein aggregates and enhance the surface hydrophobicity which makes the protein adsorbed at the air–water interface (Bouaouina et al.; Maresca et al., see Table 7). The influence of HPH on emulsion stability depends on the type of dispersion. In single protein dispersions like faba bean protein (Yang et al.) and whey protein (Grácia‐Juliá et al.) dispersions, the high pressure‐associated shear appears to reduce the emulsion stability, due to protein aggregation by hydrophobic interactions, particularly at pressure above 200 MPa. On the other hand, in soy protein‐stabilized oil‐in‐water emulsions, HPH was found to stabilize emulsion against long‐term coalescence phenomenon (Floury et al.). Martínez‐Monteagudo et al. assessed the emulsion stability of dairy‐based beverages treated by HPH and reported significant stability and emulsion shelf‐life improvement as compared to conventionally homogenized beverages. The authors reported that HPH changes the dynamic rheological behavior and presents an opportunity to reduce the concentration of stabilizers in beverages. Thus, HPH could be used as processing tool for development of clean label products.
High intensity PEF deforms and degrades the protein granules and destabilizes the colloidal emulsion. Egg white foaming capacity was influenced by PEF based on the intensity (Zhao et al.; Marco‐Molés et al., see Table 7). Ultrasound is observed to increase hydrophobicity and free sulfhydryl group and reduce surface tension and particle size in pea protein isolate (PPI), thereby increasing its foaming properties (Xiong et al.; Arzeni et al.). CP treatment led to greater emulsifying properties in protein due to higher solubility and lower particle size of protein, which gets absorbed on the interface (Mehr and Koocheki, see Table 7). Thus, the effect of nonthermal treatment on the foaming and emulsion properties strongly depends on the intensity of the treatment applied.

Heat Stability of Treated Liquid Beverages
Protein‐based liquid foods are pasteurized using thermal or nonthermal process technologies to ensure microbial safety. Prior to consumption, consumers may prefer to heat (e.g., microwave) such beverages. The heat stability of pasteurized liquid beverages refers to how well a drink resists physical, chemical, and microbial changes when exposed to elevated temperatures after pasteurization (during storage, transport, or further processing). Heat stability depends heavily on the beverage type, pH, composition, and packaging. Although beverages such as coffee, tea, fruits, and acidic products are fairly stable, dairy and plant protein beverages may not be stable after heat treatment. Heating such beverages may lead to protein conformational changes, which influence the product's physical stability. For example, Lee stated that exposing dairy protein‐based liquid formulations to thermal pasteurization temperatures between 65°C and 71°C increases the mobility of certain parts of polypeptide chain and disrupts the α‐helix and β‐structures. This increased kinetic energy facilitates cleavage of some intramolecular disulfide bonds. At temperatures above 70°C, intermolecular disulfide bonds can form in the protein molecules and parts of the peptide chain could associate with each other through hydrophobic interactions. These molecular rearrangements often result in protein aggregation and precipitation.
Janahar et al. evaluated the thermal stability of UST‐treated model pea‐milk protein dispersions by boiling at ∼100°C for 10 min. The UST‐treated suspensions were stable to heat treatment, with no apparent fat separation or sedimentation, immediately post‐heat treatment. However, centrifugation of suspensions after the heat treatment led to separation of milk fat, serum, and sediment fractions, likely due to the reduced water retention capacity of the protein ingredients in the suspensions. Earlier, Khalesi and FitzGerald stated that thermal denaturation could alter the protein–protein and protein–water interactions and so, the aqueous solubility of protein molecules. Consequently, it could modify the functionality of proteins and the wettability and water‐holding capacity of the protein ingredients during processing. Therefore, it is essential to assess the heat‐stability of protein‐based beverages to estimate the possible sudden or eventual onset of separation of contents and design the product and process appropriately.

Rheological Behavior
The different nonthermal processes have different effects on the rheological properties of foods (Table 8). HPP significantly influences the rheological behavior of protein‐based liquid foods by inducing protein denaturation, unfolding, and aggregation, leading to changes in rheological behavior. Upon application of high pressure of 200–800 MPa at 20–60°C for 20 or 50 min, hydrated soy concentrate showed changes in rheological behavior (Apichartsrangkoon). For the treated samples, the loss modulus values were substantially lower than those of storage modulus values by almost one log cycle, which indicated gel behavior with some weak viscoelastic character. The rheological changes were more effected by temperature than pressure. The finding was later supported by Ahmed et al., where soy protein isolate showed viscoelastic gel nature after HPP treatment. Further, holding at high pressure increased the elastic behavior of soybean protein isolate (SPI). The dairy proteins tend to form gel‐like structure upon HPP. Devi et al. studied the rheological properties of dairy protein and gelatin mix, comparing the effect of heat treatment at 45–80°C at 1°C/min, followed by cooling to 5°C and high‐pressure treatment at 600 MPa and 5°C or 30°C (initial sample temperatures) for 15 min. Heat treatment induced a phase change in the mix, whereas high pressure retained the gel structure at 600 MPa. HPP at 30°C (initial temperature) resulted in higher values of G′ and relatively monodisperse whey protein aggregates in the mix, as compared to the mixtures treated by HPP at 5°C (initial temperature). Pressure treatments of MPC at 350 and 450 MPa for 15 min resulted in a significant increase in G′, by nearly two orders of magnitude, as compared to the untreated samples (Cadesky et al.). Further, the samples showed a drop in tan δ to 0.2–0.3, which indicated a clear solid‐like behavior and a weak gel‐like structure (Cadesky et al.). Thus, the rheological behavior of food matrices exposed to HPP depends on the pressure, temperature, and holding time.
Influence of nonthermal technologies on the rheological behavior in high‐protein food matrices.
Product	Process condition	Observation	Suggested mechanism of functional effect	Reference	 	High‐pressure processing	 	Soy milk added with a coagulant—10 mM CaCl2	500 MPa for 30 min	HPP treatment increased the viscosity and led to phase change from liquid to sol	Hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions disrupted by pressure	Zhang et al. 	 	Micellar casein (MC) dispersions and two mixtures (micellar caseins: whey proteins weight mixing ratios 80:20 and 20:80)	Pressure = 500 MPaSurrounding temperatures: −35°C (pressure assisted freezing, PAF), −15°C (pressure shift freezing, PSF), or 25°C (room temperature, RT)Time = 20 min	MC‐rich samples shifted from Newtonian to shear‐thickening fluid after high‐pressure low‐temperature (HPLT) treatments	HPLT treatment caused large flocs formation and induced new structures and gel‐like network	Baier et al. 	 	Semicontinuous high pressure processing	 	Pea protein	HPH treatmentPressure = 70, 150 MPa, 1 pass	Pseudoplastic behavior	Protein structural modification favored formation of protein–protein network at high HPH intensity	Melchior et al. 	 	Pressure = 70 MPa, 100 MPa, 3 passesMax. sample temperature = 30°C ± 2°C	Plastic behavior	 	Emulsion with 20 vol.% sunflower oil and 2 wt% aqueous solution of soybean 11S globulin protein	HPH treatmentPressure = 20–350 MPaInlet temperature = 10°C	With increasing pressure, emulsion's apparent viscosity increased, and changed from Newtonian to shear‐thinning fluid	Intermolecular interactions due to attractions between adjacent denatured molecules and weak transient networks formation	Floury et al. 	 	Milk:Pea protein dispersions with 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:3 protein ratios	UST treatmentPressure = 400 MPaTemperature = 70°C, 40°C	Viscosity increased with increasing protein concentration in sample	Due to impact and collisions during UST, the particles aggregate	Janahar et al. 	 	The UST‐treated suspensions were pseudoplastic (flow behavior index, n < 1)	Disruption of gel network linkages at high shear rate	 	Pulsed electric field processing	 	Liquid whole egg (LWE)	High‐intensity pulsed electric fields (HIPEF)Treatment intensities19 kV/cm for 30 µs32 kV/cm for 30 µs37 kV/cm for 18 µs	A slight increase in hardness values (25.3–26.4 N) with increasing field strength and no significant difference in cohesiveness in the gels from treated samples	High electric field strengths results in gels with high hardness values	Marco‐Molés et al. 	 	Soy milk	Treatment intensity = 18, 20, 22 kV/cmNumber of pulses = 25–100 (frequency = 0.5 Hz)Temperature = 26°C	Apparent viscosity increased from 6.62 to 7.46 (10−3 Pa s) with increasing electric field intensity from 18 to 22 kV/cm	Intermolecular interactions between denatured molecules with creation of weak transient networks	Xiang, Simpson, et al. 	 	Ultrasound processing	 	Yoghurt drink produced by ultrasound processed raw milk	Treatment conditionsRaw milk samples preheated to 70°CFrequency = 24 kHzPower output = 100, 125, or 150 WExposure time = 15 min	US of raw milk at 70°C resulted in higher apparent viscosities in yoghurt drinkIncrease in US power led to increase in apparent viscosity	Sonication of preheated samples (thermosonication) likely promotes casein micelles disruption into subunits that form strong networks with each other and/or with whey proteins that were partially denatured during fermentation	Gursoy et al. 	 	Whey protein concentrate, ultrasonicated and diluted to prepare dispersion (12% w/v)	Net power = 750 W and 220 VFrequency = 20 kHz, 12.75% concentration of feed, 20% amplitudeTime = 19.75 min	The ultrasonicated protein exhibited dramatically higher storage modulus (G′) and higher gel firmness throughout the temperature profile (20–90°C; heat rate = 1°C/min) as compared to untreated protein	Increased proteins aggregation led to more elastic and stronger gel	Khatkar et al. 	 	Whey protein concentrate (WPC) and whey protein isolated (WPI) dispersions (10% w/w)	Low frequency power USFrequency = 20 kHzTime = 15 minUltrasonic power = 43–48 W/cm2	Significant increase in apparent viscosity of both samples and increase in consistency coefficient (0.152 and 0.186 for WPC and WPI, respectively) related to untreated control samples	Changes in flowing behavior are due to variation in binding capacity for waterIn protein structure altered by US, hydrophilic parts of amino acids are opened toward water surroundings which led to higher water binding	Krešić et al. 	 	Beef myofibrillar proteins with 3% concentration	High‐intensity ultrasoundFrequency = 20 kHzTime = 10, 20, and 30 minPower = 100 and 300 W	Increasing time and power of sonication enhanced the gel strength of myofibrillar proteins	Decrease in particle size and uniform myofibrillar proteins size	Amiri et al. 	 	Membrane processing	 	Labneh (concentrated yoghurt)	UF and RO before and after fermentation	Within linear viscoelastic region, UF labneh samples had greater complex modulus than RO samples	Same interaction forces take place in the formation of labneh gels but to different degrees	Ozer et al. 	 	Micellar casein concentrates (MCC) obtained by membrane separation	Microfiltration (MF)0.1‐µm pore sizeTemperature of milk = 50°C	MCC with 2.5% casein concentration = NewtonianMCC with casein concentrations >5% = mild shear‐thinningMCC with casein concentrations ≥7.5% = clear non‐Newtonian shear‐thinning	As the concentration of casein increased, the distance between the casein micelles decreased, leading to a subsequent increase in electrostatic repulsion, thus increasing the flow resistance to the liquid where it's suspended	Sauer et al. 	 	Goat whey orange juice beverage	MFFeeding temperature = 20, 30, 40, and 50°C0.2 µm poreWorking pressure = 2 kgf/cm2	A significant decrease in consistency index, k (Pa sn) and increase in n from temperature 30°C to 40°C	Increase in temperature rises the permeation flux, which increase the fouling rate, due to insoluble pectic and cellulosic materials, which altered the k and n	Vieira et al. 	 	UV/Pulsed light processing	 	Pasteurized whole milk	High intensity pulsed (HIP) UV lamp3 treatment conditions(HIP‐1: 31 J/pulse, 8 Hz, 328 min 7 s; HIP‐2: 344 J/pulse, 0.75 Hz, 86 min 32 s; HIP‐3: 644 J/pulse, 0.5 Hz, 39 min 36 s)Fluence: 5 mJ/cm2	At HIP‐2 and HIP‐3 treatment, the viscosity remained almost unchangedHIP‐1 lamp caused significant effects on the milk texture	Denaturation of proteins in milk at high UV intensities	Orlowska et al. 	 	Fish gelatin samples—UV treated and diluted to prepare dispersion (6% w/v)	Samples exposed to a UV light source (253.7 nm; 30 W) in laminar flow cabinet at 30 cm from the surfaceExposure times = 30 and 60 min	Significant reduction in the viscosity of UV‐treated gelatin solution as compared to the control	Free radicals could be created by UV, which cause molecular changes and chain fragmentationAt temperature below the gelling point, extensive intermolecular binding between the shorter crosslinked polypeptide chains would develop during the maturation period, which facilitate stronger gel than untreated sample	Bhat and Karim 	 	Significant increase in gel strength with increasing UV exposure time	 	Cold plasma	 	Pea protein isolate solution (15%, 20 w/v)	High voltage sinusoidal signal at 20 kHz generated by two‐dimensional DBDTreatment time = 30 minDischarge conditions: atmospheric pressure in dry air as well as argon (Ar) with 20% admixture of O2	Samples with 15% protein exposed to O3, NxOy/O3 mixture, and OH species created a gelSamples with 20% protein had the greatest gel strength	Increase in protein solubility, soluble aggregates, and balance between surface hydrophobicity and surface charge	Bu et al.
Abbreviations: DBD, dielectric barrier discharge; HPH, high‐pressure homogenization; UST, ultra‐shear technology; UV, ultraviolet.
HPH induces protein structural modification and favors protein–protein interaction, which converts rheological properties from pseudoplastic to plastic (Melchior et al.). A shift from liquid‐like to a gel‐like structure was observed in pea protein treated with HPH as the structural modifications favored the formation of a network responsible for the solid‐like behavior of emulsion (Melchior et al.). Bi et al. studied the effect of HPH on SPI and found that G′ increased from 291 Pa at 5 MPa to 528 Pa at 80 MPa. The frequency dependency was decreased at higher pressure treatment. An increase in viscosity effected by HPH or UST contributes to the physical stability of products, in accordance with Stoke's law (Janahar et al.).
During PEF treatment, the electrical field intensity creates protein denaturation. Due to attractions between adjacent denatured molecules, weak networks are formed that contribute to an increase in the apparent viscosity. Increase in viscosity with increased electric field strengths is reported in liquid egg (Marco‐Molés et al.) and soy milk (Xiang, Simpson, et al.).
Ultrasound significantly influences the rheological behavior of protein‐based liquid foods by inducing structural changes in the proteins, primarily through the acoustic cavitation. Arzeni et al. treated WPC, EWP, and soy protein isolate with high intensity ultrasound. WPC and EWP increased gel strength, whereas soy protein did not show any effect. Higher elastic characteristics of ultrasonicated WPC were attributed to stronger aggregation promoted by hydrophobicity. Absence of native protein in commercial soy protein isolate could have contributed less to the structural rearrangement in soy protein during sonication evidenced by decreased G′. Ultrasonication of okara tofu suspension indicated sharp increase in of G′ and G″ values which was attributed to protein denaturation due to exposure of the hydrophobic group and increased hydrophobic interaction (Fan et al.).
UV treatment at high intensities causes denaturation of proteins which could lead to increased viscosity in protein foods like milk (Orlowska et al.). Likewise, increases in soluble aggregates in PPI solutions after treatment by CP led to increased gel strength in samples (Bu et al.). Thus, the intensity of treatments and resulting conformational changes to proteins in liquid foods led to changes in rheological properties in foods.

Digestibility
Native proteins show lower digestibility than processed ones, due to rigid conformational structures that are not accessible to proteolytic enzymes in gastric conditions. Several food processing methods, through nonthermal and thermal effects, have demonstrated the ability to modify the protein structure giving access to digestive enzymes, thereby increasing the digestibility. It is important to understand how different thermal and nonthermal‐based methods can improve digestibility of foods so that relevant technologies can be employed for industrial manufacturing of food products.
Researchers demonstrated that high pressure (HPP) could increasing the digestibility of proteins like β‐Lg and enhance its nutritional value. Zeece et al. reported that HPP treatment of the β‐Lg at 400–800 MPa for 10 min at 20°C improved the protein digestibility and the effect increased with increasing pressure. A similar effect of improved digestibility by HPP treatment or combination of HPP with subsequent heat treatment has been reported in WPI (Vilela et al.), soy protein isolate (Peñas et al.), lentils, chickpeas, peas, soybeans (Han et al.), egg ovalbumin (López‐Expósito et al.), and squid tropomyosin (Jin et al.). On contrary, Yin et al. reported that HPP treatment of vicilin‐rich red kidney bean isolates decreased the trypsin digestibility, owing to pressure‐led formation of soluble protein aggregates. De Carvalho Oliveira et al. reported that the in vitro protein digestibility (IVPD) of 5% (w/v) quinoa protein concentrate suspension was not affected by HPP treatment at 200–600 MPa for 20 min at 25°C. Thus, the effect of HPP on protein digestibility depends on the source of proteins and conditions of treatment.
Protein unfolding induced by HPH favors digestive enzymes activity and thus shows better digestibility in pea (Melchior et al.). Smaller particle size is ideal for better solubility and digestibility. On the contrary, large protein aggregation at higher pressure reduces the accessibility of protein hydrolysis, thus lowering digestibility. Sha et al. treated fish gelatin (2% w/v) by high pressure‐based shear in a microfluidizer at pressures from 40 to 160 MPa (five passes). The in vitro pepsin digestibility of the gelatin increased with an increase in pressure up to 80 MPa, attributed to protein conformational changes under pressure. However, the digestibility decreased at pressures above 80 MPa, which was attributed to protein reaggregation at these pressures. Improvement in in vitro trypsin and in vivo (Wistar rats) digestibility of milk proteins by microfluidization (2500–30,000 psi) was reported by Kumar et al.. It is to be noted that some protein, due to its intrinsic properties, may either resist unfolding or maintain a configuration upon HPH, which keeps sites accessible to digestive enzymes. Accordingly, De Carvalho Oliveira et al. reported that the IVPD of 7% (w/v) quinoa protein concentrate suspension with an inlet temperature of 25°C treated at pressures between 50 and 180 MPa for a single pass by HPH was not affected by the treatment.
The local heating and sonication effect during US processing induces conformational changes in proteins and influences the digestibility of proteins. Vanga et al. investigated the impact of pulsed high‐intensity ultrasound (20 Hz, 1–16 min, 50% duty cycle) on IVPD% of the almond milk protein. The authors observed that the IVPD% of almond protein increased slightly at 16 min and depended on the protein secondary structure. Few researchers have reported that US treatment increased the digestibility in fresh milk (Cui et al.), WPC (Alizadeh and Aliakbarlu), and MPC (Uluko et al.). The degree of proteolysis depended on the US intensity and duration. On the other hand, Martínez‐Velasco et al. observed that the ultrasonication‐promoted structural changes caused a decrease (∼3.6%) in the relative protein digestibility of optimized faba bean protein isolate (72.67% amplitude for 17.29 min) as compared to native faba bean protein isolate.
MF seems to have no effect on the digestibility of milk proteins, as the nonthermal process does not substantially alter the intrinsic molecular structure or cause significant denaturation of the proteins. Liu et al. used MF as a pre‐treatment of skim milk before HPP at 600 MPa for 5 min and studied the IVPD. The processed samples were compared with the samples treated by HPP‐only and unprocessed milk. The MF before HPP led to large casein micelles compared with HPP alone, possibly due to the association of whey proteins with caseins. However, no significant change in the protein digestibility was observed in the microfiltered samples in comparison with other samples.
PL technology has been reported to alter the protein conformation. Particularly, PL modifies the structure of β‐Lg, thus increasing its IVPD by pepsin (del Castillo‐Santaella et al.; Orcajo et al.). The light‐induced conformational changes create a more opened structure that exposes hydrophobic amino acids, which could not only favor protein aggregation but also make pepsin‐susceptible sites more accessible. Accordingly, Da Silva et al. reported that UV‐C light treatment significantly increased the in vitro gastric digestion index for β‐Lg by 36% ± 4% and 9% ± 2% under simulated elderly and young adult digestive conditions, respectively.

Allergenicity
In addition to improving the digestibility, the changes to protein structure induced by nonthermal processes could also reduce the allergenicity of certain food allergens. HPP induces aggregation of allergen proteins and so, the immunoreactivity of allergens in peanuts (Huang et al.), almond (Dhakal et al.), rice (Kato et al.), egg white (Hildebrandt et al.), and soy protein isolate (Li, Zhu, et al.) has been reported to be significantly decreased by high‐pressure treatment. Zeece et al. suggested that the degree of β‐Lg digestion induced by HPP treatment may have potential for reducing its allergenicity through reduction of its structural integrity and promotion of unfolding, thus increasing accessibility to digestive enzymes.
During HPH or UST, the high pressure and temperature effects in addition to the shear effects can facilitate reduction of allergenicity of proteins. Accordingly, Briviba et al. reported that upon HPH‐treatment of almond milk, >99.8% of the almond protein antigens (17 ± 5 ppm) were not detectable. The HPH induced chemical or physicochemical alteration of epitopes in almond proteins. Earlier, Dhakal et al. reported that thermal treatment of almond milk (85°C/300 s and 99°C/30 s) resulted in reduction of immunoreactivity in almond milk. Therefore, the heat generated during HPH contributes to allergenicity‐reduction. Janahar et al. used small angle x‐ray scattering (SAXS) to assess the influence of high pressure and the associated shear and temperature on β‐Lg and pea lectin which are known for their allergenic properties. Pea lectin showed more structural and colloidal resistance to the UST processing conditions than β‐Lg. The UST could cause aggregation of proteins in certain concentrations (Janahar et al.). These aggregated proteins could hide the epitopes and prevent the antibodies of the ELISA kit from reaching the buried antigenic epitopes. Thus, HPH can reduce the allergic potential of proteins.
PEF induces structural changes in proteins and reduces the allergenicity of food allergens in ovalbumin (Toshiko et al.) and whey protein (Sun et al.). Conversely, PEF (0–35 kV/cm, 2 Hz) caused no significant changes to peanut and apple allergens (Johnson et al.). Use of United States to reduce the allergenicity of tropomyosin has been investigated by several researchers and the authors have observed that reduction of allergenicity improved with US power level (Zhang et al.) and treatment duration (Li et al.; Dong et al.).
Ultrasound leads to generation of free radicals which oxidizes the amino acids of allergen and degrade the allergen to generate protein fragments. This has been reported to reduce the allergenicity of the major shrimp allergen tropomyosin (Zhang et al.). United States in combination with germination or other treatments like enzymatic treatments has also been observed to reduce the allergenicity in soybean (Yang et al.), peanut (Li et al.; Yu et al.), and pastes from treated cashew and pistachio nuts (Cuadrado et al.).
The PL treatment leads to decrease of immunoreactivity due to modification of proteins structure. The inhibition of immunoglobulin E (IgE)‐binding in acid and sweet whey supported the possibility that PL reduces the allergenic potential of β‐Lg (del Castillo‐Santaella et al.; Orcajo et al.). Tammineedi et al. reported that UV‐C treatment at 53–252 mJ/cm2 energies resulted in significant reduction in IgE binding values in α‐casein and whey fractions as compared to untreated samples, indicating decrease in allergenicity (25% decrease for α‐casein and 27.7% decrease for whey fractions) of proteins. High intensity ultrasound treatment (500 W, 20 kHz, up to 30 min) and nonthermal plasma (power: 60 W, argon gas, flow rate: 30.7 L/min, time: up to 15 min) did not influence allergenicity of milk proteins. The authors suggested use of higher intensities and longer US treatment time and use of higher plasma power and direct exposure of sample to plasma rather than plasma afterglow (indirect plasma) during nonthermal plasma treatment to obtain better efficacy toward reducing the allergenicity of major milk allergens (Tammineedi et al.). Use of PL and pulsed UV light treatment for decrease in immunoreactivity of peanut (Yang, Mwakatage, et al.), gluten (Panozzo et al.), and soy protein (Meinlschmidt et al.) was reported, and the effects were attributed to light‐induced structure modification of proteins. It is worth noting that Manzocco et al. observed that egg white exposed to PL by xenon lamps (max. emission 200–1000 nm, pulse duration and interval 0.50 µs) at number of light pulses above 12 showed significant increase in egg‐white immunoreactivity. The protein fragmentation caused by intense PL could lead to higher exposure of the protein epitopes, resulting in an increase in egg white immunoreactivity. Therefore, the process conditions should be controlled according to the type of protein. Further, several factors like transparency, optical properties, and presence of solids contribute to the actual amount of energy absorbed by the sample.
CP reduces the immunoreactivity of food proteins by generating highly reactive species that modify the protein's structure. Meinlschmidt et al. treated soy protein isolate dispersions with direct (9–11 kVpp) and remote (indirect) cold atmospheric pressure plasma (CAPP). The direct plasma treatment used a surface dielectric‐barrier air‐discharge system. The remote (indirect) CAPP treatment used plasma processed air that was generated by a plasma torch driven by microwave (frequency: 2.45 GHz and power: 12 kW). Direct CAPP led to the maximum reduction (up to 100%) in immunoreactivity in the soluble protein fraction, and remote CAPP of samples reduced the immunoreactivity up to 89%. Influence of CP in reducing allergenicity in peanuts (Venkataratnam et al.), shrimp tropomyosin (Shriver), and wheat (Nooji) has been reported. The underlying mechanism involved in reduction of immunoreactivity is considered to be modification of the conformational and linear epitopes.

Future Outlook
The continuing research in the nonthermal technologies has been inspired by the demand for safe, nutritious, and clean‐label and sustainably processed foods by consumers. In addition, some consumers prefer proteins from plants over animal sources due to perceived health benefits and ethical and religious considerations.
Research on the role of nonthermal technologies in fostering sustainable food supply chain emphasizing energy conservation, carbon emission reduction, and circular economy is in its infancy (Younis et al.). Due to emerging nature of these technologies, many researchers employed lab or pilot scale equipment. As a result, only limited number of researchers systematically conducted life cycle analysis studies on these technologies, particularly for industrial applications. As a result, the results obtained may be difficult to scale‐up and generalize in real‐world settings. In addition, comparison of sustainability benefits of different nonthermal and conventional technology is challenging due to diversity in equipment used, as well as wide variation in processes, products, and recipes. For‐profit food companies often do not want to share proprietary energy and other relevant sustainability data of individual facility sites. This further makes it difficult to systematically compare different technologies for sustainability assessment. More comprehensive systematic energy and water consumption data are needed for different nonthermal technologies to understand the true sustainability benefits of such innovative technologies.
Apart from animal and plant proteins, alternative sources of proteins are generally produced by fermentation of a fungus on a glucose substrate and cell‐based in vitro meat (or cultured meat). This biomass fermentation has been used as an environmentally friendly strategy to produce mycoprotein of very high protein content. Recently, precision fermentation is used as a metabolic engineering tool to produce several food ingredients such as protein, pigments, vitamins, and fats. These proteins can upgrade the quality of plant‐based alternatives (Boukid et al.). Furthermore, new sources have been used for development of emerging alternative proteins, including microalgae proteins from spirulina and proteins from insects such as beetles, caterpillars, ants, bees, wasps, grasshoppers, locusts, crickets, planthoppers, leafhoppers, cicadas, dragonflies, termites, and flies (Lee et al.). These proteins are less common due to high production cost and projected climate impacts, and they are still under development (Sha and Xiong). Further research is essential to use appropriate nonthermal technologies to process these proteins in order to produce safe products devoid of hazards like toxins, biological residues, and allergens.
“Meat substitute” refers to analogues from sources other than animal‐based muscle meat that mimic the sensorial and functional properties of whole meat or processed meat in food products. The meat substitutes are commonly used in protein‐based products like burgers, meatballs, patties, and nuggets. Companies like Beyond Meat, Impossible Foods, and Gardein have successfully ventured into the meat substitutes business with a widening product portfolio. There is a rapid market expansion due to the entry of several entrepreneurs, supported by venture‐capital firms. Further, traditional meat companies like Tyson, Hormel Foods, Smithfield, Maple Leaf Foods, and Perdue Farms have also entered the market (Sha and Xiong).
Furthermore, significant efforts are being directed toward the development of hybrid meat products in which a portion of conventional meat (approximately 20%–50%) is replaced with plant‐based protein ingredients. These hybrid formulations incorporate diverse plant‐derived components—such as legumes, grains, fruits, and vegetables—in varying proportions, enabling modulation of nutritional value while maintaining desirable meat‐like flavor and texture (Grasso and Goksen; Nie et al.). The common and primary ingredients to produce meat substitutes and hybrid meat products are legumes, such as soy and pea, and cereals, such as wheat. The principal components responsible for the functionality of the products are proteins. The required functional properties in the products, such as gelation, emulsification, water holding, and binding, are determined by proteins (Asgar et al.). In hybrid meat products, the interplay between muscle myofibrillar proteins and plant proteins is essential to be understood. Nie et al. evaluated the structure‐forming properties of hybrid meat analogues made by replacing meat with PPI at various levels and adjusting the salt levels in the product. Although muscle proteins (mixed sarcoplasmic and myofibrillar) had the strongest gelling capacity, the sol‐to‐gel rheological transition and gel hardness testing showed that the muscle‐pea hybrid proteins also exhibited moderate aggregation and gelling activity. The observations showed the potential for developing reduced‐salt hybrid meat analogues. The authors emphasized that different plant proteins could interact differently with muscle proteins in low‐salt hybrid analogues. Hence, formulation‐specific analyses are needed to elucidate the influence of the interplay of hybrid proteins on product characteristics.
When hybrid protein products derived from multiple protein sources (including meat, dairy, plant, and insect proteins) are utilized in food formulations, clear and comprehensive labeling frameworks are essential to accommodate diverse consumer dietary preferences. Additionally, as certain proteins may elicit allergenic responses, appropriate allergen declarations and warnings must be provided.
The properties of the plant proteins are modified by the processes such as extrusion, spinning, and shear (Chajuss). Recently, Nie et al. used high‐intensity ultrasound for structural and functional modification of pea protein and used it to substitute lean meat at various ratios in hybrid meat gel‐type sausages with reduced salt content (0.3 M NaCl). The reduced‐salt sausage with pea protein substitution showed restricted bulk water mobility, leading to significantly less cooking loss (28%–31%) than non‐substituted product. However, the hybrid sausages were susceptible to lipid oxidation. Thus, for integration of plant‐based ingredients in hybrid meat products, managing lipid oxidation is critical.
It is to be noted that exposure of liquid samples with high protein or fat concentration to high pressure associated shear in UST process could lead to increase in viscosities and development of gel–solid structures due to formation of protein–fat networks and cross‐links (Janahar et al.). The ability of UST to increase water‐binding capacity and gel firmness provides an opportunity to develop meat substitutes. In the current processes for the meat substitute‐based products, additives, including preservatives, stabilizers, colorants, vitamins, and minerals, are added to obtain meat‐like aesthetic, sensorial, and nutritional qualities (Sha and Xiong). The use of nonthermal processes like UST could help to eliminate or minimize inclusion of synthetic additives, thereby enabling clean‐label products.
When the nonthermal processes are used to produce the meat substitute or hybrid meat products, the functionality of the proteins would be different than those produced by thermal processes. For instance, the conversion of native proteins to unfolded and denatured protein by thermal process would help texture modification in these products. When nonthermal processes are utilized, thermal‐induced protein denaturation could not be obtained. On the other hand, nonthermal technologies like HPP enable protein unfolding through pressure as the agent. The functionality of the foods can be differently altered by nonthermal processes. More research on application of nonthermal processes can lead to innovative meat substitutes.

Conclusion
This article presents an overview of the effects of nonthermal processing on the safety and quality of high‐protein, clean‐label liquid foods derived from animal, plant, insect, or hybrid protein sources. Thermal and nonthermal technologies employ different mechanisms to inactivate pathogens and spoilage organisms and vary in their impact on product quality attributes. Although refrigerated products primarily rely on nonthermal lethal agents applied under ambient or chilled conditions, shelf‐stable products typically require combined thermal–nonthermal treatments. As a result, nonthermal pasteurization often helps preserve the quality attributes of protein‐based liquid foods. Nonthermal technologies offer several advantages, including operational convenience and reduced thermal exposure, along with product benefits such as enhanced functionality, fewer additives, and customizable textures. However, these technologies also present processing challenges and may affect product quality in different ways, requiring careful evaluation. Future research should adopt a holistic approach to assess the impact of these technologies across diverse food matrices, with particular attention to process parameters, physicochemical changes in proteins, and interactions with other ingredients. Addressing challenges such as rheological changes that may impede fluid flow and temperature uniformity will be essential. Overall, this review supports informed technology selection and process optimization to facilitate efficient scale‐up and cost‐effective production of clean label, protein‐based liquid foods.

Author Contributions
Jerish Joyner Janahar: conceptualization, writing – original draft, data curation, formal analysis, writing – review and editing, visualization, methodology, investigation. Dibyakanta Seth: conceptualization, writing – review and editing, writing – original draft. V. M. Balasubramaniam: conceptualization, writing – review and editing, supervision, resources, funding acquisition.

Funding
This work was supported by USDA National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) (Grant 2018‐67017‐27914).

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
Dynamic Viscoelastic Behavior of High Pressure Treated Soybean Protein Isolate Dispersions
Protein Production: Planet, Profit, Plus People?
Plasma Sterilization Using Glow Discharge at Atmospheric Pressure
Characterization of Low‐Phytate Soy Protein Isolates Produced by Membrane Technologies
Effects of Ultrasound and Ohmic Heating Pretreatments on Hydrolysis, Antioxidant and Antibacterial Activities of Whey Protein Concentrate and Its Fractions
PEF Assisted Thermal Sterilization (PEF‐ATS) Process‐Inactivation of Geobacillus sterothermophilus Spores
Membrane Filtration and Isoelectric Precipitation Technological Approaches for the Preparation of Novel, Functional and Sustainable Protein Isolate From Lentils
Mixing Animal and Plant Proteins: Is This a Way to Improve Protein Techno‐Functionalities?
Inactivation of Bacillus Spores Inoculated in Milk by Ultra High Pressure Homogenization
Application of Ultrasound Treatment for Improving the Physicochemical, Functional and Rheological Properties of Myofibrillar Proteins
Particle Size Changes and Casein Solubilisation in High‐Pressure‐Treated Skim Milk
Application of Ultrasound in Proteins: Physicochemical, Structural Changes, and Functional Properties With Emphasis on Foaming Properties
Effects of High Pressure on Rheological Properties of Soy Protein Gels
Comparative Study of High Intensity Ultrasound Effects on Food Proteins Functionality
Consumer Perception of Plant‐Based Proteins: The Value of Source Transparency for Alternative Protein Ingredients
Nonmeat Protein Alternatives as Meat Extenders and Meat Analogs
Making Sense of the “Clean Label” Trends: A Review of Consumer Food Choice Behavior and Discussion of Industry Implications
Effect of the Application of Ultrasound to Homogenize Milk and the Subsequent Pasteurization by Pulsed Electric Field, High Hydrostatic Pressure, and Microwaves
Effect of Bulk Nanobubbles on Ultrafiltration Membrane Performance: Physiochemical, Rheological, and Microstructural Properties of the Resulting Skim Milk Concentrate Dispersions
Changes in Functionality of Whey Protein and Micellar Casein After High Pressure—Low Temperature Treatments
Principles and Application of High Pressure–Based Technologies in the Food Industry
Kinder, Gentler Food Processing
UV‐C Treatment of Soymilk in Coiled Tube UV Reactors for Inactivation of Escherichia coli W1485 and Bacillus cereus Endospores
PEF: Pulsing with Promise
Allergenic Proteins in Foods and Beverages
Resistance of the Genome of Escherichia coli and Listeria monocytogenes to Irradiation Evaluated by the Induction of Cyclobutane Pyrimidine Dimers and 6‐4 Photoproducts Using Gamma and UV‐C Radiations
Effect of Processing Parameters on Inactivation of Bacillus cereus Spores in Milk Using Pulsed Electric Fields
Ultraviolet Irradiation Improves Gel Strength of Fish Gelatin
Effect of High‐Pressure Homogenization on Gelling and Rheological Properties of Soybean Protein Isolate Emulsion Gel
Pressure Effects on Intra‐ and Intermolecular Interactions Within Proteins
Functional Properties of Whey Proteins as Affected by Dynamic High‐Pressure Treatment
Fermentation for Designing Innovative Plant‐Based Meat and Dairy Alternatives
Improvement of Tangential Microfiltration of Gelatin Solution Using a Permanent Magnetic Field
Ultra High Pressure Homogenization of Almond Milk: Physico‐Chemical and Physiological Effects
Modifications of Structures and Functions of Caseins: A Scientific and Technological Challenge
Impact of Plasma Reactive Species on the Structure and Functionality of Pea Protein Isolate
Structural Changes Induced by High‐Pressure Processing in Micellar Casein and Milk Protein Concentrates
Recent Advances in the Application of Ultrasound in Dairy Products: Effect on Functional, Physical, Chemical, Microbiological and Sensory Properties
Determination of the Efficiency of Removal of Whey Protein From Sweet Whey With Ceramic Microfiltration Membranes
Electrodialysis of Model Salt Solution Containing Whey Proteins: Enhancement by Pulsed Electric Field and Modified Cell Configuration
The Effect of Ultrasound on Casein Micelle Integrity
Classical and Recent Applications of Membrane Processes in the Food Industry
Heat‐Induced Soluble Protein Aggregates From Mixed Pea Globulins and β‐Lactoglobulin
Structural Properties of Single and Mixed Milk/Soya Protein Systems
Effects of Pulsed UV‐Light on Peanut Allergens in Extracts and Liquid Peanut Butter
Gelation Properties of Soya and Whey Protein Isolate Mixtures
Chocolate Milk Drink Processed by Cold Plasma Technology: Physical Characteristics, Thermal Behavior and Microstructure
Cold Plasma Processing of Milk and Dairy Products
Influence of Enzymatic Hydrolysis on the Allergenic Reactivity of Processed Cashew and Pistachio
Ultrasound‐Assisted Preparation of ACE Inhibitory Peptide From Milk Protein and Establishment of Its In‐Situ Real‐Time Infrared Monitoring Model
Inactivation of Microorganisms in Milk and Apple Cider Treated With Ultrasound
UV‐C Light Promotes the Reductive Cleavage of Disulfide Bonds in β‐Lactoglobulin and Improves In Vitro Gastric Digestion
Proteins From Land Plants—Potential Resources for Human Nutrition and Food Security
Meat Morals: Relationship Between Meat Consumption Consumer Attitudes Towards Human and Animal Welfare and Moral Behavior
Modulating the Techno‐Functional Properties of Quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa Wild) Protein Concentrate Using High‐Pressure Technologies and Their Impact on In Vitro Digestibility: A Comparative Study
Improved Digestibility of β‐Lactoglobulin by Pulsed Light Processing: A Dilatational and Shear Study
Different Alternatives to Improve Rheological and Textural Characteristics of Fermented Goat Products‐A Review
Microbiological Efficacy in Liquid Egg Products of a UV‐C Treatment in a Coiled Reactor
Modification of the Structural and Rheological Properties of Whey Protein/Gelatin Mixtures Through High Pressure Processing
Effect of High Pressure Processing on Dispersive and Aggregative Properties of Almond Milk
Effect of High Pressure Processing on the Immunoreactivity of Almond Milk
Effects of Ultraviolet Radiation on Properties of Films From Whey Protein Concentrate Treated Before or After Film Formation
Novel Technologies for Extending the Shelf Life of Drinking Milk: Concepts, Research Trends and Current Applications
Gelatin: A Valuable Protein for Food and Pharmaceutical Industries: Review
Effects of Pulsed Electric Fields on the Conformation and Gelation Properties of Myofibrillar Proteins Isolated From Pale, Soft, Exudative (PSE)‐Like Chicken Breast Meat: A Molecular Dynamics Study
Characterization of Physicochemical and Structural Properties of Atmospheric Cold Plasma (ACP) Modified Zein
Effects of High‐Intensity Ultrasound Processing on the Physiochemical and Allergenic Properties of Shrimp
Technological Aspects and Potential Applications of (Ultra) High‐Pressure Homogenisation
Shelf‐Stable Complete Pre‐Mixes That Are Combinable to Form Ready‐to‐Cook Mixes or Food Beverage Products
Thermosonication Versus Thermal Processing of Skim Milk and Beef Slurry: Modeling the Inactivation Kinetics of Psychrotrophic Bacillus cereus Spores
Extraction, Purification and Stability of C‐Phycocyanin From Arthrospira platensis
Mechanism of Change of the Physicochemical Characteristics, Gelation Process, Water State, and Microstructure of Okara Tofu Analogues Induced by High‐Intensity Ultrasound Treatment
Emergent Food Proteins—Towards Sustainability, Health and Innovation
Effect of Ultra‐High‐Pressure Homogenization on Structure and on Rheological Properties of Soy Protein‐Stabilized Emulsions
Continuous Raw Skim Milk Processing by Pulsed Electric Field at Non‐Lethal Temperature: Effect on Microbial Inactivation and Functional Properties
Classification and Processing Optimization of Barley Milk Production Using NIR Spectroscopy, Particle Size, and Total Dissolved Solids Analysis
Comparing Quality Changes of Cupped Strawberry Treated by High Hydrostatic Pressure and Thermal Processing During Storage
Pilot Scale Recovery of Proteins From a Pea Whey Discharge by Ultrafiltration
Processing Influences on Composition and Quality Attributes of Soymilk and Its Powder
Functional and Bioactive Properties of Collagen and Gelatin From Alternative Sources: A Review
Effect of Dynamic High Pressure on Whey Protein Aggregation: A Comparison With the Effect of Continuous Short‐Time Thermal Treatments
The Best of Both Worlds? Challenges and Opportunities in the Development of Hybrid Meat Products From the Last 3 Years
Efficient Removal of Spores From Skim Milk Using Cold Microfiltration: Spore Size and Surface Property Considerations
Advantages and Limitations on Processing Foods by UV Light
Low Temperature Plasma for Decontamination of E. coli in Milk
Effect of Ultrasound Power on Physicochemical and Rheological Properties of Yoghurt Drink Produced With Thermosonicated Milk
Mixing Milk, Egg and Plant Resources to Obtain Safe and Tasty Foods With Environmental and Health Benefits
Protein and Muscle Health During Aging: Benefits and Concerns Related to Animal‐Based Protein
Ultrafiltration of Partially Hydrolyzed Rice Bran Protein to Recover Value‐Added Products
Protein Digestibility of Selected Legumes Treated With Ultrasound and High Hydrostatic Pressure During Soaking
The Effect of Pulsed Electric Field Processing on Particle Size and Viscosity of Milk and Milk Concentrates
Ultrasonic Production of Nano‐Size Dispersions and Emulsions
In Vitro Determination of the Allergenic Potential of Egg White in Processed Meat
Protein–Which Is Best?
Effect of High Intensity Ultrasound on Physicochemical and Functional Properties of Aggregated Soybean Beta‐Conglycinin and Glycinin
Synergistic Effects of Pressure, Temperature, Shear, and Their Interactions on Clostridium sporogenes PA3679 Spore Inactivation During Ultra‐Shear Processing
Cleaning and Sanitization Method for a Pilot‐Scale Ultra‐Shear Equipment for Liquid Food Processing
The Effect of High Intensity Ultrasonic Pre‐Treatment on the Properties of Soybean Protein Isolate Gel Induced by Calcium Sulfate
Application of Membrane Filtration to Cold Sterilization of Drinks and Establishment of Aseptic Workshop
Effects of High Pressure Processing on Immunoreactivity and Microbiological Safety of Crushed Peanuts
The Aggregation, Structures and Emulsifying Properties of Soybean Protein Isolate Induced by Ultrasound and Acid
Dissociation of Caseins in High Pressure‐Treated Bovine Milk
High Pressure Treatment of Bovine Milk: Effects on Casein Micelles and Whey Proteins
High Pressure Effect on Foaming Behaviour of Whey Protein Isolate
Whey Protein Concentration by Ultrafiltration and Study of Functional Properties
Recovery of Brines From Cheesemaking Using High‐Pressure Homogenization Treatments
Non‐Thermal Technologies for Food Processing
Physical Properties of Ultrasound Treated Soy Proteins
Effect of Ultrasound Treatment on Particle Size and Molecular Weight of Whey Proteins
Pressure, Shear, Thermal, and Interaction Effects on Quality Attributes of Pea–Dairy Protein Colloidal Dispersions
Impact of Ultra‐Shear Technology on Quality Attributes of Model Dairy‐Pea Protein Dispersions With Different Fat Levels
High‐Pressure Processing of Foods
Small Angle X‐Ray Scattering Studies on the Effects of Ultra Shear Technology on Model Animal and Plant‐Based Protein Solutions
Effects of Pressure, Shear, Temperature, and Their Interactions on Selected Milk Quality Attributes
Inactivation of Lactobacillus brevis Cells and Bacillus cereus Spores as Influenced by Pressure, Shear, Thermal, and Valve Geometry
Pulsed Electric Field Processing of Foods: A Review
Effects of Dielectric Barrier Discharge (DBD) Cold Plasma Treatment on Physicochemical and Functional Properties of Peanut Protein
Effects of Ultrasound on the Structure and Physical Properties of Black Bean Protein Isolates
Impact of Transmembrane Pressure (TMP) on Membrane Fouling in Microalgae Harvesting With a Uniform Shearing Vibration Membrane System
Allergenic Response to Squid (Todarodes pacificus) Tropomyosin Tod p1 Structure Modifications Induced by High Hydrostatic Pressure
High Pressure, Thermal and Pulsed Electric‐Field‐Induced Structural Changes in Selected Food Allergens
Fractionation by Microfiltration: Effect of Casein Micelle Size on Composition and Rheology of High Protein, Low Fat Set Yoghurt
Response of Bacillus cereus Spores to High Hydrostatic Pressure and Moderate Heat
Inactivation of Escherichia coli in Goat Milk Using Pulsed Ultraviolet Light
Release of Allergenic Proteins From Rice Grains Induced by High Hydrostatic Pressure
Effect of Dynamic High Pressure Homogenization on the Aggregation State of Soy Protein
Physicochemical Properties and Water Interactions of Milk Protein Concentrate With Two Different Levels of Undenatured Whey Protein
Characterization of Heat‐Stable Whey Protein: Impact of Ultrasound on Rheological, Thermal, Structural and Morphological Properties
Microbial Safety and Quality Attributes of Milk Following Treatment With Atmospheric Pressure Encapsulated Dielectric Barrier Discharge Plasma
Optimization of the Extraction and Purification of Oligosaccharides From Defatted Soybean Meal
Effects of High Hydrostatic Pressure on Technical Functional Properties of Edible Insect Protein
Nutritional Improvement of Plant Foods by Non‐Thermal Processing
UV Light for Processing Foods
Advances in Ultraviolet Light Technology for Non‐Thermal Processing of Liquid Foods
Effects of Ultraviolet Light and High‐Pressure Processing on Quality and Health‐Related Constituents of Fresh Juice Products
Development of a New Rice Beverage by Improving the Physical Stability of Rice Slurry
Influence of Novel Food Processing Technologies on the Rheological and Thermophysical Properties of Whey Proteins
Emulsifying and Foaming Properties of Ultraviolet‐Irradiated Egg White Protein and Sodium Caseinate
Effect of Microfluidization on Cholesterol, Thermal Properties and In Vitro and In Vivo Protein Digestibility of Milk
Perspective of Membrane Technology in Dairy Industry: A Review
The Potential for Land Sparing to Offset Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Agriculture
Low Temperature Plasma‐Based Sterilization: Overview and State‐of‐the‐Art
Ultrasound Technology as Inactivation Method for Foodborne Pathogens: A Review
Status of Meat Alternatives and Their Potential Role in the Future Meat Market—A Review
Prospects of Pulsed Electric Fields Technology in Food Preservation and Processing Applications From Sensory and Consumer Perspectives
Food‐Processing Approaches to Altering Allergenic Potential of Milk‐Based Formula
Impacts of European Livestock Production: Nitrogen, Sulphur, Phosphorus and Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Land‐Use, Water Eutrophication and Biodiversity
Reduction of Major Peanut Allergens Ara h 1 and Ara h 2, in Roasted Peanuts by Ultrasound Assisted Enzymatic Treatment
Effects of High Hydrostatic Pressure Treatment on Allergenicity and Structural Properties of Soybean Protein Isolate for Infant Formula
Inactivation of E. coli 8739 in Enriched Soymilk Using Pulsed Electric Fields
Effects of Pulsed Electric Fields and Thermal Processing on the Stability of Bovine Immunoglobulin G (IgG) in Enriched Soymilk
Effects of Pulsed Electric Fields on Physicochemical Properties of Soybean Protein Isolates
Modification of Rapeseed Protein by Ultrasound‐Assisted pH Shift Treatment: Ultrasonic Mode and Frequency Screening, Changes in Protein Solubility and Structural Characteristics
Effects of Pulsed Electric Field Processing on Quality Characteristics and Microbial Inactivation of Soymilk
Effect of High Intensity Ultrasound on the Allergenicity of Shrimp
Inactivation Mechanisms of Non‐Thermal Plasma on Microbes: A Review
Alterations to the Composition of Casein Micelles and Retentate Serum During Ultrafiltration of Skim Milk at 10 and 40°C
Comparative Study on Quality of Whole Milk Processed by High Hydrostatic Pressure or Thermal Pasteurization Treatment
A New Membrane Based Process to Isolate Immunoglobulin From Chicken Egg Yolk
Pulsed Electric Field Treatment of Reconstituted Skim Milks at Alkaline pH or With Added EDTA
The Composition of the Milk Fat Globule Surface Alters the Structural Characteristics of the Coagulum
Changes in the Ovalbumin Proteolysis Profile by High Pressure and Its Effect on IgG and IgE Binding
Inactivation Efficacies and Mechanisms of Gas Plasma and Plasma‐Activated Water Against Aspergillus flavus Spores and Biofilms: A Comparative Study
Interactions Between Plant Proteins/Enzymes and Other Food Components, and Their Effects on Food Quality
Effect of Atmospheric Cold Plasma on Structure, Interfacial and Emulsifying Properties of Grass Pea (Lathyrus sativus L.) Protein Isolate
Atmospheric Cold Plasma Inactivation of Escherichia coli and Listeria monocytogenes in Tender Coconut Water: Inoculation and Accelerated Shelf‐Life Studies
Foods for Special Dietary Needs: Non‐Dairy Plant‐Based Milk Substitutes and Fermented Dairy‐Type Products
Effect of Ultraviolet Processing on Selected Properties of Egg White
Effect of Pulsed Light on Selected Properties of Egg White
Ultrasonic Inactivation of Microorganisms: A Compromise Between Lethal Capacity and Sensory Quality of Milk
Physical and Structural Changes in Liquid Whole Egg Treated With High‐Intensity Pulsed Electric Fields
Effect of Dynamic High Pressure on Functional and Structural Properties of Bovine Serum Albumin
Effect of Manufacture and Reconstitution of Milk Protein Concentrate Powder on the Size and Rennet Gelation Behaviour of Casein Micelles
Inactivation of Escherichia coli Suspended in Liquid Egg Using Pulsed Electric Fields
Improvements in Emulsion Stability of Dairy Beverages Treated by High Pressure Homogenization: A Pilot‐Scale Feasibility Study
High Intensity Ultrasound Treatment of Faba Bean (Vicia faba L.) Protein: Effect on Surface Properties, Foaming Ability and Structural Changes
The Effects of Pulsed Ultraviolet Light, Cold Atmospheric Pressure Plasma, and Gamma‐Irradiation on the Immunoreactivity of Soy Protein Isolate
High Pressure Homogenization Shapes the Techno‐Functionalities and Digestibility of Pea Proteins
High Homogenization Pressures to Improve Food Quality, Functionality and Sustainability
Interactions in Casein Micelle—Pea Protein System (Part II): Mixture Acid Gelation With Glucono‐δ‐Lactone
Applications of Cold Plasma Technology for Microbiological Safety in Meat Industry
Pulsed Electric Fields for Food Processing Technology
Inactivation of Salmonella typhimurium and Staphylococcus aureus by Pulsed Electric Fields in Liquid Whole Egg
Application of Ultrasound in Membrane Separation Processes: A Review
Meta‐Analysis: Microbial Inactivation in Milk Using Pulsed Electric Field
A Review of the Potential of Conventional and Advanced Membrane Technology in the Removal of Pathogens From Wastewater
Requisite Scientific Parameters for Establishing the Equivalence of Alternative Methods of Pasteurization
Quinoa Proteins (Chenopodium quinoa Willd.) Fractionated by Ultrafiltration Using Ceramic Membranes: The Role of pH on Physicochemical and Conformational Properties
The Interplay of Muscle and Pea Proteins in Low‐Salt Gels: An Insight Into In Situ Structure Formation in Hybrid Meat Alternatives
Texture, Microstructure, and In Vitro Digestion of Hybrid Meat Gel‐Type Sausages Formulated With Functionalized Pea Protein
Modification Approaches of Plant‐Based Proteins to Improve Their Techno‐Functionality and Use in Food Products
Reduction of Wheat Allergen Potency by Pulsed Ultraviolet Light, High Hydrostatic Pressure, and Non‐Thermal Plasma
Influence of Age and Individual Differences on Mouthfeel Perception of Whey Protein‐Fortified Products: A Review
Mathematical Modeling Used to Evaluate the Effect of UV‐C Light Treatment on Microorganisms in Liquid Foods
Effect of Pulsed Light Treatment on β‐Lactoglobulin Immunoreactivity
Continuous and Pulsed Ultraviolet Light for Nonthermal Treatment of Liquid Foods. Part 1: Effects on Quality of Fructose Solution, Apple Juice, and Milk
The Effect of Ultrasound Treatment on the Structural, Physical and Emulsifying Properties of Animal and Vegetable Proteins
Rheology and Microstructure of Labneh (Concentrated Yogurt)
Applications of Ultrasound in Processing of Liquid Foods: A Review
Effects of Cold Plasma on Food Quality: A Review
Effect of High Pressure Homogenisation on Microbial Inactivation, Protein Structure and Functionality of Egg White
Effect of Pulsed Light on Structure and Immunoreactivity of Gluten
Milk Analog: Plant Based Alternatives to Conventional Milk, Production, Potential and Health Concerns
A Comparative Study Between Ovalbumin and β‐Lactoglobulin Fouling in a Tube Hot Surface
High Pressure and the Enzymatic Hydrolysis of Soybean Whey Proteins
Effects of Ultra‐High Pressure Homogenization on Microbial and Physicochemical Shelf Life of Milk
Sustainability of Meat‐Based and Plant‐Based Diets and the Environment
Microstructure and In Vitro Digestion of Mixed Protein Gels of Soy and Whey Protein Isolates
Mixed Soy Globulins and β‐Lactoglobulin Systems Behaviour in Aqueous Solutions and at the Air–Water Interface
Physicochemical Modifications of High‐Pressure‐Treated Soybean Protein Isolates
Influence of Processing Temperature on Membrane Performance and Characteristics of Process Streams Generated During Ultrafiltration of Skim Milk
Effects of High Hydrostatic Pressure on Physicochemical and Functional Properties of Walnut (Juglans regia L.) Protein Isolate
Influence of the Electrode Material on the Decontamination Efficacy of Dielectric Barrier Discharge Gas Plasma Treatments Towards Listeria monocytogenes and Escherichia coli
Utilizing Unique Properties of Caseins and the Casein Micelle for Delivery of Sensitive Food Ingredients and Bioactives
Compression Heating of Selected Fatty Food Materials During High‐Pressure Processing
Properties of Ultraviolet Irradiated Protein Films
Effect of High Hydrostatic Pressure on Bovine α‐Lactalbumin Functional Properties
Aggregation of Soy/Milk Mixes During Acidification
Fat Content Increases the Lethality of Ultra‐High‐Pressure Homogenization on Listeria monocytogenes in Milk
Innovations in High‐Pressure Technologies for the Development of Clean Label Dairy Products: A Review
Development of Soy Milk in the Form of Wet Foam in the Presences of Whey Protein Concentrate and Polysaccharides at Different Whipping Temperatures: Study of Physical, Rheological and Microstructural Properties
Pulsed Electric Field Technology: Modeling of Electric Field and Temperature Distributions Within Continuous Flow PEF Treatment Chamber
Recent Developments of Membrane Technology in the Clarification and Concentration of Fruit Juices
Toward a Philosophy and Theory of Volumetric Nonthermal Processing
Steady Shear Rheological Properties of Micellar Casein Concentrates Obtained by Membrane Filtration as a Function of Shear Rate, Concentration, and Temperature
Effect of UV‐Radiation on the Packaging‐Related Properties of Whey Protein Isolate Based Films and Coatings
Atmospheric Pressure Cold Plasma (ACP) Treatment of Whey Protein Isolate Model Solution
Plant‐Based Milk Alternatives an Emerging Segment of Functional Beverages: A Review
Plant Protein‐Based Alternatives of Reconstructed Meat: Science, Technology, and Challenges
Influence of Dynamic High Pressure Microfluidization on Functional Properties and Structure of Gelatin From Bighead Carp (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis) Scale
Inactivation of Microbiota and Selected Spoilage and Pathogenic Bacteria in Milk by Combinations of Ultrasound, Hydrogen Peroxide, and Active Lactoperoxidase System
Effects of Pulsed Electric Field Processing on Microbial, Enzymatic and Physical Attributes of Milk and the Rennet‐Induced Milk Gels
Compression Heating and Temperature Control for High‐Pressure Destruction of Bacterial Spores: An Experimental Method for Kinetics Evaluation
Potential Application of DBD Plasma Technique for Modifying Structural and Physicochemical Properties of Soy Protein Isolate
Microbiological and Enzymatic Activity of Bovine Whole Milk Treated by Pulsed Electric Fields
Effect of Pulsed Electric Field Processing on the Functional Properties of Bovine Milk
Development of a Protein Fortified Fruit Beverage and Its Quality When Processed With Pulsed Electric Field Treatment
The Role of Hydrodynamic Conditions and Solution Chemistry on Protein Fouling During Ultrafiltration
Effect of Selected Nonthermal Processing Methods on the Allergen Reactivity of Atlantic White Shrimp (Litopenaeus setiferus)
Influence of Pulsed Light Treatment on the Aggregation of Whey Protein Isolate
Inactivation of Bacillus subtilis Spores by Pulsed Electric Fields (PEF) in Combination With Thermal Energy–I. Influence of Process‐and Product Parameters
Heat‐Induced Gelation of Mixtures of Micellar Caseins and Plant Proteins in Aqueous Solution
Guava Flavored Whey‐Beverage Processed by Cold Plasma: Physical Characteristics, Thermal Behavior and Microstructure
Development of a Hydrodynamic Model for the UV‐C Treatment of Turbid Food Fluids in a Novel ‘SurePure Turbulator™’swirl‐Tube Reactor
Soy Protein Concentrate Having High Isoflavone Content and Process for Its Manufacture
Impact of High‐Pressure Processing on Microbial Shelf‐Life and Protein Stability of Refrigerated Soymilk
Use of Pulsed Ultraviolet Laser Light for the Cold Pasteurization of Bovine Milk
Effect of High Pressure Processing on the Safety, Shelf Life and Quality of Raw Milk
Properties of Whey Protein Isolate–Dextran Conjugate Prepared Using Pulsed Electric Field
Initial Pasteurisation Effects on the Protein Fractionation of Skimmed Milk by Microfiltration
Determining the Effect of UV‐C, High Intensity Ultrasound and Nonthermal Atmospheric Plasma Treatments on Reducing the Allergenicity of α‐Casein and Whey Proteins
Effect of PEF on Allergen Molecule in Aqueous Solution
Effects of Thermal, Microwave, and Ultrasound Pretreatments on Antioxidative Capacity of Enzymatic Milk Protein Concentrate Hydrolysates
World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision. Revision of World Population Prospects
Comparing the Effects of Ultra‐High‐Pressure Homogenization and Conventional Thermal Treatments on the Microbiological, Physical, and Chemical Quality of Almond Beverages
Effect of Pulsed Ultrasound, a Green Food Processing Technique, on the Secondary Structure and In Vitro Digestibility of Almond Milk Protein
High‐Performance Tangential Flow Filtration Using Charged Membranes
High Performance Tangential Flow Filtration
Impact of Cold Plasma Processing on Major Peanut Allergens
Advantages of Microfiltration Processing of Goat Whey Orange Juice Beverage
High Hydrostatic Pressure Enhances Whey Protein Digestibility to Generate Whey Peptides That Improve Glutathione Status in CFTR‐Deficient Lung Epithelial Cells
Cold Plasma Technology for Fruit Based Beverages: A Review
Processing Sheep Milk by Cold Plasma Technology: Impacts on the Microbial Inactivation, Physicochemical Characteristics, and Protein Structure
Impact of Cold Plasma on the Biomolecules and Organoleptic Properties of Foods: A Review
Whey Protein Membrane Processing Methods and Membrane Fouling Mechanism Analysis
Consumption of Fluid Skim Milk Promotes Greater Muscle Protein Accretion After Resistance Exercise Than Does Consumption of an Isonitrogenous and Isoenergetic Soy‐Protein Beverage
Thermal Aggregation of Whey Proteins Under Shear Stress
The Utility of Algae as Sources of High Value Nutritional Ingredients, Particularly for Alternative/Complementary Proteins to Improve Human Health
Influence of Dielectric Barrier Discharge Cold Plasma on Physicochemical Property of Milk for Sterilization
Pulsed Electric Field‐Induced Structural Modification of Whey Protein Isolate
Effect of Pulsed Electric Field on the Rheological and Colour Properties of Soy Milk
Effect of High Intensity Ultrasound on Structure and Foaming Properties of Pea Protein Isolate
Influence of Water Activity and Acidity on Bacillus cereus Spore Inactivation During Combined High Pressure‐Thermal Treatment
Inactivation of Foodborne Pathogens in Raw Milk Using High Hydrostatic Pressure
The Ultrasound‐Treated Soybean Seeds Improve Edibility and Nutritional Quality of Soybean Sprouts
Effects of High Pressure Homogenization on Faba Bean Protein Aggregation in Relation to Solubility and Interfacial Properties
Mitigation of Major Peanut Allergens by Pulsed Ultraviolet Light
Myofibrillar Protein Synthesis Following Ingestion of Soy Protein Isolate at Rest and After Resistance Exercise in Elderly Men
Effect of Power Ultrasound Pre‐Treatment on the Physical and Functional Properties of Reconstituted Milk Protein Concentrate
Functional Properties and In Vitro Trypsin Digestibility of Red Kidney Bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) Protein Isolate: Effect of High‐Pressure Treatment
Non‐Thermal Processing Techniques for Sustainable Food Supply Chains
Food Proteins: Solubility & Thermal Stability Improvement Techniques
Preparation of Resveratrol‐Enriched and Poor Allergic Protein Peanut Sprout From Ultrasound Treated Peanut Seeds
Effect of High‐Pressure Treatment on In‐Vitro Digestibility of β‐Lactoglobulin
High‐Pressure Treatment Effects on Proteins in Soy Milk
Non‐Thermal Plasma Technology for Organic Contaminated Soil Remediation: A Review
Atmospheric Cold Plasma Treatment of Soybean Protein Isolate: Insights Into the Structural, Physicochemical, and Allergenic Characteristics
Influence of Ultrasonic Treatment on the Structure and Emulsifying Properties of Peanut Protein Isolate
Use of Microfiltration to Improve Quality and Shelf Life of Ultra‐High Temperature Milk
Conformation Stability, In Vitro Digestibility and Allergenicity of Tropomyosin From Shrimp (Exopalaemon modestus) as Affected by High Intensity Ultrasound
Combined Effects of Heat and PEF on Microbial Inactivation and Quality of Liquid Egg Whites
Recent Advances in the Action of Pulsed Electric Fields on Enzymes and Food Component Proteins
Effect of High Intensity Ultrasound on the Structure and Physicochemical Properties of Soy Protein Isolates Produced by Different Denaturation Methods
Enhancement of Functional Properties of Rice Bran Proteins by High Pressure Treatment and Their Correlation With Surface Hydrophobicity
Acoustic Cavitation for Agri‐Food Applications: Mechanism of Action, Design of New Systems, Challenges and Strategies for Scale‐Up
The Prevalence of Plant Food Allergies: A Systematic Review