Global Economic Evaluation of the Nurse Prescribing of Medication Role: A Scoping Review
ABSTRACT
Background
There is a paucity of evidence and reports addressing the Economic Evaluation in Health (EEH) of the implementation of the Nurse Prescribing of Medication (NPM) role. Consequently, there is limited knowledge about the economic costs and the overall impact of NPM on healthcare systems worldwide where it has been implemented. This gap of knowledge limits the ability of other nations to determine whether adopting this initiative would be beneficial. A few countries have published their NPM economic benefits, though available scientific publications have focused on NPM clinical effectiveness, particularly regarding quality and safety in patient care.
Objective
This review aimed at mapping the current knowledge about the role played by the NPM internationally in terms of EEH in terms of direct and indirect economic benefits for cost minimization, cost‐effectiveness, cost‐utility, cost–benefit, return on investment and healthcare cost savings.
Design
A scoping review of international literature was conducted based on the PRISMA‐ScR checklist and the Johanna Briggs Institute Guide to identify scientific evidence and relevant grey literature on the review topic.
Methods
The search strategy was conducted in four bibliographic databases of Scopus, Web of Science, PubMed (covering Medline) and Google Scholar, with no time restrictions, covering publications up to 30 September 2024. The search was performed in both English and Spanish, selecting relevant publications based on inclusion and exclusion criteria. For research synthesis and data analysis, two summaries were developed: one summarizing the findings from the scientific literature search and the other summarizing the results from the grey literature search.
Results
The 26 included studies in this scoping review suggest a positive EEH across various countries where its implementation has led to enhanced efficiency, reduced healthcare costs and improved economic profitability. The actions carried out for decades in those countries represent a significant reduction in direct and indirect costs, also in medical supplies and waiting lists, as well as an increase in the quality of patient care leading to a positive contribution to healthcare systems' sustainability.
Conclusions
Improving the conditions and utilization of NPM is essential to maximize nurses' contribution to patient care within healthcare systems. More high‐quality research is required to identify and examine economic effectiveness and healthcare cost savings by governments and other healthcare organizations, given that evidence regarding the benefits of the NPM role globally is insufficient.

Abbreviations
AANP
American Association of Nurse Practitioners
APRN
Advanced Practice Registered Nurses
CPD
Continuing Professional Development
EEH
Economic Evaluation in Health
EPA
Advanced Practice Nursing
GPs
general practitioners
HF
heart failure
NA
not appropriate
NP
nurse practitioner
NPM
Nurse Prescribing of Medications
NS
nurse specialist

Background
In pharmaceutical care (PC), the Nurse Prescribing of Medication (NPM) is defined as the nurse's contribution to patient care for optimizing medication use and improvement of health outcomes (Allemann et al. ). In English‐speaking nations, such as the United Kingdom (UK), the United States (US), Australia, Canada or New Zealand, the NPM role has been devised and oriented for academic nurses including nurse specialists, nurse practitioners (NPs) and advanced practice nurses (APNs) (Latter and Courtenay ; Bradley and Nolan ). Economic data and population health outcomes have shown the benefits of the NPM role to healthcare systems and organizations.
Scientific evidence about the implementation of NPM at an international level indicates that it is fully possible in the form of non‐medical autonomously or supervised prescribing, leading to efficiency and cost saving in healthcare systems in various countries across the world (Stenner and Courtenay ; Maier ; Kroezen et al. ). Consequently, it has been highlighted that promoting NPM in some contexts, has a series of direct and indirect benefits that are associated with a reduction in the costs of medical supplies, improved patient care, more effective use of time, optimization of resources and an improvement in the healthcare professionals' relationships among healthcare professionals (Jennings et al. ; Bradley et al. ; Kilpatrick et al. ; Neumann et al. ). For instance, in the UK, according to the National Health System (NHS), an annual savings of 777 million pounds was reported estimated with the implementation of the NPM in 2020. In the US, the incorporation of specialized nurses led to savings of 77 million dollars in 2019 (Merrifield ).
The field of the economic evaluation of strategies and initiatives adopted to healthcare practice is focused on assessing the cost‐effectiveness, cost‐utility and cost–benefit of healthcare interventions and programs. The Economic Evaluation in Health (EEH) fits with this mission as it aims to carry out a comparative analysis between the different alternatives of an intervention based on their costs, understood as their benefits for public health (Prades et al. ; Drummond et al. ; Torrance ). When it comes to the NPM role, comparing it with other types of medication prescribing such as by physicians and pharmacists requires the use of analysis techniques for EEH for identifying its cost by the value of resources utilized. The EEH consists of cost minimization analysis, cost‐effectiveness analysis, cost‐utility analysis, cost–benefit analysis as well as efficiency and return on investment (ROI) (García‐Altés et al. ; Johns et al. ). Through EEH, policymakers can decide on resource allocation in healthcare systems and identify potentially valuable interventions that are essential to patients, healthcare organizations and professionals (Orlik et al. ; Peters et al. ).
Despite the potential benefits, only a few countries worldwide have adopted the NPM role. Some countries have implemented various strategies, primarily focusing on nursing education to develop specific competencies related to nurse prescribing or non‐medical prescribing. However, the application of these competencies into practice remains limited, with significant variability in how NPM is integrated into healthcare systems globally. The scarcity of data on global economic evaluations of healthcare systems, related to the activities of healthcare professionals in terms of cost savings and benefits, is a reality and remains complex. The question is, if countries that have sustained this initiative for years justify it economically and ensure appropriate training for nurses, why are other countries meeting these requirements still reluctant to implement it? Therefore, this study aimed at mapping the current knowledge about the role played by the NPM internationally in terms of EEH in terms of direct and indirect economic benefits for cost minimization, cost‐effectiveness, cost‐utility, cost–benefit, return on investment and healthcare cost savings.

Methods

Design
A scoping review of international literature was conducted based on the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) Guide (Peters et al. ), which has been reported using the PRISMA‐ScR for scoping review (Data S1). It incorporated the most extensive evidence currently accessible and relevant grey literature on the review topic (Tricco et al. ; Peters et al. ).
Scoping review is an ideal research method to determine the scope or coverage of a body of literature on a given topic and achieve an overview of a phenomenon. It provides the possibility of exploring and evaluating scientific evidence in health and especially if the proposed topic has not been previously investigated or scarcely explored (Levac et al. ). It also allows a broad and rapid identification of the key points related to the proposed topic (Mays et al. ), being particularly useful to answer a question in a flexible way, characterized by contextual, conceptual or population factors (Colquhoun et al. ). Therefore, scoping review is useful for examining emerging evidence where more specific questions can be posed and addressed using systematic review (Tricco et al. ). The general purpose of conducting this scoping review is to map available evidence on an innovative topic.

Search Process
This scoping review covered a search for scientific publications and grey literature. The scientific evidence was searched through the online databases of Scopus, Web of Science (WoS) and PubMed (covering MEDLINE), in English and Spanish. The grey literature covered data available in specific contexts and in different formats, such as protocols, guidelines, practice statements or technical reports and reports from international and national organizations that could be retrieved from the Google Scholar search engine. The search was conducted and peer‐reviewed by two review authors without any time limitations and lasting until 30th September 2024. Inclusion and exclusion criteria were developed based on the review objectives. The review was formulated using the PICO statement as follows:

P (Population)
Nurse Prescribers of Medication (NPM), as registered nurses (RN) who are authorized to prescribe medications as part of their professional scope of practice. These nurses typically undergo specialized training and certification that enable them to assess, diagnose and prescribe medications independently or in collaboration with other healthcare providers.

I (Intervention)
Role played by the NPM as functions and responsibilities carried out by nurse prescribers in the context of medication management consisting of clinical decision‐making, prescribing activities, education and follow‐up and interprofessional collaboration.

C (Comparison)
Medication prescription by other healthcare professionals such as physicians, pharmacists, physician assistants or medical officers.

O (Outcome)
Economic Evaluation in Health (EEH) in terms of direct and indirect economic benefits for cost minimization, cost‐effectiveness, cost‐utility, cost–benefit, return on investment and healthcare cost savings. The economic impact of the NPM role on healthcare systems compared with other types of medication prescribing was also considered.
The strategy focused on retrieving studies that investigated economic factors focused on health through the implementation of the NPM role using the following MeSH terms: economic (“economic evaluation” OR “cost‐effectiveness” OR “cost‐efficiency”) AND health professionals (“nurse prescribing” OR “nurse prescriber” OR “nurse prescription” OR “doctor” OR “physician”). The inclusion criteria were those studies that presented a relationship through different aspects such as efficiency, effectiveness and cost savings of the NPM in different healthcare systems across the world. The exclusion criteria were those studies that did not report a relationship between the NPM role and economic factors or lacked a foundation from medical or pharmaceutical organizations related to the nursing workforce.
There was no limitation in terms of the years of publication of the studies and the type of papers included due to the scarcity of publications available. Therefore, other previous reviews were also included though it implied that all the articles included within those reviews had to be filtered to exclude duplicates.
The inclusion criteria were studies on the NPM role in relation to EEH in the international context. For grey literature documents from scientific societies, governments and technical reports that provided economic evaluation on the role of the NPM were included.
The database search initially identified 307 studies. After removing duplicates and excluding irrelevant records based on predefined criteria, 20 studies were retained. All studies met the quality appraisal criteria and were therefore included. The same MeSH terms were used to carry out the search for grey literature on Google Scholar. The inclusion criteria were those published documents indicating a significant relationship between NPM and efficiency, effectiveness and cost savings. Exclusion criteria were those published documents that provided data with doubtful veracity. Different results from different countries from scientific organizations involved with the topic, protocols, white papers, projects on related interventions, government records and press articles were retrieved. Additionally, search was conducted in English and Spanish. The search for general and grey literature, along with backward reference tracking, yielded 80 records, of which 6 were deemed relevant. Finally, a total of 26 studies met the inclusion criteria and were included in the data extraction and analysis (Figure 1). Scoping reviews focus more on mapping the breadth of available research to provide an overview of the topic. Therefore, for quality appraisal the assessment was performed qualitatively, with a focus on key study aspects such as design, relevance and clarity using the JBI's critical appraisal tools. The review authors conducted a thorough discussion of each study's strengths and weaknesses, reaching consensus on the inclusion of studies based on their overall quality and relevance to the research question. This approach ensured a comprehensive evaluation without relying on numerical scoring.
The search process according to the PRISMA 2020 flow diagram.

Data Extraction and Analysis
Two summaries of the contents resulting from the scientific search and the grey literature search were developed. An analysis of the documents' characteristics was carried out focusing on the following variables: authors, year of publication, topic, context, type of document and findings. In addition, duplicate and irrelevant studies were excluded, and all included studies were peer‐reviewed and selected by consensus among the review authors. The review authors independently evaluated the titles and abstracts of the articles based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria to choose relevant studies.

Results
The review findings have been presented in two parts: findings from the scientific literature review, followed by insights from the grey literature. Both sources highlight several similarities in terms of improved efficiency among healthcare professionals and significant cost–benefit and savings within healthcare systems.

Scientific Literature for Economic Evaluation of NPM
The studies mostly have been carried out in the UK, the Netherlands and the US, with publications dating from 2000 until 2021, mostly characterized by review methodologies. Furthermore, they focus on analysing aspects such as efficiency, benefits, cost‐effectiveness and economic evaluation. Table 1 summarizes the characteristics and findings of these studies.
Findings from the scientific publications about NPM and EEH.
Authors, year, country	Research methodology	Sample/setting	Nurse designation and qualification	Nurse role in NPM	Impact on EEH	 	(Kilpatrick et al.)/Martin‐Misener et al., Canada	Review	11 studies	CNS/NP	Cost effectiveness	NP in ambulatory primary care and outpatient roles as alternative providers have equivalent or better patient outcomes and are potentially cost savers.	 	(Orlik et al. ), Ireland	Review	119 studies	CPD	Cost and benefits	CPD activities for healthcare professionals are central to the optimization of patient safety and person‐centred care. Evidence on the economics of healthcare professionals training is limited, and little is known about the costs and benefits of CPD.	 	(Tchouaket et al. ), Canada	Observational study	538 residents in long‐term care	NP	Cost savings	Cost savings caused by NPS on reduced adverse events, including reduced medication administration time.	 	(Ordóñez‐Piedra et al. ), Spain	Review	11 studies	EPA	Cost and benefits	The implementation of the EPA reduces the number of hospital admissions, readmissions and mortality. It has a positive cost–benefit relationship, and it implies some improvement in the quality of life of patients with HF.	 	(Sánchez et al. ), Spain	Review	24 studies	NPM	Economic efficiency	Advanced nursing practice activity in Andalusia indicating significant efficiency in healthcare products for years.	 	(Stenner and Courtenay ), UK	Qualitative study	Interviews with 26 nurse prescribers	NPM	Cost savings and efficiency	Nurse prescribers provided different benefits such as more appropriate medication prescribing, greater safety, better relationships and communication with patients, greater efficiency and cost savings.	 	(Wilson et al. ), Ireland	Qualitative study	Interviews with 10 nurses and 2 midwife prescribers	NPM	Cost savings and effective	Nurses and midwives prescribing in Ireland were identified as necessary, safe, effective and healthcare cost‐saving professionals.	 	(Traczynski and Udalova ), US	Review	51 studies	NP	Cost savings	The implementation of NP reduces administrative costs for physicians and indirect costs for patients to access medical care.	 	(Venning et al. ), UK	Multicentre randomized clinical trial	Interviews with 1292 patients: 651 GP consultations and 641 NP consultations.		Cost savings	The costs of clinical care and health services for NPs and general practitioners were similar, although if NPs could maintain benefits while reducing the rate of return of patients to consultations, they could be more profitable than GPs.	 	(Dierick‐van Daele et al. ), The Netherlands	Randomized controlled trial	12 NP and 50 GP	NP	Cost savings	Both direct costs for NP consultations and costs from a patient social perspective were lower than for GP consultations.	 	(Paez and Allen ), US	Randomized controlled trial	115 NP	NP	Cost effectiveness	Incorporating NPs into cardiovascular disease risk factor case management in primary care settings is an effective and cost‐effective strategy to help patients achieve their cholesterol goals and improve outcomes.	 	(Arts et al. ), The Netherlands	Randomized controlled trial	4 NS	NS	Cost effectiveness	Economic improvements with a specialist nurse as a central caregiver provide opportunities for savings of specific healthcare resources.	 	(Schuttelaar et al. ), The Netherlands	Review	160 dermatologists and NPs	NP	Cost effectiveness and savings	The option of substituting NPs for dermatologists represents cost savings and cost‐effectiveness. The treatment of choice is that provided by NPs, as it is equally effective as treatment provided by a dermatologist with greater parental satisfaction.	 	(Tijhuis et al. ), The Netherlands	Randomized controlled trial	Intervention with 210 patients	NS	Cost savings	NS provides benefits in clinical care by saving healthcare costs and improving the patient's quality of life.	 	(Luthy et al. ), US	Review	NPs prescribe: hypertension, depression, diabetes mellitus, insomnia and gastroesophageal reflux disorder	NP	Cost effective	NPs familiarity with cost‐effective treatment options for common diagnoses such as hypertension, depression, diabetes mellitus, insomnia and gastroesophageal reflux disorders may help alleviate the financial burden on uninsured and underinsured patients, especially with respect to prescribed medications, and improve compliance with medication regimens.	 	(Courtenay ), UK	Letter to the editor	26 nurses qualified to prescribe medicines	EPA	Cost savings	The use of knowledge and skills by NPs has allowed the development of advanced professional functions, favouring the use of different roles to meet the needs of the workforce, leading to more efficient services, with patients able to access their medications faster and providing greater cost savings for the healthcare system.	 	(Htay and Whitehead ), UK	Review	13 studies	ANP and NP	Cost effectiveness	APRN improves patient care, increases service profitability, efficiency and overall patient satisfaction with the overall quality of care provided. The majority of studies included in this review were conducted in high‐income countries, providing strong evidence that the positive and comparable effectiveness of NPs can be explored and exported to low‐ and middle‐income countries.	 	(Hummel and Pirzada ), US	NA	1352 for one GP, adjusted baseline of 1352 patients increased up to 2800 patients	NP	Cost savings	Adding an NP to the practice could virtually double the panel of patients seen by a physician, increasing revenue by $1.28 per member per month, saving approximately $1.65 million per 100,000 enrollees annually.	 	(Abbasi et al. ), Iran	Review	7 studies	NPM	Cost savings	NPM improves teamwork of nurses, reduces the prescription of expensive medications, advises patients to choose the right medication and use it correctly, and reduces the workload of GPs, which can lead to a reduction in financial burden on the healthcare system.
Abbreviations: APRN, Advanced Practice Registered Nurses; CPD, Continuing Professional Development; EEH, Economic Evaluation in Health; EPA, Advanced Practice Nursing; GPs, General Practitioners; HF, Heart Failure; NP, Nurse Practitioner; NPM, Nurse Prescribing of Medications; NS, Nurse Specialist; CNS, Clinical Nurse Specialist.
NPs have been practicing for years across various countries, including the UK, Ireland, the US, Canada and The Netherlands, with significant progress in the implementation of NPM. The NPM role brings different benefits to healthcare systems, as it reduces the cost of drug prescription, diminishes adverse effects and drug administration time, improves the relationship between the interprofessional team, reduces the workload of physicians to be able to perform other tasks, increases interprofessional communication and patient safety, increases efficiency and reduces the financial burden on healthcare systems (Tchouaket et al. ; Stenner and Courtenay ; Wilson et al. ; Tijhuis et al. ; Abbasi et al. ).
In addition, NPM caused developing effective and profitable strategies in specific healthcare resources and promoted patient support leading to the improvement of their care outcomes and achieving care objectives (Paez and Allen ; Arts et al. ).
The economic profitability of primary care outpatient consultations highlights both direct and indirect cost benefits in favour of nurse prescribers (Kilpatrick et al. ), having the ability to significantly reduce the waiting time for physicians' consultations and patients' readmission (Traczynski and Udalova ; Venning et al. ; Dierick‐van Daele et al. ; Hummel and Pirzada ). Furthermore, the option of replacing a physician by a nurse prescriber for specific types of medications, such as those prescribed for chronic diseases or linked to protocols and clinical guidelines, provides greater economic profitability, increases service efficiency and improves patient satisfaction (Schuttelaar et al. ). In specific cases, the knowledge of prescribing nurses with treatments such as diabetes mellitus, high blood pressure or depression helps reduce the economic burden on patients with chronic pathologies (Luthy et al. ).
APNs who are closely associated with the NPM role have generated cost savings in healthcare systems by applying advanced competencies and performing a range of expanded clinical functions (Courtenay ). They have shown to play a fundamental role in relation to the efficiency of health products (Sánchez et al. ), reduce the number of hospital readmissions, diminish mortality, increase the efficiency and profitability of healthcare service and lead to patient satisfaction through improved care quality (Ordóñez‐Piedra et al. ; Htay and Whitehead ).

Grey Literature for Economic Evaluation of NPM
Publications from countries such as the UK, Spain and the USA, dated from 2010 to 2015, were inclusive and presented relevant economic data linking NPM to EEH demonstrating benefits for healthcare systems. Table 2 summarizes the findings of grey literature regarding the economic evaluation of NPM.
Findings from grey literature regarding Economic EEH and NPM.
Authors, year, country	Research methodology	Nurse designation and qualification	Nurse role in NPM	Impact on EEH	 	(Merrifield ), UK	Press article	NPM	Cost savings	Non‐medical prescribers are saving England's National Health Service (NHS) an estimation of £777 million a year.	 	(Cagistrolo, ), US	Blog article	NS	Cost savings	The incorporation of nurses in conversations about formulating cost reduction strategies favours healthcare cost savings.	 	(Pérez Cordón et al. ), Spain	Conference presentation	NPM	Cost savings	Influence of nursing prescription on cost savings in absorbents for urinary incontinence and blood glucose test strips.	 	(Sánchez et al. ), Spain	Quasi‐experimental study	NPM	Cost savings	Nurse prescriber through an appropriate clinical assessment guide contributes to cost savings in absorbent naps for patients with urinary incontinence.	 	(Larkin ), US	NA	NP	Cost savings	Highly trained NPs dedicated to patient management and coordination of all aspects of complex cases positively impact clinical outcomes and cost savings.	 	(AANP ), US	Position paper	NP	Cost savings	NPs provided equivalent or improved medical care at a lower total cost than physicians.
Abbreviations: AANP, American Association of Nurse Practitioners; NA, Not Appropriate; NP, Nurse practitioner; NPM, Nurse Prescribing of Medications.
The scarcity of grey literature in this context is highlighted, with the UK, the US and Spain being the countries that have been able to publish openly economic data through press articles, weblogs or national health reports and guidelines. Some healthcare systems are committed to incorporate nurse prescribers into the coordination of risk factor cases, considering that they are highly trained in managing the treatment and care of patients with complex healthcare issues (Larkin ).
The incorporation of nurse prescribers in health strategy formulation meetings provides an outstanding cost reduction in the healthcare system (Cagistrolo, ). Cost reduction in medical supplies through the NPM role as nurses exercise their skills in the use of clinical practice guidelines in relation to absorbents for urinary incontinence and blood glucose test strips in Spain has been reported (Pérez Cordón et al. ; Sánchez et al. ). Additionally, APNs in the US have shown to improve efficiency, stating an economic output of approximately $8 billion annually and fostering permanent job creation (Texas Nurses Practitioners, ). Also, US nurse prescribers have generated savings of up to $166 million by caring for patients in nursing homes (American Association of Nurses Practitioners [AANP] ). In the UK, there are a lot of discussions about non‐medical prescribers, a term that is associated with the NPM role by APNs, which provides the NHS with an estimated saving of £777 million annually (Merrifield ).

Discussion
This review maps the current knowledge about the role played by the NPM internationally in terms of EEH in terms of direct and indirect economic benefits for cost minimization, cost‐effectiveness, cost‐utility, cost–benefit, return on investment and healthcare cost savings. The 26 included studies indicate that NPM contributes to improved efficiency, reduced costs and greater economic value. Long‐standing implementation in various countries has led to notable reductions in direct and indirect expenses, medical supply use and waiting times, though enhancing care quality and supporting the healthcare system's sustainability. In recent decades, the concept of NPM has attracted great interest significant international attention in the medical literature (Latter and Courtenay ; Bradley and Nolan ; Stenner and Courtenay ) with various implementation models producing diverse outcomes, public health impacts and economic implications. It has been shown how healthcare professionals contribute to benefits and cost savings within these systems (Cagistrolo, ; Prades et al. ; Drummond et al. ). Our review findings help identify studies highlighting the favourable reduction in direct outpatient consultation costs when prescribing nurses are involved, compared to other medication prescribers (Orlik et al. ; Dierick‐van Daele et al. ).
Our scoping review results, consisting of scientific publications and grey literature, present relevant information regarding various interventions regarding the terms of NPM and EEH, and mostly from the US and the UK reflecting the highest publication rate about benefits, efficiency and cost savings of NPM (Stenner and Courtenay ; Traczynski and Udalova ; Venning et al. ; Paez and Allen ; Luthy et al. ; Courtenay ; Htay and Whitehead ; Hummel and Pirzada ; Larkin ; Neumann et al. ; Merrifield ). Across the world, nurse prescribers assume different forms, with competencies that vary by country and by whether their prescribing authority is autonomous or collaborative. The US stands out, on one hand, where the first NPs and APNs appeared in the 1960s as professionals capable of influencing clinical health outcomes, providing direct health services to people, families and communities. On the other hand, in Europe the UK stands out, with different types of nurse prescribers: independent nurses or nurse prescribers responsible for their own prescriptions, supplementary or collaborative nurse prescribers to chronic patients based on protocols and nursing directors without specific training for prescription responsibilities. Additionally, in the UK the concept of ‘non‐medical prescribers’ is used to describe any prescription made by a healthcare professional other than a physician or dentist (Gielen et al. ; Department of Health, ; Sheer and Wong ; Hutchinson et al. ).
Published economic data shows the great benefits that NPM provides for healthcare systems, such as the one published through the NHS, and the NPs and APNs in the grey literature, indicating savings of £777 million in the UK with the addition of prescribers' non‐physicians. In the US with APNs who obtain savings of 8 billion dollars and with nurse prescribers who generate savings of up to 166 million dollars due to caring for patients in nursing homes (Merrifield ). There are countries where the NPM figure has been implemented for years, but their governments have not yet published information about it, which presents an opportunity to begin sharing relevant data to enrich our understanding of NPM and encourage the scientific community to continue exploring its benefits from an EEH perspective. Increased transparency and international collaboration can further support evidence‐based policymaking and optimize the integration of NPM into healthcare systems globally.
Regarding the economic impact of digital health technology interventions aimed at improving medication safety and cost‐effectiveness, key drivers include reductions in adverse outcomes, the proportion of medication errors that result in adverse drug events, and the overall costs of implementation (Insani et al. ). Although digital solutions often involve significant upfront investment, evidence shows they can yield a positive return on investment and support more efficient clinical workflows. When combined with NPM roles, they have the potential to further strengthen cost‐effectiveness. However, the economic impact of this integration remains underexplored and requires more rigorous research.

Limitations
The limited number of publications directly providing scientific evidence on EEH and NPM restricted the inclusion of studies in this review, which prompted the authors to also conduct a grey literature search. Furthermore, the published scientific publications mostly referred to both direct and indirect costs, though barely about specific roles such as NPM. The search language can be a limitation, and it is possible that scientific evidence published in other languages has not been included. In relation to the key terms used in our search, the existence of more synonyms for economic evaluation as broader terms should be explored and used in future studies.

Conclusions
In this scoping review, we identified and analysed scientific publications and grey literature that highlight the limited economic data available from countries where NPM has been implemented and supported for several years. Accordingly, the implementation of NPM has yielded positive economic outcomes across various countries. Reported benefits include increased efficiency, reduced healthcare costs and improved economic performance. Its long‐term implementation has also contributed to lowering direct and indirect expenses, reducing the use of medical supplies and waiting times, and enhancing the quality of patient care as factors that collectively support the sustainability of healthcare systems. Therefore, improving the conditions and utilization of NPMs is essential to maximize nurses' contribution to patient care within healthcare systems. By enhancing nurses' work environment, expanding their scope of practice and ensuring their skills, NPM can lead to higher care quality, improvement of patient outcomes and efficiency of healthcare delivery.
Despite limitations in terms of the number of publications related to the objective of this study and their quality, our findings can be inspiring for healthcare systems around the world to consider and promote the implementation of the NPM role given its direct and indirect economic benefits. Future research should prioritize the creation of robust, comparable economic data that can accurately capture direct and indirect cost savings associated with NPM, including reductions in medical supply use, waiting times and avoidable care. Also, EEH should be constantly performed contributing to the improvement of the quality of publications leading to economic evaluations and benchmarking in different healthcare systems. Additionally, future research should focus on developing and promoting innovative strategies to achieve economic benefits in healthcare systems globally, particularly concerning the efficient implementation of the NPM role.
In terms of efficiency and cost savings, NPM has a documented value through the application of the EEH framework and can be an example for other countries to reproduce it in their own contexts. There is also a compelling need for more studies on EEH directly related to NPM, making a necessary contribution of economic data by those countries that consider NPM as an indispensable health professional functional role for their healthcare systems.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization: F.J.G.‐J. and M.L.‐C.; Methodology: F.J.G.‐J. and M.L.‐C.; Validation: F.J.G.‐J.; Formal analysis: F.J.G.‐J. and M.L.‐C.; Investigation: F.J.G.‐J. and M.L.‐C.; Resources: F.J.G.‐J. and M.L.‐C.; Data curation: F.J.G.‐J. and M.L.‐C.; Writing‐original preparation: F.J.G.‐J. and M.L.‐C.; Writing‐review and editing: F.J.G.‐J. and M.V.; Visualization: F.J.G.‐J.; Supervision: M.L.‐C.; Project administration: M.L.‐C. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding
The authors have nothing to report.

Ethics Statement
The Ethical Advisory Committee on Social and human Sciences of the University of Antwerp in Belgium approved the initiation of the collection of data in Demophac study on 30 October 2019.

Consent
Consents from the selected organizations' chiefs and from participants were collected and maintained assuring the principles of privacy and data protection. This study was part of a work package in Demophac Project. An International Project Funded by the European Commission. Project Reference: 2018‐1‐BE02‐KA203‐046861.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author. The data are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.

References
Benefits of Prescribing by Nurses (With Emphasis on Financial and Economic Benefits): An Integrated Review
Pharmaceutical Care: The PCNE Definition 2013
“Nurse Practitioner Cost Effectiveness.”
The Cost‐Effectiveness of Substituting Physicians With Diabetes Nurse Specialists: A Randomized Controlled Trial With 2‐Year Follow‐Up
Nurse Prescribing: Reflections on Safety in Practice
Impact of Nurse Prescribing: A Qualitative Study
“Linkedin [Internet].”
Scoping Reviews: Time for Clarity in Definition, Methods, and Reporting
Is Advanced Nursing Practice Possible Without a Nurse Prescribing?
“A Guide to Implementing Nurse and Pharmacist Independent Prescribing Within the NHS in England.”
Economic Evaluation of Nurse Practitioners Versus GPs in Treating Common Conditions
Evaluación Económica de Intervenciones de Salud Pública
The Effects of Nurse Prescribing: A Systematic Review
The Effectiveness of the Role of Advanced Nurse Practitioners Compared to Physician‐Led or Usual Care: A Systematic Review
Estimating the Cost of Using Non‐Physician Providers in Primary Care Teams in an HMO: Where Would the Savings Begin?
Deriving Consensus on the Characteristics of Advanced Practice Nursing Meta‐Summary of More Than 2 Decades of Research
Digital Health Technology Interventions for Improving Medication Safety: Systematic Review of Economic Evaluations
The Impact of Nurse Practitioner Services on Cost, Quality of Care, Satisfaction and Waiting Times in the Emergency Department: A Systematic Review
Programme Costs in the Economic Evaluation of Health Interventions
The Effectiveness and Cost‐Effectiveness of Clinical Nurse Specialists in Outpatient Roles: A Systematic Review
Nurse Prescribing of Medicines in Western European and Anglo‐Saxon Countries: A Systematic Review of the Literature
The Case for Nurse Practitioners. Used Correctly, They Can Improve Outcomes, Lower Costs and Make Up for Reduced Residents' Hours
Effectiveness of Nurse Prescribing: A Review of the Literature
Scoping Studies: Advancing the Methodology
Cost‐Efficient Treatment for Uninsured or Underinsured Patients With Hypertension, Depression, Diabetes Mellitus, Insomnia, and Gastroesophageal Reflux
Nurse Prescribing of Medicines in 13 European Countries
Cost‐Effectiveness of Nurse Practitioners in Primary and Specialised Ambulatory Care: Systematic Review
Systematically Reviewing Qualitative and Quantitative Evidence to Inform Management and Policy‐Making in the Health Field
“Nursing Times [Internet].”
Effectiveness of the Advanced Practice Nursing Interventions in the Patient With Heart Failure: A Systematic Review
Economic Evaluation of CPD Activities for Healthcare Professionals: A Scoping Review
Cost‐Effectiveness of Nurse Practitioner Management of Hypercholesterolemia Following Coronary Revascularization
Updated Methodological Guidance for the Conduct of Scoping Reviews
Eficiencia en la Prescripción Enfermera en Andalucía. Un Paso Atrás en el Sistema Sanitario Tras Anulación Por Real Decreto
Prescripción Enfermera: ¿Contribuye a la Sostenibilidad Del Sistema?
Costs and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis of Treatment in Children With Eczema by Nurse Practitioner vs. Dermatologist: Results of a Randomized, Controlled Trial and a Review of International Costs
The Development of Advanced Practice Nursing Globally
Benefits of Nurse Prescribing for Patients in Pain: Nurses' Views
Benefits of Nurse Prescribing for Patients in Pain: Nurses' Views
Effectiveness for Introducing Nurse Practitioners in Six Long‐Term Care Facilities in Québec, Canada: A Cost‐Savings Analysis
(n.d.). Accessed October 31, 2023. https://www.texasnp.org/page/72/ResearchBackground.htm.
Two‐Year Follow‐Up of a Randomized Controlled Trial of a Clinical Nurse Specialist Intervention, Inpatient, and Day Patient Team Care in Rheumatoid Arthritis
Measurement of Health State Utilities for Economic Appraisal: A Review
Nurse Practitioner Independence, Health Care Utilization, and Health Outcomes
PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA‐ScR): Checklist and Explanation
Randomised Controlled Trial Comparing Cost Effectiveness of General Practitioners and Nurse Practitioners in Primary Care
The Need for and Value of Nurse and Midwife Prescribing: Findings From an Irish Research Investigation