Analytical Quality Evaluation of the Tox21 Compound Library
The analytical quality of compounds subjected to high-throughput screening (HTS) impacts accurate interpretation of assay results, with poor quality samples potentially leading to false negatives or positives. The Tox21 “10K” library consists of over 8900 unique compounds, spanning a diverse landscape of environmental and pharmaceutical chemicals, posing opportunities and challenges for analytical quality control (QC) determinations. Tox21 sample plates stored in DMSO at ambient conditions for 0 (T0) and/or 4 months (T4), totaling more than 13K unique sample identifiers (Tox21 IDs), were subjected to various analyses, including liquid and gas chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS, GC-MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Results for each sample at T0 or T4 underwent expert review and, where possible, a QC grade conveying purity, identity, and concentration was assigned. Herein, we relate details of the methods applied and report on the original (v0) Tox21 ID level results. Thirteen QC grades were condensed to 5 quality scores to aid global analysis, resulting in reinterpretation and improvement of >700 sample grades. Of the 92% T0 samples successfully graded, 76% exceeded 90% purity. For 76% of samples that were also tested at T4, 89% showed no evidence of sample loss or degradation. Prioritized quality bins were used to summarize thousands of replicate sample-level QC results to a compound-level QC score to support structure-based analyses. ToxPrint chemotype analysis identified structural features enriched in unstable compounds, as well as in high and low quality T0 subsets. Predicted vapor pressure was weakly correlated with low-concentration QC indicators, reflecting likely entanglement with method amenability and quality issues. Finally, an ongoing EPA effort to re-evaluate the original QC spectra is generating insights that will further modify QC grades. Tox21 QC spectra and results will be made available in a new public QC browser, facilitating further evaluation to support HTS interpretation and modeling applications.

Introduction
Substance identification and characterization are prerequisites for producing robust and reliable results when biological or biochemical activity is assessed in any type of bioassay screening, including high-throughput screening (HTS) assays. The objectives of HTS range from identifying potential target actives in drug discovery to identifying actives or inactives across a diverse set of assays with the potential to inform chemical safety assessments. The success of the HTS endeavor, in turn, will be influenced to different degrees by the quality of individual chemical samples, with large (>100K) drug discovery libraries that provide good coverage of local chemical domains possibly less impacted by individual chemical sample quality variations and sample loss compared with smaller (<15K), structurally diverse, small-molecule libraries. The latter describes the Tox21 toxicity screening program, where not only broad patterns of activity are of interest, but the activity (or inactivity) of individual chemical samples takes on heightened importance when used to inform individual chemical safety assessments. Furthermore, in toxicology screening, the priority is on sensitivity, whereas in pharmacology, the emphasis is more typically on efficacy and/or specificity.
Certificates of Analysis (CoAs) are often available for commercially procured chemicals, reporting the purity and identity of neat (powder or pure liquid) samples, along with the analytical method used and date of analysis. All Tox21 compounds, to the extent possible, were procured as analytical grade quality (i.e., >90% purity). Neat chemicals can also be analyzed after procurement, prior to solubilization and plating, to ensure sample quality (see, e.g., ). However, once chemicals are solubilized, frozen, thawed, plated, and subjected to atmospheric test conditions, quality issues can arise that can adversely affect the HTS outcome. Additionally, analytical quality control (QC) methods and analysis techniques are often tailored to the chemicals of interest, taking into consideration the nature of the solvent, volatility, polarity, and presence of metals. Hence, the cost and practical challenges of analyzing large HTS libraries, comprising thousands of solubilized, microplated chemical samples, can be prohibitive. As a result, QC analyses of HTS libraries are seldom undertaken, and results are rarely published.
The Tox21 “10K” chemical sample library, developed as part of the Toxicology in the 21st Century partnership to advance in vitro methods for toxicity assessment, consists of over 8900 unique compounds spanning a structurally diverse landscape of industrial, commercial, environmental, and pharmaceutical chemicals. Given the novel and transformative nature of the Tox21 screening effort and anticipating the potentially broad range of applications of Tox21 HTS results, the initial project design included funding and plans to perform analytical QC for the full Tox21 chemical sample library. Construction of the library was completed in 2012 and HTS testing commenced soon thereafter. As described in earlier publications, ten copies of the full Tox21 library were created from stock solution plates provided by the three initial Tox21 partners—the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS, formerly known as the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Chemical Genomics Center, or NCGC), the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) Division of Translational Toxicology (DTT), formerly known as the NIH National Toxicology Program (NTP). (Note: Due to the very recent organizational name change, we will continue to use “NTP” to refer to the historical Tox21 affiliation in this study.) One of these ten plate sets was designated and set aside for analytical QC, whereas the remaining nine plate sets have supplied Tox21 HTS efforts to the present day. By design, each of the ten Tox21 library plate sets contained multiple copies of a common set of 88 compounds drawn from the same stock solution (i.e., same Tox21 ID) to serve as library replicates. In addition, thousands of compound replicates, mostly sourced from different suppliers (i.e., different Tox21 IDs), were included in each full plate set by virtue of Tox21 partner library overlaps and chemical sample replenishments.
A primary objective of the analytical QC of Tox21 samples was to confirm the identity of the compounds being tested to support the interpretation of HTS assay results. However, since problems can arise from impurities, poor solubility, volatility, hydrolysis, or degradation, additional efforts were to be made to assess the purity, concentration, and stability of chemical samples under storage conditions that mirrored test plates at two different time points: (1) when the Tox21 plates were freshly taken out of the −80 °C storage and thawed at room temperature (T0); and (2) at the end of a 4-month period stored at room temperature (T4) and under atmospheric conditions, mirroring the experience of a companion plate set undergoing testing on the Tox21 robotics system. Multiple analytical methods and approaches were expected to be required, given the structural diversity of the Tox21 library compounds. Liquid chromatography mass spectroscopy (LC-MS) was proposed as the initial screen of the full library due to the method’s relatively low cost, speed, and broad applicability, with a small number of metal-containing compounds to be subjected to flow-injection analysis (FIA). A subset of T0 chemicals deemed unamenable to LC-MS or that did not yield usable results, including many nonpolar and lower molecular weight compounds, were to be submitted for follow-up gas chromatography mass spectroscopy (GC-MS). Finally, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy would be employed to analyze ungraded samples at T0 and T4, pending the availability of sufficient remaining chemical sample and/or contract funds.
To date, the Tox21 library has been screened against more than 80 cell-based assays for potential biological pathway disruptions that may result in downstream toxicity effects.− In addition, a significant fraction of the Tox21 library’s unique chemical sample content contributed by EPA (∼4000 unique compounds) has undergone additional HTS in association with EPA’s ToxCast program. Factors that affect chemical sample quality can introduce uncertainty in the interpretation of chemical-assay results, leading to false positives if the activity is caused by an impurity or degradation product or false negatives if the active chemical of interest is missing or undetected, e.g., due to sample loss, degradation, or analytical method amenability issues. Hence, chemical sample quality and stability information impacted by storage and testing protocols has broad applicability and importance for interpreting and assessing confidence in assay results from both the Tox21 and ToxCast programs. To date, more than 13000 unique Tox21 chemical samples (i.e., unique Tox21 ID stock solutions), comprising the full Tox21 testing library, have been analyzed by one or more analytical methods, at one or both T0 and T4 time points. These 13000 unique chemical samples correspond to more than 8900 unique chemical substances (i.e., compounds with unique CAS RN), of which over 8500 are assigned to unique defined structures (i.e., InChIs), with the remainder mixtures and ill-defined substances. Henceforth, “chemical sample” will be shortened to “sample” to denote unique Tox21 ID chemical stock solutions, i.e., the level at which analytical QC data are reported herein. The term “compound” will refer to the CAS RN substance level, corresponding to multiple Tox21 IDs when differently sourced samples or different stock solutions were included in the full Tox21 QC library.
Section 2 (Methods) of the current study describes, for the first time, the process and analytical methods used to generate the full set of Tox21 analytical QC results at the Tox21 ID (stock solution) sample level. Section 3 (Tox21 Sample-Level QC Results), presents a high-level summary of the published Tox21 QC results that have been available on the NCATS Tox21 QC online browser since 2016, including description of the 13 standardized QC grades that were developed by the Tox21 partners to communicate the analytical results and aid HTS assay results interpretation. This previously published set of QC results constitutes what we will henceforth refer to as the “v0” Tox21 ID QC grade set. To aid in discerning patterns in this large, multifactorial (QC grade x time x method) data set, the 13 possible QC grades are reduced to a smaller number of numeric quality scores. These quality scores are color-coded to generate a visual overview of the data set that is intended to highlight overarching patterns of quality assessment, stability, and analytical method successes/failures, as well as to identify chemical domains with missing, and potentially questionable or less reliable, QC outcomes. A result of this analysis is the improvement of QC grades for more than 700 Tox21 ID samples, and an updated “v1” version of the Tox21 QC data set. This section concludes by briefly considering possible sources of error in the sample-level analytical QC data and estimating the reproducibility of Tox21 sample-level QC grades.
Section 4 (Tox21 Compound-Level QC Results) considers ways in which replicate compound-level QC results, i.e., different Tox21 sample IDs mapped to the same compound at either T0 or T4, can be collapsed to a single compound-level QC quality bin at T0 or T4 to aid in structure-based analyses of the QC results. Compound-level QC bins are designed and prioritized to facilitate structure-based modeling objectives with preliminary results provided herein. A previously developed chemotype (CT)-enrichment approach is used to identify ToxPrint features significantly enriched in compounds labeled as “unstable” relative to those labeled as “stable”, as well as for those labeled high-quality versus low-quality at T0. We also consider how well computed vapor pressure values correlate with QC indicators of low-concentration initially (T0) or over time under ambient conditions (T4) relative to the target plated concentration.
Lastly, in Section 5, we briefly report on a concurrent, ongoing effort of EPA analytical chemists and curators to reexamine the nearly 30,000 spectral summaries generated during the original analytical QC effort that will lead to updated versions of the QC data set in the future. This re-evaluation of the v0 QC data set was motivated by concerns about conflicting or missing QC results, as well as by efforts over the past 10 years to reevaluate original QC spectra to support regulatory use of Tox21 or ToxCast HTS assay results for individual compounds, often resulting in more nuanced spectral interpretations and, in some cases, revision of QC grades. Whereas this multiyear expert review and re-evaluation effort is still underway, it has already generated new insights and will lead to some revised Tox21 sample-level QC grades.
A hallmark of both Tox21 and ToxCast testing programs has been the public release of both raw and processed summary HTS data. In keeping with that objective, the v0 Tox21 ID, sample-level QC grades and supporting pdf spectral summaries previously were published in searchable form on the NCATS Tox21 online browser for the majority of samples for which usable QC results could be obtained. A complete table of the v0 Tox21 sample-level analytical QC grades, with each grade corresponding to a single analytical method and time point (T0 or T4), is provided herein along with the modified v1 QC grades, scores, and quality bins resulting from the present study. These v1 Tox21 sample-level and compound-level QC results point to how the Tox21 analytical QC data set is evolving and can be mined for further patterns and associations to support HTS assay results interpretation, as well as serve as a large computational chemistry and analytical chemistry resource. The soon-to-be public EPA analytical QC data browser, created to support the QC expert re-evaluation effort, will provide complete access to pdf spectral summaries and will facilitate more thorough and detailed investigations of the legacy QC data moving forward, as well as support ongoing revisions and addition of expert annotations as these data are reevaluated.
The present study lays the groundwork for future structure-based analyses of compound-level properties revealed by the analytical QC results, such as analytical method amenability, as well as the quality and stability of DMSO-solubilized compounds, the latter including sample loss, degradation, or reactivity due to the hydroscopic nature of DMSO. Limitations of the Tox21 analytical QC effort described herein include incomplete coverage of the data set by method and time point, as well as the inherent challenges and technical constraints of applying multiple analytical methods in a semi-high-throughput manner, involving a limited range of instrument or column settings, to the analysis of the large HTS library. Hence, no single analytical method provided full library coverage at either the T0 or T4 time point, and no Tox21 QC quality grade could be generated for subsets of T0 and T4 samples. Despite these limitations, the structurally and analytically diverse Tox21 QC data set, with the accompanying summary spectral data, provides one of the largest publicly available QC data sets associated with diverse chemistry and assay data. It also provides an invaluable chemistry resource and quality lens for data mining. An area ripe for improved understanding, but relegated to future study, is investigation of patterns in the analytical QC results related to sample loss, low purity, etc., in relation to the corresponding Tox21 and ToxCast HTS assay profiles. The present work is intended to provide the background and foundation for future versioning and uses of the Tox21 QC analytical data set.

Materials and Methods

Quality Control Procedure
To prepare compounds for analysis or screening, they were first dissolved in anhydrous DMSO (≥99.9%, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) to a target concentration of 20 mM and dispensed into 384-well plates (made from polypropylene). Initially, ten copies of the full Tox21 chemical sample library were created as 20 mM DMSO 384-well stock solution plates, with nine copies designated for HTS and one copy designated for analytical QC. (Note: A small number of Tox21 chemical samples were plated at lower concentrations (5–10 mM) due to DMSO insolubility, and a handful of highly potent estrogenic compounds were plated at 0.2 mM). HTS plates were subsequently diluted to multiple concentrations in 1536-well screening plates and both these HTS plates and the undiluted analytical QC plates were stored in the freezer at −80 °C when not being screened or analyzed. During screening in various HTS assays, the chemical plates were maintained on the robotics system under atmospheric, humidity-controlled conditions at room temperature (22 °C, 50% relative humidity) for up to, but not exceeding, 4 months. Analytical QC was conducted on sample solutions drawn from the designated 384-well Tox21 20 mM stock solution plates to assess the compound identity and purity at two time points: T0, when compound plates were freshly taken out of the freezer (−80 °C) and thawed; and T4, after compound plates had been exposed to ambient conditions for 4 months. To prepare the T4 samples, compound plates were removed from the freezer, allowed to thaw overnight at room temperature, and briefly centrifuged, and the seal (composed of three layers: polyester on top, aluminum in the middle, and polyethylene on the bottom (facing the solvent)) removed/discarded. A heavy metal gasketed compound lid was placed on top, and the plates were placed in the Tox21 Kalypsys compound carousel (22 °C, 50% relative humidity) to mirror the test sample plate treatment. After 4 months, the lid was removed, the plates were centrifuged briefly, heat sealed with an Agilent brand DMSO-resistant heat seal on an Agilent PlateLoc, and refrozen at −80 °C until time of analysis. Aliquots of 20 mM stock solution from each of the full library T0 and T4 384-well plate sets were replated and shipped overnight to contracted analytical laboratories and packed on dry ice. Prior to analytical QC analysis, DMSO samples were diluted further to a target concentration of 3 mM.
All LC-MS (and related FIA) and NMR analyses were performed by OpAns (OpAns LLC, Durham, NC) under Contract No. HHSN271201500023I issued by the National Toxicology Program. The GC-MS analyses were performed under Interagency Agreements, Nos. ATR12001-0000 and ATR12001-001, between NCATS and the National Institutes of Standards & Technology (NIST). Samples were provided to OpAns and NIST in approximately 27 μL aliquots as a 20 mM DMSO solution in 384-well plates. Further details of analytical methods are provided in the subsections 2.1.1–2.1.15 below.

High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) Mass Spectrometry (MS) Instrumentation
LC-MS analysis was performed on an Agilent 1100/1200 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with an Agilent diode array detector (DAD), binary pump, column thermostat, autosampler and Agilent 6140/6150 single quadrupole MS. Additionally, an evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) (SofTA Corporation, Westminster, Colorado, USA) and an Antek 8060 chemiluminescent nitrogen detector (CLND) (Antek Instruments, Houston, TX, USA) were coupled to the HPLC-MS system for compound quantitation analysis. The mobile phases used for the separation were deionized water (>18 MΩ/cm in house purification) with 0.1% acetic acid (Fisher Scientific) (solvent A) and HPLC grade methanol (Fisher Scientific) with 0.1% acetic acid (solvent B). Gradient elution was performed at a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min, and the mobile phase gradient was 5–100% B in 3 min and maintained at 100% B for 0.3 min. A high surface area (>350 m2/g), high carbon load (>18%), and efficient packing material were requirements for the HPLC column to provide the specified resolving power (fwhm <0.025 min in UV detector for all standards). Initially, a Varian Pursuit UPS C18 1.9 μm 50 × 3.0 mm column was used, but that column was discontinued by the manufacturer. A Fortis C18 2.5 μm, 50 × 3.0 mm column was used for most of the analyses and yielded similar retention times and resolving power as the Varian column.
Separations were performed at a column temperature of 50 °C. One microliter of sample dissolved in DMSO in the 384-well plate was injected onto the column for each experimental run. All effluent from the HPLC column went through a 2 μL flow cell in the diode array and was then split with approximately 200 μL/min going to the MS, 300 μL/min going to the CLND, and 1000 μL/min going to the ELSD. The MS was equipped with a AJS ESI source operating in alternating positive/negative ion mode, and spectra were acquired from m/z 50 to 1350 in both modes. The electrospray ionization (ESI) source parameters were used as follows: gas temp, 300 °C; drying gas flow, 12 L/min; nebulizer pressure, 50 psi; Vcap (both positive and negative), 3000 V; fragmentor, 70 V. The CLND nebulizer oxygen flow was 320 mL/min with a nitrogen flow of 50 mL/min. The furnace was at 1050 °C and the PMT voltage at −700 V. The ELSD used a low dispersion nebulizer with the Spray Chamber at 25 °C and the Drift Tube held at 60 °C.

Preparation of LC-MS Calibration and Quality Control (QC) Standards
A mixture composed of ethyl adenine-9-acetate (10.0 mM), verapamil (5.0 mM), terfenadine (2.0 mM), and propranolol (0.4 mM) in DMSO (Fisher Scientific) was prepared as a standard to determine system suitability and perform calibration. A 10.0 mM solution of diclofenac in DMSO was used as a QC standard to verify the performance of the quantitative detectors. Compounds were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Both the calibration mix and QC sample were injected at the beginning of each analysis batch, after every 96 samples, and at the end of the batch. Sample results must be bracketed by passing calibration for QC samples to be accepted (see Supporting Information Methods, Table S1).

LC-MS Sample Preparation
Samples were received in 384-well plates on dry ice. The samples were transferred to a −80 °C freezer until analysis. When preparing for analysis, a plate was removed from the freezer and placed on the laboratory bench for approximately 1 h to thaw without assistance. The plate was “floated” in an ultrasonic water bath for 45 s then centrifuged for 1 min at 32 g and placed in the LC-MS autosampler for analysis. The seal applied at NCATS was not removed.

CLND Quantification
Peak areas for each compound of interest (COI) in the calibration mixture were plotted against the corresponding nitrogen concentration. A linear calibration curve was fit to the data.

ELSD Quantification
Peak areas for each COI in the calibration mixture were plotted against their corresponding mg/mL concentration. A linear calibration curve was fit to the data. If a peak was found corresponding to the COI, then the observed mg/mL concentration was converted to mM based on the molecular weight of the COI. Quantification of COI that eluted in the solvent front required the peak from the blank (DMSO only) to be small relative to the peak from study samples. In general, the peak from the COI eluting in the solvent front must be at least 5 times the solvent blank to be quantified.

LC-MS Data Analysis
Retention times of the detectors were adjusted to align the standard peaks, a process known as “peak grouping”. This was accomplished by holding the MS time constant, while the time was added to the UV detector (0.01 min) and subtracted from the ELSD and CLND (0.05 min). Once the chromatograms were aligned, peaks could be grouped across all detectors, which was essential for calculating the results. Results are reported based on peak number, which was the same for all detectors even though not all peaks were observed by each detector. The average MS was determined for each peak group by averaging the spectra for all points with an intensity greater than half the height of the peak for the narrowest peak in the peak group. For each peak group in the chromatogram, the average MS value was interpreted. The peak was considered consistent with the COI if the dominant ions could be assigned to adducts of the COI (e.g., [M + H]+, [M + Na]+, [2M + H]+, [2M + Na]+, [M + H + DMSO]+, etc.) and the response in the other detectors was consistent with the COI (e.g., peak observed in CLND for nitrogen containing COI).

Flow Injection Analysis (FIA)
FIA was performed on the same system as LC-MS with the only change being the column was removed. The HPLC pump was set to an isocratic 95% B at 1.4 mL/min and the data acquisition time ended at 0.8 min. ELSD and CLND quantifications were performed using a single point calibration line fit to the data with the intercept set to 0.

Gas Chromatography–Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) Instrumentation
An Agilent 7890 gas chromatograph (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) equipped with an Agilent programmable temperature vaporizer (PTV), an Agilent capillary flow purged splitter, an Agilent 5975 mass selective detector, a flame ionization detector (FID), and a Gerstel MPS2 autosampler was used to perform simultaneous GC-MS and GC-FID analysis. The ionization energy was 70 eV, the ion source temperature was 230 °C, and the transfer line temperature was 270 °C. The vendor’s standard tune method was used to tune the instrument. A Varian FactorFour VF-5 ms column (Agilent Technologies, Sana Clara, CA, USA), 15 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 μm, was operated at a constant flow of 1.0 mL/min with helium as the carrier gas. The GC parameters were as follows: inlet temperature program: 60 °C, hold for 1 min, then 200 °C/min up to 270 °C; split ratio 30:1; oven temperature program 50 to 70 °C at 5 °C/min then up to 280 °C at 10 °C/min. The oven and PTV programs were started at the same time. The conditions for the injection into the PTV were 1.5 μL of a 1:1 mixture of derivatization reagent and dichloromethane anhydrous, ≥99.8%, (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), followed a minute later by a sandwich injection of 0.5 μL of derivatization reagent, a 0.2 μL air gap, a 1.0 μL sample, and a 0.2 μL air gap for a total injection volume of 3.4 μL. The splitter, located at the end of the column, was operated with a helium make up gas flow such that the split was approximately 1:1 at an oven temperature of 50 °C. The GC split conditions were such that the holdup times (retention times) were the same for both detectors within ±0.002 min. Retention indices (RI) were determined by using a mixture of the straight chain hydrocarbons from C7 to C30 as external standards. All data were acquired with Agilent MassHunter (Versions: B.05.00, B.06.00, and B.07.00) software.

GC-MS Sample Derivatization
Derivatization was accomplished by coinjecting (sandwich injection) an aliquot of the sample with N,O-bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide containing 1% trimethylsilyl chloride (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO).

GC-MS Sample Analysis
Identity confirmation for the expected compounds and tentative identifications of other observed materials were achieved by matching spectra extracted with the Automated Mass Spectrometry Deconvolution and Identification System (AMDIS) with spectra from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) with either the NIST11 or NIST14 Mass Spectral libraries using the Windows MS Search Program (v2.2) [], as well as by expert evaluation. For compounds with a spectrum in the NIST11 or NIST14 libraries, a high match factor and consistency with the expected structure constituted positive identification. For compounds without a spectrum in NIST Mass Spectral libraries, the compound was considered identified if the observed spectrum was judged to be consistent with an expected structure. Identifications were attempted for all compounds having concentrations estimated to be above 1%. Samples were considered as a “QC fail” or “identity not confirmed” when the expected compound was not observed.

Quantitation by Flame Ionization Detector (FID)
Approximate concentrations were calculated from only the flame ionization detector (FID) response. A mixture of the trimethylsilyl derivatives of five alcohols (1-heptanol, 1-decanol, 1-hexadecanol, 1-nonadecanol, and 1-docosanol) at alcohol concentrations of 0.1 0.3, 0.7, and 0.9 mg/mL in DMSO were used as external standards for semiquantitative analysis. In some cases, the derivatization of the samples gave a mixture of underivatized or derivatives with different numbers of trimethylsilyl groups. Estimated purities and concentrations were calculated using the sum of the under- and derivatized components. The program used to calculate peak areas for the FID peaks sometimes failed to properly separate adjacent peaks. In those cases, peak areas from AMDIS were used to calculate the purity.

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy Instrumentation
A Bruker 700 MHz NMR spectrometer (Billerica, MA, USA) equipped with a 1.7 mm CPQNP Z-gradient cryoprobe was used to acquire NMR data for analysis. 1H NMR spectra were obtained using a shaped pulse presaturation experiment to suppress the H2O (3.33 ppm) and residual DMSO-d6 (2.50 ppm) solvent signals. The pulse tip angle, number of transients, and receiver gain were kept constant for all samples, and the total recycle time was 7.5 s to facilitate relaxation between scans and better quantification. Chemical shifts are reported in δ (ppm) units by using 1H signals from tetramethylsilane (TMS) (0.00 ppm) as the internal reference. The experiments had a sweep width of 12 ppm with the spectral range from 11.0 ppm to −1.0 ppm.

NMR Sample Preparation
Due to the hygroscopic nature of DMSO, the samples had absorbed a significant amount of water at the time of analysis. 76.5 μL of DMSO-d6 solution (with a small amount of added TMS for internal reference (<0.01% v/v)) was added to the well of interest. The entire aliquot was transferred by a long-tipped PCR pipet into a 1.7 mm NMR tube, an additional 76.5 μL of DMSO-d6 was added to the original well (i.e., to rinse the well) and transferred to the NMR tube, thus resulting in a total volume of 180 μL. The reported expected concentration was the calculated dilution concentration.

NMR Reference Standard Preparation
A reference standard of 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) was run on the NMR instrument at the beginning and end of each acquisition block of samples to monitor the instrument performance and stability. The standard was prepared by accurate weighing of the solid material and subsequent dilution with DMSO-d6 to give a concentration comparable to the test samples. The concentration of the reference standard was independently verified with a validated quantitative LC-MS/MS instrument. NMR data were acquired in the same manner as the test samples, and the integral values were used to calibrate the sample data.

NMR Data Analysis
Processing of the NMR sample data was performed with ACD/Laboratories Spectrus and ACD/HNMR prediction software (Advanced Chemistry Development, Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada). For each sample, a report was generated containing the Fourier transformed spectrum as well as a predicted spectrum based on the expected chemical structure. For substances with multiple potential isomers or components, the structure used for prediction was specified as only one particular isomer or component when the structure provided included such information. For tautomers, the most stable form predicted by the ACD/HNMR software was used. In both cases, if there was interpretable evidence of multiple isomers/tautomers, the presence of such was noted, and the integrals were added to produce the estimate of quantification. Identity confirmation for the expected compounds was accomplished by matching the experimental and predicted spectra as well as by expert evaluation. A high match level and consistency with the expected structure constituted a positive identification. Samples with missing peaks in the spectrum due to overlap with DMSO and H2O or because they are correlated to exchangeable protons (e.g., OH, COOH) were considered a positive identification (e.g., Tox21_300032, Tox21_300066, Tox21_300137). An approximate purity was assigned to each sample based on the presence of extraneous peaks in the spectrum. A sample was considered failed when the spectral data did not match predicted data, was evaluated as being inconsistent with the expected chemical structure (e.g., Tox21_300128), or no peaks for the desired chemical were observed (e.g., Tox21_300049). For samples where the expected product was identified, the quantitated concentration was calculated relative to the integration of the external MDMA reference sample of known concentration.
Further discussion of the limitations of individual analytical methods are provided in Supporting Information Methods.

QC Analysis Workflow
A schematic of the overall QC sample analysis workflow is provided in Figure 1. The entire T0 sample collection was initially analyzed by OpAns using high-throughput LC-MS (a), possibly run multiple times under different retention and detection conditions, with a small subset of metal-containing compounds analyzed by the FIA. T0 samples for which a grade could not be determined and deemed unamenable to the LC-MS method (including low molecular weight, nonpolar, or metal-containing compounds) were submitted to NIST for follow up analysis by GC-MS (b). A second complete set of Tox21 plates, designated T4, that mirrored the Tox21 ambient exposure conditions of a set of HTS plates actively undergoing testing for a period of approximately 4 months, was returned to the freezer to await QC analysis (d). A subset of these T4 samples, the majority consisting of samples previously deemed high-quality at T0 by LC-MS, were submitted for LC-MS analysis to assess stability over time (e). Subsequently, pending availability of additional contract funds and sufficient remaining sample, T0 samples that had been deemed unamenable to both LC-MS and GC-MS (c), as well as many T4 samples not previously analyzed by LC-MS (f) or not graded, were submitted to OpAns for NMR analysis. Additionally, in some cases, entire T0 or T4 384-well plates that contained unamenable compounds along with previously graded LC-MS compounds were analyzed by NMR.
QC sample analysis workflow of T0 and T4 plate sets, where yellow
arrows (a–c) pertain to T0 plate analyses and light blue arrows
(d–f) refer to T4 plate analyses: (a) freshly thawed T0 plates
submitted for high-throughput LC-MS analysis, with a small subset
analyzed with FIA; (b) subset of T0 samples deemed unamenable to LC-MS
submitted for GC-MS analysis; (c) T0 samples, the majority deemed
unamenable to both LC-MS and GC-MS, later submitted for NMR analysis;
(d) separate T4 sample plates stored at ambient conditions for 4 months,
mirroring the maximum exposure of HTS test plates; (e) subset of T4
samples, largely excluding poor quality T0 samples, submitted for
LC-MS analysis; (f) any remaining untested T4 samples later submitted
for NMR analysis.

Structure Data
Structures and identifiers for all Tox21 samples were expert manually curated within the EPA’s DSSTox program in coordination with NCATS and NTP. This effort entailed two possible levels of DSSTox quality review. The first was at the compound level for all substances in the full Tox21 library, involving the review and accurate assignment and reconciliation of DSSTox substance identifiers (e.g., DTXSID, chemical name, CAS RN) with structure identifiers (e.g., DTXCID, mol file structures, SMILES, InChIs). Additional curation occurred at the neat sample level for EPA’s Tox21 partner library and entailed the review and accurate mapping of supplier-provided information to DSSTox substance-structure identifiers. This sample-level review relied upon supplier-provided CoA information, which was available for the majority of EPA’s library, or supplier-provided chemical names and CAS RNs, which sometimes conflicted and required reconciliation. Two sets of DSSTox mapping files were subsequently generated for the entire Master Tox21 10K plated sample library, indexed by Tox21 ID, i.e., a tabular MS Excel file and the corresponding structure-data format (SDF) file. Plate map files, in turn, were generated for each Tox21 partner’s Master stock solution plates and included Tox21 IDs mapped to plate-well address and solution concentration. Master plates were used to generate the 10 daughter plate set copies, which included one full set of Tox21 analytical QC plates slated to undergo analysis at OpAns and NIST. In addition, a “desalted” SMILES and nitrogen count were provided for each plated sample to aid QC analysis and analytical review. The former was generated using ACD ChemFolder v2012 software (ACD Laboratories, Toronto, Canada), whereas the nitrogen count was calculated using the molecular formula, combined with text filters, and confirmed by manual review (results not shown). Once Tox21 sample plates mapped to Tox21 IDs were received by NCATS, NCGC substance identifiers (IDs formatted NCGC###···) were assigned and registered in PubChem.
The DSSTox SDF for the Tox21 library, denoted “TOX21S”, consists of the full list of unique DSSTox substance identifiers (i.e., DTXSIDs) mapped 1:1 to a set of defined structures (DTXCIDs) for all but 4% (or 371) of the DTXSIDs, the latter subset including mixtures/formulations, polymers, and ill-defined substances. The TOX21S inventory has been subjected to continuous DSSTox database curation since it was first published on the original EPA DSSTox Web site in 2012, which has resulted in corrections for a small number of Tox21 structure-sample mappings. These corrected structures and Tox21 mappings were periodically relayed to NCATS and used to inform the analysis and expert review of the analytical QC results. The TOX21S SDF used in the present study was downloaded from the EPA CompTox Chemicals Dashboard List Download page (, accessed 14 Feb 2023). This file, along with the master Tox21 ID to DTXSID mapping file, was used to construct an updated index file containing the full list of unique Tox21 IDs mapped to NCGC Sample ID, PubChem SID, DTXSID and source collection (i.e., NCATS, NTP, or EPA) (Supporting Information Table S2). In addition, a corresponding compound-level table from the DSSTox TOX21S file lists DTXSID, DTXCID, CAS RN, Chemical Name, Substance Type, InChI, InChI Key, SMILES, Formula, and MW (molecular weight) (Supporting Information Table S3).
The complete set of 8575 unique chemical structures (DTXCIDs) in the DSSTox TOX21S SDF file were processed using the publicly available ChemoTyper application () to generate ToxPrint fingerprints (v2.0_r711, ). The ChemoTyper application uses CORINA cheminformatics algorithms () to remove salts and stereo features prior to ToxPrint feature mapping. The ToxPrint set includes 729 uniquely defined chemical features coded in an XML-based Chemical Subgraphs and Reactions Markup Language (CSRML). ToxPrints include organic chemistry building blocks (e.g., alkyl and aromatic groups, functional groups, elemental and generic metals) and toxicologically important chemical scaffolds (e.g., steroidal backbone, bicyclics, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons). The DSSTox TOX21S SDF was processed by the ChemoTyper application to produce a binarized ToxPrint fingerprint file in which each structure is represented as a bit vector, where the presence or absence of the ToxPrint feature is recorded as 1 or 0, respectively (Supporting Information Table S4).
Vapor pressure (VP) values (in units of mmHg) for the structurable subset of TOX21S DTXSIDs were downloaded from the EPA’s CompTox Chemicals Dashboard (accessed 20 June 2024). These were computed using the OPERA (Open (Quantitative) Structure–activity/property Relationship) application and are included in Supporting Information Table S3 (see also ).

Significant Chemical Feature/Property Identification
Statistical tests were performed to identify calculated properties and chemical features significantly associated with binarized QC indicators of chemical quality, sample loss, or stability. Binarized sample-level QC labels PASS/CAUTION are introduced in Section 3, whereas compound-level categories are defined in Section 4.
Listing of v0 Tox21 Analytical QC
Grades, Labels, and Quality Indicators Assigned to the Full Dataset
of Tox21 ID-Level Samples, with Associated Definitions and Sample
Totals at T0 and T4
The original v0 Tox21 QC sample-level
grade data set, published on the NCATS Tox21 Sample Browser, labeled
grade bin “C” as PASS; for purposes of the present study,
the “C” grade bin is relabeled CAUTION to better delineate
the higher quality A,B,I graded samples.
Numeric score (and associated color
codes) to be used for visualization and binning of graded results
in later sections of this manuscript.
QC grade bin counts for samples
analyzed at T0 = 0 months, i.e., directly after thawing from frozen
storage.
QC grade bin counts
for samples
analyzed at T4 = 4 months, i.e., after 4 months exposure to the same
ambient conditions as Tox21 HTS samples undergoing testing.
Either a QC grade could not be assigned,
i.e., analytical results could not be generated, or were inconclusive
(possible for T0 and T4), or the sample was not analyzed (only for
T4); U was originally defined on the NCATS Tox21 Sample Browser as
“Unknown/Inconclusive” but should also include “Not
Determined”, so was changed to the more general “Ungraded”
for this report.
After library
plating was complete,
58 NCATS samples were deemed unsuitable for inclusion in the marketed
drug inventory and were excluded from subsequent HTS and QC analysis.
A previously developed Chemotype Enrichment Workflow (CTEW) was used to identify ToxPrint chemical features (or chemotypes) found to be significantly enriched in a QC “activity” category. In the present application, categories consist of binarized QC grade bins or stability bins, as described in Section 4. For the enrichment analysis, a positive (POS) hit indicates the presence of the chemotype (CT) in the target QC category and a negative (NEG) hit indicates the absence of the CT in the target category. The CTEW generates a standard confusion matrix for each ToxPrint CT in association with the corresponding set of binary hit-calls (1 = POS; 0 = NEG), where the following definitions apply: True positives (TP) are compounds that contain the CT and have an associated POS hit-call; true negatives (TN) have neither the CT nor a POS hit-call; false positives (FP) contain the CT but have a NEG hit-call; and false negatives (FN) do not contain the CT but have a POS hit-call. Based on the confusion matrix, the CTEW applies default statistical thresholds for establishing enrichment that are intended to filter out insignificant results while retaining both weak and strong enrichments for follow-up analysis. The default thresholds include: number of True Positives ≥3, Fisher’s exact p-value one-tailed ≤ 0.05, and odds ratio (OR) ≥ 3, where OR = (TP × TN)/(FN × FP).
For analysis of volatility in association with compound-level QC results indicating sample loss (i.e., low concentration relative to expected target concentration), we used DSSTox molecular weight (MW) values and OPERA-predicted VP values exported from the EPA’s CompTox Chemicals Dashboard. We constructed box plots and computed point-biserial correlation statistics using the CORREL function within the MS 365 Office version of Excel.

TOX21 ID Sample-Level QC Results
Figure 2 indicates four levels of analytical QC data and results to be considered in this study and provides qualitative estimates of the relative sizes of the Tox21 data sets corresponding to each. In total, over 30,000 analytical QC spectra were generated for Tox21 compounds at the sample plate-well level 2(a) for the majority of T0 and T4 samples. In many cases, multiple spectra were generated using the same method (just with different detector or method settings). Additional spectra were collected with alternate methods primarily for failed or challenging samples as well as for many samples successfully analyzed previously. These raw spectral results were used to create the ∼22K PDF summary reports, designed to support the final NCATS expert-based Tox21 ID method-grade assignment. The highlighted Tox21 ID sample QC data level is the primary starting point and the focus of this study. Comparison of level 2(b) Tox21 ID sample QC results, separately acquired at T0 and T4, were intended to be used to assess sample stability over time under ambient test conditions.
Four main analytical
QC aggregation levels are shown: (a) original
spectral data for both T0 and T4 samples collected at the plate-well
address sample level, yielding more than 22K spectral summary PDFs;
(b) summarized Tox21 ID (unique stock solution) results collapsed
separately for T0 and T4, yielding results for ∼13K unique
Tox21 ID samples, the level at which summary QC grades are assigned
and then collapsed in the present study to fewer summary scores and
assigned to quality and stability bins (the 88 Tox21 ID replicate
set is further discussed in Section 3.6.1); (c) summary QC grades and scores for
Tox21 ID samples aggregated to the compound level, yielding results
for ∼8900 unique compounds (DTXSIDs or CAS RN), the level at
which structure–property correlations are computed; and (d)
unique set of Tox21 compound structures represented by ∼600
ToxPrint feature fingerprints (out of 729 possible), the level at
which generalized feature enrichments within QC-binned results are
sought.
Since multiple distinct Tox21 IDs (from different suppliers, partner libraries, or stock solutions) can map to a single generic compound (i.e., unique CAS RN or DTXSID), aggregating QC grades or scores from levels 2(b) to 2(c) required assumptions that would serve the objectives of the data application but also could be justified and documented. Lastly, further collapsing of unique structures to ToxPrint fingerprints was used to detect feature enrichments in a binarized QC property bin of interest (e.g., quality or stability), which required clearly stated assumptions related to bin membership. Understanding these relationships is important when attempting to establish lineage and thus relevance of Tox21 ID sample-level analytical QC results to HTS outcomes generated for the same Tox21 ID solution versus more distantly related samples corresponding to the same or similar compounds. At the compound-level, when structure-QC patterns emerge, particularly in association with poor analytical QC outcomes, they can be used prospectively in the evaluation of testing protocols and HTS results of new chemicals. The impact of this goes beyond individual sample-level quality associations.
In the remainder of this manuscript, the term “sample-level” will refer to QC results generated for individual plated samples assigned to unique Tox21 IDs, which correspond to unique stock solutions, i.e., derived from different lot/batch/supplier neat samples, or from the same neat samples but solubilized at different times. (Note: Only in the case of the intentionally plated 88-replicate set were replicate Tox21 ID samples plated and, for these samples, a single representative QC result is reported—seeSection 3.6.1.) We will employ the terms substance and compound, as represented by DTXSID or CAS RN, interchangeably to refer not just to individual chemicals with a single defined molecular structure, but also to defined mixtures and ill-defined substances, both of which are represented in the Tox21 library. Hence, the complete list of unique Tox21 IDs for which QC results are reported herein will contain many compound-level replicates and, thus, will map to a smaller number of unique compounds and a smaller still number of unique defined structures (the latter list excluding mixtures, polymers, etc.).

Tox21 QC PDF Spectral Summaries
For the majority of Tox21 samples analyzed by one or more of the previously described analytical methods, a standardized PDF template was created by OpAns to provide a summary of each of the analytical QC Tox21 ID sample-level results. The template included the plate and sample identifier, i.e., unique Tox21 ID, along with the date of measurement, images of the spectral results (including from multiple detectors), and the expected formula, MW, and target concentration used to determine, where possible, a preliminary qualitative grade of Pass or Fail. Following subsequent review of the raw spectral data by the Tox21 NCATS analytical chemistry team, PDF summaries were further annotated in the lower left corner with a Tox21 QC letter grade (A–F) and associated color flag (green = PASS, yellow/red = CAUTION), along with a note conveying identity confirmation, percent purity, and/or loss of concentration. Additionally included on the annotated PDF was a pasted image of the chemical’s structure and a PubChem logo hyperlink to the associated PubChem substance (SID) page corresponding to the Tox21 ID DSSTox identifier assigned at the time of the PDF creation. (Note: For a small number of samples, the Tox21 DSSTox structure record was corrected after further curation review, but the historical static NCATS PDFs were not updated; hence, the reader should consultSupporting Information Tables S2 and S3for the most current Tox21 ID mapping and corresponding structure.) A representative annotated PDF summary for Estradiol cypionate is shown in Figure 3.
PDF summary of LC-MS spectral results for the Tox21_110003 sample
(Estradiol cypionate, DTXSID4022999, NCGC00013034-01, CAS RN 313-06-4)
at T0 showing the originally assigned chemical structure image and
Tox21 QC grade flag (A = MW confirmed, purity >90%, no significant
loss of concentration observed; green = PASS) in the lower left of
the figure; PDF can be accessed at  (accessed 13 June, 2024).
Summary spectral file names are of the general format [Tox21 ID]_[T0,T4]_[method].pdf, e.g., “Tox21_110003_00_LCMS1.pdf”. In total, 22,207 summary QC PDF files are available for ftp download from the Tox21 Tripod ftp site,  (accessed 13 June, 2023). The PDF summaries are provided separately for T0 and T4 samples, and in some cases, a single PDF summary includes LC-MS spectra run using multiple detectors or by FIA, and/or spectra generated from alternative methods (i.e., GC-MS for T0 or NMR for T0 and T4). The spectra for one of four distinct Tox21 ID samples of Estradiol cypionate, shown in Figure 3, illustrates one of the many challenges in applying and comparing the results from multiple analytical techniques. The PDF indicates that only some LC-MS settings and detection modes were successful in detecting the chemical, with no detection shown by chemiluminescent nitrogen detection (CLND), an expected outcome since the chemical does not have nitrogen in its formula. A more detailed description of various strengths and limitations affecting the relative ability of the analytical methods employed in this study to detect the chemicals of interest is provided in Supporting Information Methods.

Tox21 (TRIPOD) QC Sample Browser (v0)
To provide public access to the Tox21 analytical chemistry results, a Tox21 Sample Browser was built and hosted on the NCATS Web site (). The first batch of v0 QC graded results with PDF summaries was posted in 2016 and the last completed batch, containing most of the v0 NMR results, was posted in 2019. The Tox21 Sample Browser was built to provide public searchability, browsing, and downloading of Tox21 ID sample-level QC results. Figure 4 presents a view of the main sample search page, with the ability to search by several types of identifiers (4a), download data files from an associated ftp site (4b), perform structure-similarity searches (4c), access the PDF spectra summary for a Tox21 ID sample for either T0 or T4, if available, and link out to the corresponding Tox21 ID substance (SID) information page on PubChem (4f) or generic substance (DTXSID) information page on the EPA CompTox Chemicals Dashboard (4g). Successful search results are displayed in the same table format as the browsing results. In addition, the upper menu tabs provide summary grade and method totals (to be discussed in Sections 3.3 and 3.4).
Screen shots of the NCATS Tox21 Sample Browser indicating
various
functionalities and link-outs, including: (a) identifier search box;
(b) link to data download ftp site; (c) link to JS Marvin (ChemAxon,
Ltd.) structure-similarity search tool; (d) Tox21 ID hypertext link
to expanded list of compound identifiers; (e) hypertext link to PDF
spectra summary for Tox21 ID and T0 time point.; (f) link to corresponding
PubChem SID substance page associated with Tox21 ID, ; (g) link to EPA CompTox Chemicals Dashboard DSSTox substance page
associated with Tox21 ID, .

Tox21 ID Sample-Level QC Grade and Method Totals
Given that various analytical methods and approaches were to be used for analyzing the Tox21 sample library, the Tox21 leadership team endorsed a standardized Tox21 ID-level QC grading system to be applied across the entire library to support the future public release of the results. Hence, following the NCATS analytical chemistry team review of the individual sample-level QC results, a QC grade was assigned to each Tox21 ID sample successfully analyzed at either T0 or T4 according to the predefined Tox21 criteria. [Note that any modifications of chemical identity and quantitation conclusions originally delivered by the OpAns and NIST coauthors are to be attributed to the NCATS analytical review team.] In the case of the only replicate Tox21 ID sample set, comprising the intentionally plated 88 replicates (see Section 3.6.1), a “majority rule” grade (i.e., the most frequently observed grade) was chosen as theTox21 ID summary grade. The Tox21 ID-level QC grades were designed, where possible, to convey three quality attributes of the sample: compound identity confirmed (based on assumed parent MW), purity (based on area of parent peak), and actual vs target concentration (>30%, 5–30%, or <5% of expected concentration). The complete list of these Tox21 QC grades and descriptions is provided in Table 1, along with the total number of Tox21 ID samples analyzed at either T0 or T4 that were assigned to each QC grade. The labels U and W are included for completeness: U indicates the sample was “Ungraded”, either because a grade could not be determined with the methods applied (at T0 or T4), or because they were not tested (only in the case of T4, since all samples are presumed to have been analyzed by LC-MS at T0); W indicates a set of 58 NCATS samples that were withdrawn from analysis and reporting after initial plating. The full list of Tox21 IDs and associated v0 QC grades published in searchable form on the NCATS Tox21 Web site, including samples designated U or W, along with the analytical method used to determine each grade at T0 or T4, are provided in Supporting Information Table S5 for a total of 13,128 unique Tox21 IDs. (Note: The QC grade “U” was originally defined on the NCATS Tox21 Sample Browser as “Unknown/Inconclusive” but has been changed to the more accurate “Ungraded” to reflect inclusion of “Not Analyzed” samples.)
Early on, much discussion across the multiagency Tox21 leadership and workgroups took place regarding communications that were to accompany QC grades presented in association with HTS sample results. At one extreme and for some types of HTS studies, an analytical chemist might label only grade “A” chemicals as PASS, and discard HTS results for all other chemicals. However, given that many environmental and industrial chemicals might produce only weak target activity in HTS assays, grades “A–C” and “I” were initially labeled “PASS” for purposes of assay results interpretation. Since analytical QC method amenability issues can mistakenly produce poor QC grades (i.e., the analysis method may not be suited to detection of the chemical), any grade lower than those in the PASS group was considered less reliable and potentially suspect. Hence, all sample grades outside the PASS bin were accompanied by a CAUTION flag and a corresponding note. Due to the greater uncertainty attributed to the CAUTION-labeled samples, the Tox21 leadership supported full publication of all HTS data associated with Tox21 samples, including those in the lowest quality bins, giving users the opportunity to carefully consider both the QC analysis and the HTS results. For example, a low concentration QC grade (Ac, Bc, or Cc) associated with an inactive HTS assay profile might reasonably be considered inconclusive, whereas the same sample manifesting high assay target activity might be of keen interest for a follow-up study. And, finally, there was the possibility of human error in testing or review of the raw QC data. (Note: The relatively small number of “C” graded samples (75–50% purity) are relabeled CAUTION for purposes of the present study to better delineate the highest quality A,B,I graded samples.)
The relative sizes of the T0 and T4 grade totals in Table 1 tell only a portion of the overall library quality story. Of the total 13,070 Tox21 ID samples tested at one or both time points (i.e., 13,128 minus the 58 W-Withdrawn samples), 11% of T0 samples and 25% of T4 samples were labeled as ungraded “U”, with the larger T4 ungraded count mostly due to incomplete analytical testing coverage. Of the 11,586 samples for which QC grades were assigned at T0 (89% of the total number of Tox21 samples), the majority, 78%, were assigned to the PASS bin, with 73% exceeding 90% purity. Similarly, of the 9717 samples for which grades were assigned at T4 (75% of the total), 70% were assigned to the v0 PASS bin, and 66% exceeded 90% purity. The remaining 22% of T0 graded samples and 30% of T4 graded samples assigned to the v0 CAUTION bin represent QC results recommended to undergo further scrutiny in association with HTS results from Tox21. Finally, the “Score” column and coloration in Table 1 were added for the present study and will be utilized later in this section to aid in global visualization and analyses of the Tox21 ID sample-level QC results.
Table 2 presents the total numbers of Tox21 ID samples for which grades were assigned, broken down by the analytical method at either T0 or T4. Of the 13,070 T0 samples initially evaluated by LC-MS, only 8163, or 62%, were successfully analyzed and graded by that method. This knowledge of complete LC-MS testing coverage, however, provides a large, structurally diverse data set that has already been employed for LC-MS amenability modeling. An additional 48 metal-containing compounds were analyzed by FIA. In follow-up studies at NIST, 1398 of the remaining T0 samples, or 11% of the total, were analyzed and graded by GC-MS. Lastly, NMR analyses of the T0 samples for which sufficient samples remained and grades could not be determined by the previous 3 methods, as well as some T0 samples with grades by other methods, yielded results for 1977 samples, leaving the remaining 1484 T0 samples ungraded (U). There were 1878 fewer samples analyzed and graded at T4 than at T0 as indicated by the difference in U totals. This was largely by design as only higher quality (PASS) T0 samples were originally intended for T4 follow-up analysis to evaluate stability over time; i.e., it was assumed that poor quality or unamenable T0 samples would remain so at T4. However, given the method challenges and difficulties encountered in analyzing thousands of the T0 Tox21 samples, when additional contract funds became available to apply the potentially more accurate NMR technique, entire T4 plates with the remaining sample containing previously ungraded T4 chemicals were analyzed. This accounts for the substantially larger number of T4 samples (3966) than T0 samples (1977) analyzed by NMR.
Total Number of Graded (A–F)
and Ungraded (U) Tox21 ID Samples Analyzed at Times T0 (0 Months)
and T4 (4 Months), Broken down by Analytical Method
Tables 1 and 2 present v0 QC sample grades and analytical method totals that were independently determined for T0 and T4 samples; hence, no Tox21 ID sample-level T0–T4 grade or method associations can be extracted from those totals. The linkage of grades for individual Tox21 ID samples tested at both T0 and T4 is required to assess the sample stability over time. Similarly, knowing whether the analytical methods applied to analyzing individual samples at T0 or T4 were the same or different, and which methods were applied, can affect the outcome and interpretation of the results, e.g., how many of the 3968 NMR T4 results had a corresponding LC-MS, GC-MS, or FIA result as opposed to an NMR T0 result? To shed further light on these associations, Table 3 presents an expanded version of Table 2, showing the overlapping correspondence of T0 and T4 analytical method totals at the sample level. Here we see that of the 3966 T4 samples analyzed by NMR, 318 and 1179 were previously analyzed by LC-MS and GC-MS, respectively. A set of 1351 samples analyzed by NMR at both T0 and T4 (indicated in red) offers an opportunity for the same method-grade comparisons, whereas it would be of interest to examine the large set of 1179 samples analyzed by different methods, GC-MS at T0 and NMR at T4, for possible inconsistencies. The ungraded (U) totals in this table correspond to samples where one of the two time points was graded and the other was not, except in the case of the U,U entry (307), which is the number of samples ungraded at both time points. For example, the U total listed at the bottom of the T4-NMR column indicates that 1118 T0, U samples were successfully graded by NMR at T4. This is to be expected since NMR was applied to a high proportion of T4 samples deemed unamenable by other QC methods at T0, and for which the remaining T4 sample was available. Also listed in Table 3 is the same-method total for LC-MS (in red), indicating that 5636 samples were analyzed by LC-MS at both T0 and T4. These, and the corresponding 1351 same-method set of samples for NMR, offer subsets of results that are expected to yield the most internally consistent, least confounded comparisons of T0 and T4 sample-level results.
Total Number of Graded (A–F)
and Ungraded (U) Tox21 ID-Level Samples Analyzed at Times T0 (0 Months)
and T4 (4 Months), Indicating Number of Samples in each T0–T4
Method Pairing, with Red Totals Indicating the Same Method Was Used
to Generate QC Grades for Both T0 and T4 Samples

Patterns of Tox21 ID Sample-Level QC Scores
The totals in Tables 1–3 provide high-level views of the analytical QC Tox21 ID sample results without considering the association of methods and time points with the 13 possible QC grades. The 13,070 samples were analyzed by one of 4 possible analytical methods at T0 (LC-MS, GC-MS, FIA, and NMR) and one of 2 possible methods at T4 (LC-MS or NMR), with the additional possibility of samples being ungraded (labeled U) at T0 and/or T4. If each sample were to have both a T0 and T4 grade, this would yield 1352 potential grade-method-time result combinations (i.e., (13 × 4) × (13 × 2)) for the 13,070 sample QC data set. With the additional possibility of ungraded samples (U) at either T0 or T4, the total number of combinations increases to 1430. To aid the reader and research community in perceiving useful patterns in this large multifactorial data set, we collapsed the 13 grades to a set of 5 color-coded scores (Table 4), adding the color-coded U label to account for missing data, which reduced the total number of possible score-method-time combinations 5-fold, to 324. Scores 1 and 2 (dark and light green) represent the highest quality “PASS” QC grades (A and B, I), whereas scores 3, 4, and 5 (yellow, orange, and red, respectively) represent the remaining “CAUTION” grades with lower quality and higher method-related uncertainty. The colors are intended to visually convey levels of sample quality and confidence, as well as missing data: light blue for a missing T0 grade, dark blue for a missing T4 grade, and gray for missing both T0 and T4 results.
Color-Coded Scores and Total Numbers
of Samples at T0 and T4 Time Points Assigned to v0 QC Grade Groups
(and Ungraded Bins) in Table 1 for the Purpose of Visualizing Tox21 ID Sample-Level (Grade
× Method × Time) results
Assigning a color-coded score from Table 4 to each assigned QC grade at T0 and T4 for the set of 13070 Tox21 ID samples, in association with the appropriate analytical method, produces a 6-cell colored band and what we refer to as a 6-digit numeric barcode, or barcode for short, for each Tox21 ID sample. For illustration purposes, Table 5 provides a sample listing of Tox21 IDs with QC grades assigned at T0 and T4, with the associated color-coded scores and barcodes. Where a sample was successfully graded at either T0 or T4, a color-coded score associated with a single analytical method is assigned, i.e., one possible score for each of the two time points. A 6-cell color band (under the blue T0 and T4 headers) and a corresponding 6-digit numeric barcode is shown for each of the Tox21 IDs listed in Table 5. The full expanded version of Table 5, listing a color-coded band and numeric barcode for each of the 13070 Tox21 ID samples, is provided in Supporting Information Table S6.
Sample List of Tox21 IDs Showing T0
(v0) and T4 QC Grades That Are Each Assigned to a Color-Coded Score
(See Table 4), Aligned
with One of the 6 Possible Time-Method Columns, Where Numeric Barcodes
(Red Text) Are a Concatenation of the 6 Time-Method Column Numeric
Scores and Are Assigned to One of 8 Possible Bins (a–h)
To provide the reader with a global overview of the full analytical QC data set, we sorted the full sample barcode table (i.e., Supporting Information Table S6) by T0 and T4 color-coded time-method scores to group and order approximate indications of overall sample quality. (Note: This sort is also reflected in the a-h BIN assignments for the samples inTable 5.) We then transposed the full barcode table and condensed the view of the 6-cell color bands × 13070 Tox21 ID columns to produce the heat map in Figure 5. This global representation serves to highlight overarching patterns across the data set, as well as the frequency with which unique patterns are observed. The incompletely scored sample coverage within each analytical method or time point across the library is readily apparent, as is the predominance of the LC-MS results. The left side of the figure also visually conveys the large fraction of high-quality samples (green, with the majority score 1), particularly at T0, whereas relatively fewer samples on the right side of the figure indicate various pairings of lower quality scores (yellow, orange, red) at T0, T4, or both time points. On the other hand, missing grades for T0 (light blue) or T4 (darker blue) are paired with both high and low-quality graded samples in approximately equal numbers. These visual patterns begin to convey a more nuanced picture of graded vs not graded, high-quality vs low-quality, and stable vs unstable chemicals.
Sample-level
QC results shown for 13,070 unique Tox21 ID samples,
sorted and grouped into 8 Bins (a–h) across 2 time points (T0
= 0 months, T4 = 4 months) and 4 possible analytical methods (4 methods
for T0, 2 methods for T4), with a sample grade mapped to a color-coded
quality score for a single method at each time point; refer to Table 1 for grade definitions
and Tables 4 and 5 for numeric score-grade-color mappings and barcode
definitions.
To delve further into these patterns and propose useful groupings for subsequent analysis, Figure 5 has been subdivided into 8 sample Bins, labeled a–h (see sample table entries for Bins a–g in Table 5). The 13,070 vertical 6-cell colored bands in Figure 5, in turn, can be represented as a 6-bit numeric barcode, as shown in Table 5, e.g., the barcodes for the first and last scored samples in Figure 5, Bins a–g (reading from bottom to top) are “100010” and “000500″, respectively. In total, there are 115 unique barcodes out of the 324 possible score-method-time combinations in the full Tox21 ID data set and represented in Figure 5. Barcode patterns within each of the 8 Bins in Figure 5 are considered in more detail below.

Bins a, b: High-Quality “PASS” Samples
Figure 6 presents a pivoted, expanded view of the 38 unique QC barcodes represented in Bins a and b of Figure 5; also listed are the individual barcode counts and total Bin counts. Bin a groups together the highest quality T0 and T4 sample results for which the quality score is 1 (A) or 2 (B, I), low concentration is not flagged as a concern, (i.e., excluding score 4 samples with grades Ac, Bc, etc.) and no degradation below 75% purity is indicated for the entire set. Bin a also contains the largest fraction of Tox21 samples graded at both T0 and T4 (6176/8531, or 72%), with 78% (4855) of the T0 grades and 77% (4736) of the T4 grades determined by LC-MS. As the method initially applied to analyzing the entire T0 sample library, LC-MS not only successfully graded the most Tox21 samples at T0 (8163) and T4 (5749) (see method totals in Table 1, but also the majority of those were assigned to high-quality Bin a. A corollary is that the set of remaining Tox21 samples comprise chemicals likely to be more methodologically challenging or of lower quality and, as a result, a smaller percentage of samples were successfully graded by other analytical methods. This is further evidenced by the lower (higher quality) average T0 score for LC-MS (1.46) versus higher (lower quality) scores for GC-MS (2.65), FIA (3.75), and NMR (2.38).
Unique “barcode” patterns of QC
results across time
(T0 and T4) and analytical methods with the highest T4 QC grades (scores
1, 2 = green), listing sample barcode counts and totals (and % of
total sample inventory) corresponding to Bins a,b in Figure 5; refer to Table 1 for grade definitions and Table 4 for score-grade-color
key.
Bins b1 and b2 consist of 225 samples for which a low-quality score (3–5) is assigned at T0 and a high-quality score is assigned 4 months later at T4, with the majority of T4 scores assigned by NMR. A sample is highly unlikely to increase in quality over time, casting significant doubt on the low-quality T0 results in these bins. In addition, we posit that the high-quality scores obtained for T4 samples, 97% of which were graded by NMR, are likely to be more accurate and reliable than the corresponding low-quality T0 results, even when the T0 and T4 results were generated by the same method. In part, this is due to the assumed greater accuracy of the NMR result at T4 (see discussion in Supporting Information Methods – Part 2). In addition, a high QC grade requires a positive signal confirming identity and purity, whereas low QC grades can result from a lack of signal and are more likely to be confounded by analytical method inadequacies and spectral review challenges. Where no T0 result is available for the remaining 476 samples in Bin b3 and a high-quality score is assigned at T4, we can reasonably assume that no degradation has occurred and the higher T4 grade, and the method by which that grade was successfully determined, can be assigned to the T0 sample. These changes increased the T0 high-quality score sample count by 701 samples or nearly 5%. (Note: these changes are incorporated in an updated T0(v1) version of the Tox21 QC results reported herein.)

Bins c, d: Unstable and Indeterminant Stability Samples
Figure 7 presents the unique QC barcodes represented in bins c, d of Figure 5, containing the highest quality T0 scores (green = 1, 2), associated with missing (bin c) or lower quality (bin d) T4 scores. Bin c contains a total of 1548 samples that were assigned high-quality scores at T0 but the T4 sample was not analyzed or a grade could not be determined. Hence, for this subset of T0-only samples, no information can be inferred about sample stability over time. On the other hand, bin d contains 1130 high-quality T0 samples for which clear evidence of purity degradation or loss of sample is indicated by the lower quality T4 QC scores. Because a high-quality grade was successfully determined at T0, we can confidently infer that the sample was amenable to analysis with the T0 methods indicated; hence, the T4 low-quality result is less likely attributed to method-amenability issues. Bin d could be divided further into the midlow quality T4 = 3 scored subset (d1), the T4 = 4 low concentration subset (d2), or the T4 = 5 lowest quality subset (d3).
Unique “barcode” patterns of QC results across time
(T0 and T4) and analytical methods with the highest T0 QC grades (scores
1, 2 = green) associated with either missing (bin c) or lower quality
(bin d) T4 QC grades, listing sample barcode counts and totals (and
% of total sample inventory) corresponding to bins c, d in Figure 5; refer to Table 1 for grade definitions
and Table 4 for score-grade-color
key.

Bins e–h: Poor Quality Samples
Figure 8 presents several patterns of results for scores 3–5 samples that we have deemed the lowest quality (and highest uncertainty) Tox21 samples, having no association with high-quality sample scores at either T0 or T4. Bin e contains 493 low or indeterminate quality samples, grouping together samples with grades C (50–75% purity), M (mixture), or Z (parent detected but purity could not be determined). For 165 of the samples in which a T4 score of 3 was assigned (Bin e1), the T0 score was the same for the majority (156) indicating a poor-quality sample but possibly stable, whereas the T0 grade was even lower for the remaining 9 cases, results that may warrant further investigation. On the other hand, for the 328 samples in Bin e2 where a T4 grade was not assigned (likely due to the sample not analyzed at T4), nothing more can be inferred about stability of the sample over time in ambient conditions.
Unique “barcode” patterns of QC results across time
(T0 and T4) and analytical methods for the poorest quality samples
(scores 3–5) at T0 and/or T4, showing sample barcode counts
and totals (and % of total sample inventory) corresponding to bins
f–h in Figure 5; refer to Table 1 for grade definitions and Table 4 for score-grade-color key.
Bin f contains 701 samples for which a T0 grade was not assigned, but the sample was deemed to be low-quality at T4, grouping together samples with scores 3, 4, 5. Given that all Tox21 samples were initially screened by LC-MS, and possibly other methods, the lack of an assigned T0 grade coupled with the low-quality T4 grades implies that these samples were challenging to analyze by LC-MS at both time points. Hence, although degradation from a higher quality sample at T0 cannot be ruled out, it also cannot be supported by the available data.
Bin g contains 2014 samples deemed to be of the lowest quality overall. Low-quality is determined with the highest confidence for the 835 samples having low-quality scores (3–5) at both T0 and T4, whereas a low-quality score at T0 is less confidently applied with no confirmation at T4 for the remaining 1179 samples. Bin g could be further subdivided into samples with low-concentration concerns (bin g2) versus samples with the lowest purity or quality concerns (bin g3).

Tox21 ID Sample QC Results Summary
Collapsing the 13 Tox21 ID sample-level QC grades to the 5 quality scores implied prioritization of quality grades: scores 1,2 (grades A, B, I) are equated with high-quality samples, score 3 (C, Z = unknown purity, M = Mixture) indicates lower quality and greater uncertainty samples, score 4 samples (Ac, Bc, Cc) are considered low-quality by virtue of low-concentration (<30% of target value) due to sample loss or possible volatility, and score 5 (D, F, Fc, Fns) represents samples in the lowest quality bin, failing identity, purity, or concentration. When considered for both T0 and T4 results, these scores can be used to create sample-level quality labels, such as PASS/CAUTION (Table 1), that can help guide use of the QC results in association with HTS bioassay data.
We incorporated the proposed changes to Bin b T0 sample grades based on the higher quality T4 grades, yielding a modified (v1) QC data set. In the remainder of this paper, the use of these modified T0 (v1) QC grades and scores is assumed.
In Figure 9, we present a summary of the Tox21 sample-level QC results using the “PASS-CAUTION” labels and QC scores in Tables 1 and 4: PASS - high quality T0 v1 results (bins a, b1, b2 in Figure 6); PASS - high quality T4 results (bins a, b in Figure 6); PASS → CAUTION “degrades” subset (yellow bar) corresponding to bin d in Figure 7, indicating samples that degrade from high-quality T0 to low quality T4; and a low-quality CAUTION → CAUTION bin (red bar) that includes samples with T0 scores 3, 4, 5 and T4 scores 3, 4, 5 or no T4 score. The purpose of this figure is to show the relative proportions of high-quality T0 and T4 samples (82% and 71% of their respective total sets, with the large majority scored 1), to the smaller subsets of samples showing evidence of degradation or sample loss (12%), or deemed low-quality overall (27%), each compared to their respective total sets. The total sets, in turn (total bar length including the blue hatched sections), differ depending on the T0 to T4 score requirements, i.e., from top to bottom: T0 all, T4 all, T0 to T4 with both graded, T0 all.
Summary of Tox21 sample-level
QC results: solid colored bars indicate
total number of Tox21 ID samples within a QC T0 and/or T4 scored subset,
where high-quality is indicated by scores 1 (dark green) and 2 (light
green); yellow bar = degradation from high-quality score 1, 2 to a
low-quality score 3, 4, 5 (bin d in Figure 8); red bar = low-quality overall (T0 score
3, 4, 5 and T4 score missing or 3, 4, 5); in each case, colored bars
are shown relative to total number of samples meeting the T0 to T4
score requirements (including the blue hatched fill), i.e., from top
to bottom - T0 all, T4 all, both T0 and T4 graded, T0 all; the small
vertical striped bar section in the topmost bar indicates the T0 subset
whose missing or low-quality scores were modified to match the high-quality
T4 scored results in v1 of the Tox21 QC data set; see Table 1 for grade and score definitions,
with sample score subsets and totals computed from the barcode bins
in Figures 6–8.
The breakdown of “High- and Low-quality” and “Degrades or Sample Loss” subsets in Figure 9 is just one possible parsing of the sample-level QC data set. Other ways of grouping bins or scored subsets could potentially focus on more clearly defined QC subsets at the cost of fewer overall numbers. For example, a subset of samples focused on potential sample loss could consist of the 914 samples with T0 or T4 score = 4 (grades Ac, Bc, Cc), with the possible addition of the T0 or T4 score = 5 subset with grades Fc or Fns. Similarly, a subset of 724 samples focused on degradation leading to a loss of purity could exclude all samples with indications of sample loss. However, these separations assume that the two issues are unrelated to each other or to method amenability concerns. These issues will become more relevant when considering compound-level QC results in relation to intrinsic properties, to be taken up in Section 4.

Tox21 ID Sample-Level Grade Reproducibility and Method Amenability
There are several possible sources of error and uncertainty applied to the Tox21 ID sample-level analytical QC grades. These include plating errors (resulting in different or contaminated plate-well level samples) or analytical method limitations and associated analytical chemist review challenges when spectral results are unclear or confounded, e.g., when NMR resonances are buried under solvent signals in the spectrum, or when the chemical elutes too late to be observed during the method observation time. The latter are more likely to lead to conflicting grades either at two time points (such as in Figure 6, bin b), or in results obtained by different analytical methods. Errors in supplier-provided information or incorrect structure assignments to the Tox21 ID, on the other hand, would lead to a failed identity grade assignment (F). In general, method amenability and higher confidence in results can be inferred when a high-quality grade is assigned, particularly at both time points since this requires clear positive evidence of identity and concentration. A low-quality grade assignment, on the other hand, is associated with greater uncertainty, as it can be confounded by method limitations or difficulty interpreting spectra.

Tox21 ID 88 Replicate Set
In the present data set, LC-MS was applied initially to analyzing the entire Tox21 T0 sample library. Referring to Figure 2, all v0 analytical QC grades are reported at the unique Tox21 ID sample level, which also corresponds to the plate-well level, except in the case of the Tox21 IDs corresponding to the 88-replicate sample set. The full 88 replicate set of stock solutions (denoted “Tox21_4#####” in Table S1) was a subset of compounds provided by the EPA, primarily pesticides with reliably measured bioactivity in early ToxCast studies that were chosen to serve as replicates across the entire Tox21 library. Two sets of the 88 Tox21 ID samples were plated randomly on each of the three 1536-well plate sets of chemicals submitted by each of the three Tox21 federal partner’s collections. Hence, each of these 88 samples were analyzed by LC-MS at least 18 times at T0. During NCATS analytical chemist review, these T0 sample results were aggregated to a single Tox21 ID grade by majority rule (data not shown). Of the 67 samples for which an LC-MS grade could be assigned, 61 were graded A consistently, with the majority having no grade conflicts, 2 were consistently graded D, and only 4 samples (6%) received multiple grades across the sample set. Hence, although a relatively small data set, this 88 replicate Tox21 ID sample set indicates a high degree of analytical grade reproducibility, with the conflicting grades for 6% of samples most likely an indication of analytical method challenges. Final v0 grades for the 88 samples are associated with Tox21_4##### IDs in Supporting Information Table S5.

Inferring T0–T4 QC Score Reproducibility
In Figures 6–8, we tabulated Tox21 ID sample-level quality scores for T0 and T4, collected by the same or different analytical methods at the 2 time points. An approximate, indirect means of inferring analytical grade reproducibility within the current data set is by considering the total number of samples for which T0 and T4 scores were consistent compared to samples where they differed significantly. Combining the 6176 total from Bin a in Figure 6, where both T0 and T4 samples were deemed high-quality (scores 1, 2), with the 1000 Bin e,g samples that were deemed low-quality (scores 3–5) for both T0 and T4, yields 7176 out of 8531 total samples consistently graded at both T0 and T4. In cases where a T0 grade is high-quality, it is indicative not only of positive sample identity confirmation but also of method amenability. If we remove the 1130 samples in Bin d, where degradation from T0 to T4 is indicated and plausible, from the total graded at T0 and T4, the percentage of consistent T0–T4 scores (high-quality to high-quality or low-quality to low-quality) increases to 97%. Note that these numbers include same-method T0 and T4 score pairings (only for LC-MS and NMR), as well as different method pairings.
Alternatively, in Figure 6, bin b, we encountered the most clear-cut cases indicating possible method or reviewer error in assigning sample grades, where a low-quality T0 grade conflicted with the high-quality T4 grade. For reasons stated previously, a high-quality result is more reliable than a low-quality result since the former requires positive confirmation of identity, purity, and concentration, whereas the latter may be due to a variety of factors, including method amenability, misinterpretation of spectra, etc. If all T0 and T4 method pairings are considered, then only 225 out of the 8531 samples for which both T0 and T4 samples were graded (i.e., 2.6%) present this conflict. Interestingly, more than half of the 225 samples with this conflict, i.e., 145, occurred for samples where the T0 grade was generated by GC-MS and the T4 grade was generated by the NMR method, strongly suggesting amenability issues with the GC-MS result. If, instead, we only consider the subset in which the same method was used to grade both T0 and T4 samples, this type of error only occurred for 19 out of 5636 (0.3%) LC-MS samples and 20 out of 1351 (1.4%) NMR samples (see totals in Table 3). We conclude that the Tox21 ID sample QC data set has a high rate of PASS/CAUTION label consistency across T0 and T4 samples.

Structure-Based TOX21 QC Results

Collapsing Tox21 ID Sample-Level QC Results to the Compound Level
In this section, we propose means to collapse the 13,070 Tox21 ID sample-level QC summary labels to the compound-level (Figure 2b to 2c) for 8929 unique substances, resulting in a single QC label assigned to a generic substance, i.e., CAS RN or DTXSID, and associated structure where possible. Due to compound-level overlaps in the 3 Tox21 partner libraries, there is a 1:many mapping of thousands of Tox21 IDs (either different stock solutions from the same neat sample or different supplier neat procurements) to fewer unique compounds (DTXSID or CAS RN). Different QC grades at the Tox21 ID sample level for the same compound can result from plate-well effects, supplier-provided neat quality differences, the age of the sample prior to plating, and method amenability challenges. In contrast, the objective in collapsing QC results at the compound level is to potentially extract intrinsic compound-level QC-related properties of chemicals solubilized in DMSO that could be generalized beyond the sample level. These properties could include analytical method amenability, propensity for hydrolysis due to the hygroscopic properties of DMSO or reactivity leading to degradation, and DMSO insolubility, volatility, or column retention leading to the loss of detectable sample.
Figure 10 indicates the relative sizes of the compound-level replicate sample subsets. Out of the total 13,070 Tox21 ID samples, 5693 (or 44%) “Singlets” map 1:1 to their respective compound. For this subset, the compound level QC grade, score, or PASS/CAUTION label is the same at the sample-level and compound-level. For the remaining 56% of samples, 39% have one replicate (i.e., 2 samples mapping to 1 compound), 10% have 2 replicates mapping to the same compound (3 replicates total), 7% have 3 replicates (4 total), and 0.4% have 4 replicates (5 total). Hence, collapsing from sample-level QC labels to compound-level QC labels is necessary only for the 7377 non-singlets mapping to the remaining 3236 unique compounds (i.e., 8929–5693).
Relative numbers of Tox21 ID samples
mapped to a single compound:
Singlets are compounds with a single mapped Tox21 ID sample, i.e.,
1:1, versus sets of 2–5 Tox21 ID samples mapped to a single
compound, 2:1, 3:1, 4:1, and 5:1, respectively.
There are many ways in which the Tox21 ID sample-level QC results could be collapsed to the compound level, including grade averaging and score averaging. The means by which this is accomplished should have a scientific rationale and be fit for the purpose for which the compound-level results will be applied. We chose an approach based on the previously stated assumption that “PASS” high-quality QC sample grades or scores, by virtue of the need for definitive and clear positive confirmation of identity, purity, and concentration, are less uncertain than low-quality QC results mapped to the same compound. In Table 5a and 5b, we propose QC labels and category definitions to be used in this section to characterize each Tox21 ID QC sample graded at T0 and/or T4, either individually or paired, i.e., T0 → T4. These labels and categories were designed for use in prioritizing samples for aggregation to the compound level as well as for subsequent efforts to relate QC results to structure–property attributes.
The QC Labels PASS/CAUTION, defined in Table 6a, were first assigned to each Tox21 T0(v1) and T4 sample grade separately (Columns 1 and 2 in Table 6c). Next, a second set of QC Labels, HighQuality/LowQuality, was applied at the sample level to the paired set of T0(v1) and T4 results (column 3 in Table 6c). Finally, one of four Stability Labels, defined in Table 6b, was assigned to each pair of T0(v1) and T4 results (column 4 in Table 6c). Concatenation of these 4 category labels produced the list of 11 unique QC Priority Categories (Column 5 in Table 6c) and associated Priority Bins (Column 6 in Table 6c), which indicate the order of their use in collapsing the sample-level QC results to the compound-level (Column 6 in Table 6c). Note that we split the CAUTION supercategory into the constituent subsets SampleLoss and PurityLoss.
Definitions of QC Labels (6a, b) and
Prioritized Categories (6c) Used in Collapsing Tox21 ID Sample-Level
QC Results to the Compound Level, Resulting in a Single High-Priority
Category Tox21 Sample Mapped to Each Unique DTXSID Compound, with
Total Numbers of Samples and Compounds in Each QC Priority Category
Listed in the Last 2 Columns of 6c
Once a QC Priority Category was assigned to each Tox21 ID sample, we applied sequential sorting and filtering to the main MS Excel table in the Priority Bin order shown in Table 6c. Within each Priority Category, grades were ordered from high to low, with Caution samples first listing the SampleLoss grades and then the PurityLoss grades. The QC Priority Categories were then ordered from high to low quality, prioritizing PASS results at T0 above all CAUTION results, prioritizing samples having both T0 and T4 grades over those with only a T0 grade and the latter over those with only a T4 grade. The purpose of the prioritized sorting was to select the Tox21 ID sample replicate with the highest QC Priority Category to represent the compound-level QC result. The initial number of Tox21 samples and final number of compounds in each Priority Bin are listed in the last 2 columns of Table 6c. The full listing of 13070 Tox21 ID samples, with the corresponding QC grades, scores, QC and stability labels, and Priority Categories and Bins is provided in Supporting Information Table S7. The collapsed listing of 8929 unique DTXSID compounds resulting from this process is provided in Supporting Information Table S8.
A corollary result of collapsing of Tox21 ID sample-level QC results to the DTXSID compound-level was to reduce the proportion of “NA” (Not Available) T0(v1) or T4 results when another, graded Tox21 ID sample in a higher Priority Bin mapped to the same compound. This is most notably and reliably seen in the sharp 10-fold reduction in Samples vs Compound (Cmpd) totals (1548 to 144) for Priority Bin 4, T0 = PASS → T4 = NA. In this case, more than 1400 Priority Bin 4 samples had compound-replicates in the higher Priority Bins 1–3 with a PASS or CAUTION T4 grade, resulting in selection of a representative compound from the higher Priority Bin in each case. Given that the T0 = PASS label was assigned to these T4 = NA samples, method amenability also can be assumed at T4, implying that the T4 = NA grade likely resulted from the sample not being analyzed.

Structure Enrichments in Compound-Level Quality Subsets
The analytical QC results and discussion presented to this point are intended to provide the reader with a deeper appreciation not only for the richness and complexity of the multidimensional QC results data set at the sample-level but to point toward ways in which the analytical QC data can be represented, mined, and modeled at the compound-level. A thorough investigation of the compound-level data, exploring structure–property correlations to compound-level QC properties, is beyond the scope of this manuscript. However, a few preliminary analyses and results are provided to illustrate approaches that could be taken and to encourage others to continue these types of investigations.

Chemotype Enrichments in Degrades vs Stable Compounds
A compound that experiences degradation in QC grade over 4-month sample storage at ambient conditions may be a chemical for which resultant bioactivity could occur due to some unknown mixture of parent and degradant or for which lack of a bioactivity signal may be due to loss of compound. Hence, it is useful to be able to anticipate whether such degradation is likely to occur based on chemical features. We first encountered these types of QC results for sample subsets in Figure 7 - bin d, in which T0 PASS (scores 1,2) QC results were associated with T4 CAUTION (scores 3–5) QC results. After the sample-level QC results collapsed to the compound level, these were represented in Table 6c within priority bins 2 and 3. Recognizing that the term “Degrades”, as represented by PASS → CAUTION labels, encompasses both loss of purity (scores 3,5) and loss of sample (or concentration) (score 4), we broke down the category into priority bins 2 and 3 in Table 6c: PASS-CAUTION-···-SampleLoss and PASS-CAUTION-···-PurityLoss.
We combined Priority Bins 2 and 3 into a single “Degrades” subset and analyzed for ToxPrint chemotype (CT)-enrichments in this 878-compound subset relative to priority bin 1 in Figure 5c (PASS-PASS-···Stable), i.e., the “Stable” 5628-compound subset. Note that ToxPrints can only be generated for the “structurable” portion of each subset, i.e., compounds for which a defined structure or DTXCID can be assigned, yielding slightly smaller totals in each case: 852 Degrades and 5571 Stable). The 15 enriched CTs exceeding the required CTEW threshold statistics (see Section 2.4) are plotted in Figure 11, with the counts of Stable compounds scaled by a factor of 0.15 relative to the Degrade counts to compensate for the larger size of the former subset, solely for visualization purposes. Whereas several reactive ToxPrint features are listed (e.g., diene, aldehyde, alkyl/acyl halides, etc.) that are consistent with degradation potential, the overall counts and statistics of the CT-enrichments within this Degrades subset are not impressive (CTEW statistics provided in Supporting Information Table S9). In total, the 15 enriched CTs are present in 100 of the 852 Degrades chemicals, providing only 12% coverage of the full Degrades subset.
ToxPrint
chemotype-enrichments in Degrades compounds vs stable
compounds, as defined by priority bins 2, 3 relative to priority bin
1 in Table 6c, where
the Stable counts are scaled by a factor of 0.15 to compensate for
the larger size of the total Stable subset (5571) relative to the
total Degrades subset (852), with sample ToxPrint images shown.
Given the relatively weak CT-enrichment results for the Degrades vs Stable comparison, we were interested to determine if the results would improve with a clearer focus on the Priority Bin 3, 442 “Degrades-PurityLoss” subset (424 with ToxPrints), i.e., removing the Priority 2, Degrades-SampleLoss subset. The CT-enrichment results for this more focused comparison are shown in Figure 12.
ToxPrint chemotype-enrichments in Degrades:PurityLoss compounds
vs Stable compounds, as defined by Priority Bin 3 relative to Priority
Bin 1 in Table 6c,
where the Stable counts are scaled by a factor of 0.08 to compensate
for the larger size of the total Stable subset (5571) relative to
the total Degrades-PurityLoss subset (424); 10 enriched-CTs also found
enriched in the full Degrade subset (Figure 11) are circled in red.
Interestingly, we found a larger number of enriched CTs, 22 for the smaller 424 Degrades:PurityLoss subset versus 15 for the full 848 Degrades subset. Furthermore, these 22 enriched CTs were present in 99, or 23% of the Degrades:PurityLoss subset, providing twice the coverage of the 15 enriched CTs to the full Degrades subset. Comparing the list of CTs in Figure 12 to that in Figure 11, ten enriched CTs appear in both lists (circled in Figure 12), albeit with substantially improved statistical scores for both Odds Ratios and p-values for 5/10 in the more focused Degrades:PurityLoss case (CTEW statistics provided in Supporting Information Table S10). We interpret these results as follows: (1) focusing the CT-enrichment analysis on the Degrades:PurityLoss subset boosts the CT “signal”, indicating higher relevance of the overlapping CTs in Figures 11 and 12 to the PurityLoss subset; (2) chemotype drivers for PurityLoss compared to the larger, less focused Degrades subset, as defined by QC grades/score and Priority Bins, differ but are overlapping; (3) the results also suggest different chemical drivers for the Degrades:SampleLoss subset, possibly indicated by the nonoverlapping 5 CTs in Figure 11.
We conclude from this exercise that the quality labels SampleLoss and PurityLoss, and the supporting grades, scores, and Priority Bins, are useful but approximate quality designations from an analytical chemistry perspective. As previously indicated, the reliability of CAUTION quality scores is less certain than that of PASS quality scores, since the former are more likely to be affected by analytical method amenability, instrument settings, and possible errors in spectra interpretations. Designating a sample or compound as “Degrades” is also less certain if the method used to determine the T4 CAUTION grade was different from that used to determine the T0 PASS grade. An example of how a SampleLoss and PurityLoss quality indicator can become conflated is when a sample decomposes into one or more products but the degradation products are either volatile or not amenable to detection by the applied method, leading to a SampleLoss designation. However, the utility of these designations, despite their imprecision, is supported by the CT-enrichment results in Figure 12.

Chemotype Enrichments in T0 Quality Subsets, PASS vs CAUTION
In considering the propensity of a compound to degrade over the 4-month Tox21 HTS testing period, we focused only on comparison of “Degrades” Priority Bins 2,3 to T0 PASS Priority Bin 1, thereby ignoring cases where T0 samples were received as poor quality from the supplier, were degraded in neat form during storage, or had undergone degradation after DMSO solubilization, prior to the initial T0 sample plate freeze. To determine structural indicators of overall compound quality prior to the 4 month course of Tox21 testing, we compared the larger T0 PASS compound subset (priority bins 1–4) to the larger T0 CAUTION compound subset (priority bins 5–8). ToxPrints were available for a total of 6562 T0 PASS compounds and 1340 T0 CAUTION compounds.
Figure 13a presents CT-enrichment results within the T0 CAUTION subset relative to the T0 PASS subset, where the latter results are scaled by a factor of 0.2 to compensate for the larger relative size of the T0 PASS subset. In total, we found 45 enriched CTs, 32 of the most statistically significant listed in Figure 13a (the remaining 13 were redundant and contributed minimally to overall coverage). The set of 32 enriched CTs was present in 33% of the 1340 T0 CAUTION compounds, providing significant overall coverage of that subset. Once again, we can see several reactivity features represented (e.g., dienes, acyl halides, esters, hydrazine, isocyanate, etc.) that could plausibly lead to degradation, either before solubilization, under storage conditions, or in DMSO solution prior to or immediately after T0 thaw. Interestingly, only 4 of the enriched reactive CTs in Figure 13a overlap with the list of Degrade CTs in Figure 11 (bond: C=O_acyl_halide, bond: C=O_aldehyde_alkyl, bond: P=O_phosphonate_acid, chain: alkeneLinear_diene_1_4-diene), with only the first 3 of these overlapping the list of enriched CTs in Figure 12. CTEW statistics are provided in Supporting Information Table S11. The differences likely have to do with the distinction between the larger CAUTION set spanning a broader range of reasons for poor sample quality at T0 (including several highly reactive CTs, i.e., peroxy, phosphine, isocyanate, and sulfhydride, and 10 metals and metallic features represented by the CTs in Figure 13a), as compared to more specific features leading to degradation (i.e., from PASS to CAUTION) over time, as represented by the CTs in the Degrades subsets in Figures 11 and 12.
ToxPrint chemotype-enrichments in T0 CAUTION compounds
vs T0 PASS
compounds, as defined by priority bins 5–8 and priority bins
1–4 in Table 6c, respectively, where the T0 PASS CT counts are scaled by a factor
of 0.20 to compensate for the larger size of the T0 PASS subset (6562)
relative to the T0 CAUTION subset (1340), with images of sample CTs:
a) list of enriched CTs in the T0 CAUTION subset; b) list of enriched
CTs in the T0 PASS subset.
To determine if CT enrichments could be found in the T0 PASS compound subset relative to the T0 CAUTION subset, the original T0 CAUTION confusion matrix was transposed (i.e., True Positives become True Negatives, etc.), and the CTEW was applied. This comparison yielded a total of 38 enriched CTs, 35 of which are listed in Figure 13b (3 were redundant). These enriched CTs were present in 73% of the 6562 T0 PASS compounds, providing an exceptionally high degree of coverage (which could possibly yield a global SAR model). In addition, none of the enriched CTs in the T0 PASS set overlapped with the previous 3 CT enrichment sets (Figures 11, 12, and 13a), as might be expected. The majority of enriched CTs in this T0 PASS set either contained the term “aromatic” (7 total) or were in the “ring:hetero” or “ring:fused” ToxPrint groups (13 total). CTEW statistics are provided in Supporting Information Table S12.
We conclude from these and the Section 4.2.1 results that CT-enrichment results depend on the definitions of the priority bin subsets being compared, and with thoughtful selection of such subsets, it is possible to find significant associations to chemical features and gain insight into different aspects of the QC compound-level results.

“SampleLoss” Relationship with Volatility
It might seem reasonable to equate the original sample-level QC grades indicating “low concentration”, i.e., Ac, Bc, etc., with compound volatility. However, since an indication of “low concentration” in the sample spectra, at either T0 or T4, could be caused by several factors, such as poor DMSO solubility, long retention time on the LC-MS column, adherence to plastic microplates, etc., we chose to use the term “SampleLoss” (rather than Volatility) in creating our compound-level Quality Priority Categories and Priority Bins in Table 6. The latter, in turn, were used to collapse the sample-level QC results to the compound level. Hence, the last question we wished to pose to our compound-level QC data set was: How well does the binary quality designation of “SampleLoss” [1] relative to the Priority 1 Bin “Stable” [0] correlate with volatility, with the latter represented by OPERA-predicted vapor pressure (VP, in units of mmHg). Since the computed VP values spanned more than 10 orders of magnitude, correlations were sought using Log10(VP) values for the subset of compounds for which values could be computed (i.e., defined structures, no metals, etc.)—see Supporting Information Tables S13a–e. The results are shown in Figure 14a, b.
Plots considering relationship between volatility, as
represented
by Log10 (Vapor Pressure), and QC compound-level results labeled “SampleLoss”
vs “Stable” (see Table 6): (a) Box plot comparing range of Log10(VP) values
in each of the two labeled categories of compounds, where the median
is indicated by the blue horizontal line and the mean by the “x”
symbol; (b) Point-Biserial correlation of Log10(VP) continuous values
in predicting the binary values [1,0] within the “SampleLoss”
priority bin category and subcategories (1) to the full “Stable”
category (0) in all 5 cases, where the 2nd from top light blue bar
is the full SampleLoss compound set, the orange bars are subsequent
priority bin subsets (see Figure 5c), and the top dark blue bar showing the highest correlation
is the subset of the full Stability compound set having MW < 100.
Figure 14a shows the overlapping but distinct ranges of Log10(VP) values in the two subsets consisting of 5389 Priority Bin 1 “Stable” compounds, and 1434-compounds in priority bins containing the term “SampleLoss” (i.e., 2,5,7,9) for either T0 or T4. Figure 14b shows the Point-Biserial correlation (varies from −1 to 1, with 0 meaning no correlation) of the binary SampleLoss column [1,0], and various subsets thereof, to the continuous data column, Log10(VP).
Comparing the two data sets represented in Figure 14a, a Student’s t test, two-tailed p-value 5.7 × 10–05 indicates a highly significant association of SampleLoss with VP, a common measure of volatility. However, evaluating the correlation within various subsets in Figure 14b, the highest r2 correlation (0.56) is found when we restrict the full SampleLoss set (light blue bar second from top) to those compounds with MW < 100 (top dark blue bar) and, even then, the correlation is less than might be expected. Considering all compounds, regardless of MW, the highest correlation is 0.4 for the largest SampleLoss subset in Figure 4b (i.e., all Priority Bins containing the term light blue bar) and decreases with successive Priority Bin subsets (orange bars).
We conclude from these results that the original sample QC grades associated with concentration loss and the quality term “SampleLoss” assigned to these at the compound level bear some relationship to volatility but that other influences and causes for SampleLoss are clearly involved in this stability category. This is a clear case warranting closer examination of the original spectral results to provide additional insight into the causes of low concentration or sample loss over time being observed.

Re-evaluation of Tox21 QC Results
Since the Tox21 v0 QC data were made publicly available from 2016–2019, EPA researchers have frequently consulted the QC results to aid in the interpretation of Tox21 and ToxCast HTS bioassay data for individual chemicals, as well as for larger data sets for use in modeling QC-related compound-level properties, such as LC-MS amenability or a particular bioassay target activity.− Particularly when questions arose in the case of missing or low-quality QC data, the original pdf files and spectra were accessed from source files obtained directly from OpAns and NIST and re-evaluated, which often led to additional insights and, occasionally, reinterpretations resulting in QC grade changes. For example, Sulfluramid (Tox21_300377) was originally labeled as Ungraded (U) at both T0 and T4 based on LC-MS spectra. This is a highly fluorinated, lipophilic chemical that eluted late on the column and could only be detected in the negative ionization mode, with no signal in the detectors to allow for quantitation, and therefore was assigned Z grade (i.e., mass confirmed but no purity). An NMR spectrum was located in the source OpAns data files, and based on this, the sample was judged to be of good quality but with some degradation and, thus, assigned a QC grade of “Bc” (identity confirmed, 75–90% purity but low concentration). In other cases, closer reexamination of source spectra has revealed additional chemically relevant details, such as isomers (or tautomers) not indicated in the Tox21 grade or labeled as impurities, known mixtures labeled as failing when component signals can clearly be seen, etc.
In the interest of simplicity and promoting usability of the QC data for informing a single Tox21 ID bioassay result or profile, the current v0 sample-level QC data set intentionally provided a single Tox21 ID sample-level grade attributed to a single method for each T0 and T4 sample successfully analyzed. At the source data level, however, there were often multiple spectra generated, either at different LC-MS detection settings or for different methods, that can potentially provide additional insights. Presenting an informed user of the analytical QC data with multiple grades and notations for different spectra provided for a single Tox21 ID sample can provide a more nuanced view of the analytical challenges posed by particular chemicals or classes of chemicals as well as point to the most appropriate method to apply. Hence, the assignment of a single Tox21 QC grade can be an oversimplification. Another oversimplified aspect of the Tox21 v0 QC graded database is the assignment of a single “U” label when a sample is ungraded. This label was originally defined on the NCATS Tox21 sample browser as “Unknown/Inconclusive”, but we have found many cases where the result should have been labeled “Not Determined” (ND), e.g., no source spectra file exists at T0 or T4. The original U label was misleading; hence, its definition has been revised as “Ungraded” in the present article as well as on the NCATS Tox21 sample browser to be more encompassing of all possibilities, including ND.
Motivated by the above observations and past experiences, a re-evaluation of the OpAns and NIST source-level data was undertaken to re-examine and curate source-level data and add analytical and reviewer notations for every chemical in the Tox21 sample collection. This effort began two years ago and is ongoing, having covered thousands of records thus far. Given the large scope of this effort, the re-evaluation of analytical spectra and source notes necessitated construction of a database and web-based application to standardize and facilitate curation review as well as to capture relevant source and reviewer notes. In addition, predicted physicochemical properties (such as vapor pressure and log Kow) were generated to inform interpretation of the data, with all supporting data stored in the database records. Finally, the data are being fully integrated within the EPA’s CompTox Chemicals Dashboard, also allowing for continued and independent user review and updating, as needed. This substantially expanded Tox21 analytical QC database and web-based application are slated for public release by early 2025 and a manuscript is in progress that will describe this re-evaluation effort in greater detail and relate it to the present work.
The result of this re-evaluation and research effort will be a newly versioned, enriched Tox21 sample QC data set with many observations that have already influenced analytical methods being applied to new measurements within EPA projects. Additionally, patterns in the data now inform the selection process of new chemicals to be analyzed in EPA’s bioactivity screening programs. Occasional re-evaluation of individual sample QC results continues based on questions from researchers reviewing the HTS bioactivity data. It should be emphasized that the entirety of this re-evaluation effort would have been impossible without the investment in generating the analytical QC results and Tox21 v0 QC data set reported in this work and represent continued valuation of these data. Revised QC grades resulting from this re-evaluation were not included in the present manuscript because we felt it important to document and report on the initial Tox21 v0 QC effort underlying all subsequent efforts. However, it is hoped that the detailed presentation of QC results at both the sample and compound levels in this manuscript, as well as the insights gained from the CT-enrichment analyses, have shone a light on subsets of the QC data where re-evaluation might be warranted and informative.

Conclusions
We have attempted in this review to provide an overview of the Tox21 analytical QC methods and original (v0) published results for more than 13,000 unique samples mapped to ∼8900 unique compounds, analyzed by various analytical methods at two possible time points, mirroring ambient testing protocols. Both the public Tox21 analytical QC undertaking and its companion Tox21 HTS effort are unprecedented in size and scope and, thus, not likely to be soon repeated. Equally unprecedented are the efforts to make all analytical QC and HTS testing methods and data fully transparent and publicly available to the research and regulatory communities. The full set of Tox21 ID sample-level analytical QC results has been searchable and available for download through the Tox21 NCATS sample browser since 2019. To date, however, these results have primarily been consulted for individual or small sets of Tox21 samples or compounds in cases where the corresponding HTS bioassay data (Tox21 or ToxCast) were of sufficient interest to warrant assessment of sample quality. In the present study, we provided global views of the sample-level QC data to aid in understanding and identifying QC subsets of high and low quality and confidence, as well as a subset with QC grade inconsistencies that resulted in elevating hundreds of low quality or missing T0 QC grades based on high-quality T4 grades. Throughout our analyses, we were guided by the assumption that high-quality QC grades, by virtue of the need for definitive and clear positive confirmation in interpreting analytical spectra, imbue those results with higher confidence over low-quality QC grades, which can result from a variety of chemistry- and analytical-method-related challenges, in addition to inherent sample quality issues.
Various assumptions were made throughout the course of grading, binning, and collapsing the sample-level QC data to the compound level. Each of these assumptions could be examined and potentially modified to provide QC results that are better fit for different needs. For instance, changing the thresholds for PASS/CAUTION bins, STABLE/UNSTABLE, or excluding certain grades from inclusion (e.g., M or Z) could be examined for their impact on modeling results. To underscore this point, we have demonstrated with the CT-enrichment analyses in Section 4 that assumptions underlying the grading, binning, and collapse of sample-level QC data to the compound level as well as the resolution of sample subsets chosen for modeling are important to achieving modeling success. Equally important to the scientific enterprise is the clear articulation of assumptions underlying the preparation of modeling inputs, including the method by which the sample-level QC results are collapsed to the compound level. The degree to which analytical method limitations impact the reported low-quality QC results is also an area that could be better understood and articulated with expert reexamination of the original spectral results.
A major goal of this manuscript has been to document and present the Tox21 (v0) analytical QC data in ways that aid understanding and promote deeper appreciation of both the limitations and potential uses of the data, with the goal to better inform ToxCast and Tox21 HTS results as well as provide inputs for structure-based modeling. Anticipating the use of the published Tox21 analytical QC results to aid in the interpretation of both Tox21 and ToxCast HTS results moving forward, inferences pertaining to sample loss and degradation derived from the T0 to T4 sample comparisons, presented herein, warrant qualification. The QC analysis of T4 sample plates occurred at a single time point, i.e., after 4 months of ambient storage mirroring the companion Tox21 plate testing conditions, whereas Tox21 screening took place along the continuum of 0–4 months. Hence, the age of samples at the time of bioassay data collection and the effect of possible sample loss or degradation inferred from T4 QC results on these bioassay results are unknowns. Similarly, whereas the majority of ToxCast samples were drawn from the same stock solution (Tox21 ID) or neat samples as were included in EPA’s Tox21 library, ToxCast bioassay testing conditions were not as extreme as those indicated for Tox21 plates (the latter 4-month usage more typical of pharmaceutical HTS screening) and hewed more closely to T0 storage conditions. Where Tox21 and ToxCast assays are most similar, this might provide an interesting angle for a comparison of bioassay results comparison. In any case, compound-level inferences indicating the potential for DMSO-solubilized compounds to potentially volatilize, hydrolyze, or degrade should be considered when interpreting Tox21 and ToxCast bioassay data. Some compounds associated with a CAUTION QC grade that produce a strong bioactivity result should undergo further scrutiny, i.e., was the activity due to testing artifacts, high potency counteracting low concentration, or activity of an impurity or secondary aqueous degradant due to the hydroscopic nature of DMSO? Similarly, if a compound is broadly negative across the full bioassay screen, could this be explained by sample loss or degradation indicated by the QC results and associated physical chemical properties, i.e., is the solvated compound outside the domain of the testing conditions?
The re-evaluation effort undertaken by EPA researchers, accompanied by a structure-indexed database and web-based application, will allow for continued annotation, revision, and use of the Tox21 QC data as well as encourage broader scientific engagement with these data by the analytical and environmental chemistry communities. Nothing comparable to the Tox21 QC database is available publicly in association with a large and diverse chemical landscape, increasing its value beyond its initial focus in serving the Tox21 HTS program. Ultimately, however, the primary motivation and objective for QC evaluation of the Tox21 sample library was to provide assurances that the chemicals undergoing Tox21 HTS testing were of sufficient quality to lend confidence to the HTS bioassay outcomes. The large percentages of T0 and T4 high quality subsets of QC results are reassuring in that regard (Figure 9). For the remainder of chemicals for which varying degrees of “CAUTION” are indicated from the QC results, there are many possible underlying reasons for such findings, some of which can be explained and countered, leading to grade improvements. The total number of such grade reversals ultimately is expected to be small relative to the total number of Tox21 samples screened, i.e., hundreds rather than thousands. We argue, however, that each of these individual samples and associated compounds, by virtue of being associated with a Tox21 HTS bioactivity profile, can find themselves the subject of focused inquiry with respect to a research or regulatory concern. Hence, each time a CAUTION QC result can be better understood, it can potentially “rescue” a chemical and associated HTS profile that could be of particular interest or inform future testing efforts.
The application of large-scale HTS technologies and approaches to both the Tox21 HTS and the QC evaluation effort has, by necessity, imposed practical limitations on each enterprise. At the same time, the assay results and supporting QC results of both programs are of intense interest to the toxicology and regulatory communities for informing assessments of individual or small groups of chemicals. Reconciling these two objectives has been a challenge for the Tox21 program from the start. Our hope that the present review has provided a path and some guideposts for making greater utilization of the Tox21 analytical QC results in association with the Tox21 and ToxCast HTS results.

Supporting Information Available
Table S1: Criteria for initial pass/fail categorization of LC-MS samples; Commentary on analytical methods used in this study; Figure S1: The OpAns LCMS report for Flutolanil showing a response in each of the detection channels; Figure S2: The OpAns LCMS report for Ethoprop showing responses in only the +MS and +ESI channels; Figure S3: The experimental (top) and predicted (bottom) NMR spectra for 1-ethylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate (PDF)
Table S2: Unique Tox21 IDs mapped to collection (NCATS, NTP, EPA, or 88-ReplicateSet), NCGC Sample IDs, PubChem SIDs, and DSSTox DTXSID; Table S3: DSSTox TOX21S unique compounds listed with DTXSID, CAS RN, Preferred Name, substance-structure attributes (Substance Type, SMILES, InChI, InChIKey, Formula, MW), and OPERA-calculated vapor pressure (mmHg); Table S4: ToxPrint (V2.0_r711) fingerprints for the TOX21SL SDF structures file; Table S5: Tox21 v0 QC sample-level results, including QC methods and grades at T0 and T4; Table S6: Sorted list of Tox21 sample-level T0(v0) and T4 QC results, with color-coded numeric scores and corresponding barcodes; Table S7: Revised (v1) Tox21 sample-level QC methods and grades at T0 and T4 compared to (v0) results, with Quality Bins, Labels and Priority Categories; Table S8: Tox21 compound-level (v1) QC results; Table S9: Enriched CT list and statistics for “Degrades vs Stable” compound subsets; Table S10: Enriched CT list and statistics for “Degrades:PurityLoss vs Stable” compound subsets; Table S11: Enriched CT list and statistics for “CAUTION” compounds relative to “PASS” compounds; Table S12: Enriched CT list and statistics for “PASS” compounds relative to “CAUTION” compounds; Table S13: OPERA-calculated Vapor Pressure (VP, mmHg) values used to compare Priority Bin subsets for SampleLoss vs Stable compounds, and correlate with MW (XLSX)
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.chemrestox.4c00330.

Supplementary Material

Author Present Address
‡ GlaxoSmithKline, Collegeville, PA

Author Present Address
⊥ Digital R&D Solutions, Pfizer

Author Present Address
¶ RTice Consulting, Hillsborough, NC

Author Contributions
A.M.R served as chemical contract manager for EPA’s ToxCast and Tox21 library construction from 2007 to 2017, was EPA’s Tox21 Chemical Workgroup lead, performed all the CT-enrichment analyses, and wrote substantial portions of the manuscript. Within NCATS, D.T. reviewed the LC-MS and GC-MS data, C.A.L. reviewed the NMR data, and W.L. coordinated the QC efforts and reviewed the LC-MS and GC-MS data; all QC grades published herein are the results of these secondary NCATS team reviews of the data delivered by OpAns and NIST. K.V.T. performed the GC-MS analysis and was responsible for refinement and implementation of measurements protocols, quality control, data processing, data analysis. E.W.V was responsible for overall design of GC/MS and GC/FID measurements, data analysis, report of GC/MS and GC/FID procedures, and results. K.C.L. managed the LC-MS analysis. A.S. managed the NMR analysis. P.S. managed the compound plates for the QC analysis. B.J.C. led efforts to construct the NTP’s portion of the Tox21 library and ship samples to NCATS and EPA. D.-T.N. generated the pdf summaries of the QC results and constructed the Web site to publish the QC results. L.Y. conducted part of the QC data analysis. T.Z. updated the Tox21 sample QC Web site and is responsible for maintaining the Web site. T.X. conducted part of the statistical analysis. A.J.W. coordinates chemistry data dissemination via the EPA’s CompTox Chemicals Dashboard and led the Analytical QC data re-evaluation and curation project. S.W. heads up the NTP’s chemical contract management and served as NTP’s Tox21 Chemical Workgroup lead. R.S.T. is the Tox21 lead for the EPA. R.T. was a founding Tox21 lead for the NTP. A.S. is the Tox21 lead for the NCATS. R.H. led the effort to create the NCATS sample QC data browser, and coordinated the Tox21 library QC data review, analysis, and publication efforts.
The work presented in this manuscript was solely supported by appropriated funds of the United States Environmental Protection Agency and National Institutes of Health. NCATS received funding through Interagency Agreements with NTP (#Y2-ES-7020-01) and the EPA (#Y3-HG-7026-03) to cover the cost of preparing and shipping plates for analytical QC analysis, and for final processing and publishing of the analytical QC results received from both OpAns and NIST. All LC-MS (and related FIA) and NMR analyses were performed by OpAns (OpAns LLC, Durham, NC) under Contract No. HHSN271201500023I issued by the NTP. The GC-MS analyses were performed under Interagency Agreements, No. ATR12001-0000 and ATR12001-001, between NCATS and the National Institutes of Standards & Technology (NIST).
Certain commercial equipment, instruments, or materials are identified in the paper in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. The views expressed in this manuscript are solely those of the authors and do not represent the policies of the EPA, nor should mention of trade names of commercial products be interpreted as an endorsement by the EPA. This work has been internally reviewed at the EPA and has been approved for publication; mention of trade names or commercial products does not constitute endorsement or recommendation for use. A.M.R and R.R.T are retired from government service, and P.S. is deceased.
The authors declare no competing financial interest.

Author Status
† Retired, currently EPA Emeritus

Author Status
§ Deceased as of November 17, 2022

Dedication
The authors wish to dedicate this work to the memory of Paul Shinn (December 7, 1975 to November 17, 2022), an essential member of the Tox21 NCATS team who managed all Tox21 sample platings and shipments and who was a valued friend and colleague to many.

Abbreviations
AMDIS
Automated Mass Spectrometry Deconvolution and Identification System
CAS RN
Chemical Abstracts Service registry number
CLND
chemiluminescent nitrogen detector
COI
compound of interest
CoA
certificate of analysis
CT
chemotype
CTEW
chemotype-enrichment workflow
CSRML
chemical subgraphs and reactions markup language
DMSO
dimethyl sulfoxide
DSSTox
distributed structure-searchable toxicity database
DTXSID
DSSTox unique substance identifier
ELSD
evaporative light scattering detector
EPA
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
ESI
electrospray ionization
HPLC
high-performance liquid chromatography
HTS
high-throughput screening
FIA
flow-injection analysis
FID
flame ionization detector
FN
false negatives
FP
false positives
GC-MS
gas chromatography mass spectroscopy
IDs
identifiers
LC-MS
liquid chromatography mass spectroscopy
MDMA
3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine
MS
mass spectroscopy
MW
molecular weight
NA
not available
NCATS
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences
NCGC
NIH Chemical Genomics Center
NIH
National Institutes of Health
Neg
negative
NIST
National Institutes of Standards & Technology
NMR
nuclear resonance spectroscopy
NTP
National Toxicology Program
OPERA
open structure–activity/property relationship app
OR
odds ratio
POS
positive
PTV
programmable temperature vaporizer
QC
quality control
SDF
structure-data format
SID
PubChem substance ID
SMILES
simplified molecular-input line-entry system
T0
time zero months under ambient testing conditions
T4
time four months under ambient testing conditions
TN
true negatives
TP
true positives
UV
ultraviolet
XML
extensible markup language

References
High-Throughput Screening: The Hits and Leads of Drug Discovery- An Overview
The ToxCast program for prioritizing toxicity testing of environmental chemicals
The Tox21 10K Compound Library: Collaborative Chemistry Advancing Toxicology
Improving the human hazard characterization of chemicals: a Tox21 update
The US Federal Tox21 Program: A strategic and operational plan for continued leadership
The Tox21 robotic platform for the assessment of environmental chemicals - from vision to reality
Chemical genomics profiling of environmental chemical modulation of human nuclear receptors
Expanding biological space coverage enhances the prediction of drug adverse effects in human using in vitro activity profiles
Modelling the Tox21 10 K chemical profiles for in vivo toxicity prediction and mechanism characterization
ToxCast Chemical Landscape: Paving the Road to 21st Century Toxicology
High-throughput screening and chemotype-enrichment analysis of ToxCast phase II chemicals evaluated for human sodium-iodide symporter (NIS) inhibition
EPA’s DSSTox database: History of development of a curated chemistry resource supporting computational toxicology research
DSSTox web site launch: Improving public access to databases for building structure-toxicity prediction models
The CompTox Chemistry Dashboard: a community data resource for environmental chemistry
New publicly available chemical query language, CSRML, to support chemotype representations for application to data mining and modeling
OPERA models for predicting physicochemical properties and environmental fate endpoints
Predicting compound amenability with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry to improve non-targeted analysis
Improving predictions of compound amenability for liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry to enhance non-targeted analysis
Tox21 phase II data
Use of New Approach Methodologies to Derive Extrapolation Factors and Evaluate Developmental Neurotoxicity for Human Health Risk Assessment