Mapping gender role stress scales utilities: a scoping review approach
Introduction
Gender role stress emerges as a concept to try to explain the health difficulties presented by men and women due to gender socialization. Thus, gender role stress arises when individuals feel stressed due to their perceived inability to fulfill the demands of their gender role, or when they believe that a particular situation necessitates behavior traditionally attributed to the opposite gender. To evaluate the presence of gender role stress in individuals, two scales were developed: the masculine gender role stress scale and the feminine gender role scale.
Objective
To identify the main thematic areas studied in the behavioral sciences with the feminine gender role stress scale (FGRSS) and the masculine gender role stress scale (MGRSS) as main variables, specifically examining their contributions to the understanding of the attitudes and behaviors of individuals who are affected by gender role stress. We also aimed to analyze the difference, both quantitatively and qualitatively, in terms of scientific literature produced between the scales.
Method
We followed the preferred items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) checklist. A scoping review of the literature was conducted using systematic techniques, resulting in the inclusion of 87 articles utilizing either of the two scales.
Results
80% (n = 72) of the articles employed the MGRSS, while 20% (n = 18) utilized the FGRSS. The MGRSS articles were also the most frequently cited in the literature. The FGRSS has been predominantly used to examine the implications for women’s well-being, whereas the MGRSS has primarily been employed to predict disruptive behaviors in men.
Conclusion
This scoping review highlights disparities in the scientific literature concerning the examination of feminine and masculine gender role stress and its consequences for people. Specifically, it points out the limited investigation into feminine gender role stress and its ramifications compared to masculine gender role stress. These findings indicates the lack of a gender perspective even in research intended to study it, and outline the importance of more research with a gender perspective where women are the aim of study.

Introduction
Gender is interpreted as a social schema through which people learn to behave based on the expectations that society attributes to women and men. According to the social role theory, due to physical differences between men and women, there is a social division of tasks by gender: Care behaviors are associated with women (caregivers) and strength behaviors with men (breadwinners). The result of this differentiation is that gender roles assign to women behaviors that foster positive interpersonal relationships, self-silencing, and caring for others; meanwhile, for men, the social expectation consists of being assertive and decision-making behaviors. These social expectations due to gender socialization have consequences on men and women. demonstrated that women suffer disadvantages in health and stress based solely on socio-cognitive explanations. He specifically proved that socialization, particularly through gender roles and gender traits, has been related to the stress process, the experience of stress, and to the health of individuals. Likewise, have shown that having a higher score on gender role norms was related to more depressive symptoms, anxiety and psychological stress. Especially in women, depressive and anxious symptoms were significantly higher than in men. On these issues, research in 2020 showed that two thirds of the Spanish population believed that equality between men and women has already been achieved. However, recent studies have shown that gender stereotypes are still active in society. Despite these striking differences, some statistics show that people do not seem to recognize the existing inequality, hence the importance of focusing on gender roles and how these norms influence people’s behavior and perceptions.”
From childhood, individuals are socialized to exhibit behaviors and traits aligned with their gender roles, making the repercussions of deviance apparent. Therefore, despite the persistent socialization pressures, the expectations associated with gender roles are demanding, causing challenges for both women and men to consistently conform to gender roles. An example of the implications of these socialization pressures can be found in the emotional expression of individuals. Individuals’ emotional expression is shaped by modeling, expectations, reinforcement, and traditional social norms. explained that socialization differences might be the most proximate and direct cause of gender differences in emotional expressiveness. These socialization differences are influenced by cultural and historical factors and may be perpetuated through a process wherein each generation identifies with and internalizes the values, behaviors, and parenting styles of previous generations. As children internalize these norms and expectations their emotional expression is shaped based on gender norms. When they reach adolescence, they already witness significant differences in their emotionality as a result of this socialization. These differences are maintained in adulthood, women show a greater emotional expression, particularly of positive emotions and internalize more negative emotions, mainly sadness and anxiety. Adult men, on the other hand, express a greater presence of aggressiveness and anger.” In this line, the gender role strain paradigm asserts that the pressures traditional gender roles place on men and women, and the consequences of failing to conform them, usually cause people strain- and stress-motivating feelings, thoughts, and behaviors that can be harmful to themselves and others. Consequently, it is important to analyze the impact of gender roles on individuals, given that gender role socialization influences cognitive appraisal and coping, thereby creating gender differences in vulnerability to particular stressors, and the consequences that this may have for people’s well-being.
There is empirical evidence both for and against the evolution of gender roles. However, the issue does not lie in whether behaviors are masculine and/or feminine; it is about how gender roles shape a rigid attitude that constrains and dictates individuals’ behaviors and skills, limiting their behavioral repertoire, which sometimes increases their vulnerability to certain health problems. In response to this issue, the concept of gender role stress emerged, explaining the health problems of men and women based on gender socialization. Gender role stress refers to the degree to which women and men experience stress in contexts incongruent with their gender roles—for example, when men fail to possess leadership or women fail to be nurturant, which seems to trigger discomfort in both. Based on this premise, individuals may experience stress when they perceive themselves as unable to adhere to the imperatives of masculine/feminine gender roles. Consequently, the emergence of gender role stress may be due to (a) avoiding behaviors that society expects from one’s own gender or (b) performing behaviors assigned to the opposite gender.
As gender roles consider both male and female genders, the concept of gender role stress also applies to both. First, the concept of masculine gender role stress (MGRS) emerged, which refers to the cognitive appraisal of specific situations as stressful for men, including the individual’s thoughts and behaviors. Men experience stress when they consider themselves unable to cope with masculine role imperatives or when they consider that a situation requires unmasculine or feminine behavior. For example, a man might experience masculine gender role stress when his behaviors are more directed toward caring for others than toward achieving his professional goals, deviating from his role as a provider (example of an item related on the MGRS scale: “Staying home during the day with a sick child”). Shortly after the formalization of this construct, Gillespie and Eisler explored whether there was a cognitive-behavioral pattern similar to that of male gender role stress in women. It was found that certain events affected women more than men. Thus, the concept of feminine gender role stress (FGRS) emerged, which refers to the cognitive appraisal of specific situations as stressful for women, including thoughts and behaviors. As with men, women may experience stress when they feel unable to cope with the imperatives of the feminine role or when they feel that a situation requires unfeminine or masculine behavior. For example, a woman may experience feminine gender role stress when her behaviors are more directed toward the achievement of her professional goals than toward caring for others, deviating from her role as a caregiver (example of an item related on the FGRS scale: “Having someone else raise your children”).
In summary, gender role stress appears differentially in men and women. The onset of gender role stress depends on traditional gender and social norms. When individuals attempt to avoid or remain attached to gender norms in their behavior is apparently the triggering factor for the occurrence of gender role stress. While the process of onset is the same for men and women, the social and gender norms surrounding the onset are completely different between men and women.
Currently, researchers agree that MGRS and FGRS negatively affect people’s well-being, with gender role stress being related to eating disorders, alcohol abuse or the presence of anxiety and depression. Given the importance of all these findings, it is worthwhile to analyze the empirical evidence on these variables. Yet, deviating from the gender role is not without negative consequences. A clear example is the social discrimination women face when they diverge from expected feminine gender roles, known as backlash. This discrimination has significant repercussions on women, such as increased stress, tension, and frustration.
Now, focusing on how gender roles are measured, previous literature has utilized various instruments to explore the relationship between masculinity–femininity and well-being, including the Bem Sex Role Inventory, the personal attributes questionnaire, the Male Role Norms Scale, and the Traditional Egalitarian Sex Role Scale. These instruments assess masculinity–femininity dimensions as self-ascribed personality characteristics. Although associations between masculinity–femininity and health have been found using these instruments, the results may be limited due to three reasons: (a) These instruments define masculinity–femininity in terms of personality traits, (b) they lack consideration of other components of the masculinity–femininity dimension, such as attitudinal and behavioral components, and (c) some of them include predominantly positive masculine personality traits, which may hinder the identification of links between instrument outcomes and health or well-being problems.
Regarding these reasons, Eisler and colleagues argued that is not the masculine-feminine behavior or coping strategy that acts as a risk factor for health problems, but rather the rigid or maladaptive gender role-determined attitude that decreases the person’s repertoire of behaviors. On this basis, they introduced the previously mentioned gender role stress concept and developed two instruments to assess the degree to which men and women perceive certain gender role-related situations as stressful. The first one developed was the masculine gender role stress scale (MGRSS), which evaluates gender role stress regarding masculine behaviors. Four years later, the feminine gender role stress scale (FGRSS) was created to evaluate the stress associated with feminine behaviors.
The MGRSS is a 39-item scale that contains specific situations that elicit stress in relation to perceived failure to meet the standards of MGRS, for example, “being outperformed at work by a woman”. The dimensions of this scale include physical inadequacy, emotional inexpressiveness, subordination to women, intellectual inferiority, and performance failure. The scale validation showed that scores (a) differentiated men and women significantly, (b) did not involve sex-related masculinity measures, and (c) were significantly associated with at least two measures of self-related stress, that is, anger and anxiety.
The FGRSS was designed to analyze women’s tendency to experience stress when faced with threats and challenges to feminine gender role commitments, for example, “Having others believe that you are emotionally cold”. The dimensions of this scale are fear of unemotional relationships, fear of physical unattractiveness, fear of victimization, fear of behaving assertively, and fear of not being nurturant. The FGRSS was validated with the following conclusions: (a) The FGRSS dimensions reflect potential stressors that are particularly salient for women as a result of feminine gender role socialization, (b) as in the MGRSS’s case, FGRSS scores were not related to the personal attributes questionnaire’s measure of femininity, and (c) FGRSS scores were also related to self-reported depression, but it cannot be used as a predictor of depressive symptomatology.
Over the past 3 decades, interest in gender role stress has been slowly growing across the world, along with the use of these instruments. The accumulating range of gender role stress evidence provided us the opportunity to take stock and cover (almost) everything that has happened since the validation of both scales in 1987 and 1992 as objectively as we can (i.e., using systematic principles, transparency, and openness; see the Method section).
In this research, we utilized a principled approach (using preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses [PRISMA]) to review empirical articles using either the MGRSS or FGRSS. This enabled us to synthesize the multidisciplinary empirical literature on the applicability and conclusions derived from the use of the MGRSS and FGRSS. To the best of our knowledge, this will be the first scoping review on the concept of gender role stress. Given that the concept has been little studied, this scoping review could lay the groundwork for future research and increase the visibility of the concept itself. The importance of this review lies in its aim to provide future researchers with an overview of the variables related to gender role stress and to identify gaps in the existing literature, particularly concerning the concept of female gender role stress. Thus, the aim of this review is to identify the main areas of study for each measure (MGRSS and FGRSS), specifically examining how they have contributed to the understanding of attitudes and behaviors; as well as the implications of the findings for understanding individuals’ behavior in relation to the presence gender role stress. Similarly, we aim to analyze the scientific community’s interest with gender role stress. We adopt a bottom-up approach to discover emergent themes from the literature rather than forming a priori hypotheses, thereby reducing author bias.

Materials and methods

Protocol and registration
This scoping review’s pre-registration can be found.1 We followed the PRISMA checklist. A scoping review of the papers was retrieved using the systematic technique.

Data source
Data were procured from direct consultation and access to the following bibliographic databases in the social and health sciences: MEDLINE (via PubMed), Scopus, and Web of Science. The databases were last revised in February 2024, prior to the writing of this paper.

Information processing
The following search equations were deemed appropriate after consulting the APA thesaurus and MESH terms and finding that the term “gender role stress” is not an indexed term in any platform.
Equation for PubMed: (“gender role stress*” AND ((humans[Filter]) AND (alladult[Filter]))) OR (“gender role stress*”[Title/Abstract] AND ((humans[Filter]) AND (alladult[Filter]))) AND ((humans[Filter]) AND (english[Filter] OR spanish[Filter]) AND (alladult[Filter])).
Equation for Scopus: TITLE-ABS-KEY (“GENDER ROLE STRESS*”) AND (LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, “ar”)) AND (LIMIT-TO (LANGUAGE, “English”)).
Equation for Web of Science: (TS = (“GENDER ROLE STRESS”)) AND ((DT==(“ARTICLE”) AND LA==(“ENGLISH” OR “SPANISH”) AND LA==(“ENGLISH”)) NOT (SILOID==(“PPRN”))).
The search equations were maintained using these terms, even though they were not indexed in the thesaurus, to avoid the documentary noise that could have emerged if we used APA thesaurus or MESH terms.

Final selection of articles
Articles that met the following criteria were selected for review:
Inclusion: articles published in peer-reviewed journals that used the FGRSS, MGRSS, or both.
Exclusion: (a) systematic reviews, (b) validation trials of new scales, (c) validation trials for the mentioned scales for other populations different from the original scale, (d) articles for which the full text could not be found, (e) articles in languages other than English or Spanish.
Additionally, the bibliography of each selected article was reviewed for possible new papers to be included in the review. The authors of this review evaluated the adequacy of the articles selected. To validate the inclusion of articles, the concordance assessment of the selection (kappa index) had to be greater than 0.60.

Data extraction
Articles were initially categorized based on their use of either the MGRSS or the FGRSS to facilitate comprehension of the results. Subsequently, the multiplatform program ZOTERO, a bibliographic reference manager developed by the Center for History and New Media at George Mason University, was utilized to assign a maximum of 10 tags to each article in both groups. This was done to separate the fields of study addressed with each of the scales. Finally, a critical review was conducted, taking into account the authors, year of publication, abstract of the article, variables studied, scales used, aim of the study, principal results, and authors’ conclusions. For more information about the screening process of the studies selected for the scoping review, see Figure 1. Duplicate records, identified through comparison across multiple databases, were removed using ZOTERO.
Identification and selection of studies diagram.

Results
As can be observed in Figure 1, 314 works were retrieved using our search criteria. After screening the 132 duplicate records, 182 final references remained. No additional documents meeting the inclusion criteria were identified through the consultation of bibliographic lists from the selected articles. After applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 87 papers were finally selected for the review. For further details, refer to Supplementary Table A1 for FGRSS articles and Supplementary Table A2 for MGRSS articles.2
The agreement between the reviewers regarding the appropriateness of the selected studies was calculated using the kappa index, resulting in 98% agreement (p < 0.01).

Overall article characteristics
Before starting with the preregistered content analysis of the articles, an exploratory analysis of the scientific literature in the field was carried out. This exploratory analysis was intended to contextualize the level of annual scientific production on gender role stress in the bases used. For this purpose, the raw number of articles found in each database was taken from the search equations (see Figure 1). The data were analyzed with the statistical analysis program R, specifically the Bibliometrix package.
This exploratory review included articles published between 1987 and 2023 on Web of Science, Scopus, and MedLine (see Figure 2).
Annual scientific production in different databases concerning FGRS and MGRS. A is Web of Science’s line graph, B is Scopus’s line graph, and C is Medline’s line graph. The horizon axis (years) in the three charts starts in 1987 and ends in 2023. On the vertical axis, the maximum value of articles is 12 for Web of Science (A) and eight for both Scopus and MedLine (B,C).
In the articles included in this review (n = 87), in terms of scale usage, 75% (n = 65) of the articles used the MGRSS, 10% (n = 18) used the FGRSS and 15% (n = 13) used both scales. In terms of gender composition, the majority of the articles used male samples (64%), followed by mixed-sample studies (25%), and lastly followed by female-sample use (11%). In this battery of articles, only in the male-sample studies was it specified if participants were heterosexual, veterans, gay/bisexual, substance abusers, or males who batter. Regarding the authorship of the articles included in this study (see Figure 3), it is noteworthy that (a) 54.02% (n = 47) of the articles have a male first author, while the remaining 43.68% (n = 38) have a female first author. Within these percentages, the distribution of authorship between articles using the MGRSS, FGRSS, or both was more balanced in the female first-authored articles (see Figure 3; Supplementary Table A3). A total of 25 articles had equal numbers of male and female authors. Of the remaining 62 articles, 43.68% (n = 36) had more male than female authors. Similar to the previous category, the study of MGRSS, FGRSS, or both was more equitable in articles with a majority of female authors. Finally, about 40% (n = 36) of the articles had either male-only (n = 23) or female-only (n = 14) authorship. Male-only authored articles exclusively studied the MGRSS, while female-only authored articles studied both the MGRSS (n = 5), the FGRSS (n = 2), and both simultaneously (n = 7).
Stocked bar chart about authorship of the papers studied in this paper. On the Y-axis it can be seen the categories studied on this graph separated by dashed red lines, each grouping of two categories should add up to 87. For example, in the case of single authorship by one of the two genres, to the sum of the bars (36), have to add the number of articles that have mixed authorship (47) to reach the total number of articles studied (87). For a clearer understanding of the graph, see Supplementary Table A3.
To conclude the general inspection of the articles included in this review, we analyzed the origin of the articles. As shown in Figure 4, the country with the highest scientific production including the MGRSS and FGRSS scales is the United States (n = 53 papers).
World map infographic of the original country in which studies were conducted. The darker is the country, the higher is the amount of papers published about either FGRS or MGRS.
Focusing on the usage of both scales (FGRSS and MGRSS), the differences between the fields that each scale has been used to study are notable, as well as the percentage of scientific production each scale involves. Particularly, the fields of interest that have involved the usage of the FGRSS are (in order of quantity of scientific productions) mental health (27.8%, n = 5), body image (22.2%, n = 4), intimate partner violence victimization (11.1%, n = 2), femininity (11.1%, n = 2), parenting (11.1%, n = 2), neurobiological differences (5.6%, n = 1), work context (5.6%, n = 1), and gender equality (5.6% each, n = 1; Figure 5).
Fields of study on feminine gender role stress. The number of citations has been calculated by averaging the citation counts of each article across the three databases. This average was then combined with the overall averages of articles within the same field to determine the total number of citations.
In the case of the MGRSS, the fields that have been studied are intimate partner violence perpetration (29.9%, n = 21), mental health (12.5% each, n = 9), well-being (12.5% each, n = 9), masculinity (11.1%, n = 8), LGBTIQ+ community (9.7%, n = 7), parenting (8.3%, n = 6), substance abuse (6.9%, n = 5), body image (2.8%, n = 2), work context (2.8%, n = 2), sexual harassment (2.8%, n = 2) and neurobiological differences (1.4%, n = 1; Figure 6).
Fields of study on masculine gender role stress. The number of citations has been calculated by averaging the citation counts of each article across the three databases. This average is then combined with the overall averages of articles within the same field to determine the total number of citations.
Even though the similarity at first sight that can be seen in the percentages, evaluating the numbers of articles behind those percentages is worthwhile. The FGRSS principal field added up to only 12 articles, and the MGRSS principal domains added up to 47 articles (see Figures 3, 4).
Hereupon, the results are structured as follows. The overall domains with gender role stress research appear in separated subsections below (FGRSS and MGRSS) to examine the most remarkable outcomes, the constructs under study, and domain-specific strengths and shortcomings of the research reviewed. Each subsection is concluded by a table containing (a) the main topics of interest that have been used with the tool, (b) the authors who have studied the construct, and (c) the variables related to that tool in the results, summarizing the overall work done in that particular domain. In addition to the tables, each subsection has domain-specific results highlights, limitations, and open theorical questions. Every domain also has a more extended table with the result of each study included (see Supplementary Tables A1, A2).

Feminine gender role stress ()
This domain offers an overview that situates FGRS in the scientific literature from the validation of the FGRSS thus far. As shown in Table 1, the various domains of interest that have utilized FGRS and the FGRSS include mental health, body image, intimate partner violence victimization, femininity, parenting, neurobiological differences, work context, and gender equality.
Summary of the variables studied with FGRSS in science.
Topic	Authors	Variables related to FGRS	 	Body image	.	PregnancyMasculinity / AndrogynyCultural normsWilling of cosmetic surgeryBody image satisfaction	Eating disordersBody dysmorphic disordersStress (cardiovascular / chronic)Self-esteemLife satisfaction	 	Femininity / Femininity ideology	.	Self-esteemStress (perceived / racial)Femininity	Strong black women ideologyTraditional femininity ideology	 	Mental health	.	DepressionPsychological distressPsychological functioningGuilt-pronenessShame-pronenessRegret-pronenessBorderline personalityHistrionic personality	Dependent personalityFear of evaluationExternalizationCommunal rolesSupportEmpathic concernGender transformationWomen’s sterilization	 	Work context	.	Feminine attributesGender-typed professions	AutonomyStress	 	Victimization	.	Intimate partner violenceJustification of male dominance and violenceTraditional female submission	Sexist stereotypesRelationship commitmentRisky sexual online behaviorSelf-esteem	 	Parenting		Psychosocial functioningAnxietyAnger	Distress/dysphoriaRelationship functioningFirst-time pregnancy	 	Neurobiological sex-differences	.	Brain responsePrevalence of depression and anxiety	Hormonal factorsStereotyped gender rolesFemininity	 	Gender equality	.	Fear of negative evaluationGender equalityEgalitarian thinking
Below, we focus on the main results from each category. See Supplementary Table A1, which provides detailed highlights of results in each domain, separated by authors and organized by year for more information.

Body image
Articles in this domain focus on FGRS vulnerability if body image is perceived as a threat, eating disorders, pregnancy body image, and the relationship between cosmetic surgery and body image in women.
Women who perceive themselves as stressed due to their lack of physical attractiveness (high FGRS) tend to experience more chronic stress, are more vulnerable to eating disorders, are more willing to receive cosmetic surgery, and have lower life satisfaction. Furthermore, among pregnant women, body image satisfaction (high FGRS) is negatively related to adhering to cultural norms set for women.

Femininity/femininity ideology
Articles in this domain focus on the relationship between FGRS and African-American women’s identity as well as the FGRS, femininity, and self-esteem.
Articles involving FGRS and femininity show that, in African-American women, racial stress is more harmful than gender-related stress, especially when women endorse what is known as strong black women ideology versus African-American women who endorse traditional femininity ideology. Also related to the effects of femininity, explained that the negative relation between FGRS and self-esteem has a significant interaction with feelings of femininity.

Mental health
Articles in this domain revolve around psychosexual adjustment, gender-related stress implications in personality and stress, and shame and guilt proneness associated with the FGRSS.
The relation between mental health and gender-related stress shows that women have a tendency to experiment higher levels of FGRS when facing a lack of support. The FGRSS also seems to be a predictor of shame and externalization among women, and it is negatively associated with self-esteem among women.

Work context
This domain focuses on gender-typed professions and how they relate to gender role stress and stress in the workplace. Compared to men, women feel more FGRS in situations demanding feminine attributes at work. Moreover, in gender-typed professions, people (men and women) experience more gender role stress and burnout. FGRS scores are reduced after attending to stress prevention programs in the workplace. FGRS scores in the workplace are positively correlated with emotional labor strategies, indicating that gender role stress is a broader predictor of social distress.

Intimate partner violence victimization
Articles in this domain focus on the relationship between FGRS and relationship commitment in abusive relationships, as well as the consequences for adolescent victims of intimate partner violence concerning self-esteem.
Articles that explore the relation between FGRS and intimate partner violence victims have shown that there is no FGRSS score difference between women who leave and women who stay in abusive relationships. FGRS is related with relationship commitment; in particular, the “fear of behaving assertively” dimension predicts the likelihood of women reporting what they like about their partner. Additionally, adolescent victims of intimate partner violence express less self-esteem and higher FGRS when they do not conform to gender stereotypes.

Parenting
Articles in this domain revolve around the relationships among FGRS, being a first-time pregnant woman, and psychosocial functioning of romantic relationships during pregnancy.
The relation between first-time pregnancy and gender-related stress shows that women experience more FGRS aligning with a gradual increase in vulnerability from midpregnancy on. For romantic couples, during pregnancy, mood is strongly related with the levels of gender role stress for both sexes. In women, the variables involved in this psychosocial functioning of the couple are (a) the sense of being cared for by her partner, (b) her satisfaction with the support, and (c) her assessment of the couple’s relationship quality.

Neurobiological sex differences
This domain focuses on neurobiological differences between men and women and their possible relation to gender role stress. Authors debate whether sex differences in emotion-related connectivity can be fully explained by hormonal factors and by social learning of stereotyped gender roles (as evaluated using the MGRSS and FGRSS).

Gender equality
This domain focuses on gender equality, specifically for women. Authors concluded that gender equality in women is influenced by mothers’ educational level, FGRS, and fear of negative evaluation. Moreover, they assessed that more egalitarian thinking in women implies and enhances FGRS.
For an overview of the variables related to FGRS, see Table 1. For a more extended overview of each article’s conclusions, see Supplementary Table A1.

Masculine gender role stress scale ()
This domain offers an overview that situates MGRS in the scientific literature based on the validation of the MGRSS thus far.
As shown in Table 2, the totality domains of interest that have involved MGRS and the usage of the MGRSS are intimate partner violence perpetration, mental health, well-being, masculinity, LGBTIQ+ community, parenting, substance abuse, body image, work context, sexual harassment, and neurobiological differences.
Summary of the variables studied with MGRSS in science.
Topic	Authors	Variables related to MGRS	 	Body Image	.	Physical appearanceCosmetic surgeryWomen’s eating disorders	AnxietySexual performanceMasculinity	 	Masculinity	.	MasculinityEmotional control male normAmbivalence over emotional ExpressionExpression of anger, hostility and aggressionAggressive / impulsive behaviorFear of emotions	Self-stigmaSelf-compassionSelf-coldnessShameDepressed moodWomen’s orgasms functionAttraction to gunsPsychological well-being	 	Mental health	.	Shame pronenessStrategy of externalizationGuilt pronenessEmotional distressSelf-esteemFemininityAlexithymiaSocial support	Fear of emotional states / fearsPersonality traitsDepressionHostilityAnxietyHopelessnessLonelinessPTSD symptomatology	 	Work Context	.	Emotional exhaustionPersonal lossDepersonalizationBurnout / Stress	Type A behaviorHostilityLife dissatisfactionCardiovascular diseases	 	IPV and Sexual attitudes	.	MasculinityTraditional masculine identityMasculine gender role imperativesAntifemininityAggression toward female intimate partnersAggression against womenHostility toward women.IPV proclivityAggression PatternHostile sexism	Controlling behavior Insecure attachmentRelationship powerSubstance abuseSexual harassmentsexual violence.Self-esteemAnxiety / depressionArousalGender-relevant situationsBystander decision-making	 	Parenting	.	FatherhoodPaternal attachmentPaternal depression and anxietyIntergenerational violenceAngerHypermasculine norms	Work–family conflictMarital satisfactionFears of work disruption / sex performanceAffectionSocial support	 	Neurobiological differences	.	Hormonal factorsBrain response	Stereotyped gender roles	 	Well-Being	.	MasculinityGender-relevant instructionsAnxious / Hostile personalitySelf-stigmaSelf-compassionSeeking psychological helpCoping patterns	Phobic / Obsessive-compulsive behaviorSocial networkCommitmentExpressivenessSpiritual well-beingHealth habitsCardiac-related health	 	LGTBIQ+ community and anti-LGTBIQ+ community	.	MasculinityAntifemininity normAnger and aggression toward sexual minorities	Racial discriminationSexual prejudiceSexual risk-taking	 	Sexual harassment / coercion	.	Subordination to womenWomen’s gender role violations“Manly” sexual behaviorSexual harassment proclivity	Sexual coercionPsychological aggressionInjury to partnersFailure (work and sexual domains)	 	Substance abuse	.	Sexual inadequacySexual harassment (sober/intoxicated women)Alcohol abuse	MasculinityJob inadequacyFatherhoodPTSD symptom
Here, we focus only on the main results from each category. For more detailed highlights of results in each domain, separated by authors and by year, see Supplementary Table A2.

Body image
Articles in this domain focus on MGRS vulnerability if body image is perceived as a threat to men, eating disorders in women, and cosmetic surgery relation with body image in men.
Women with eating disorders, apart from FGRS, experience MGRS as a relevant source of stress. Meanwhile, male populations with higher MGRS are more willing to undergo cosmetic surgery to meet the current idealized male form and have less corporal satisfaction. Furthermore, in overweight/obese men, anxiety related to sexual performance or physical appearance causes a significantly high level of MGRS.

Masculinity
Articles in this domain focus on masculinity identity and effects of masculinity on attitudes and behavior.
In masculinity identity articles, the resulting highlights are that (a) high-masculinity identity in men with high MGRS can predict aggressive behavior, (b) women’s orgasms lead men with high MGRS to feel more masculine, (c) men with high MGRS are likely to believe that seeking counseling would have a negative impact on their self-worth, and (d) for men with high MGRS, acceptance threat is positively associated with men’s attraction to men and aggressive reactions to perceived disrespect.
Concerning the effects of masculinity on attitudes and behavior articles, the main findings show that (a) high MGRS in men is related with masculine ideology, men’s fear of emotions, anger, depressive mood, shame proneness, external expressions of anger and hostility, and aggression, (b) the emotional control masculine norm is associated with poorer psychological well-being, especially when men have high ambivalence over emotional expressions (i.e., high scores on the subscale of emotional inexpressiveness of the MGRSS), and (c) there is an association between shame-related threatened masculinity and physical aggression tendencies in men who experience MGRS.

Mental health
Articles in this domain explore psychosocial adjustment and health and implications on self-esteem.
MGRS has negative implications on mental health because it is related to depression, self-reported fears, hostility, and anxiety among men and women. It is also a contributor to shame and guilt in men, particularly among those strongly committed to gender schemas, but it plays a protective role against emotional dysfunction associated with personal distress. In male veterans, MGRS is positively associated with alexithymia.
It seems that the relation between gender-related stress and self-esteem is not clear. On one side, affirmed that gender-related stress in both men and women decreases self-esteem. On the other side, affirmed that high MGRS is associated with lower self-esteem in women but not in men.

Work context
Articles in this domain explore the relationship between MGRS and workplace perceptions, stress at the workplace, as well as gender-typed professions and how they relate to gender role stress.
MGRS is related to emotional exhaustion and depersonalization for both male and female professionals in gender-typed professions. MGRS scores are related to unfavorable perceptions of the workplace among women but favorable perceptions among men. MGRS scores are reduced after attending to stress prevention programs in the workplace. MGRS scores in the workplace are positively correlated with emotional labor strategies, indicating that gender role stress is a broader predictor of social distress.

Intimate partner violence perpetration
Articles in this domain cover the intimate partner violence phenomenon in terms of support by the masculine hegemonic norms, gender-relevant situations, adolescent perpetrations, attachment or emotions and even ostracism.
The most consistent finding in this domain is that MGRS is related to intimate partner violence perpetration either as a cause or as a mediator. The main findings surrounding masculine hegemonic norms (antifemininity, status, and toughness) are that (a) their relation with MGRS leads to hostility toward women, (b) adherence to the antifemininity norm has been normally related to MGRS due to women’s subordinate positions, and (c) adherence to toughness and antifemininity norms correlates positively with perpetration of physical aggression toward female intimate partners via MGRS. In the sexual domain of intimate partner violence, adherence to toughness and antifemininity norms is associated with confidence in intervening in a sexually aggressive event. In conclusion, MGRS is related to the likelihood of accepting psychological, physical, and sexual dating violence.
In the case of gender-related situations involving women’s behavior, the key findings are that more negative attributions and negative affect can be reported for women’s behavior in gender-relevant situations, especially when men have high MGRS. In the case of gender-related situations and men’s behaviors, high MGRS in men is related to more negative attributions to those situations, especially if the situation can be perceived as a female threat. Considering female threats, men with high MGRS endorse verbal aggression toward women. In terms of emotion, masculine gender-relevant situations produce more feelings (anger, affect, attributions), especially among men with high MGRS.
Focusing on specific populations, MGRS predicts dating violence against women and sexual harassment in male adolescents. Among substance abusers, men with high MGRS show greater levels of anger and verbally abusive behavior toward their female partners.

Parenting
Articles in this domain revolve around the relationship between MGRS and romantic couples in which the woman is pregnant for the first time, psychosocial functioning of couples during pregnancy, fatherhood, and parental attachment.
The relation between first-time pregnancy and gender-related stress shows that a couple’s pregnancy invokes anticipated fears of work disruption and less sexual activity in men. Work- and sex- related fears may mask perceived threats to the male identity in some men (who have higher scores on the MGRSS). For romantic relationships, during pregnancy, mood is strongly related with the levels of gender role stress in both sexes.
Adult males report that their levels of MGRS are related with lesser parental attachment and a greater degree of psychological separation.
Concerning the relation between MGRS and fatherhood, studies have shown that (a) men high in MGRS have a higher tendency toward postnatal depression and anxiety about the change of their social role, (b) compared to highly masculine males with rejecting fathers and low self-esteem, some highly masculine males with accepting fathers might experience less MGRS due to their strong self-confidence but are still aggressive because that is part of their belief system regarding how a man should behave, and (c) men who strongly adhered to traditional masculine norms may find it difficult to transition to an egalitarian fatherhood and, hence, experience high levels of MGRS.

Neurobiological differences
This domain focuses on neurobiological differences between men and women and their possible relation to gender role stress. Authors debate whether sex differences in emotion-related connectivity are fully explain by hormonal factors and by social learning of stereotyped gender roles (as evaluated using the MGRSS and FGRSS).

Well-being
Articles in this domain focus on psychosocial well-being, cardiovascular reaction to stress, spiritual well-being, health habits, and attitudes toward seeking psychological help.
Concerning psychosocial well-being, MGRS predicts negative psychosocial and somatic consequences. Specifically, said that excessive commitment to masculine gender norms produces high levels of MGRS, which lead to inflexible and maladaptive coping patterns. When facing these psychosocial drawbacks, MGRS in conjunction with self-stigma and self-compassion were negatively related with seeking psychological help among men.
MGRS is related to increased systolic blood pressure, especially in gender-relevant situations that challenge masculinity, MGRS is also negatively related to cardiac-related health in PTSD male patients. In terms of general health habits, MGRS is related to poor mental and physical health and worse health habits in both men and women.

LGTBIQ + community and anti-LGBTIQ + community
Articles in this domain focus on sexual prejudice toward the LGTBIQ+ community, aggression toward gay men, sexual functioning, and self-identification.
Men’s self-identification as African-American and gay/bisexual lead to higher levels of self-esteem, HIV prevention self-efficacy, stronger social support networks, greater levels of life satisfaction, and lower levels of MGRS. Concerning sexual functioning in this population, racial discrimination, gay bashing, and MGRS may increase the chances that sexual problems develop.
Regarding aggression toward gay men, adherence to the antifemininity norm elicits anger and aggression toward gay men among men high in MGRS.
Regarding sexual prejudice toward the LGTBIQ+ community, studies present in this review conclude that (a) male gender role norms, particularly the antifemininity norm, are strongly associated with anger in response to male and female sexual minorities. Additionally, sexual prejudice and MGRS are important mediators of these associations, (b) men high in MGRS respond aggressively to masculinity threats, regardless of whether the threat originates from women or gay men, and (c) acceptance of the traditional male role norms of status and toughness, MGRS, religious fundamentalism, and sexual prejudice against lesbians and gay men are higher among Black heterosexual men (vs. White heterosexual men).

Sexual harassment/coercion
Articles in this domain explore the relationships among MGRS, sexual harassment, and coercion.
High levels of MGRS in men are related to (a) failure to perform associated with psychological aggression, (b) appearing physically fit and not appearing feminine associated with sexual coercion, and (c) intellectual inferiority associated with injury to partners.
concluded that self-reported harassment proclivity scores were also positively correlated with MGRS scores that were not thematically related (or were, at most, weakly related) to women’s gender role violations.

Substance abuse
Articles in this domain explore the relationships among MGRS, alcohol abuse, and PTSD substance abuse treatment.
Concerning the relationship between alcohol abuse and MGRS, literature has concluded that (a) in a sample of male inpatient alcohol abusers, higher MGRS scores were related to higher scores on alcohol abuse, (b) MGRS is a risk factor for alcohol-related problems among men, (c) patients (men in inpatient alcohol programs) who acknowledge men-specific treatment needs suffer significantly more from MGRS and problems with sexuality and fatherhood than patients who are not aware of masculinity issues, (4) men higher in MGRS who are intoxicated (alcohol) are more likely than sober men to select an sexually explicit film in which a woman is intoxicated and less likely than sober men to select a sexually explicit film in which a woman is sober, and (5) men lower, but not higher, in MGRS receiving an intervention manipulation, relative to control, enacted significantly less alcohol-related physical aggression toward women.
studied the relationship between MGRS and posttraumatic stress disorder symptom severity among male crack/cocaine-dependent patients in residential substance abuse treatment. In their study, MGRS was found to be significantly associated with posttraumatic stress disorder symptom severity when controlling for other variables previously found to be associated with posttraumatic stress disorder.
For an overview of the variables related to MGRS, see Table 2. For a more extended overview of each article’s conclusions, see Supplementary Table A2.

Discussion
The aim of this study was to identify the main fields of study for the MGRSS and the FGRSS, specifically examining their contributions to understanding attitudes and behaviors in these fields, and to analyze the scientific community’s interest with gender role stress. The first finding of this review suggests that, compared to other fields of social psychology, gender role stress has been relatively understudied. Since the formalization of masculine and feminine gender role stress and the development of their respective scales, scientific production in this context appears to have been growing slowly (see Figure 2). This progressive but slow growth could be interpreted from different perspectives. A positive interpretation is that this growth reflects a gradual and steady increase in the scientific community’s interest in gender role stress as a concept because it provides answers to pertinent questions posed by researchers over the years. Another positive interpretation could be that the heightened interest in researching gender roles, which have long guided behavior and remained largely unnoticed by the scientific community, signifies a shift in focus toward issues of gender socialization. Conversely, a negative interpretation of this growth could be that it reflects intermittent interest in the construct, marked by fluctuating levels of attention. This could be due to social changes, the emergence of new and more contemporary study concepts, or the aging of the scales, which might have become outdated for assessing today’s society.
Before discussing the results regarding the content of the articles included, it is relevant to reflect on the numbers obtained in this research. First, it is striking to note the significant difference in terms of scientific publications in this area between the United States (n = 53) and the rest of the scientific community (n = 34; Figure 3). This suggests that US authors have paid the most attention to this construct, as is the case in most of the research.
Within the 87 articles reviewed in this research, a total of 65 articles focused on MGRS and used the MGRSS, whereas only 22 articles addressed FGRS and the study of both concepts together. This discrepancy has implications for the conclusions that can be drawn from the studies, as discussed below. The analysis of works using the FGRSS led to several conclusions. Firstly, feminine gender role stress appears to be a precursor to low self-esteem in women across various situations, such as intimate partner violence victimization, low body satisfaction, and feelings of femininity. Secondly, the tendency to experience high FGRS in women seems to be influenced by factors such as maternal educational level and femininity.
Meanwhile, analyzing the works based on MGRS revealed that (a) the MGRSS has been more widely used than the FGRSS, (b) it has been used to generate conclusions about both men and women, and (c) it has been involved in a wider range of studies across scientific literature in general. Specifically, outcomes related to MGRSS concluded that, in general, (a) MGRS acts as a predictor of aggressive behavior in men in the intimate partner violence context, LGTBQ+ community aggressions, and masculinity threat-related context and (b) MGRS in men is related to masculine ideology, men’s fear of emotions, anger, depressive mood, shame proneness, external expressions of anger and hostility, and aggression. Additionally, (c) MGRS implications for mental health are related to depression, hostility, and anxiety among men and women, (d) MGRS can be either a cause or a mediator of intimate partner violence perpetration, and (e) MGRS is a risk factor for alcohol-related problems among men. As women authors, when we approached this review, we started with the idea that there was a gender bias in the research and in how the study of gender role stress was being approached differently for men and women. Regarding the content of the articles, we can draw the general conclusion that, for men, this construct has primarily been used to explain socially undesirable behavior, serving an exculpatory or justifying function for gender role stereotypes (e.g., predicting or justifying violent behavior) or assessing its influence on well-being. In contrast, for women, the findings have mainly focused on the consequences for their well-being or on justifying behaviors that are harmful to themselves, giving gender role stress an explanatory or confirmatory function (e.g., explaining that victimization in intimate partner relationships is due to their gender role stress). This discrepancy may have led to a gap in the use of this construct to explain a broader range of female behaviors, which, as authors, we believe also contributes to maintaining the differences between men and women and the status quo in today’s society.
Considering these results from a general perspective, 80% of the works examined primarily utilized the masculine construct and scale, demonstrating a broader and more extensive exploration across thematic areas compared to the feminine counterpart. This significant difference in the amount of research conducted on one type of gender stress compared to another also influences the number of conclusions that can be drawn from the studies analyzed. Because FGRS has been less studied, the results of the studies tend to be more general in nature or shared with research on MGRS. In contrast, MGRS has received more specific attention in areas such as intimate partner violence, parenting, and masculinity. To conclude the detailed reflection on the results found, it is important to highlight the differences in the areas studied. The MGRS encompasses more areas of interest than the FGRS. Specifically, certain topics have not been studied in relation to FGRS: substance abuse, the implications of gender role stress for physical health, the effect of gender role stress on members of the LGBTIQ+ community, and the relationship and/or implications of gender role stress in situations of sexual harassment. When examining these differences at a more specific level within each area, there remain significant disparities. For instance, while MGRS is addressed in 16 papers on intimate partner violence perpetration, its female counterpart is only explored in two papers on intimate partner violence victimization. When examining the content of these articles, it becomes evident that even within the same subject matter (intimate partner violence), the approaches to studying male and female contexts are markedly distinct. Research on male populations posits hypotheses that rationalize male dominant behaviors; meanwhile, studies focusing on female populations tend to propose hypotheses that justify subordination and victimization behaviors.
This review provides clear evidence of the normalization of gender inequality, including in research in which women occupy an inferior position compared to men. Women have been disadvantaged for years, and the consequences of gender socialization for them have gone unnoticed or poorly studied.
However, this gender inequality seems to be not only found in the studies included in this review. Based on the analysis of the authorship of the articles included in this research (see Supplementary Table A3), several issues can be observed: (a) In general terms, when the authors are mostly men, the main topic of interest appears to be MGRS. (b) Conversely, when the majority of the authors are women, the interest is much more dispersed among studying MGRS, FGRS, or both. (c) When the articles are authored solely by men, we did not find any articles addressing FGRS or both MGRS and FGRS. (d) However, when the authorship is composed solely of women, the articles are spread across MGRS, FGRS, and both. Three main conclusions can be drawn from this analysis of authorship. Firstly, it can be concluded that, in general, there is more interest or attention given to the male construct, despite the fact that gender inequality—partly caused by gender roles and associated stress—has greater and more negative consequences for the female population. Secondly, these data may reflect the current proportion of male and female researchers. Finally, these data indicate the level of interest in women’s issues within today’s society and the scientific community in particular. These findings should prompt the research community to reflect on our interests moving forward, particularly regarding gender role stress and, more broadly, in pursuing more egalitarian research for the female population.
Based on the findings of this scoping review and considering the ongoing evolution of gender roles in contemporary society, it would be necessary to update both the scales and definitions of male and female constructs of gender role stress to generate definitive conclusions about their societal impact. This, together with an equal study of both constructs in both female and male populations by the scientific community.

Limitations
There are a few limitations worth noting in this research. The main limitation has to do with the generation of the database search equations. “Gender role stress” is not included in the MESH terms or the APA thesaurus, which led the authors to generate search equations with a term not indexed in the thesaurus, with the consequent documentary noise or documentary silence that this entailed in the searches of each database studied.

Conclusion
This scoping review shows the gap in the scientific literature related to the study of male and female gender role stress and its consequences in the population since the formalization of both constructs in 1987 and 1992, respectively. Specifically, it points out the lack of research on FGRS and its consequences for the female population compared to MGRS. For example, some studies on MGRS use the scale with women to corroborate hypotheses, a practice we have not seen in the opposite direction. Therefore, this review merely reflects that gender inequality is not only present in today’s society but also in the scientific literature.
Studies on gender role stress in women have focused more on highlighting aspects that denote the weakness of women as a social group (mental instability, preoccupation with their image, internalizing behaviors, etc.) while studies on male gender role stress have focused more on using this construct as a mechanism that explains and/or moderates socially negative behaviors in men (mental weakness, lack of coping, weakness, sexual orientation, violent behaviors, aggressiveness, etc.).
The unequal number of studies on men and women, as well as the emphasis on the differentiating role of the construct to highlight consequences for men and women, indicates the lack of a gender perspective even in research intended to study it. These findings outline the importance of more research with a gender perspective where women are the aim of study.
1https://osf.io/ve5t4/?view_only=95b5ba5fe651429299132015a90e7c45
2In those tables, the summary of articles is not equal to the total number of articles studied in this work. This discrepancy arises because certain articles covered both MGRSS and FGRSS, therefore being included in both tables.

Data availability statement
The data presented in the study are deposited in the open science framework repository, available at https://osf.io/ve5t4/?view_only=95b5ba5fe651429299132015a90e7c45. Further queries should be directed to the corresponding author.

Author contributions
AA: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. LV-M: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing. FE: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Resources, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

Supplementary material
The Supplementary material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1436337/full#supplementary-material

References
Analysis of the factors affecting Men’s attitudes toward cosmetic surgery: body image, media exposure, social network use, masculine gender role stress and religious attitudes
Men who target women: specificity of target, generality of aggressive behavior
Bibliometrix: an R-tool for comprehensive science mapping analysis
Masculine gender role stress: a potential predictor of phobic and obsessive–compulsive behaviour
Biological sex, sex role orientation, masculine sex role stress, dissimulation and self-reported fears
Higher levels of masculine gender role stress in masculine than in feminine nations
Gender and stress: is gender role stress? A re-examination of the relationship between feminine gender role stress and eating disorders
Stress prevention training: sex differences in types of stressors, coping, and training effects
The measurement of psychological androgyny
An exploration of black college students’ conformity to gender-role norms on gender-role stress and depression
The ‘managed’ or damaged heart? Emotional labor, gender, and posttraumatic stressors predict workplace event-related acute changes in cortisol, oxytocin, and heart rate variability
A multidimensional model of empathy, and the occurrence of personality disorders and stress in social settings
Masculine gender role stress and self-stigma of seeking help: the moderating roles of self-compassion and self-coldness
You’ve come a long way… maybe: how moral emotions trigger backlash against women leaders
On understanding gender differences in the expression of emotion. Gender roles, socialization, and Language
Gender role behaviors of high affiliation and low self-silencing predict better adherence to antiretroviral therapy in women with HIV
Men’s adjustment to fatherhood: implications for obstetric health care
Individual, organizational, and societal backlash against women
Self-regulatory mechanisms governing gender development
Fathers, sons, and aggression: a path model
Do Women’s orgasms function as a masculinity achievement for men?
The unmanliness of ostracism: the role of masculine gender role stress and intimate partner violence in Men’s mental health
Gender and emotion expression: a developmental contextual perspective
The role of emotion regulation in the development of psychopathology
Predictive factors for depression and anxiety in men during the perinatal period: a mixed methods study
Effects of masculine identity and gender role stress on aggression in men
Masculine gender-role stress, anger, and male intimate abusiveness: implications for Men’s relationships
Effects of masculine gender-relevant task instructions on Men’s cardiovascular reactivity and mental arithmetic performance
The influence of dual-identity development on the psychosocial functioning of African-American gay and bisexual men
Racial differences in sexual prejudice and its correlates among heterosexual men
Many Mickles make a muckle: evidence that gender stereotypes reemerge spontaneously via cultural evolution
Traditional femininity versus strong black women ideologies and stress among black women
Masculine gender role conflict and stress in relation to parental attachment and separation
Types of male adolescent violence against women in three contexts: dating violence offline, dating violence online, and sexual harassment online outside a relationship
Typology of victimization against women on adolescent girls in three contexts: dating offline, dating online, and sexual harassment online
The factor structure of prenatal psychological and psychosocial functioning in first-time expectant parents
Social role theory
Gender role stress in relation to shame, guilt, and externalization
Masculine gender role stress: implications for the assessment of men
Masculine gender role stress and intimate abuse: effects of gender relevance of conflict situations on men’s attributions and affective responses
Masculine gender role stress. Scale development and component factors in the appraisal of stressful situations
Masculine gender-role stress: predictor of anger, anxiety, and health-risk behaviors
Parental relationship quality and masculine gender-role strain in young men
Masculine gender role stress and intimate abuse: effects of masculine gender relevance of dating situations and female threat on men’s attributions and affective responses
What accounts for Men’s hostile attitudes toward women? The influence of hegemonic male role norms and masculine gender role stress
A self-awareness intervention manipulation for heavy-drinking Men’s alcohol-related aggression toward women
Threatened-masculinity shame-related responses among straight men: measurement and relationship to aggression
Development of the feminine gender role stress scale: a cognitive-behavioral measure of stress, appraisal, and coping for women
Masculine gender role stress, low relationship power, and aggression toward intimate partners
Feminine gender role discrepancy strain and Women’s self-esteem in daily and weekly life: a person X context perspective
Masculine gender role stress in an inpatient sample of alcohol abusers
Masculine gender role stress and Men’s fear of emotions as predictors of self-reported aggression and violence
The role of masculine ideology and masculine gender role stress in men’s perpetration of relationship violence
Implications of masculine gender role stress in male veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder
Masculinity and emotionality: an investigation of Men’s primary and secondary emotional responding
Masculinity, shame, and fear of emotions as predictors of Men’s expressions of anger and hostility
Masculine gender role stress and attitudes towards seeking psychological help: serial mediation by self-stigma and self-compassion
The relationship between gender role stress and self esteem in students of Faculty of Health Sciences
The feminine and masculine gender role stress – Conclusions from Polish studies
Pregnancy and body image in Poland: gender roles and self-esteem during the third trimester
An exploratory study of gender role stress and psychological distress of women in Kosovo
Conflicting cultural and religious views on Cosmesis: the modern Women’s dilemma
Masculinity issues in addiction treatment in Swiss inpatient alcohol programs: bringing men’s treatment needs Back to the research agenda
Examination of the relationship between fear of negative evaluation, gender role stress, and gender equality of female university students
Attitudes toward sex-roles: Traditional or egalitarian?
Cardiovascular reactivity to stress in men. Effects of masculine gender role stress appraisal and masculine performance challenge
Effects of men’s acute alcohol intoxication, perceptions of women’s intoxication, and masculine gender role stress on sexual aggression perpetration: findings from a laboratory analogue
Masculinity and bystander attitudes: moderating effects of masculine gender role stress
‘Demonstrating masculinity’ via intimate partner aggression: the moderating effect of heavy episodic drinking
A latent class analysis of dyadic perfectionism in a college sample
Sex differences in effective fronto-limbic connectivity during negative emotion processing
The role of insecure attachment and gender role stress in predicting controlling behaviors in men who batter
Examining masculine gender role conflict and stress in relation to religious orientation and spiritual well-being
The relationship between feminine gender role stress, body image, and eating disorders
Gender roles and traits in stress and health
The male role, alcohol use, and alcohol problems: a structural modeling examination in adult women and men
The relationship between masculine gender role stress and psychological adjustment: a question of construct validity?
Masculine gender role stress and posttraumatic stress disorder symptom severity among inpatient male crack/cocaine users
College men’s intimate partner violence attitudes: contributions of adult attachment and gender role stress
College Men’s and Women’s masculine gender role strain and dating violence acceptance attitudes: testing sex as a moderator
On the motivation of quid pro quo sexual harassment in men: relation to masculine gender role stress
Masculine gender role stress as a mediator of the relationship between Justifi cation of dominance and aggression and male adolescent dating violence against women
Gender roles and gender norms associated with psychological distress in women and men among the Dutch general population
Effects of masculine gender role stress on Men’s cognitive, affective, physiological, and aggressive responses to intimate conflict situations
Domains of masculine gender role stress and intimate partner violence in a clinical sample of violent men
Masculinity moderates the relationship between symptoms of PTSD and cardiac-related health behaviors in male veterans
First-time parenthood: Influences on pre- and postnatal adjustment in fathers and mothers
Evolution of gender stereotypes in Spain: from 1985 to 2018
Aggression toward gay men as gender role enforcement: effects of male role norms, sexual prejudice, and masculine gender role stress
Determinants of aggression toward sexual minorities in a community sample
Correlates of anger in response to gay men: effects of male gender role beliefs, sexual prejudice, and masculine gender role stress
The gender role strain paradigm: an update
Definitions of gender and sex: the subtleties of meaning
Effectiveness of short-term specialized inpatient treatment for war-related posttraumatic stress disorder: a role for adventure-based counseling and psychodrama
Man enough? Masculine discrepancy stress and intimate partner violence
The role of masculine gender role stress in expressivity and social support network factors
Protecting manhood: race, class, and masculinity in Men’s attraction to guns and aggression
How does masculinity impact on health? A quantitative study of masculinity and health behavior in a sample of UK men and women
Deconstructing hegemonic masculinity: the roles of antifemininity, subordination to women, and sexual dominance in Men’s perpetration of sexual aggression
Ratings of self and peers on sex role attributes and their relation to self-esteem and conceptions of masculinity and femininity
The correlation between body mass index and gender role stress among young Hungarian males
Psychosexual adjustment following sterilization: a prospective study on Chinese women
Gender role stress and burnout in Chinese human service professionals in Hong Kong
The structure of male role norms
PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation
Leaving an abusive dating relationship: an investment model comparison of women who stay versus women who leave
Cross-cultural validity of the masculine and feminine gender role stress scales
Spanish women making risky decisions in the social domain: the mediating role of femininity and fear of negative evaluation
Combined effects of masculine gender-role stress and sexual prejudice on anger and aggression toward gay men
Systematic reviews in nutrition: standardized methodology
Psychosocial and physiological correlates of male gender role stress among employed adults
Conformity to the emotional-control masculine norm and psychological well-being among Chinese men in Hong Kong: the mediating role of stress appraisal for expressing tender emotions
Minority stress and sexual problems among African-American gay and bisexual men
Automatic associations and conscious attitudes predict different aspects of Men’s intimate partner violence and sexual harassment proclivities