Late Gadolinium Enhancement by Cardiac Magnetic Resonance and Speckle Tracking Echocardiography in the Evaluation of Cardiac Complications in Chagas Cardiomyopathy: A Systematic Review
Background:
Chagas cardiomyopathy (CC) increases cardiovascular  mortality associated with congestive heart failure (CHF), ventricular arrhythmias  (VA), and sudden cardiac death (SCD). Different imaging techniques have been  tested to assess disease progression and cardiac risk in individuals with Chagas  disease (ChD). In this systematic review, we evaluated the accuracy in detecting  cardiac complications in CC patients using cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) and  speckle tracking echocardiography (STE).
Methods:
A search was done on  PubMed, Cochrane, and Embase for studies in humans over 18 years of age with ChD.  Demographic data, research methodology, imaging parameters, and cardiac outcomes  were extracted, and study quality was assessed, resulting in a narrative  description.
Results:
Twelve studies with 1124 patients were analyzed.  One study discovered a contractility pattern by STE. Four studies assessed the  identification of Early Cardiac Impairment (ECI) and VA risk, respectively, while  three studies evaluated the risk of SCD. Global Longitudinal Strain (GLS)  identified patients with ECI (–18.5  3.4% non-fibrosis vs –14.0   5.8% fibrosis, p = 0.006 and –18  2% non-fibrosis vs –15   2% fibrosis, p = 0.004). The amount of fibrosis 11.78% or  in two or more contiguous transmural segments were markers for VA risk. GLS and  the amount of fibrosis were found to be predictors of SCD.
Conclusions:
STE may be considered a screening technique for identifying the subclinical  status of CHF. CMR using Late Gadolinium Enhancement (LGE) is considered a  relevant parameter for stratifying patients with ChD who are at risk of SCD.  Fibrosis and GLS can be used as markers to categorize patients at risk for  arrhythmias.

1. Introduction
Chagas disease (ChD) is an infectious illness that is a public health problem in  Latin America. Globalization has increased the number of cases to approximately  300.000 in the United States and 181.181 in Europe. ChD is defined by an  acute phase that progresses to the indeterminate form (IF), which in a  minority of patients evolves to the clinically active determined form. ChD can  cause chronic myocyte inflammation and fibrosis in the clinically active form,  resulting in Chagas cardiomyopathy (CC), which can cause congestive heart failure  (CHF), sudden cardiac death (SCD), and ventricular arrhythmias (VA). CHF accounts  for more than 50% of mortality in ChD, and SCD is a relatively common feature of  the disease. In comparison to other kinds of cardiomyopathies, CC is  associated with a lower rate of survival.
Despite significant research efforts in ChD, robust markers or indicators for  guiding therapeutic interventions such as implantable cardioverter-defibrillators  destined to treat lethal arrhythmias and abort episodes of SCD, have not been  established.
As a result, early diagnosis of cardiac abnormalities leading to overt disease  has become a major research priority with a potential impact on long-term  prognosis. Different non-invasive diagnostic methods such as cardiac magnetic  resonance (CMR) using Late Gadolinium Enhancement (LGE) and speckle tracking  echocardiography (STE) have been used to identify CC. CMR is considered the  goldstandard to assess ventricular systolic function, detect segmental wall  motion abnormalities, and measure the amount of fibrosis in the myocardium by LGE  assessment. STE also provides vital insights into myocardial dynamics and  the mechanical function of the heart.
However, there is no consensus on which imaging modality is the best choice  based on the cardiac complication being assessed in CC. Nor is there any  consensus on whether LGE or STE is better for detecting an IF of ChD. To help  classify risk and create effective early interventions to avoid or minimize the  most severe cardiac outcomes associated with CC, specific criteria related to  each method must be established. This article will review and synthesize the  information about the accuracy of CMR and STE in detecting cardiac complications  in CC patients.

2. Methods
This systematic review of the literature compared the accuracy of two imaging  techniques CMR and STE in for detecting cardiac complications in CC. The work was  published in PROSPERO under the ID CRD42021272533, utilizing Preferred Reporting  Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA).
Pubmed, Embase, and Cochrane were searched electronically using English, Spanish  and Portuguese languages. The search terms for STE databases were: “Speckle  tracking echocardiogram”, “Speckle tracking strain”, and “Myocardial  strain”. “Magnetic Resonance Imaging” was used as a key term for LGE. Finally,  the terms for ChD were: “Chagas Cardiomyopathy” and “Chagas disease”. Search  equations also included Boolean terms (AND/OR) (Appendix Table 2). Additionally,  a Google Scholar search was done to locate unpublished literature or research not  available in the electronic databases. References from systematic reviews  obtained during the search were screened and experts recommended adding  additional articles.
Two researchers chose which publications to include (screening was done by  title, abstract, and secondly, full text revision). Inclusion criteria for  articles were defined as: studies done on humans over 18 years old, patients with  ChD, experimental or observational studies and studies that included speckle  tracking and/or LGE techniques. Exclusion criteria included: low quality  assessment and case reports or series of cases. A third reviewer (epidemiologist)  was consulted in the event of a dispute.
After completing the selection procedure, the study team extracted data using a  form which was designed, tested, and standardized. The extraction matrix has six  sections: (1) first author’s last name, publication year, journal, DOI, country,  study design, period of the study, and number of groups; (2) imaging methods and  equipment; (3) participants’ age, gender, and race; (4) CMR variables included:  left ventricle contractility and location, fibrosis presence and location in T1  [enhancement], left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF); (5) echocardiography  variables included ventricular dilatation (global or segmental), wall motion  abnormalities (global or segmental), LVEF; longitudinal, radial, and  circumferential strains (global and segmental); (6) cardiac outcomes: SCD, VA,  and CHF. Finally, valvulopathy was excluded since Trypanosoma.cruzi does not  directly affect heart valves.
Quality of information was assessed by Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) check list  forms based on each study design. The epidemiologist applied the tool to the  different articles and categorized the quality of information using three levels:  high, moderate, and low (Table 1 (Ref.)/Appendix Table 3 (Ref.  )). For data synthesis and analysis, a narrative description was built  that included characteristics and differences found in primary studies for each  imaging technique (STE and LGE) with respect to the cardiac outcomes defined. A  consensus of imaging technique experts was performed to unify recommendations for  cardiac complications in patients with ChD identified throughout the literature  review.
Results from the systematic review. Summary of 
socio-demographic characteristics, type of imaging techniques, the main outcomes 
of the systematic review and quality assessment.
Last name of the first author	N	Country of publication	Age (mean  SD) or (mean/range)	Imaging technique	Gender	Measurement of CI	Outcomes		 	Value	Cutoff	CHF	AR	SCD	 	 2015 	62	Brazil	58.3  8.3	STE	Male (62%)	GLS	–14.3%	None	Predictor for malignant VAR	None	 	 2019 	54	Mexico	55.9  12.2	LGE	Male (57%)	Percentage of fibrosis	17.1%	None	Predictors For V-AR	None	 							2 or more contiguous, transmural segments with fibrosis	None				 	 2012 	50	Brazil	55.1  11.9	LGE	Male (72%)	2 or more contiguous, transmural segments with fibrosis	None	None	Predictor for V-AR (4.1 fold greater risk)	None	 	 2014 	61	Brazil	62.32  10.43	LGE	Male (38%)	Percentage of fibrosis	11.78%	None	Predictor for V-AR	None	 	 2018 	61	Brazil	58  8	LGE	Male (41%)	Percentage of fibrosis indeterminate form group (41%) vs cardiac form without lv dysfunction group (44%)	None	Early detection of subclinical	None	None	 								CHF stage			 	 2018 	140	Brazil	57/(45–67)	LGE	Male (48%)	Amount of fibrosis (9.2% median calculated among patients with scar)	None	None	Predictor for sustained ventricular tachycardia	Predictor of sudden cardiac death	 	 2015 	131	Brazil	55  10	STE	Male (34%)	RD (mm) pattern of contraction - CCC suspected	None	None	None	None	 							Inferior segment Ch3 0.92  1.72 mm vs C3 2.22  1.20 mm, p = 0.03					 							Posterior segment Ch3 2.02  0.90 mm vs C3 3.80  1.92 mm, p = 0.03					 							Septal segment Ch3 5.88  2.25 mm vs C3 2.39  1.09 mm, p = 0.001					 							Anterior segment Ch3 5.27  2.49 mm vs C3 3.62  1.50 mm, p = 0.04					 	 2020 	90	Argentina	59/(52–65)	STE	Male (40%)	LV-GLS	–18%	Early detection of subclinical CHF stage	None	None	 							LV-GLS by segments (%)	Basal anteroseptal: ChD –17 (–14–19) vs CG 19 (–17–21) p = 0.09				 								Mid-anterior: ChD –15 (–12–18) vs CG 20 (–19–22) p = 0.002				 								Apical-anterior: ChD –16 (–10–21) CG –22 (–18–25) p  0.001				 								Mid-lateral: ChD –17 (–13–20) vs CG –19 (–18–22) p = 0.16				 								Mid-posterior: ChD –17 (–14–20) vs CG20 (–17–22) p = 0.38				 								Basal inferoseptal: ChD –17 (–14–20) vs CG –18 (–16–14) p = 0.99				 								Apex: ChD –17 (–12–21) vs CG –22 (20–25) p  0.001				 	 2020 	65	Brazil	52  11.3	STE/LGE	Male (50%)	LV-GLS	–18.5  3.4% (Absence of fibrosis) p = 0.006 –14.0  5.8 (Presence of fibrosis) p = 0.0006	Early detection of subclinical CHF stage	None	None	 							LV-GLS by segments (%)	Basal inferoseptal:				 								NC –15.2  –2.7				 								IFCD –13.1  3.4				 								CCC –11.9  5.6 p = 0.01				 								Basal inferior:				 								NC –18  –2.2				 								IFCD –16.3  3.3				 								CCC –11.9  5.6 p = 0.01				 								Mid inferoseptal:				 								NC –19.4  2.0				 								IFCD –17.7  –3.2				 								CCC –14.5  6.3 p = 0.03				 								Mid inferolateral:				 								NC –17.8  2.8				 								IFCD –15.2  3.5				 								CCC –10.5  8.2 p = 0.01				 	 2016 	168	Brazil	45  8	STE/LGE	Male (45%)	GLS (%)	–18.5  1.8 (NF) vs –15.0  1.8 (F) p = 0.004	Early detection of subclinical CHF stage	None	None	 							GCS (%)	–18.6  2.4 (NF) vs –13.8  2.2 (F) p = 0.002				 							GRS (%)	54  12 (NF) vs 36  13 (F) p = 0.02				 	SANTOS  2019 	112	Brazil	56.7  11.8	STE	Male (56%)	GLS (%)	–12%	Greater risk for hospitalization and heart transplant	None	Greater risk	 	 2018 	130	Brazil	53.6  11.5	LGE	Male (46.1%)	Amount of fibrosis	12.3G	None	Higher risk	Higher risk
N, Number of patients who participated in the study; CI, Cardiac Impairment; 
CHF, Congestive Heart Failure; AR, Arrhythmia; SCD, Sudden Cardiac Death; GLS, 
Global Longitudinal Strain; V-AR, Ventricular Arrhythmia; RD, Radial 
Displacement; Ch, Chagas Group; C, Control Group; LV-GLS, Left Ventricular Global 
Longitudinal Strain; G, Grams; STE, Speckle Tracking Echocardiography; LGE, Late 
Gadolinium Enhancement; NC, Control Group. IFCD, Indeterminate Form Chagas group; 
CCC, Chagas Cardiomyopathy Group; GCS, Global Circumferential Strain; GRS, Global 
Radial Strain; NF, No Fibrosis Group; F, Fibrosis Group; SD, Standard Deviation; 
Quality assessment: ; .
This manuscript adheres to the ethical principles of health research. During the  selection process of the articles included and the data analysis, the veracity of  the information has been rigorously handled.

3. Results
Through database searches, 329 studies were located. Six duplicate records were  removed resulting in a total of 323 articles. These articles identified 22  studies that met the criteria for full-text evaluation. After reviewing these 22  documents for inclusion and exclusion criteria, nine articles were eliminated as  duplicates. Five systematic reviews (SRs) were identified in the full text  reports, and the SRs included 34 references. As a result, 47 articles were  evaluated: thirteen were excluded due to low quality assessment, fifteen were  excluded based on expert opinion evaluation, five were excluded since they were  identified as SRs, and two were not recovered. Finally, 12 articles were included  in the study. The method for performing this systematic review is depicted in  Fig. 1.
PRISMA, systematic research flow diagram.
The flow diagram depicts the different phases developed to obtain the selected  articles. It lists the studies identified, included and excluded, and the reasons  for exclusions. PRISMA: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and  Meta-Analyses.
Six of the twelve studies were cross-sectional, two were cohorts (one  was retrospective and one was prospective), and four were case-control  . Most studies are categorized as high to moderate quality (Table 1/Appendix Table 3). The studies included 1124 patients from Brazil, Mexico, and  Argentina (946 ChD and 178 non-ChD). They ranged in age from 45 to 62 years old  , and most participants were male (590 = 52.4%).
In terms of imaging techniques, six used LGE via CMR, two  LGE/STE, and four STE. A modified Second Brazilian  Consensus on ChD was acknowledged in each paper. The studies analyzed cardiac  outcomes in patients with ChD such as: CHF, VA, and SCD. Table 1 highlighted the  general characteristics of articles considered and summarizes key  sociodemographic and cardiac outcome data while the graphical abstract summarized  imaging recommendations to assess cardiac complications in patients who have ChD.

4. Cardiac Outcomes as Measured by STE and LGE
CC subclinical phase (IF) was evaluated across several studies utilizing global  and segmental strains. Cianciulli et al. demonstrated that the ChD  group had a reduced left ventricular (LV)-global longitudinal strain (LV-GLS) in  comparison to the control group (median –17 vs –20.3, p  0.001).  Seven segments were significantly lower –18% in patients with ChD compared to  the control group: mid-anterior –15% (–12 to –18) vs –20% (–19 to –22),  apical- anterior –16% (–10 to –21) vs –22% (–18 to –25), and the apex  –17% (–12 to –21) vs –22% (–20 to –25).
Similarly, Romano et al. revealed that the indeterminate group’s  regional longitudinal segments strain (RegLS) values were greater (worse) than  those of the control group (NC): basal inferior-septal (–13.1  3.4 vs  –15.2  2.7), basal-inferior (–16.3  3.3 vs –18.6  2.2),  mid infero-septal (–17.7  3.2 vs 19.4  2.0), mid infero-lateral  (–15.2  3.5 vs –17.8  2.8). The IF group had a lower global  radial strain (GRS) than the NC group (28.4  14.6 vs 34.2  10.3;  p = 0.043), and the CC group had a lower global longitudinal strain and  global circumferential strain (GCS) than the NC group (GLS: –14  6.3% vs  –19.3  1.6%, p = 0.001; GCS: –13.6  5.2% vs –17.3   2.8%; p = 0.008). Patients without fibrosis had significantly  higher values of GLS (–18.5  3.4 vs –14.0  5.8, p =  0.006) compared those with detected fibrosis. Furthermore, a statistically  significant non-linear relationship between GLS and fibrosis was observed in  patients with ChD (r = 0.625, p  0.001).
Gomes et al. discovered that individuals with fibrosis in the  early stages of the cardiac form had a reduced global strain value: GLS (–15   2% vs –18  2%, p = 0.004), GCS (–14  2% vs  –19  2%, p = 0.002), and lower radial left ventricular strain  (36  13% vs 54  12%, p = 0.02).
Lima et al. described a peculiar imaging distribution pattern of  contractility characteristic of CC. This study utilized the myocardial strain to  assess left ventricular mechanics in four groups of patients with ChD and various  progressive degrees of LV dysfunction from normal to severe (Ch1A, Ch1B, Ch2, and  Ch3) compared to the control groups with matched degrees of LV dysfunction (C1,  C2, C3). ChD groups had lower global longitudinal velocity values than control  groups. However, a vicarious pattern was noted in the severe LV dysfunction ChD  (Ch3) compared to a control group (C3): Ch3 displayed a surprising rise in global  longitudinal and radial displacement (RD). In RD, segmental measurements revealed  that Ch3 had lower values in the inferior and lateral wall segments vs C3 (RD  posterior: Ch3 2.02  0.90 mm vs C3 3.80  1.92 mm, p =  0.03; inferior: Ch3 0.92  1.72 mm vs C3 2.22  1.20 mm, p =  0.03) and higher values in the septal and anterior wall segments vs C3 (RD  antero-septal: Ch3 5.88  2.25 mm vs C3 2.39  1.09 mm, p =  0.001; anterior: Ch3 5.27  2.49 mm vs C3 3.62  1.50 mm, p  = 0.04).

5. Myocardial Fibrosis and GLS
Fibrosis was also used to evaluate the IF of ChD. A cross-sectional study  comparing individuals with indeterminate ChD to those with the CC but no left  ventricular dysfunction found that fibrosis occurred equally in individuals with  indeterminate ChD (6/17; 41% of fibrosis) and individuals with the CC but no  left ventricular dysfunction (7/16; 44% of fibrosis; p = 1.0). When the  total quantity of myocardial fibrosis was compared between groups, it was  determined to be 4.1% (IIQ: 2.1–10.7) in the indeterminate group, 2.3% (IIQ:  1–5) in the CC without ventricular dysfunction group, and 15.2% in the  ventricular dysfunction group (IIQ: 1–5).
GLS and cardiac fibrosis were both associated with an increased risk for cardiac  events. Santo Junior et al. demonstrated that GLS was an  independent predictor of cardiac adverse events (HR 1.365; 95% CI 1.106–1.686;  p = 0.004) with a value greater than –12% thus increasing the  likelihood of cardiac events (log-rank p = 0.035). Senra et al.   defined a cutoff value of 12.3 g for cardiac fibrosis that was found  to be a good predictor of both the combined endpoint (adjusted HR 1.031; 95% CI  1.013–1.049; p = 0.001) and all causes of mortality (adjusted HR 1.028;  95% CI 1.005–1.051; p = 0.017). Each additional gram of myocardial  fibrosis was related to a 2.8% increase in mortality and a 3.1% increase in the  risk of reaching a combination of hard endpoints.
Volpe et al. demonstrated that the scar (ascertained by LGE) group  was more likely to experience a cardiac event related to primary (log-rank test,  p = 0.043) and secondary (log-rank test, p = 0.016) endpoints,  but there was no relationship between primary and secondary endpoint for the scar  pattern. As a consequence, scars in patients with ChD is a strong predictor of  sustained ventricular tachycardia and all causes of death.

6. Ventricular Arrhythmias
VA were investigated in three studies involving LGE. Two studies established  that the involvement of two or more transmural segments was associated with a  higher risk of ventricular tachycardia (VT). Mello et al.  found that the group of patients with VT had a relative 4.1 risk (95% CI  1.06–15.68) of having two or more segments with LGE with a transmural  distribution, compared to those without VT. In addition, Melendez et al.   established a cutoff of 17.1% for cardiac fibrosis with respect to the  percentage of LGE, resulting in 0.5 g (0–2.5) in the indeterminate group, 12 g  (0.38–22) in the CC group without VT, and 23 g (18–34) in the CC group with VT.  Tassi et al. showed evidence that the presence of VA was associated  with a cutoff point of 11.78% for cardiac fibrosis mass (p   0.001) by LGE. LVEF and fibrosis were found to be inversely proportional (  = –0.37).
Similarly, GLS was found to be associated with malignant VA in patients with CC.  GLS was considerably worse in patients with arrhythmias than in the control group  in a cross-sectional study (–13.6  5.5 vs –16.5  4.3, p  = 022). GLS and LVEF all demonstrated the ability to differentiate between  patients who did not have or had previous implantable  cardioverter-defibrillators. A GLS cutoff of –14.3% sensitivity of 67% and a  specificity of 69% for detecting VA, were found to be independent predictors of  malignant arrhythmias.

7. Discussion
The current review analyzed relevant literature pertaining to the ability of STE  and LGE to detect CC complications—including their accuracy in predicting SCD,  VA, and CHF. As a result, this systematic review gathered specific imaging  findings to guide clinicians in the management of cardiac complications in  patients with CC.
The only follow-up on the majority of patients in the IF of ChD is an  electrocardiogram to assess progression to the cardiac form of the disease.  Frequent sophisticated cardiac imaging is still not advised in asymptomatic  patients for the assessment of heart disease. Nonetheless, STE has the  potential to provide detailed analysis of ventricular mechanics and myocardial  contraction while allowing for the detection of subtle changes in the heart  muscle prior to the beginning of cardiac complications. Because STE can  detect slight alterations in the fibers of the heart, it is beneficial for  assessing the subclinical status of CHF in CC. Cianciulli et al.  concluded that GLS and segmental longitudinal peak systolic strain (SLPSs) values  were sensitive enough to detect cardiac impairment in IF of ChD patients.
Romano et al. also demonstrated that RegLS was greatly reduced in  the IF population despite the absence of detectable myocardial fibrosis with LGE  indicating that, in patients with IF ChD, the mere presence of RegLS  abnormalities even in absence of myocardial fibrosis is a prelude to myocardial  dysfunction.
In regard to fibrosis, Noya Rabelo et al. demonstrated that  myocardial fibrosis is not a good predictor of IF progression to an overt cardiac  form. However, the degree of fibrosis is an excellent marker of CHF progression  and severity of disease in individuals with CC. Fibrosis has been proven to be  inversely related to LVEF. This implies that a greater level of fibrosis results  in lower ventricular systolic function and, that the extent of fibrosis  correlates well with the New York Heart Association functional class. The  reduced myocardial contractility associated with fibrosis translates into reduced  GLS. Romano et al. found that GLS was modified to a greater extent  when the quantity of fibrosis was larger. Gomes et al. demonstrated  that 50% of participants in stage A of ChD had lower GLS and GCS compared to the  amount of cardiac fibrosis detected by CMR at follow-up, whereas those with  normal GLS and GCS did not develop cardiac fibrosis at the follow up CMR  examination. This observation has obvious relevance in a clinical setting since  the onset of fibrosis in CC causes extensive ventricular remodeling and results  in an increased likelihood of lethal arrhythmias and adverse outcome events.
Although, poor prognosis in CC may be driven by malignant VA and, consequently  SCD, there is strong evidence that progressive CHF has a bigger impact as the  most common cause of death in ChD. As a result, identifying patients with  early cardiac impairment by STE could be a key imaging technique to change  prognosis in patients with ChD.
Because CC is considered arrhythmogenic, identifying people who are at risk of  developing VA is critical. Myerburg et al. considered myocardial  fibrosis to be the arrhythmogenic substrate of VA. As a result, fibrosis has  emerged as an important predictor of VA in ChD. Although LV dysfunction is  an equally important substantial predictor of arrhythmic mortality in ChD, LVEF  alone does not predict VA. The Tassi, Mello, and Melendez studies  indicated that the extent of cardiac fibrosis is a marker for VA (Table 1). Accordingly, correlating LV dysfunction with the amount of fibrosis could be  extremely useful for clinicians in categorizing high risk arrhythmogenic  patients.
STE does not detect fibrosis, but, by detecting functional abnormalities  associated with fibrosis might help in risk stratification. For example, STE, by  detecting the presence of abnormalities in the inferolateral and inferoseptal  segments, common sites of origin for ventricular tachycardia in CC helps in  identifying patients at risk for malignant arrhythmic events, regardless of LVEF  .
Considering LGE is a reliable quantification method for the amount of fibrosis  and STE is a detector of variations in the segmental function of the myocardium,  it is reasonable to state that for an evaluation of VA in ChD, patients should be  evaluated by both techniques although this will depend on the availability of  each technique and the expertise of physicians.
Predicting SCD in patients with ChD is difficult since it can be the first  manifestation without previous symptoms or not be related to any other condition  other than ChD. The fibrotic nature of ChD makes arrhythmogenic events more  likely, and these are the major cause of sudden death in patients with ChD.
LGE is excellent for quantifying the amount of myocardial fibrosis that is a  predictor of SCD, and it has a clear role in stratifying mortality risk in  patients with ChD. Volpe et al. demonstrated that LGE is an  independent predictor of the composite endpoint of cardiovascular death and  sustained ventricular tachycardia. Furthermore, Senra et al.  discovered that every additional gram of fibrosis increased the likelihood of hi  developing major adverse cardiovascular events such as the risk of all causes of  mortality, regardless of heart disease status (CHF, ventricular dysfunction, and  arrhythmias). This finding provides support for the belief that fibrosis, apart  from LV systolic function, is a useful indicator of cardiovascular adverse  outcomes. Indeed, the American Heart Association has advised using CMR on  patients with CC who have been diagnosed with complex ventricular arrhythmias  .
Myocardial fibrosis has been shown to be a modifier of GLS as evidenced by the  Romanos and Gomes studies, in which GLS decreased in the presence of fibrosis. This observation is important in stratifying the risk to SCD patients  because it implies that, just as the degree of fibrosis is recognized as a  predictor of SCD, GLS could be another predictor of mortality in CC.  Santos-Junior et al. noticed an association between GLS –12%  and the incidence of cardiovascular events, regardless of LV function. Based on  data, using both approaches broadly and evaluating GLS as a predictor of  mortality in CC is proposed.
Comparing CC to ischemic cardiomyopathy reveals that LVEF is a strong predictor  of mortality in patients with heart disease. However, GLS in CC is more  accurate than LVEF in quantifying ventricular function and predicting VA risk. Similarly, the amount of fibrosis is a good predictor of SCD in ChD, but LVEF  is not. As a result, adverse cardiac predictors in CC differ from other  types of cardiomyopathies.
Finding imaging patterns to distinguish between specific types of  cardiomyopathies could have a significant impact on the health system and make  diagnosis easier. LGE has a long history of finding patterns in imaging to  diagnose various cardiomyopathies. However, Lima et al.  demonstrated that STE may also be utilized for the same purpose. Thus, when CC is  suspected, there is a STE heterogenous pattern in the inferior and posterior  walls of the LV as well as the septal and anterior regions that can be used to  distinguish CC from other forms of cardiomyopathies.

8. Study Limitations
Since the studies included in this systematic review were observational, there  is a greater likelihood of increasing the risk of bias as a result of the lack of  randomized clinical trials. Therefore, multi-center clinical trials are needed to  validate the use of these two imaging techniques for the evaluation of cardiac  complication of ChD. Due to the heterogeneity of the methodology studies and the  data reports, a metaanalysis could not be performed.
STE and CMR using LGE should be interpreted by qualified observers. Although  almost all studies indicated that inter- and intra-observer variability was  controlled, there are no international recommendations that standardize CC  measurement parameters.
This investigation limited its analysis to CMR using LGE. Other magnetic  resonance imaging techniques such as T2 weighted sequence and T1 weighted  myocardial early gadolinium enhancement sequence have been used in patients with  ChD and reflect different stages of the natural history of the disease  characterized by edema and hyperemia respectively. These are promising emerging  tools, however, they have not been compared directly with STE and thus, they have  been excluded from this analysis.
Surprisingly, this systematic review contained no papers from beyond Latin  America. While ChD is endemic in this region, it is vital to bring it to the  global community’s attention because CC is becoming increasingly common in  non-endemic areas and the index of suspicion should be kept high even in  nonendemic areas.

9. Conclusions
STE and LGE can be utilized to evaluate cardiac complications in patients with  CC. Progression from IF to cardiac form can be assessed with STE because it is a  tool that is sensitive enough to assess the subclinical status of CHF in ChD. But  when the CC is established, the progression to CHF should be evaluated by  correlating systolic ventricular function with the amount of fibrosis and GLS in  order to predict the risk of adverse events and early mortality. Because ChD is  associated with a high mortality, STE may be a relevant imaging technique to  determine the prognosis in patients with CHF and VA.
LGE is an excellent imaging technique for detecting high arrhythmogenic risk  patients and to identify those at the higher risk of SCD. However, GLS is also  emerging as a potential tool for risk stratification in patients with ChD.  Abnormalities in the inferolateral wall should be evaluated with STE in patients  with ChD as a predictor for VA. The value of GLS as a predictor of cardiac  mortality in ChD remains under investigation. Although LVEF is a strong predictor  of death among cardiomyopathies, in CC and, GLS, the amount of fibrosis could  have an equivalent role to predict adverse cardiac outcomes.
Finally, when CC is suspected, in both endemic and non-endemic geographical  regions, a complete initial evaluation using STE may be advisable for optimal  morphologic assessment.
Publisher’s Note: IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author Contributions
LR—conceptualization, data curation, writing-original draft, writing-review  and editing, visualization. AG—methodology, validation, formal analysis,  resources, writing-review and editing, visualization. MN—conceptualization,  resources, writing-review and editing, visualization, supervision.  FM—conceptualization writing-review and editing, data curation.  HM—conceptualization, writing-review and editing. ES—conceptualization,  methodology, writing-review and editing. FT—conceptualization, writing review  and editing. AO—conceptualization, resources, writing-review and editing, data  curation. CA—writing-review and editing, visualization, data curation, ethics  appraisal. JF—conceptualization, data curation, writing-review and editing.  RM—conceptualization, data curation. DV—conceptualization, data curation.  GS—conceptualization, resources, data curation. AD—conceptualization, funding  acquisition, writing-review and editing, project administration, data curation.

Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Funding
This project was sponsored by the Ministry of Science of Colombia (MINCIENCIAS).  Until 2019, this institution was known as COLCIENCIAS. The project number  749-2016 identifies the funding provided to the cardiovascular group of  Fundación Universitaria de Ciencias de la Salud in Bogota, Colombia.

Conflict of Interest
All the authors affiliated to Fundacion Universitaria de Ciencias de la Salud  declare that this project was financed by the Colombian Ministry of Science  (COLCIENCIAS), today called MINCIENCIAS, through a grant awarded to the  cardiovascular group of Fundación Universitaria de Ciencias de la Salud in  Bogota, Colombia. It is identified by the project number 749-2016. Authors  affiliated to Cardiac Care and Vascular Medicine (Bronx, NYC, USA), Fundación  cardio-infantil (Bogota, Colombia) and Instituto de Cardiologaí de San  Nicolás (Buenos Aires, Argentina) declare no conflicts of interests.

Appendix
See Tables 2,3.
Systematic review equations. Research equations used to track 
articles in the different databases.
DATABASE	RESEARCH EQUATION	 	PubMed	((cardiomyopathy, chagas [MeSH Terms]) OR (chagas disease [MeSH Terms])) AND (imaging, magnetic resonance [MeSH Terms]).	 	(((cardiomyopathy, chagas [MeSH Terms]) OR (chagas disease [MeSH Terms]) OR (“chagas’ cardiomyopathy”.	 	[MeSH Terms])) AND ((speckle tracking echocardiography) OR (speckle tracking strain) OR (myocardial strain)).	 	Embase	“Chagas disease OR chagas cardiomyopathy AND nuclear magnetic resonance OR magnetic resonance”.	 	‘Chagas disease’ OR ‘Chagas cardiomyopathy’ AND ‘speckle tracking echocardiography’ OR ‘speckle tracking strain imaging’ OR ‘myocardial strain imaging’.	 	Cochrane	“Chagas cardiomyopathy in Keyword OR “echocardiography” in Title Abstract. Keyword OR speckle tracking imaging” in Title Abstract Keyword.	 	Keyword: chagas cardiomyopathy AND title abstract key word “magnetic resonance imaging” OR title abstract key word “Chagas disease”.
Quality assessment of studies. JBI check lists for assessing 
the quality of studies classified by study type.
Criteria cross sectional studies	BARROS 	MELLO 	TASSI 	NOYARABELO 	ROMANO 	MELENDEZ 	 	Were the criteria for inclusion in the sample clearly defined?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	Were the study subjects and the setting described in detail?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	Was the exposure measured in a valid and reliable way?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	Were objective, standard criteria used for measurement of the condition?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	Were confounding factors identified?	N	Y	N	U	Y	U	 	Were strategies to deal with confounding factors stated?	U	Y	Y	U	Y	N	 	Were the outcomes measured in a valid and reliable way?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	Was appropriate statistical analysis used?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	total YES (n)	6/8	8/8	7/8	6/8	8/8	6/8	 	total YES (%)	75%	100%	88%	75%	100%	75%	 	Criteria cohort studies	SENRA 	SANTOS JUNIOR 		 	Were the two groups similar and recruited from the same population?	NA	Y		 	Were the exposures measured similarly to assign people to both exposed and unexposed groups?	Y	Y		 	Was the exposure measured in a valid and reliable way?	Y	Y		 	Were confounding factors identified?	Y	Y		 	Were strategies to deal with confounding factors stated?	Y	Y		 	Were the groups/participants free of the outcome at the start of the study (or at the moment of exposure)?	Y	Y		 	Were the outcomes measured in a valid and reliable way?	Y	Y		 	Was the follow up time reported and sufficient to be long enough for outcomes to occur?	Y	Y		 	Was follow up complete, and if not, were the reasons to loss to follow up described and explored?	Y	Y		 	Were strategies to address incomplete follow up utilized?	U	NA		 	Was appropriate statistical analysis used?	Y	Y		 	total YES (n)	9/10	10/10		 	total YES (%)	82%	100%		 	Criteria case-control studies	VOLPE 	LIMA 	CIANCIULLI 	GOMES 	 	Were the groups comparable other than the presence of disease in cases or the absence of disease in controls?	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	Were cases and controls matched appropriately?	Y	Y	Y	U	 	Were the same criteria used for identification of cases and controls?	N	Y	Y	Y	 	Was exposure measured in a standard, valid and reliable way?	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	Was exposure measured in the same way for cases and controls?	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	Were confounding factors identified?	Y	N	Y	U	 	Were strategies to deal with confounding factors stated?	N	N	Y	N	 	Were outcomes assessed in a standard, valid and reliable way for cases and controls?	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	Was the exposure period of interest long enough to be meaningful?	Y	Y	U	Y	 	Was appropriate statistical analysis used?	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	total YES (n)	8/10	8/10	9/10	7/10	 	total YES (%)	80%	80%	90%	70%
Y, Yes; N, No; U, Unclear; NA, Not Applicable.

References
Chagas Disease: From Discovery to a Worldwide Health Problem
Early Detection of Left Ventricular Contractibility Abnormalities by Two-Dimensional Speckle Tracking Strain in Chagas’ Disease
Mechanical Dispersion Assessed by Strain Echocardiography is Associated with Malignant Arrhythmias in Chagas Cardiomyopathy
Myocardial involvement in Chagas disease: Insights from cardiac magnetic resonance
Relationship between Fibrosis and Ventricular Arrhythmias in Chagas Heart Disease without Ventricular Dysfunction
Delayed enhancement cardiac magnetic resonance imaging can identify the risk for ventricular tachycardia in chronic Chagas’ heart disease
The Presence and Extension of Myocardial Fibrosis in the Undetermined Form of Chagas’ Disease: a Study Using Magnetic Resonance
Early impairment of myocardial deformation assessed by regional speckle-tracking echocardiography in the indeterminate form of Chagas disease without fibrosis detected by cardiac magnetic resonance
Comparison of the amount and patterns of late enhancement in Chagas disease according to the presence and type of ventricular tachycardia
Long-Term Prognostic Value of Myocardial Fibrosis in Patients with Chagas Cardiomyopathy
Speckle tracking echocardiographic deformation indices in Chagas and idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy: Incremental prognostic value of longitudinal strain
Left Ventricular Scar and Prognosis in Chronic Chagas Cardiomyopathy
Comprehensive left ventricular mechanics analysis by speckle tracking echocardiography in Chagas disease
Speckle tracking echocardiography in the indeterminate form of Chagas disease
Analysis of Regional Left Ventricular Strain in Patients with Chagas Disease and Normal Left Ventricular Systolic Function
Chagas Cardiomyopathy: an Update of Current Clinical Knowledge and Management: a Scientific Statement from the American Heart Association
Recommendations for Multimodality Cardiac Imaging in Patients with Chagas Disease: a Report from the American Society of Echocardiography in Collaboration with the InterAmerican Association of Echocardiography (ECOSIAC) and the Cardiovascular Imaging Department of the Brazilian Society of Cardiology (DIC-SBC)
Increased mortality attributed to Chagas disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
A biological approach to sudden cardiac death: structure, function and cause
Development and Validation of a Risk Score for Predicting Death in Chagas’ Heart Disease
A risk score for predicting death in Chagas’ heart disease
Predictive value of clinical and electrophysiological variables in patients with chronic chagasic cardiomyopathy and nonsustained ventricular tachycardia
Electrophysiological characteristics of Chagas disease
Sudden Cardiac Death Risk Stratification and Prevention in Chagas Disease: A Non-systematic Review of the Literature
Influence of Ejection Fraction on Cardiovascular Outcomes in a Broad Spectrum of Heart Failure Patients
Mortality risk in chronic Chagas cardiomyopathy: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
The role of cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) in the diagnosis of cardiomyopathy: A systematic review
Myocardial tissue characterization in Chagas’ heart disease by cardiovascular magnetic resonance