Imaging Approach to Diverticular Disease of the Small Bowel
Acquired diverticular disease of the small bowel is often seen in the duodenum. It is an uncommon but under-recognized entity in the jejunum and the ileum. Meckel’s diverticulum, a true diverticulum arising in the distal ileum, although the most common congenital abnormality of the gastrointestinal tract, is rare and occurs in about 2% of the population. Most of the time, diverticular disease of the small bowel is asymptomatic. Common complications of small bowel diverticular disease include diverticulitis and hemorrhage. Diverticulitis of the small bowel is an uncommon cause of acute abdomen and may be misdiagnosed if not included in differential considerations based on the imaging features. Certain specific complications can occur related to the location of the diverticulum or due to other factors associated with the diverticulum. For example, obstructive jaundice (Lemmel syndrome) can occur in the setting of a duodenal diverticulum, and intestinal obstruction can occur in the setting of a Meckel’s diverticulum. Familiarity with the different imaging manifestations of small bowel diverticular disease complications can help with appropriate diagnoses, thereby improving patient management.
​A diverticulum can be defined as a focal outpouching occurring naturally or created pathologically due to a herniation of a lining surface through a muscular defect of a hollow viscus.​ Diverticular disease of the bowel usually occurs in the colon, where multiple outpouchings of the mucosa and the submucosa develop through defects in the outer muscle layer.​ Colonic diverticulosis is among the most common gastrointestinal pathologic conditions, particularly affecting the middle-aged and older populations. Multiple complications can develop secondary to diverticular disease of the colon, including diverticulitis and bleeding. Because of its significant prevalence, diverticular disease of the colon and its complications have been extensively studied.
Diverticular disease can also affect the small bowel, which can be congenital or acquired. Acquired diverticular disease of the small bowel predominantly affects the duodenum but can also affect the jejunum and the ileum. Similar to colonic diverticulosis, these diverticular outpouchings represent herniation of the mucosa and submucosa through the muscularis layer at points of weakness. The pathophysiology for developing small bowel diverticulosis is not precisely known but is believed to be secondary to high intraluminal pressures, disordered intestinal peristalsis, and bowel dyskinesis, like the pathogenesis of colonic diverticulosis. Diverticulitis can develop as a complication of small bowel diverticular disease or colonic diverticulosis. In addition, symptomatic diverticular disease arising in various parts of the small bowel can have other varied pathologic manifestations. Meckel’s diverticulum is a rare congenital diverticulum that arises in the distal ileum and is the only true diverticulum arising from the small bowel, as it contains all layers of the bowel. As diverticular disease of the small bowel is uncommon, the etiology of resulting complications may not be identified correctly, leading to inappropriate management.
The present review aims to familiarize the practicing radiologist with the imaging manifestations of the complications that can arise from small bowel diverticular disease and their differential diagnosis. For the review, we have subdivided small bowel diverticular disease into (A) diverticular disease of the duodenum, (B) jejunoileal diverticulosis, and (C) Meckel’s diverticulum. Diverticular disease of the duodenum is discussed separately from jejunoileal diverticulosis as it can cause specific complications distinct from that of jejunoileal diverticulosis and can mimic other conditions affecting the pancreaticoduodenal groove.

DIVERTICULAR DISEASE OF THE DUODENUM
Diverticula of the duodenum can be categorized into 2 types: true (congenital) diverticula and acquired diverticula (pseudodiverticula). True diverticula of the duodenum are rare. They are intraluminal protrusions of the mucosa and submucosa secondary to failed recanalization during embryogenesis. The present review focuses on the complications of acquired diverticular disease of the duodenum.
Acquired diverticular disease of the duodenum constitutes about 60% to 79% of the acquired small bowel diverticular disease. Acquired diverticula are usually pulsion diverticula occurring when the mucosal and the submucosal lining herniates through the muscularis layer at points of weakness, typically where the vasa vasorum penetrates the bowel wall. They often occur near the common bile duct and pancreatic duct entry into the duodenum and are termed periampullary or perivaterian if present within 2.5 cm of the papilla of Vater. Asymptomatic acquired duodenal diverticula are often diagnosed incidentally on fluoroscopy and cross-sectional imaging. On fluoroscopy, these diverticula are seen as contrast-filled saccular outpouchings. On CT and MRI, a duodenal diverticulum can be seen as an outpouching between the C-loop of the duodenum and the pancreas. Contents of the diverticula can include air, fluid, contrast, and debris, alone or in combination. Foreign bodies lodging in a duodenal diverticulum have also been reported. Typically, duodenal diverticula have air foci within them, which helps their identification (Fig. 1). However, if fluid-filled, they may mimic other cystic entities in the pancreaticoduodenal groove, including pancreatic cysts (commonly intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms) and pseudocysts, paraduodenal pancreatitis, and choledochal cysts. Correlation with prior imaging studies, if available, can help in problem-solving (Fig. 1).
A 60-year-old female with a fluid-filled duodenal diverticulum. A and B, Axial CECT images of CT studies performed at different timepoints demonstrate a fluid-filled duodenal diverticulum in image (A), which shows a focus of air in image (B) (arrows).

Acute Complications of Duodenal Diverticular Disease

Acute Diverticulitis
Diverticulitis in duodenal diverticula is relatively uncommon compared with diverticulitis of the small bowel and colonic diverticulitis. It could be due to the relatively larger size of the diverticula, as well as the relatively sterile and liquid duodenal contents. Duodenal diverticulitis can have varying presentations ranging from nonspecific abdominal pain to acute abdomen. Because of pain localized to the upper abdomen, it can mimic other acute upper abdominal pathologies like acute cholecystitis, acute pancreatitis, and peptic ulcer disease. On CT and MRI, if an inflamed diverticulum is discretely identified, it provides the best clue for diagnosing duodenal diverticulitis (Fig. 2). There can be associated inflammatory changes in the duodenal wall and adjacent perienteric fat stranding. Diverticulitis may be complicated by associated phlegmonous changes or abscess formation. A contained perforation is diagnosed when localized extraluminal air is identified. Frank perforation with generalized pneumoperitoneum can also occur and can present with signs of peritonitis. Localization of the perforation site by identifying extraluminal air originating from the diverticulum can help confirm the diagnosis. Duodenal diverticulitis is primarily managed with antibiotics. Surgical management of a perforated duodenal diverticulum typically involves either a diverticulectomy or a Roux loop duodenojejunostomy.
A 69-year-old female with duodenal diverticulitis. Coronal CECT image demonstrating an inflamed diverticulum in the fourth part of the duodenum with adjacent fat stranding (long arrows). Noninflamed duodenal diverticula are also seen (short arrows).
Differential diagnosis of duodenal diverticulitis: Peptic ulcer disease preferentially involves the first part of the duodenum but can also affect the duodenum more distally. A contrast-enhanced CT study performed for acute abdomen can demonstrate focal inflammatory changes in the form of thickening, mucosal hyperenhancement, and perienteric fat stranding (Fig. 3). Superficial ulcers are occult on CT. A deep peptic ulcer can be seen as a focal area of luminal outpouching, and a focal discontinuity of enhancing mucosa may also be present. The outpouching can mimic a duodenal diverticulum. It can be associated with localized or generalized pneumoperitoneum if complicated by perforation (Fig. 4). In the setting of a bleeding duodenal ulcer, CT angiography may identify active hemorrhage. Acute pancreatitis can cause secondary wall thickening of the C-loop of the duodenum. Associated pancreatic and peripancreatic inflammatory changes and elevated lipase levels help confirm the diagnosis. A duodenal diverticulum can demonstrate secondary inflammatory changes during an episode of acute pancreatitis (Fig. 5). Paraduodenal pancreatitis (groove pancreatitis) manifests as thickening in the pancreaticoduodenal groove associated with thickening of the inner wall of the duodenum abutting the head of the pancreas, associated cystic changes in the duodenal wall/pancreaticoduodenal groove, and surrounding inflammatory changes. The patient can have a history of multiple prior episodes of pancreatitis. Duodenitis in the setting of infection and inflammatory bowel disease is also differential consideration. A malignancy is a differential consideration in the non-acute setting. Endoscopy and tissue sampling can help confirm the diagnosis.
A 70-year-old male with a duodenal bulb ulcer mimicking a duodenal diverticulum. A CECT abdomen was performed for an acute drop in hemoglobin. Coronal CECT image demonstrating a focal outpouching in the duodenal bulb with adjacent inflammatory changes (arrow). Endoscopy showed a bleeding duodenal bulb ulcer.
A 69-year-old male with contained perforation of duodenal ulcer. A and B, Axial and coronal CECT images demonstrating wall thickening involving the first part of the duodenum and adjacent inflammatory changes (long arrows). Air-filled outpouchings are seen adjacent to the posterior duodenal wall raising concern for contained perforation (short arrows).
A 53-year-old male with a secondarily inflamed duodenal diverticulum in the setting of acute pancreatitis. A and B, Axial and coronal CECT images demonstrating peripancreatic inflammatory changes (short arrows). A duodenal diverticulum shows wall enhancement with surrounding fat stranding secondary to adjacent inflammatory changes in the setting of acute pancreatitis (long arrows).

Hemorrhage
Hemorrhage is a rare complication of duodenal diverticular disease. It can present with features of upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage, such as hematemesis and melena, and an acute drop in hemoglobin. Acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage can be diagnosed on triphasic CT angiography acquired in the noncontrast, arterial, and venous phases. Active contrast extravasation into the bowel lumen in the arterial phase, which expands on the venous phase image, confirms the diagnosis. It is not infrequent that hyperdense contents in the bowel lumen are secondary to ingested material, which can be mistaken for hemorrhage. Therefore, the noncontrast phase serves as a baseline for interpreting the postcontrast imaging sequences. Radionuclide imaging using technetium-99M-labeled red blood cell scan can detect small quantities of hemorrhage, but is limited by poor localization of the bleeding site. The usage of SPECT-CT helps in better localization of the site of bleeding. Interventional management of acute gastrointestinal hemorrhage can be performed utilizing catheter angiography, which allows for targeted embolization. If multiple bleeding sites or severe hemorrhage are present, surgical resection may be required.

Chronic Complications of Duodenal Diverticular Disease
Lemmel syndrome is a rare condition where a large periampullary duodenal diverticulum causes a mass effect on the common bile duct, leading to obstructive jaundice. Dilatation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary system can be seen on ultrasound and cross-sectional imaging. Other causes of common bile duct dilatation include choledocholithiasis, a distal obstructing mass, sphincter of Oddi dysfunction, ampullary stenosis, and choledochal cyst. Common bile duct dilatation can also be seen post-cholecystectomy as the common bile duct acts as a reservoir for bile. On imaging, proximal biliary dilatation with narrowing of the distal common bile duct secondary to compression by the periampullary diverticulum will be seen. However, laboratory evidence of obstructive jaundice, in addition to biliary dilatation secondary to compression by the duodenal diverticulum, is necessary for the diagnosis of Lemmel syndrome (Fig. 6 shows an example of a large duodenal diverticulum compressing the common bile duct, but without laboratory evidence of biliary obstruction).
A 70-year-old woman with a large duodenal diverticulum compressing the distal common bile duct. A, Coronal CECT image demonstrating a large duodenal diverticulum (long arrows) with upstream common bile duct dilatation (short arrow). B, Coronal MRCP image demonstrating identical findings with dilatation of the common bile duct measuring >9 mm, which is more than the expected diameter for age. No obstructing mass was identified on MRI. There was no associated intrahepatic biliary dilatation. As the patient did not have laboratory findings for obstructive jaundice, the findings suggest that the duodenal diverticulum causes a mass effect over the distal common bile duct, but without biliary obstruction.
A juxtapapillary duodenal diverticulum can lead to biliary stasis and can predispose to the development of choledocholithiasis. There is also an increased risk for bacterial translocation and cholangitis. A juxtapapillary duodenal diverticulum can also increase the risk of developing acute pancreatitis by causing reflux of intraluminal contents or by a direct mass effect of the diverticulum on the periampullary region. Associated choledocholithiasis can also predispose to developing acute pancreatitis. Surgical or endoscopic intervention may be needed in certain patients with symptomatic periampullary duodenal diverticular disease.

JEJUNOILEAL DIVERTICULOSIS
Jejunoileal diverticulosis is rare and is identified in about 2% of the population undergoing barium studies of the small bowel. As the involvement of the jejunum is about 5 times more common than the involvement of the ileum, jejunoileal diverticulosis is also known as jejunal diverticulosis. It is a disease that predominantly affects the older population. There is no sex predilection. The disease typically occurs along the mesenteric border of the small bowel. Diverticular disease of the small bowel may be identified incidentally in imaging studies, including fluoroscopy and cross-sectional imaging. However, due to the surrounding anatomy, jejunoileal diverticulosis is frequently overlooked in imaging due to a low index of suspicion and relative inconspicuity of diverticular disease. Evaluating multiplanar reconstructions in the coronal and sagittal planes improves the chances of identifying jejunoileal diverticular disease. CT and MR enterography techniques provide greater luminal distention of the small bowel loops and can increase the diagnostic confidence during the evaluation of small bowel diverticular disease. Mansouri and colleagues performed a retrospective study of patients who were diagnosed with small bowel diverticulosis and had a prior MR enterography. Adequate distention was essential for the diagnosis of diverticular disease and MR enterography was helpful in identification of the diverticular disease as well as for assessment of complications. All these patients underwent MR enterography for evaluation of nonspecific abdominal symptoms rather than presenting with acute abdominal pain. In the setting of acute abdominal pain, CT abdomen pelvis with IV contrast remains the first choice for diagnostic evaluation.

Acute Complications of Jejunoileal Diverticulosis

Diverticulitis
The symptomatic jejunoileal diverticular disease most commonly manifests as acute diverticulitis. The pathophysiology of acute diverticulitis is similar to that of colonic diverticulitis. Obstruction of the neck of the diverticulum, which can be caused by either mucosal edema or impacted food material/fecal contents, leads to stasis and secondary infection. The patient typically presents with acute abdominal pain. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) is the imaging modality of choice for evaluating acute abdomen, and inflammatory complications of jejunoileal diverticular disease are typically diagnosed on CT performed for acute abdomen. Jejunoileal diverticulitis and its complications are a rare cause of acute abdomen. Therefore, the condition can be misdiagnosed on imaging and mistaken for other acute conditions involving the small bowel. On CT, there is a short segment of bowel wall thickening with hyperenhancement and surrounding mesenteric fat stranding. A small amount of reactive fluid can be present. If the inflamed diverticulum is readily identified, it confirms the diagnosis of acute diverticulitis. However, the inflamed diverticulum can be inconspicuous and may not be discretely identified. In such cases, the presence of associated small bowel diverticular disease on the present or prior imaging increases the certainty of the diagnosis of diverticulitis (Figs. 7–10).
A 64-year-old woman with jejunal diverticulitis. Axial contrast-enhanced CT image demonstrates a large inflamed jejunal diverticulum, surrounding fat stranding, and associated jejunal wall thickening (long arrow). An adjacent noninflamed diverticulum is also seen (short arrow).
A 73-year-old male with perforated ileal diverticulitis. A and B, Axial CECT images demonstrating small bowel wall thickening with adjacent mesenteric inflammatory changes and localized pneumoperitoneum in the right lower quadrant (long arrows in A and B). There is a suggestion of a small ileal diverticulum (short arrow in B). The patient underwent surgery, and a contained perforation into the mesentery was seen in the region of the terminal ileum. Ileal diverticular disease was not discretely identified during surgery. Pathologic examination of the resected specimen, however, demonstrated findings consistent with a ruptured ileal diverticulum.
A 61-year-old male with perforated jejunal diverticulitis, localized and generalized pneumoperitoneum. A, Sagittal and B, coronal CECT images demonstrating an inflamed small bowel diverticulum in the left lower quadrant with adjacent fat stranding and trace adjacent fluid collection without rim enhancement (long arrows in A and B). There is localized pneumoperitoneum in the adjacent mesentery (short arrows) and generalized pneumoperitoneum, for example, deep to the anterior abdominal wall in image A (curved arrow). The patient was taken up for surgery due to signs of peritonitis. Findings were confirmed on surgery.
A 75-year-old female with recurrent episodes of jejunal diverticulitis. A, Axial CECT image demonstrating a large inflamed jejunal diverticulum with adjacent bowel wall thickening and mesenteric fat stranding (arrow). The patient was managed conservatively. She presented with another episode of acute abdominal pain 2 months later, and a CT abdomen was performed. B, Axial CECT image demonstrating an inflamed jejunal diverticulum (long arrow). A small pocket of localized pneumoperitoneum is also seen (short arrow). The patient responded to conservative management. She presented with symptoms of acute abdomen 1 month after the second episode. C, Axial CECT image demonstrating an inflamed jejunal diverticulum in the left lower quadrant with marked surrounding inflammatory changes (arrow). During the third episode the patient did not improve on medical management and surgery was performed. A segment of the jejunum involved with diverticular disease was localized to the proximal to mid jejunum, and this affected segment was resected. ​
Regional inflammatory changes can lead to the development of ileus. Mucosal edema involving the affected segment of the bowel can lead to luminal narrowing and proximal small bowel dilatation. The diverticulitis can be complicated by the development of localized or generalized pneumoperitoneum, abscess formation, and can lead to localized or generalized peritonitis (Figs. 9 and 10B). If there is pneumoperitoneum, localization of free air can help identify the source of perforation. If free air is seen along the small bowel mesentery along with the presence of small bowel diverticular disease and an inflamed segment of small bowel, it helps in diagnosing jejunoileal diverticulitis with perforation as a cause of pneumoperitoneum. The management of jejunoileal diverticulitis is essentially conservative with antibiotics and analgesics. Surgery may be performed if the patient does not respond to medical management or if surgical intervention is required as per the patient’s clinical condition.
Differential diagnosis of jejunoileal diverticulitis includes other conditions that cause focal or segmental bowel wall thickening. Crohn disease can cause focal or segmental bowel wall thickening with adjacent mesenteric inflammation (Fig. 11). It typically involves the terminal ileum and is characterized by skip lesions. Pseudosacculations seen in Crohn disease, caused by asymmetric inflammation and resultant fibrosis along the mesenteric border of the small bowel, can mimic the imaging appearance of small bowel diverticulosis (Fig. 12). As a result of fibrosis along the mesenteric border in Crohn disease, pseudosacculations are typically seen along the antimesenteric border, in contrast to jejunoileal diverticulosis seen along the mesenteric border. Scleroderma can involve the small bowel with asymmetric fibrosis resulting in development of sacculations preferentially affecting the jejunum. Other infective and inflammatory enteritis can also demonstrate bowel wall thickening and adjacent mesenteric inflammatory changes in the form of fat stranding and reactive fluid collections (Fig. 13). Protozoal and helminthic infections generally cause proximal small bowel infections. Giardiasis is the most common protozoal infection in the United States. Bacterial infection by Salmonella and Shigella is the most common cause of distal small bowel enteritis. Clinical history of diarrhea/dysentery, physical examination, stool evaluation, and, when required, endoscopy can help with the diagnosis. Neoplastic etiologies that can cause focal/segmental small bowel wall thickening include carcinoid, lymphoma, metastases, and adenocarcinoma. A carcinoid tumor of the bowel is typically radiologically occult with associated mesenteric nodules, which can demonstrate calcification with surrounding desmoplastic reaction in the mesentery and associated small bowel wall thickening. Adenocarcinoma causes an asymmetric wall thickening, generally >2 cm in diameter, and can infiltrate the adjacent mesentery. It is generally not associated with inflammatory changes. Lymphoma presents with bowel wall thickening with aneurysmal bowel dilatation without causing bowel obstruction. Associated lymphadenopathy can be seen with lymphoma and adenocarcinoma. Short-term follow-up imaging helps differentiate between inflammatory and neoplastic etiologies in cases of diagnostic dilemma.
A 23-year-old female with biopsy-proven Crohn disease. A, Axial CECT images demonstrating thickening of the terminal ileum with mural stratification and mucosal hyperenhancement (arrow). B, Associated mesenteric vascular congestion is also seen in the right lower quadrant (arrow).
A 61-year-old with longstanding Crohn disease for over 20 years. Coronal T2W MR enterography image demonstrates small bowel thickening with T2 hypointense signal suggestive of fibrosis (long arrow). Associated eccentric outpouching along the antimesenteric border is seen as consistent with a pseudo-sacculation (short arrow).
A 72-year-old male with closed-loop bowel obstruction secondary to Meckel’s diverticulum and perforated Meckel’s diverticulitis. A and B, Axial and coronal CT images demonstrating dilatation of the small bowel with diffuse small bowel wall thickening (long white arrows) and generalized mesenteric edema. The large bowel is collapsed (short arrows). The patient was taken for surgery, which showed an inflamed, perforated Meckel diverticulum, which was not identified preoperatively, and on retrospective review postoperatively. There was an associated band with resultant twisting of the bowel and closed-loop bowel obstruction.

Bleeding
Hemorrhage secondary to small bowel diverticular disease is rare and can be life-threatening. Imaging is essential for the diagnosis as the small bowel cannot be scoped to directly identify the bleeding, in contrast to bleeding from the proximal gastrointestinal tract or the colon. The role of triphasic CT angiography and radionuclide imaging in the diagnosis of diverticular bleeding and the role of catheter angiography in the management are discussed in the section on bleeding duodenal diverticulum.

Chronic Complications of Small Bowel Diverticulosis
Small bowel diverticular disease is generally asymptomatic. Long-term complications include anemia, malabsorption, and chronic diarrhea secondary to bacterial overgrowth.

MECKEL’S DIVERTICULUM
Meckel’s diverticulum is a true diverticulum of the small bowel containing all the layers of the bowel wall and is a vestigial remnant of the omphalomesenteric duct arising from the antimesenteric surface of the mid to distal ileum. The omphalomesenteric duct, an embryonic structure connecting the yolk sac to the primitive midgut of the developing embryo, involutes into a fibrous band and is absorbed in the early embryonic period. Rarely, it can be persistent and lead to a spectrum of omphalomesenteric duct abnormalities. Meckel’s diverticulum is the most common omphalomesenteric duct abnormality occurring in about 2% of the population, with a male-female ratio of 2:1, generally measures about 2 inches in length, typically located within about 2 feet of the ileocecal junction, and commonly becomes symptomatic before 2 years of age (rule of 2’s).
About 4% to 6% of the population with Meckel’s diverticulum develop clinical manifestations. The pediatric population less than ten years of age accounts for about 25% to 50% of the patient population with symptomatic Meckel’s diverticulum. Meckel’s diverticulum can have a heterotopic mucosal lining in about 60% of cases. Symptomatic Meckel’s diverticular disease is usually associated with heterotopic gastric and pancreatic mucosa. Heterotopic gastric mucosal lining is most common in Meckel’s diverticulum (62%), followed by pancreatic (6%), both gastric and pancreatic (5%), and other less common causes of heterotopic mucosa.

Acute Complications of Meckel’s Diverticulum

Intestinal Obstruction
Intestinal obstruction is the most common complication of Meckel’s diverticulum, constituting about 22% to 50% of the complications from symptomatic Meckel’s diverticulum. Mechanisms for obstruction include intussusception, diverticular inversion, or repeated episodes of diverticulitis leading to stricture formation. Meckel’s diverticulum can be associated with a mesodiverticular band, which can predispose to intestinal obstruction and lead to the development of volvulus. Rarely, a neoplastic process can occur in the Meckel’s diverticulum and can predispose to bowel obstruction by causing stricture formation or leading to intussusception. Meckel’s diverticulum can herniate into the inguinal canal (Littre’s hernia) and can get obstructed. Radiographs performed for an acute abdomen can demonstrate dilated, fluid-filled small bowel loops with collapsed large bowel. Multiple air-fluid levels can be seen on an upright abdominal radiograph. Contrast-enhanced CT can help confirm the small bowel obstruction, with a transition point identified in the distal small bowel. Although a diagnosis of small bowel obstruction can be made on CT, Meckel’s diverticulum as the cause of obstruction may or may not be identified prospectively. In cases of volvulus secondary to twisting around a mesodiverticular band, findings of closed-loop obstruction with 2 separate transition points may be identified (Fig. 13).

Meckel’s Diverticulitis
Meckel’s diverticulitis is a result of obstruction to the neck of the diverticulum that can occur secondary to inflammatory narrowing, stricture formation, or mechanical obstruction due to enteroliths or other less common causes such as food, foreign body, or mass. It accounts for about 30% of the symptomatic patients with Meckel’s diverticulum. The patient can present with acute abdominal pain, which can be associated with fever and vomiting. If identified on CT, it is seen as a blind-ended diverticulum in the distal small bowel away from the ileocecal junction, demonstrating wall thickening, increased wall enhancement, and surrounding mesenteric fat stranding with associated inflammatory changes in the adjacent segment of the small bowel (Fig. 14). Meckel’s diverticulum can mimic appendicitis or an appendiceal mucocele (Fig. 15). Careful assessment of axial, coronal, and sagittal CT images helps accurately identify Meckel’s diverticulum or diverticulitis. Meckel’s diverticulitis can be complicated by perforation, leading to localized or generalized pneumoperitoneum and secondary abscess formation (Fig. 14). If an inflamed Meckel’s diverticulum is not identified on imaging, local inflammatory changes involving the bowel and mesentery can mimic other causes of bowel wall thickening described in the section on differential diagnoses of small bowel diverticulitis.
A and B, Axial CECT images demonstrating a focal outpouching arising from the distal ileum in the right lower quadrant (long arrows in A and B) with marked surrounding fat stranding and foci of localized pneumoperitoneum (short arrows in A and B). A normal appendix was also identified (not shown). Findings of Meckel’s diverticulitis with perforation were confirmed on surgery.
A 24-year-old male with Meckel’s diverticulitis mimicking acute appendicitis. A and B, Coronal and axial CECT images demonstrating a coiled, possibly blind-ended inflamed bowel loop (long arrow) inferior to the cecum (short arrow in A). The appendix was not separately identified on the CT and a diagnosis of acute appendicitis was made based on CT findings. On surgery, inflamed Meckel’s diverticulum was seen and was resected. The normal appendix was visualized during surgery.

Hemorrhage
Hemorrhage accounts for about 15% to 30% of the complications of Meckel’s diverticulum. It typically presents in the pediatric population as painless rectal bleeding and is the most common cause of painless severe lower gastrointestinal bleeding in children. It can also manifest as prolonged anemia with a positive fecal occult blood test. The bleeding is related to mucosal erosions and ulcerations caused by enzymatic secretions, commonly from heterotopic gastric and rarely from heterotopic pancreatic mucosa.
TC 99m pertechnetate is a radioactive isotope with an affinity for mucin-secreting gastric mucosa cells. Radionuclide scintigraphy using Tc-99m pertechnetate is therefore helpful in the diagnosis of a Meckel’s diverticulum containing heterotopic gastric mucosa, which is the most common heterotopic mucosal lining of a Meckel’s diverticulum. Meckel’s diverticulum with ectopic gastric mucosa demonstrates focal radiotracer uptake, most commonly localized to the right lower quadrant, appearing concurrently with activity in the gastric mucosa (Figs. 16, 17, S1, Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/JCAT/A48, S2, Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/JCAT/A48). Using lateral and oblique projections can help differentiate a Meckel’s diverticulum from expected activity in the renal collecting system. The accuracy of the exam is high in pediatric patients, ranging from 85% to 90% due to many of the symptomatic pediatric patients having ectopic gastric mucosa, with the accuracy decreasing to less than 50% in adult patients because ectopic gastric mucosa is less common in symptomatic patients who are more than 30 years of age. The study can be falsely negative if the amount of heterotopic gastric mucosa is less than the threshold for detection on scintigraphy or if there is rapid washout of the radiotracer. There are many causes of a false positive scan, including ectopic gastric mucosa elsewhere in the bowel, anatomic variants, or abnormalities such as enteric duplication cysts. SPECT-CT is of use in cases of a diagnostic dilemma.
A 27-year-old male with acute GI bleed secondary to Meckel’s diverticulum. 3-phase CT Abdomen was performed. A and B, Axial CECT images obtained in the portal venous phase demonstrate a blind-ending loop in the right lower quadrant with internal hyperdense contents (arrow in A). The distal ileum does not contain internal hyperdense contents (arrow in B). C and D, Axial images at the level of images A and B, respectively, in the 5-minute delayed scan demonstrate no hyperdense contents in the blind-ending loop in the right lower quadrant (arrow in C), with hyperdense contents now migrating into the distal ileum (arrow in D); findings are concerning for a Meckel’s diverticulum with active bleed. E, Planar image obtained post radionuclide imaging with Tc-99m Pertechnetate demonstrates a focus of uptake in the right lower quadrant suggestive of a Meckel’s diverticulum containing ectopic gastric mucosa (sequential images of the Tc-99m Pertechnetate study are in Supplemental Figure 1, Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/JCAT/A48). The diagnosis of a noninflamed Meckel’s diverticulum was confirmed on surgery.
A 4-year-old male with an acute lower GI bleed from Meckel’s diverticulum. He presented with an acute history of blood in the stools. A planar image obtained after intravenous administration of Tc-99m Pertechnetate demonstrates focal uptake in the left mid-abdomen concerning for a Meckel’s diverticulum containing gastric mucosa (sequential images of the Tc-99m Pertechnetate study are in Supplemental Figure 2, Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/JCAT/A48). The patient underwent surgery, and a Meckel’s diverticulum was seen about 50 cm from the ileocecal junction without inflammatory changes.
As in cases of other causes of gastrointestinal bleeding, a technetium-99M tagged RBC scan is helpful in the diagnosis of acute gastrointestinal bleeding secondary to a Meckel’s diverticulum but does not help diagnose a Meckel’s diverticulum as a cause for the bleed. When triphasic CT angiography is used for the evaluation of acute gastrointestinal bleeding, it may be able to identify active gastrointestinal hemorrhage and Meckel’s diverticulum as a cause of this hemorrhage (Fig. 16). On digital subtraction angiography, active bleeding may be identified in the superior mesenteric artery territory as the blood supply to the Meckel’s diverticulum is by the superior mesenteric artery. A persistent vitelline artery, the source of embryonic supply to Meckel’s diverticulum, if present, can be seen as an elongated vessel arising from the distal ileal artery. A bleeding Meckel’s diverticulum can demonstrate contrast extravasation into the diverticulum and the adjacent small bowel. Occasionally, focal dense capillary contrast stain in a Meckel’s diverticulum can be seen, indicating the presence of ectopic gastric mucosa.

Non-Acute Conditions Affecting Meckel’s Diverticulum
Neoplastic causes account for ~0.5% to 3.2% of patients with symptomatic Meckel’s diverticulum. Carcinoid is the most common tumor arising in a Meckel’s diverticulum. Other reported neoplasms include leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma, angioma, lipoma, and adenocarcinoma.

Management of Symptomatic Meckel’s Diverticulum
The management of symptomatic patients with Meckel’s diverticulum is essentially surgical, with the surgical procedures including simple diverticulectomy and segmental resection of the small bowel from which the Meckel’s diverticulum arises, depending upon the surgical findings. In asymptomatic patients, the surgical management varies with the age and sex of the patient and other findings, such as an associated fibrous band, which can predispose to developing complications.

CONCLUSIONS
Small bowel diverticula are most commonly found in the duodenum but can occur anywhere along the small intestine. Meckel’s diverticulum is a true congenital diverticulum of the ileum, which can be asymptomatic or present with complications, most commonly in childhood. Acquired small bowel diverticular disease, although uncommon, should be considered in patients with abdominal symptoms, especially in older individuals or those with risk factors such as a low-fiber diet. Early imaging diagnosis is essential to manage complications like infection, bleeding, or obstruction. CT scans with contrast are highly effective for diagnosing small bowel diverticula, whereas enteroscopy and capsule endoscopy allow for direct visualization. Nuclear medicine studies like the Technetium-99m-labeled RBC and pertechnetate scans are useful for detecting complications, particularly in cases involving Meckel’s diverticulum or bleeding.

Supplementary Material
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Supplemental Digital Content is available for this article. Direct URL citations are provided in the HTML and PDF versions of this article on the journal's website, www.jcat.org.

REFERENCES
Diverticulitis
Small intestine diverticula: is there anything new?
Diverticular disease of the small bowel
Small bowel diverticula in elderly patients: a case report and review article
Imaging manifestations of Meckel’s diverticulum
Management of complicated duodenal diverticula
CT findings in duodenal diverticulitis
MR cholangiopancreatography diagnosis of juxtapapillary duodenal diverticulum simulating a cystic lesion of the pancreas: usefulness of an oral negative contrast agent
Mucosal repair of posterior perforation of duodenal diverticulitis using roux loop duodenojejunostomy
Non-perforated peptic ulcer disease: multidetector CT findings, complications, and differential diagnosis
Imaging spectrum of duodenal emergencies
Pancreaticoduodenal Groove: spectrum of Disease and Imaging Features
Imaging of duodenal diverticula and their complications
Gastrointestinal Bleeding Scintigraphy in the Early 21st Century
Diagnosis and management of jejunoileal diverticular hemorrhage: a decade of experience
Angiography for preoperative evaluation in patients with lower gastrointestinal bleeding: are the benefits worth the risks?
Excision of a juxtapapillary duodenal diverticulum causing biliary obstruction: report of three cases
Post-operative complications of cholecystectomy: what the radiologist needs to know
An analysis of the relationship between bile duct stones and periampullary duodenal diverticula
Duodenal diverticulum and associated pancreatitis: case report with brief review of literature
Jejunal diverticulosis: fndings on CT in 28 patients
Magnetic resonance enterography/enteroclysis in acquired small bowel diverticulitis and small bowel diverticulosis
The peritoneum: anatomy, pathologic findings, and patterns of disease spread
CT evaluation of acute enteritis and colitis: is it infectious, inflammatory, or ischemic?: Resident and fellow education feature
Pattern approach for diseases of mesenteric small bowel on barium studies 1
Radiologic imaging of bowel infections
Imaging of Meckel’s diverticulum in adults: pictorial essay
Giant Meckel’s diverticulum containing enteroliths: typical CT imaging findings
Radiologist’s perspective for the Meckel’s diverticulum and its complications
Complications of congenital and developmental abnormalities of the gastrointestinal tract in adolescents and adults: evaluation with multimodality imaging
Meckel’s diverticulum: a systematic review
Complications of Meckel’s diverticula in adults
Meckel’s diverticulitis: a rare etiology of an acute abdomen during pregnancy
Revisiting the forgotten remnant: Imaging spectrum of Meckel’s diverticulum
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding caused by Meckel’s diverticulum
Meckel’s diverticulum imaging
Meckel’s diverticulum: imaging diagnosis
Bleeding Meckel diverticulum associated with a vitellointestinal artery aneurysm found on preoperative angiography: report of a case
Meckel’s diverticulum: comparison of incidental and symptomatic cases
Malignant neoplasms of Meckel’s diverticulum; an evidence based review
The utility of technetium 99m pertechnetate scintigraphy in the evaluation of patients with Meckel’s diverticulum