Pulmonary Epstein–Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumor after kidney transplantation: two case reports with review of differential diagnosis
Pulmonary nodules are a common complication in solid organ transplant recipients, and may have various underlying causes, with Epstein–Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumor (EBV-SMT) being one of them. Given the rarity of this entity, we describe the diagnosis and therapeutic interventions for post-transplant EBV-SMT in two individuals. Both cases involved female patients who were diagnosed with multiple pulmonary nodules 60 months and 116 months, respectively, after receiving living-related kidney transplantation. Pathological examination revealed a spindle cell tumor, with immunophenotype and EBV in situ hybridization supporting the diagnosis of EBV-SMT. After diagnosis, these two patients underwent intervention by decreasing their intake of immunosuppressants. As of the latest follow-up, the patients’ lesion size remained stable, and their overall condition was favorable. We also reviewed literature about the morphological and molecular pathological features of EBV-SMT and highlighted the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of pulmonary spindle cell lesions especially in the setting of immunosuppression.

Introduction
In the face of the organ shortage crisis, living-related kidney transplantation offers an alternative for individuals suffering from end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Long-term immunosuppressive treatment is necessitated to ensure graft and patient survival following kidney transplantation. The presence of pulmonary nodules in transplant recipients represents a vexing diagnostic and therapeutic dilemma, given a broad range of potential etiologies including infectious etiologies (bacterial, viral, fungal) and non-infectious causes, such as neoplasms. A broad range of tumors are detected, including numerous infection-related and unrelated malignancies, such as post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD), Epstein–Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumor (EBV-SMT), lung cancer and liver cancer. In this context, pathological examination is essential for achieving a definitive diagnosis.
Within lung parenchyma, primary leiomyosarcoma is extremely rare. However, lung is the second most frequently involved organ of post-transplant EBV-SMT after liver. By definition, EBV-SMT is smooth muscle tumor associated with EBV infection, mainly identified in immunosuppressed patients, and usually associated with multicentricity. This tumor is distinguished by its defining histological characteristics, including variable numbers of intratumoral small lymphocytes and the presence of primitive-looking round cell areas. A comprehensive diagnosis can be made based on detailed clinical history, morphological features, immunophenotype, as well as the presence of EBV in situ hybridization (ISH) positivity.
Aim
This study reports two EBV-SMT cases after living-related kidney transplantation and reviews the relevant literature, with a particular emphasis on the differential diagnosis of this disease.

Case presentations
Case No. 1
A 32-year-old Chinese female underwent routine follow-up visit to the transplant clinic. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed bilateral pulmonary nodules, the largest in her left lower lobe measuring 1.2×1.0×1.0 cm3. The pre-contrast mean CT value of the largest nodule was 4 HU, whereas the enhanced mean CT value was 70 HU, indicating obvious enhancement (Figure 1A). Positron-emission tomography (PET)/CT scan revealed no other involved sites. The patient denied shortness of breath, cough, fevers, chills, night sweats or weight loss. There was no personal or family history of cancer. The physical exam showed no abnormal findings. The patient had a history of renal transplantation (five years earlier from a living related donor) after developing ESRD and receiving hemodialysis therapy for about two years. She was maintained on triple immunosuppression therapy with Tacrolimus, Methylprednisolone, and Mycophenolate mofetil, without rejection symptoms. Both donor and recipient cytomegalovirus (CMV) serostatus were negative. The donor was immunoglobulin G (IgG)-positive EBV, while the recipient was IgG-negative EBV (EBV primary mismatch); this patient did not receive antiviral prophylaxis. Routine EBV viral load monitoring was not done initially.
A core needle biopsy of the left lower lobe lesion was performed under CT guidance. The histopathological examination of the submitted biopsy specimen revealed the tumor was sharply demarcated from the adjacent lung parenchyma. The lesion mainly consisted of spindle cells arranged in fascicles (Figure 1C), with moderate amounts of eosinophilic cytoplasm and elongated nuclei. Primitive round cell components were also visible, with indistinct cell boundaries, blunt-ended nuclei with finely granular chromatin. Tumor cells showed mild nuclear pleomorphism with minimal atypia, and mitotic figures were infrequent (Figure 1D). There was no significant necrosis or hemorrhage. Prominent branching thin-walled blood vessels were observed in the background (Figure 1E), and intratumoral lymphocytic infiltration was occasionally seen. By immunohistochemistry, the tumor cells expressed alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) (Figure 1F) and vimentin but did not express cluster of differentiation (CD)34, KIT, CD21, anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6), CD45, S100, human melanoma black 45 (HMB45), h-caldesmon, pan-cytokeratin (CK) AE1/AE3, CK7, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), estrogen receptor (ER), or CD10. The proliferative index estimated by Ki67 nuclear labeling was 1%. Tumor cells were also positive for EBV-encoded small ribonucleic acid (RNA) (EBER) ISH (Figure 1G). Subsequently, additional immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for Epstein–Barr virus nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2) showed nuclear positivity in tumor cells (Figure 1H). The acid-fast staining result was negative. Based on the above results, we were able to confirm a final diagnosis of EBV-SMT after transplantation. The patient had an EBV viral load of 8460 copies/mL at the time of diagnosis.
The patient was intervened by only reducing the dosage of immunosuppressive medication, without undergoing surgical removal of the pulmonary nodules or other auxiliary treatments. Over a follow-up period of 60 months, regular chest CT scans had shown that the number and size of nodules remained stable, with the largest nodule diameter fluctuating between 1.2 cm and 1.5 cm (Figure 1A, 1B). The EBV deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) load varied between 1.02×103 and 1.26×104 copies/mL. Additionally, the transplanted kidney function of the patient remained generally normal, and no other tumors were detected.
Radiographic and pathological images of Case No. 1: (A) CT scan of the chest (axial plane) showing a 1.3 cm nodule located beneath the pleura in the lower left lung; (B) Follow-up CT scan three years later revealing the lesion stable; (C) Core-needle biopsy showing that the tumor was primarily composed of spindle-shaped cells set in fascicular arrangements; (D) High-power view exhibiting tumor cells with mild pleomorphism and minimal nuclear atypia; (E) Certain areas of tumor displaying hemangiopericytoma-like branching vascular pattern; (F) The tumor cells were positive for α-SMA; (G) ISH revealed nuclear positive signals for EBER; (H) EBNA2 nuclear positive staining in tumor cells. HE staining: (C and E) ×100; (D) ×400. α-SMA immunostaining: (F) ×400. EBER ISH analysis: (G) ×400. EBNA2 immunostaining: (H) ×400. α-SMA: Alpha-smooth muscle actin; CT: Computed tomography; EBER: Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small ribonucleic acid; EBNA2: EBV nuclear antigen 2; HE: Hematoxylin–Eosin; ISH: In situ hybridization
Case No. 2
A 41-year-old Chinese female patient returned to hemodialysis after renal transplant failure. Upon admission, a chest CT scan showed the presence of multiple nodules in both lungs, with the largest nodule measuring approximately 0.3 cm in diameter. The patient was devoid of any uncomfortable symptoms or positive physical signs. After four months of observation, it was discovered that the nodule located in the left upper lung had rapidly increased in size to approximately 1.1×1.0×0.9 cm3 (Figure 2A). The patient had a history of renal transplant (nine years and eight months earlier from a living related donor) after developing ESRD at age 31, with hemodialysis for six months previously. The recipient was negative for both CMV and EBV. The donor was CMV IgG seronegative without any available data regarding the EBV level testing. The maintenance immunosuppressive regimen consisted of Tacrolimus, Mycophenolate mofetil, and Prednisone. The patient’s serum creatinine level began to increase from the third year post-transplant. Additionally, the patient gave birth to a child in the eighth year. The EBV viral load was 2.17×103 copies/mL in the fourth year after transplantation, but no routine testing was performed to monitor it.
To determine the nature of the lesion, a thoracoscopic wedge resection of the left upper lobe was performed. Grossly, the lesion presented as a nodular mass, measuring approximately 0.85×0.85×0.8 cm3 in size, with a blurred scar visible at the center of the cut surface (Figure 2B). The boundary between the lesion and adjacent lung parenchyma was discernible. On section, it was grayish-white color with firm consistence. On the whole slide image, the lesion appears as an oval mass with sharp delineation from the surrounding lung tissue, without obvious capsule (Figure 2C). Microscopically, the lesion was primarily composed of round cells with a primitive appearance, although there were some spindle-shaped cells present (less than 20%). The neoplastic cells had moderate amount of cytoplasm, appearing eosinophilic or faintly vacuolated with indistinct boundaries. Mild nuclear pleomorphism was present, with evenly distributed chromatin and small prominent nucleoli. Atypical mitotic figures were occasionally observed (Figure 3A), but no necrosis was noted. Abundant infiltration of lymphocytes and a small amount of plasma cells could be seen in the background, along with extravasation of red blood cells and thin-walled vessels at the periphery, resembling inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT). Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were strongly positive for vimentin, α-SMA (Figure 3B) and EBNA2 (Figure 3C), while negative for desmin, pan-CK AE1/AE3, h-caldesmon, ALK, CD34, calponin, S100, CD21, CD35, CD207, and CD1α. The infiltrating lymphocytes were mainly CD3-positive T-cells, with few CD20-positive B-cells. The proliferative index estimated by Ki67 nuclear labeling was 20%. ISH for EBER showed more than 60% of neoplastic cells were positive stained (Figure 3D). Similarly, there was no positive finding of acid-fast stain. A diagnosis of EBV–SMT after transplantation was established.
Radiographic and pathological images of Case No. 2: (A) Plain chest CT image illustrating a circular nodule in the left upper lobe of the lung; (B) Gross examination showing grayish-white well-circumscribed mass in the cut section; (C) Whole slide image showing the lesion was circumscribed but not encapsulated (HE staining). Scale bar: (B) 1 cm; (C) 1000 μm. CT: Computed tomography; HE: Hematoxylin–Eosin
Pathological images of Case No. 2: (A) High-power view of a representative area demonstrating the morphology of the tumor, containing atypical mitotic figure (white arrow); (B) Tumor cells stained for α-SMA; (C) Tumor cells stained for EBNA2; (D) EBER ISH showing strong nuclear staining in most tumor cells. HE staining: (A) ×400. α-SMA immunostaining: (B) ×400. EBNA2 immunostaining: (C) ×400. EBER ISH analysis: (D) ×400. α-SMA: Alpha-smooth muscle actin; HE: Hematoxylin–Eosin. EBER: Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small ribonucleic acid; EBNA2: EBV nuclear antigen 2; HE: Hematoxylin–Eosin; ISH: In situ hybridization
After the removal of the largest nodule, the patient had been followed up for five months. Due to kidney transplant dysfunction, the patient was undergoing hemodialysis and had reduced the dosage of immunosuppressive agents in preparation for a second transplant. Currently, the patient’s overall condition is favorable, and the other pulmonary nodules have remained stable.

Discussions
EBV-SMT is a rare mesenchymal tumor with uncertain malignant potential. It was first reported in organ transplant recipients in 1970, but it was not until 1995 that the link between this disease and EBV was established. In addition to drug-related immunosuppression in post-transplant settings, EBV-SMT has been associated with immune suppression in other clinical contexts, including the most common human immunodeficiency virus-associated SMT (HIV-SMT), and SMT associated congenital immunodeficiency disorders. EBV-SMT can occur in any anatomical site of the body and multifocal and/or multi-centric involvements are not unusual, often being regarded as the result of multiple infection events rather than metastasis. Transplant-associated EBV-SMT most commonly occurs in the liver, followed by the lungs, larynx/pharynx, and gut. Even the transplant allograft can be affected. In cases of solid organ transplantation, kidney recipients are more commonly affected by EBV-SMT, with single-center data indicating an incidence rate of up to 1.67%. The prevalence of EBV-SMT in our Center is comparatively lower (data no shown), potentially due to limitations such as incomplete pathological examination of suspected cases or loss of follow-up. Given the rarity of this disease, it can be highly challenging to reach a correct pathological diagnosis, particularly when the pathologist is inexperienced or lacks a thorough understanding of the patient’s medical background.
EBV-SMT is generally a late complication of solid organ transplant. According to a recent retrospective analysis and literature review, the median time of diagnosis for EBV-SMT is approximately 3–4 years post-transplantation, with adult cases exhibiting a median onset delay of one year compared to pediatric cases. Consistent with prior literature, the two cases described in this study were detected to have EBV-SMT at 60 months and 116 months post-kidney transplant, respectively. Most patients with EBV-SMT had been asymptomatic and were detected during their routine health evaluation. Our two cases aligned with this trend, with the second case undergoing a lung wedge resection upon the rapid expansion of pulmonary nodule. Pre-transplant EBV seronegativity is a recognized risk factor for EBV-positive PTLD. Pre-transplant EBV seronegativity followed by the onset of primary EBV infection and sustained high EBV viral loads can also be speculated as a unique risk factor for post-transplant EBV-SMT. The first case we encountered had a pre-transplant EBV serological status of donor positive and recipient negative, which could be a contributing factor of the disease. The EBV serology of the donor was unknown in the second case.
It is well known that in some EBV-associated neoplasms, epithelial cells and lymphocytes serve as target cells for EBV and may play a critical role in disease progression. The precise mechanism underlying EBV-mediated malignant transformation via infection of smooth muscle cells (SMCs) in immunocompromised individuals is not yet fully understood. The central question pertaining to the initiation of EBV-SMT is how the EBV entry mesenchymal cells or their progenitor cells. The entry of EBV into cells is facilitated by the viral envelope protein binding to the CD21 receptor on the cell surface. Previous study has suggested that CD21 expression by HIV-associated EBV-SMT tumor cells may represent a potential mechanism of viral infection. However, post-transplant EBV-SMT, including the two cases in this study, revealed no evidence of CD21 expression. Since SMCs are not typically targeted by EBV, immunosuppression may allow an aberrant entry of EBV into these cells, potentially leading to a latent infection and subsequent neoplastic transformation. Another possibility is that tumor proliferation occurs as a result of the fusion between SMCs and EBV-infected lymphocytes, but this requires further investigation. It has been speculated that tumors could be developed from the smooth muscle located in the small vessel walls, offering a possible explanation for why tumors are more commonly found in areas lacking smooth muscle tissue. Furthermore, transplant-associated EBV-SMT can originate from either donor or recipient tissue.
Tumor often presents with an intersecting fascicular pattern, similar to well-differentiated SMCs in histology. In some cases, tumor may also display a hemangiopericytoma (HPC)-like growth pattern. Tumor cells have eosinophilic cytoplasm and elongated blunt spindle-shaped nuclei. Approximately half of the cases exhibit more primitive round SMCs with a high nuclear–cytoplasmic ratio. Except for HIV-associated EBV-SMT, cellular atypia is generally mild to moderate. Rarely, tumor could be coexistent with granulomatous inflammation. The existence of varying amounts of intratumoral lymphocytes and so-called primitive round cells are the important unique features for this tumor. Nevertheless, these features may vary greatly in different cases. Our two cases showed distinct differences in their histological features. The first case was predominantly composed of spindle cells, with some regions showing an HPC-like growth pattern. Conversely, the second case had a large proportion of primitive-appearing round cells, comprising 80% of the tumor mass, along with notable infiltration of lymphocytes.
By immunohistochemistry, the neoplastic cells exhibit a smooth muscle phenotype, with diffuse expression of α-SMA. H-caldesmon positivity is seen in most cases, while α-SMA expression varies and there may be focal positivity for desmin. EBER ISH shows constant positivity in tumor cells. The presence of EBNA2 positivity indicates EBV latency type III infection and a pathogenetic mechanism similar to PTLD. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR)/Akt signaling pathway and the increased expression of MYC transcription factor are regarded as the primary agents responsible for unbridled proliferation of EBV-SMT. A recent study observed that EBV-SMT shared a similar DNA copy-number alterations with leiomyoma, but recurrent copy number gain of oncogenes, including RUNX family transcription factor 1 (RUNX1), cyclin D2 (CCND2), and ETS proto-oncogene 2, transcription factor (ETS2), were also identified. Additionally, gene enrichment analysis also demonstrated an accumulation of genes associated with host response to viral infection, indicating that the tumor immune microenvironment may play a crucial role in the development of EBV-SMT.
From the perspective of clinical immunosuppression or acquired immune deficiency, pulmonary nodules should not only be attributed to EBV-SMT but also consider other diseases. In terms of incidence, PTLD is the most common malignancy among transplant recipients in the United States. Most PTLD cases are associated with EBV infection, and it is a heterogeneous disorder that ranges from non-destructive benign proliferation, infectious mononucleosis, to lymphoid malignancies. PTLD could affect the lungs and manifest as multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules. Combining its microscopic morphology, the use of lymphocyte-associated IHC markers like CD3, CD20, and EBER ISH, leads to a definitive diagnosis. Kaposi’s sarcoma is another complication caused by immunosuppressants, and in rare cases it may present as multiple bilateral solid pulmonary nodules. Classic purple, plaque-like papular nodules might be observed on the skin during examination. The histological characteristics of this tumor include proliferation of oval/spindle cells surrounding vessels, accompanied by infiltration of lympho-plasmacytes and extravasation of erythrocytes. Diagnosis of Kaposi’s sarcoma can be facilitated by the detection of CD31, ERG, CD34 and human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) expression. Mycobacterial spindle cell pseudotumor is a rare non-neoplastic lesion associated with immunodeficiency, with cases mainly reported in literature involving lymph nodes and skin, and occasionally involving the lung in the form of pulmonary nodule. The microscopic appearance of this disease is characterized by proliferation of spindle-shaped fibrohistiocytic cells without obvious formation of epithelioid granulomas, and it is difficult to differentiate from tumors related to spindle cells including EBV-SMT. Diagnosis requires the utilization of pathogen detection techniques, such as acid-fast staining.
Apart from the unique clinical background of immunosuppression, primary or metastatic lesions should still be considered when dealing with infrequent pulmonary spindle cell lesions. As observed in our first case, the presence of conspicuous HPC-like branching vascular pattern in certain regions necessitated the use of CD34 and STAT6 IHC markers to rule out the possibility of intrapulmonary solitary fibrous tumors. Although the presence of intratumoral lymphocytes is a characteristic feature of EBV-SMT, it is not specific to this type of tumor and can also be observed in other mesenchymal tumors, such as IMT. The growth patterns and cell morphology of these two tumors exhibit a certain degree of overlap, with IMT being more prevalent than EBV-SMT. Thus, considering both in the differential diagnosis of pulmonary spindle cell lesions can prevent misdiagnosis. Pulmonary primary leiomyoma is extremely rare, but lung is the organ most affected by benign metastasizing leiomyoma (BML). The two cases reported in this study involved women of reproductive age presenting with multiple pulmonary nodules composed of smooth muscle-like cells. After excluding other possible diagnoses, it is crucial to consider the potential for BML, utilizing IHC staining for ER and progesterone receptor (PR) to distinguish it. By elucidating the diagnostic and differential points outlined above, we hope to provide practical guidance for the pathological diagnosis of pulmonary spindle cell lesions in transplant patients in daily surgical pathology work.
Most EBV-SMTs are multifocal, but their biological behavior appears to be indolent, with an adverse prognosis upon intracranial involvement. In addition, there is no association between tumor size, atypia, mitotic count, necrosis, and biological behavior in EBV-SMT. The immune status of the patient appears to play a more prominent role in the clinical outcome, leading to the proposal of immune reconstruction adjuvant treatment. The literature suggests that the majority of EBV-SMT cases resulting in death are attributed to infections or other adverse effects resulting from the modification of immunosuppressive medication.
Due to the rareness and uncertain behavior of EBV-SMT, there are no standard therapeutic methods available currently. Nevertheless, varying degrees of success have been achieved with surgical resection, reducing immunosuppressants, chemotherapy, antiviral therapy, and mTOR inhibitors. Even a case of successful treatment of GATA binding-protein 2 (GATA2) deficiency patient with allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has been reported, resulting in complete remission of EBV-SMT. According to multiple reports, surgical excision was recommended to be first line treatment choice if possible. However, since the disease often presents with multi-focality, reducing the use of immunosuppressive agents is a commonly employed approach. Our two cases also underwent this treatment strategy and exhibited stable EBV-SMT lesions in follow-up CT scans. Sirolimus, an mTOR signaling pathway inhibitor, not only prevents transplant rejection but also has antineoplastic effect, making it a promising therapeutic drug for EBV-SMT.

Conclusions
EBV-SMT is a rare smooth muscle tumor that occurs in immunocompromised patients. Discrimination of EBV-SMT in the lungs from a series of immunodeficiency-linked or unrelated tumors, or non-tumorous lesions, requires careful attention to the clinical background and confirmation of the tumor’s smooth muscle origin morphology and immunophenotype, and EBER ISH positivity, as a crucial diagnostic criterion. Based on a limited number of case observations, it appears that reducing immunosuppressant therapy may contribute to stable EBV-SMT following transplantation.

Conflict of interests
The authors declare no potential conflict of interests with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Source of funding
This project was supported by grants from the Key Scientific and Technology Project of Fujian Province, P. R. China (2022Y0062; 2021Y0060).

References
Organ shortage crisis: problems and possible solutions
Spectrum of cancer risk among US solid organ transplant recipients
Primary pulmonary leiomyosarcoma: a population-based study
Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumors are distinctive mesenchymal tumors reflecting multiple infection events: a clinicopathologic and molecular analysis of 29 tumors from 19 patients
Malignant tumours following immunosuppressive therapy
The association of Epstein-Barr virus with smooth-muscle tumors occurring after organ transplantation
Association of Epstein-Barr virus with leiomyosarcomas in young people with AIDS
Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumor
Epstein-Barr virus-associated adrenal smooth muscle tumors and disseminated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in a child with common variable immunodeficiency: a case report and review of the literature
Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumors in children following solid organ transplantation: a review
Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumors after kidney transplantation: treatment and outcomes in a single center
Epstein-Barr virus associated smooth muscle tumors in solid organ transplant recipients: incidence over 31 years at a single institution and review of the literature
Post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorders: diagnosis, prognosis, and current approaches to therapy
Spectrum of Epstein-Barr virus-associated diseases
Characterization of natural Epstein-Barr virus infection and replication in smooth muscle cells from a leiomyosarcoma
Epstein-Barr virus-induced cell fusion
Molecular and clinicopathological analysis of Epstein-Barr virus-associated posttransplant smooth muscle tumors
Concomitant Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumor and granulomatous inflammation of the liver
Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumors of larynx: a clinicopathologic study and comprehensive literature review of 12 cases
Epstein-Barr virus-associated multicentric leiomyosarcoma in an adult patient after heart transplantation: case report and review of the literature
Expression of EBV latent antigens, mammalian target of rapamycin, and tumor suppression genes in EBV-positive smooth muscle tumors: clinical and therapeutic implications
Clinicopathologic and molecular characteristics of Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumor compared with leiomyoma and leiomyosarcoma
Pulmonary inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor in an AIDS patient
Pulmonary nodules in lung transplant recipients: etiology and outcome
Pulmonary post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder with a CT halo sign
Immunosuppressive therapy and Kaposi’s sarcoma after kidney transplantation
Pulmonary and cutaneous nodules in an immunocompromised patient
Unusual presentations of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in HIV-positive patients: a case series
Intrapulmonary solitary fibrous tumors: clinicopathologic and immunohistochemical study of 24 cases
Pulmonary inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor and IgG4-related inflammatory pseudotumor: a diagnostic dilemma
Benign metastasizing leiomyoma presenting as multiple cystic pulmonary nodules: a case report
EBV-associated hepatic smooth muscle tumor of uncertain biologic behavior after heart transplantation in a pediatric patient: case report
Role of surgery in treating Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumor (EBV-SMT) with central nervous system invasion: a systemic review from 1997 to 2019
Brain involvement in multicentric Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumours in a child after kidney transplantation
Resolution of multifocal Epstein-Barr virus-related smooth muscle tumor in a patient with GATA2 deficiency following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
Successful medical treatment of EBV smooth muscle tumor in a renal transplant recipient
Epstein-Barr virus-associated smooth muscle tumor and its correlation with CD4 levels in a patient with HIV infection
Treatment response with Sirolimus for a pediatric patient with an EBV-associated smooth-muscle tumor after bone marrow transplantation