Long COVID and the cardiovascular system—elucidating causes and cellular mechanisms in order to develop targeted diagnostic and therapeutic strategies: a joint Scientific Statement of the ESC Working Groups on Cellular Biology of the Heart and Myocardial and Pericardial Diseases
Abstract
Long COVID has become a world-wide, non-communicable epidemic, caused by long-lasting multiorgan symptoms that endure for weeks or months after SARS-CoV-2 infection has already subsided. This scientific document aims to provide insight into the possible causes and therapeutic options available for the cardiovascular manifestations of long COVID. In addition to chronic fatigue, which is a common symptom of long COVID, patients may present with chest pain, ECG abnormalities, postural orthostatic tachycardia, or newly developed supraventricular or ventricular arrhythmias. Imaging of the heart and vessels has provided evidence of chronic, post-infectious perimyocarditis with consequent left or right ventricular failure, arterial wall inflammation, or microthrombosis in certain patient populations. Better understanding of the underlying cellular and molecular mechanisms of long COVID will aid in the development of effective treatment strategies for its cardiovascular manifestations. A number of mechanisms have been proposed, including those involving direct effects on the myocardium, microthrombotic damage to vessels or endothelium, or persistent inflammation. Unfortunately, existing circulating biomarkers, coagulation, and inflammatory markers, are not highly predictive for either the presence or outcome of long COVID when measured 3 months after SARS-CoV-2 infection. Further studies are needed to understand underlying mechanisms, identify specific biomarkers, and guide future preventive strategies or treatments to address long COVID and its cardiovascular sequelae.
Graphical Abstract

Long-COVID syndrome

Epidemiology
As of May 2022, over 500 million people world-wide have been infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus and its mutant variants. COVID-19, the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2, is burdened by an overall mortality rate of 1%, and in 2020 represented the third and second leading cause of mortality amongst people aged 45–84 or over 85 years old in US, respectively. In some countries, including France, Spain, and the UK, COVID-19 was the leading cause of death in the last 2 years. Studies have estimated that 4.5–36.6% of all COVID-19 patients continue to suffer from symptoms more than 3 months post-infection, a condition referred to as ‘post COVID’ or ‘long COVID’ (defined below). This rises as high as 76% amongst those who required hospitalization during the infectious phase. A recent retrospective analysis of 273 618 patients with proven prior SARS-CoV-2 infection revealed that 36.6% had long COVID, with at least one of the nine predefined, typical long-COVID symptoms recorded in electronic health record (EHR) data between 3 and 6 months post-infection. Notably, in a matched control population of 106 578 patients who previously had influenza, 29.7% experienced at least one of the symptoms during the same period of observation.. Considering the possibility of selection and reporting bias, this suggests that many aspects of long COVID are similar to other post-viral diseases, even if there are significant differences in prevalence, clinical manifestation, or disease duration between post-viral syndromes. A particular feature of SARS-COV-2 infection is that a single patient can be infected several times within a relatively short time despite effective vaccination. A further alarming observation is, that the morbidity, mortality, and development of long COVID are largely not predictable, especially in young patients.
Successful wide-spread vaccination against SARS-CoV-2 has reduced the severity of acute infection, although concern remains about the possible escape of viral mutants with greater infectivity. Furthermore, the population of acutely infected individuals increasingly includes younger individuals who are unvaccinated, and those whose immunity is waning post-vaccination. Therefore, more patients with long COVID and possibly a shift in the age distribution of long-COVID patients to those of younger age may be anticipated.
Several clinical cardiovascular manifestations of long COVID have been reported in small studies with questionable clinical relevance. However, a recent analysis of 153 760 individuals in national healthcare databases from the US Department of Veterans Affairs, with comparison to over 10 million contemporary and historical controls, revealed a significant increase in the incidence of cardiovascular disease in surviving patients, and a 55% increase in the combined cardiovascular outcome, 1 year after COVID-19. Notably, increased risk was observed even in non-hospitalized patients, with risk related to the severity of the acute infection.
Clinical implication: Long COVID will clearly lead to an enormous health care burden on top of the costs of acute COVID-19 medical support, which are already substantial. There is therefore an urgent need to improve the diagnosis and treatment of long COVID, especially in the cardiovascular domain.
In this document, we discuss the main proposed mechanisms of long COVID, with a special emphasis on the cardiovascular sequelae of COVID-19.

Definition of acute, post-acute, and long COVID
The post-viral convalescence of COVID-19 can last for several months up to a year or even longer. There is no unique definition of this syndrome, and several different terms are used (Table 1). Most commonly, the post-SARS-CoV-2 viral period is divided into ‘acute’ (<4 weeks), ‘post-acute’, ‘new’, or ‘ongoing’ (4–12 weeks) and ‘chronic (or long or post) COVID’ (lasting 12 weeks or longer) phases. Additionally, patients hospitalized during severe SARS-CoV-2 infection and still hospitalized several weeks or months after the acute infection due to severe complications when no longer infected, are usually called ‘in-hospital post-COVID patients’. In this document, we use the term ‘long COVID’ where signs and symptoms continue beyond the acute phase of COVID-19, in line with the definition by NICE and the NIH (who refer to it as post-Acute Sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection or PASC). A strict definition of long COVID requires confirmation of the previous infection with SARS-CoV-2, either with evidence of prior positivity for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or nucleocapsid antigen.
Major clinical definitions for patients with signs and symptoms of COVID-19 beyond the period of acute SARS-CoV-2infection
Defining organization	Proposed term	Definition	References	 	NIH	Post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC)	Signs and symptoms of COVID-19 beyond 4 weeks from the onset of symptoms.	Herrera et al.	 	NICE	Ongoing symptomatic COVID-19	Signs and symptoms of COVID-19 from 4 weeks up to 12 weeks	NIfHaCE	 	NICE	Post-COVID-19 syndrome	Signs and symptoms that develop during or after an infection consistent with COVID-19, continue for more than 12 weeks and are not explained by an alternative diagnosis	NIfHaCE	 	NICE	Long COVID	Signs and symptoms that continue or develop after acute COVID-19. It includes both ongoing symptomatic COVID-19 (from 4 to 12 weeks) and post-COVID-19 syndrome (12 weeks or more)	NIfHaCE	 	WHO	Post-COVID	Occurs in individuals with a history of probable or confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, usually 3 months from the onset of COVID-19 with symptoms that last for at least 2 months and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis. Symptoms may be new onset (…) or persist.		 	CDC/WHO	Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) or adults (MIS-A)	Symptoms appear between 2 and 6 weeks (4 weeks on average) after COVID-19 infection.

General symptoms of long COVID
The clinical presentation of long-COVID patients varies considerably. A diverse range of over 200 symptoms have been reported for long COVID, involving all organs, which suggests that long COVID is a systemic, multiorgan disease. Many symptoms are mild, non-specific, and reversible but moderate, severe, and persistent symptoms have also been reported, including thromboembolic consequences, lung fibrosis, chronic inflammatory myocarditis, cardiovascular autonomic vegetative dysregulation (e.g. postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome or POTS), and chronic post-viral fatigue syndrome (similar to myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome, ME/CFS) leading to chronic disability. The most common symptoms are of neurologic–neuropsychiatric character (e.g. fatigue, brain fog, cognitive disorders, insomnia, depression, post-exercise malaise, decrease of general health condition), followed by pneumological (e.g. dyspnoea, cough) and cardiovascular symptoms (e.g. hypotonia, palpitation, tachycardia, chest pain). Neuronal infection and intracerebral viral invasion may also contribute to neurological-related symptoms affecting the heart–brain axis. Further typical symptoms are joint and muscle pain, hair loss, dermatological, or other organ-related manifestations.
Clinical implication: Cardiovascular symptoms are common in long-COVID patients and are the third-most-frequent manifestation of the disease.

Risk factors
Although more men experience symptoms from acute COVID-19 disease, 55–75% of long-COVID patients are women, with the greatest prevalence in those aged 40–60 years. Other predictors of long COVID include: a greater body-mass index, older age, presence of combined symptoms from five or more different organs during the SARS-CoV-2 infection, and, importantly severe COVID-19 disease requiring hospitalization (Table 2). A combination of several factors, including the severity of the illness during acute COVID-19 infection, clinical symptoms, and lower SARS-CoV-2 IgG level, have been found to be predictive for the development of PASC or long-COVID syndrome. Risk can be estimated using the PASC score (a clinical symptom-based score combined with antibody signature) or other calculated score. However, all risk factors investigated, especially the laboratory parameters, have been assessed in patients who were either hospitalized or had an outpatient visit due to severe symptoms. Since ∼90% of patients were not medically seen or isolated during the acute infection because of a mild–moderate diseases course, an exact estimation of long-COVID risk factors for non-hospitalized patients is not possible.
Risk factors for development of long-COVID syndrome
Risk factors	References	 	Detected during active infection		 	High level of SARS-CoV-2 RNAemia		 	High level of EBV RNAemia (latent EBV reactivation)		 	High level of INFα		 	Specific autoantibodies (e.g. ANA)		 	Low IgM and IgG Subtype 3		 	Lower level of SARS-CoV-2 IgG		 	Anosmia		 	Diarrhoea		 	Severe COVID-19 disease requiring hospitalization		 	Presence of five symptoms from different organs during acute infections (fatigue, headache, dyspnoea, hoarse voice, myalgia, but also loss of smell in pts age >70 years)		 	High PASC score		 	General		 	Diabetes mellitus		 	Female gender		 	Greater body-mass index		 	Older age		 	Any previous comorbidities if age > 70 years		 	Previous comorbidities: asthma, heart diseases
Studies with highly selected patient groups (e.g. hospitalized and/or intensive care unit treatments, older age, or significant comorbidities, as inclusion criteria) were excluded. EBV, Epstein-Barr Virus; INFa, interferon-alpha; ANA, antinuclear antibody; Ig, immunoglobulin; PASC, post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Clinical implication: The risk of long COVID can be calculated for patients with severe COVID-19, based on associated risk factors, but is difficult to predict for mild and non-hospitalized cases.

Diagnosis and patient management
The main diagnostic process for long COVID aims to either verify or exclude objective organ disorders, such as newly developed autoimmune or post-inflammatory chronic myocarditis or lung fibrosis, or unexpected progression of pre-existing diseases, e.g. chronic obstructive lung disease, coronary artery disease, chronic kidney dysfunction, diabetes mellitus, reactivation of autoimmune or endocrine disorders. Detailed guidelines for general diagnosis of long COVID, artificial intelligence-based diagnostic or prediction models for patient management have been published in several specific journals, addressing primary, secondary, and tertiary care workers, and specific medical professionals.

Cardiovascular manifestations of long COVID
The cardiovascular symptoms of long COVID are a consequence of multiple cardiac and extracardiac pathological sequelae (Figure 1), including residual respiratory abnormalities with abnormally low peak-of-maximal oxygen consumption, pulmonary hypertension, muscular deconditioning, cytokine dysregulation, left or right ventricular dysfunction, chronotropic incompetence, altered parasympathetic tone, or increased heart rate variability (Table 3). Generally, patients who required hospitalization during the acute COVID-19 phase present with more severe cardiovascular symptoms in long COVID, and with much higher incidence than in mild-to-moderate or asymptomatic patients. For hospitalized patients who had elevated cardiac troponin T, the in-hospital, 6-month, and 12-month mortality rates were 28.6, 32.2, and 33.2%, respectively, compared with 4.1, 4.9, and 4.9% mortality of patients with low-level positive troponin T and 0% mortality in those with undetectable troponin T. Patients with high troponin T during index hospitalization were re-hospitalized significantly more often and developed long-term symptoms.
The major cardiovascular manifestations in patients with long COVID (left side), and likely mechanistic contributing factors (right hand side).
Cardiac-related manifestations based on patient symptoms and their prevalence in long-COVID patients
Long COVID	 	Post-acute COVID (4–12 weeks since COVID-19)	Post COVID	 	Cardiac manifestations	Symptomatic (%)	Patients included in study (n)	References	Symptomatic (%)	Patients included in study (n)	References	 	Chest pain	12.7–28.9%	81–287		5–30%	120–1733		 	Palpitation, tachycardia, atrial fibrillation	10–32%	51–2113	, 	0.3–20%	92–1733		 	Dyspnoea	13.1–92.1%	33–3290		4.1–70%	66–2649		 	Cough	9–42.3%	110–3290		4.2–16.7%	120–958		 	Exercise-induced dyspnoea, exercise-induced ventilatory inefficiency	51%	51		14.6–29%	28–55		 	Dysautonomia				15.2–25%	92–205		 	Postural tachycardia syndrome, orthostatic intolerance, inappropriate sinus tachycardia				11–41%	27–1890
Studies with highly selected patient groups (e.g. only hospitalized and/or intensive care unit treatments, older age, or significant comorbidities, as inclusion criteria) were excluded.
Clinical implication: There are currently few randomized studies of long-COVID symptoms. Reports of cardiovascular symptoms are based entirely on individual subjective assessment, with the challenge being to verify the underlying cause.
Several studies have reported cardiac manifestations in patients affected by long COVID, although their prevalence varies according to the population studied and the methodology with which the data were collected (Table 4). Temporary or persistent ECG and Holter–ECG abnormalities have been described in some long-COVID patients, at a frequency ranging from <1% in young athletes to as high as 27.5% in patients requiring hospitalization due to cardiovascular complications. The prevalence of ECG changes depends on the time since acute COVID-19 infection, the patient population, and pre-existing cardiovascular abnormalities. The changes detected include sinus tachycardia, unspecific ST-changes, ST-elevation without signs of myocardial ischaemia, T-wave abnormalities, prolonged QT interval, low voltage, development of new complete or incomplete bundle branch block. ECG combined with tilt table test is useful for the diagnosis of POTS.
Cardiac complications and their prevalence in patients with long COVID
Cardiac complications	Patients with cardiac complications (%)	Patients included in study (n)	References	 	Chronic myocarditis	0.4–28.9%	48–543		 	Chronic pericarditis	1.9–27%	26–105		 	Myocardial oedema	15.4%	26		 	Myocardial fibrosis or scar	4%	26		 	Systolic or diastolic LV dysfunction	0.06–35%	51–8983		 	RV systolic dysfunction	7–22.6%	50–1414		 	LV thrombus	2%	51		 	Coronary artery disease	8%	51		 	Acute myocardial infarction	1.5–8%	51–47 780		 	Persistent systemic endothelial dysfunction	2.5–6.1%	72–133		 	Coronary microvascular disease	18%	22		 	Heart failure	0.1–2%	543–8983		 	Pulmonary hypertension	10–50%	102–145
Studies with highly selected patient groups (e.g. only hospitalized and/or intensive care unit treatments, older age, or significant comorbidities, as inclusion criteria) were excluded. LV, left ventricular; RV, right ventricular.
Although most COVID-19-related acute abnormalities in ventricular size, geometry, and function resolve over time, some abnormal echocardiographic findings may remain, including adverse left and right ventricular remodelling, diastolic and systolic dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension, pericardial effusions, or reduced left ventricular (LV) or right ventricular (RV) global longitudinal strain. It has been suggested that such late pathological findings can be correlated with the severity of the acute COVID-19, the time since the acute illness and the number of persisting symptoms.
In-depth characterization of cardiac involvement by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) has revealed ongoing myocardial oedema, inflammation, fibrosis, impaired LV and RV function, and pericardial enhancement and/or effusions in some patients studied after the acute phase of COVID-19. Some studies were relatively small with <50 patients, and conflicting results have been reported regarding the actual prevalence. Accordingly, the significance of these findings depends on patient population and time between COVID-19 disease and imaging time (Table 4). Furthermore, even in hospitalized severe COVID-19 patients, myocarditis-like injury was limited to three or less myocardial segments in 88% of cases, with no associated LV dysfunction. A recent meta-analysis of cardiac involvement of long-COVID syndrome assessed by cMRI reported decreased LV and RV function in non-athlete, long-COVID patients as compared with healthy controls. The cMRI abnormalities seen in patients recovered from acute COVID-19 are not always associated with pre-existing co-morbidities, other chronic clinical conditions, severity of the acute COVID-19 illness, or persistence of symptoms. A prospective case–control cMRI study of 149 healthcare workers found that cardiovascular abnormalities were no more common in seropositive vs. seronegative individuals 6 months following mild COVID-19. The exact prevalence and incidence of these cardiovascular signs in long-COVID patients is still unclear, due to substantial differences between studies, cMRI protocols, timing of disease, and patient selection criteria.
To complement cMRI information, functional positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) studies could be useful to demonstrate PET tracer uptake in active inflammatory lesions. However, to date, this specific application has rarely been employed in the clinical context of long COVID. [18F]-FDG-PET/CT imaging of 10 patients with persisting long-COVID symptoms exhibited significantly higher target-to-blood pool ratio in the thoracic aorta, right iliac artery, and femoral arteries, compared with controls. Whole-body [18F]-FDG PET/CT images of long-COVID patients revealed increased [18F]-FDG uptake in several tissues (lung, mediastinal lymph node, large vessels) in a subgroup of patients, and a brain hypometabolism of individuals suffering from persistent anosmia and/or ageusia. Cardiac 18F-FDG PET/CT of five patients with cardiac symptoms in the post-acute COVID phase displayed higher 18F-FDG-PET uptake of the LV lateral and inferolateral walls, suggesting ‘myocardial fatigue syndrome’.
Clinical implication: Although cardiac manifestations occur in some patients affected by long COVID, in some cases these might have already existed before they had COVID-19, even if the patients did not have previous corresponding complaints, but this is difficult to assess, due to missing individual comparative baseline measures. Additionally, several diagnostic investigations have been performed in highly pre-selected patient populations and their wider applicability is difficult to ascertain.
Table 5 summarizes the newly diagnosed cardiovascular manifestations during the long-COVID phase. New hypertension and diabetes mellitus have been diagnosed in up to 10 and 2.4% of individuals, respectively. Indirect haemodynamic consequences may be caused by chronic kidney disease, or gastrointestinal disorders. Several case reports and small case series report stroke, microangiopathy, venous thromboembolism, heart failure, or need for hospitalization. In a large retrospective study, mean 140 days post-discharge, 29.4% of patients required re-hospitalization, with a mortality rate 7.7-fold greater than those in a control group with matched clinical characteristics. Cardiovascular involvement with Kawasaki syndrome (especially in children) has been reported in delayed multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS) induced by COVID-19 disease. The Kawasaki-like, MIS in children (MIS-C, also called paediatric MIS or PMIS) and in adults (MIS-A) is a very rare (2 in 100 000) complication of SARS-CoV-2 infection, which manifests in the post-acute phase of infection and is characterized by generalized hyperinflammation with cardiovascular involvement.
Newly diagnosed cardiovascular complications and their prevalence in patients with long COVID
Cardiovascular complications	Patients with CV complications (%)	Patients included in study (n)	References	 	Hypertension	1.28–1.3%	512–538		 	Diabetes mellitus	0.64–2.4%	287–512		 	Stroke	0.1–6.7%	30–8983		 	Venous thromboembolism	0.2–12.5%	1062–8983		 	Hospitalization	4.5–29.4%	1062–47 780		 	Paediatric or adult multisystem inflammatory syndrome with/without Kawasaki in children and adults	Ca. 0.15%	International health records
Studies with highly selected patient groups (e.g. only hospitalized and/or intensive care unit treatments, older age, or significant comorbidities, as inclusion criteria) were excluded.
Clinical implication: Multiorgan diagnostic screening procedures may reveal hidden systemic diseases and the presence of risk factors. The increased prevalence of risk factors in a predominantly young- or middle-aged population warrants attention and suggests the importance of ongoing systematic and cardiovascular assessment of long-COVID patients.

Circulating clinical biomarkers predictive for cardiovascular manifestations of long COVID
Several studies have evaluated whether standard clinical biomarkers can predict the severity and duration of long COVID. Only a few of these studies have considered novel biomarkers using unbiased approaches to predict cardiovascular manifestations associated with long COVID. Overall, these studies suggest that circulating inflammatory and coagulation biomarkers may persist during long COVID, and therefore potentially indicate altered cardiac metabolism and increased thromboembolic and cardiovascular risks. However, most biomarker studies are based on small patient datasets and are lacking either: laboratory confirmation of prior SARS-CoV-2 infection; longitudinal evaluation; appropriate match-controlled groups to ascertain specificity for long COVID; replication with independent data sets; and/or evaluation of biomarker correlation with specific manifestations of long COVID, notably cardiovascular. Further studies are therefore required to assess the longitudinal evolution of these biomarkers during the time course of long COVID. Ongoing large-scale studies, including BIOMARK-COVID (NCT04664023), French COVID Cohort (NCT04262921), MOIST Study (NCT04525404), PHOSP-COVID, follow-up study of the ISARIC cohort, COVIDOM-study and the use of large-scale screening technologies will hopefully provide more conclusive data.

Circulating inflammatory and cardiac-related markers
There are some indications that levels of proinflammatory markers remain elevated in patients with long COVID (Table 6). In particular, several inflammatory markers that are typically elevated during the acute disease, including C-reactive proteins (CRP) and interleukins (IL), may remain elevated when measured 2 or more months post-disease onset. However, the percentage of long-COVID patients with elevated inflammatory markers reported by various studies varies widely, from 10 to 73%, and some inflammatory markers, such as IL-6, show inconsistent association with long-COVID symptoms. It is important to note that most published biomarker studies that have examined the association with patient outcome (e.g. CRP and ferritin) are very preliminary and inconclusive due to small patient numbers, the presence of confounding factors, or lack of appropriate control groups. One notable exception is the study by Phetsouphanh et al., in which inflammatory markers in long-COVID patients were compared with matching populations of individuals who recovered from COVID-19, unexposed controls, and individuals infected with other coronaviruses. Time-dependent elevations of inflammatory biomarkers were detected, and combinations of the plasma levels of interferon (IFN)-β, PTX3 (pentraxin-3), IFN-γ, IFN-λ2/3, and IL-6 characterized long COVID with 78.5–81.6% accuracy. Finally, amongst the various efforts to identify new diagnostic biomarkers for long COVID, small-scale mass spectrometry-based multiplex assays and machine learning studies have been conducted but so far these remain explorative studies and far from clinical translation.
Circulating biomarkers characterizing long-COVID syndrome
Cardiac biomarkers	Comments and detection time post-infection	References	 	Troponin T/I	Depending on elevated troponin during hospitalization, interval between hospital discharge and labour measurements; 57–71 days		 	n-Terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (proBNP)	9.6 months		 	Inflammatory biomarkers			 	C-reactive protein (CRP)	30 days to 3 months		 	Interleukins general (IL)	15 days to 3 months		 	IL-6	Inconsistent association with long-COVID symptoms; over 3 months		 	Ferritin	Associated with patient outcome in small cohort; over 3 months		 	IFN-β, IFN-λ1,	Combination of inflammatory markers are predictive for long COVID; 8 months		 	CXCL9 and CXCL10	Was also elevated in asymptomatic post-COVID patients; 8 months		 	IL-8	Was also elevated in asymptomatic post-COVID patients; 8 months		 	TIM-3	Was also elevated in asymptomatic post-COVID patients; 8 months		 	Plasma ACE2 activity	Was also elevated in asymptomatic post-COVID patients; 3–8 months		 	PTX3	8 months		 	Procalcitonin	Correlated with microvessel disease, 3 months		 	Coagulation biomarkers			 	D-Dimer	2–3 months		 	Factor VIII, vWF; Thrombomodulin	Returned to normal in >90% patients in convalescent phase; 68–81 days		 	Novel biomarkers			 	Taurine	3 months		 	Reduced glutamine/glutamate ratio	3 months		 	Lower nitrite, nitrite/nitrate	4 months		 	Molecular biomarkers (long non-coding RNA, microRNA)	Suggestive, not validated
IFN, interferon; CXCL, chemokine (C–X–C motif) ligand; TIM-3, soluble T-cell immuno-globulin mucin Domain 3; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; PTX, pentraxin; vVF, von Willebrand Factor.

Circulating coagulation biomarkers
Elevated blood levels of coagulation markers (D-dimer, Factor VIII, von Willebrand factor, plasma soluble thrombomodulin) have been detected during long COVID, together with increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate, altered vascular responsiveness, and structural membrane homeostasis of red blood cells, raising the possibility of long-term risks of thromboembolic diseases and endotheliopathy for long-COVID patients (Table 6). Persistently elevated D-dimer was found in three reported cases of STEMI in post-COVID patients with no prior cardiovascular risk factors. Higher levels of D-dimer at acute COVID-19 admission also correlated with persistent lung damage in long-COVID patients.

Current research on novel biomarkers of long COVID
Metabolic phenotyping approaches have been deployed to find novel predictive markers of long COVID (Table 6), but are all at the exploratory research level and require validation. An elevated blood taurine level with a reduced glutamine/glutamate ratio at 3 months post-COVID was identified, potentially reflecting liver, heart, and muscle damage. Lower nitrite and nitrite/nitrate levels were found in recovered COVID-19 patients. Since nitric oxide (NO) plays an important role in the cardiovascular system, further research is warranted to elucidate whether NO levels could reflect cardiovascular damage.
Potential molecular biomarkers that could help predicting cardiovascular outcomes of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection are non-coding RNAs, due to their dynamic regulation in response to disease. In fact, several microRNAs and lncRNAs that could potentially influence symptoms were reported to be differentially expressed in acutely infected patients. Up-regulation of miR-21, miR-155, miR-208a, and miR-499 in COVID-19 patients was suggested to be a predictor of chronic myocardial damage and inflammation. Most of these targets still require validation for their predictive value regarding the onset of short- and/or long-term cardiovascular events following SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Clinical implication: Currently there are no specific biomarkers of long COVID. The diverse, organ-specific, circulating biomarkers that have been detected are a consequence of the COVID-19 infection-related organ disorders, with their established diagnostic and predictive values.

Cellular and molecular mechanisms of cardiovascular long-COVID manifestations
Increasing research data are available about the cellular and molecular mechanisms that may drive cardiac and vascular injuries associated with long COVID (Figure 2). An in silico study by Hachim et al. identified several genes to be differentially expressed in various cell types which are known to play roles in endothelial cell function and cardioprotection, namely in migration and regulation of cellular response to stress, and in viral infection. However, it is conceivable that different causes and underlying mechanisms may be responsible for the different clinical manifestations of long COVID, leading to multiple types of disease presentations.
The major mechanisms that may drive long COVID, and how they may interact. Potential cellular mechanisms may involve: T-cells (interferon-gamma, IF-beta, IF-delta1 secretion, activation of CD8+, T-cell exhaustion); B-cells (dysregulation of SARS-CoV-2-specific memory B cells); haematopoietic progenitors (epigenetic reprogramming); activated CD38 + HLA-DR+ myeloid cells; plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) expressing CD86 and CD38; mast cell activation; circulating endothelial cells; neutrophils (release of autoantigens, NETs); activated monocytes; protracted immunosuppression by latent virus reactivation. Molecular mechanisms may involve: mitochondrial dysfunction; senescence; telomere shortening of blood cells; oxidative stress. Genetic mechanisms may involve: X-chromosome-associated ACE-2 receptor; genes coding Type I interferon immunity; ABO blood group genetic locus; epigenetic mechanisms. Vascular and endothelial mechanisms may involve: endotheliopathy; deterioration of capillary integrity (capillary flow disturbance, heterogeneity of capillary transit time); vasculitis; coagulopathies or thrombosis. Persistence of viral particles may contribute to the mechanism, either in myocardial tissue or hidden reservoirs in other organs.

Cellular response
Table 7 summarizes the cellular dysregulation that occur in long-COVID syndrome. Long-COVID manifestations involve autoimmune responses, with self-damaging effector responses by autoreactive T cells and autoantibodies to self-antigens produced by plasma cells. Several research groups investigated the B- and T-cell populations in different time intervals after infection onset. Files et al. found increased expression of Programmed Cell Death protein (PD1) in convalescent individuals lasting up to 45 days, while Yao et al. detected SARS-CoV-2-specific memory B cells and interferon-γ-secreting T cells in 70% of patients up to 9 months. Lack of naïve T- and B-cells expressing CD127 and TIM-3, as well as an increase in activated myeloid cells, and plasmacytoid dendritic cells were reported. Interestingly, expression of several B- and T-cell surface molecules persisted in longitudinal samples, suggesting a role for prolonged cellular dysregulation in long-COVID patients. New onset autoantibodies appear in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 and may continue following infection, but their contribution to long COVID remains to be determined.
Proposed pathomechanisms of long-COVID syndrome
Pathomechanism	Comments and detection time post-infection	References	 	Cellular pathomechanism			 	Dysregulation of SARS-CoV-2-specific memory B cells	9 months		 	Interferon-γ-secreting T cells, elevated INF-beta, INF-delta1	9 months		 	CD8+ T-cell activation expressing PD-1 and TIM3	45 days, 8 months		 	Lack of B and T cells expressing CD127 and TIM-3	8 months		 	T-cell exhaustion with reduced cytokine production	Starts during acute infection		 	Epigenetic reprogramming of haematopoietic progenitors	8 months		 	Elevated level of activated CD38 + HLA-DR+ myeloid cells	8 months		 	Activated CD14 + CD16 + monocytes	8 months		 	Persistent activation of cardiac-resident fibroblasts	n.r.		 	Higher number of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) expressing CD86 and CD38	8 months		 	Mast cell activation	n.r.		 	Increased levels of circulating endothelial cells (CD45–/CD31+/CD133–/DNA+)	27–46 days		 	Elevation of neutrophils to lymphocytes ratio (NLR)	n.r.		 	Development of NET	n.r.		 	Release of autoantigens by neutrophils	n.r.		 	Persistent antibodies	9 months		 	Protracted immunosuppression (PICS) by latent virus reactivation			 	Molecular pathomechanisms			 	Mitochondrial dysfunction	n.r.		 	Oxidative stress	n.r.		 	Telomere shortening of blood cells	n.r.		 	Epigenetic alterations	n.r.		 	Overexpression of SASP factors	n.r.
IFN, interferon; PD, programmed death; TIM-3, soluble T-cell immuno-globulin mucin Domain 3; NET, neutrophil extracellular trap; SASP, senescence-associated secretory phenotype; n.r., not reported.
The sequelae of other viral infections (e.g. influenza, parvo-virus B19, Epstein-Barr, Dengue, or Ebola) are usually shorter and present fewer and less severe symptoms over time. Nevertheless, the clinical similarities with long COVID suggest autoimmune reactive inflammation associated with the release of autoantigens by activated or dying neutrophils, elevation of neutrophils to lymphocytes ratio and neutrophil extracellular traps, which lead to the conversion of acute SARS-CoV-2 infection to long COVID.
SARS-CoV-2 infection activates mast cells. Since acquired mast cell clonality is characterized by aggravation of inflammation and generalized allergy, causing chronic multiorgan manifestation and typically fatigue syndrome, activation of mast cells has been proposed as one of the possible causes of long-COVID syndrome. However, since systemic mastocytosis is difficult to diagnose from blood samples, the significance of this hypothesis is weak, and remains to be confirmed.
An additional immune mechanism contributing to long COVID could involve epigenetic reprogramming of haematopoietic progenitors, which alters the phenotype of blood cells. A recent, real-time deformability cytometry analysis of blood samples from a small number of patients (17 acute COVID-19 patients, 14 recovered and 20 healthy volunteers), showed that COVID-19 infection caused significant changes in the size and stiffness of red blood cells and leucocytes.
Scientific implication: The hypothesis that immune dysregulation is involved in the cardiovascular manifestation of long COVID is currently highly speculative, but may provide a possible explanation for the multiorgan character of the long-COVID syndrome, and justifies further investigation.

Molecular pathomechanisms and cellular senescence
The majority of long-COVID patients suffers from CFS, a disease entity very similar to ME/CFS. ME/CFS has been suggested to be related to mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress, and the same pathomechanism has therefore been suggested for fatigue in long COVID (Table 7).
The clear vulnerability of most elderly patients to the devastating impact of SARS-CoV-2 and long COVID indicates a possible effect of infection on accelerated senescence of the immune system. It is possible that the viral infection enhances the diffuse proinflammatory status in organs susceptible to ageing. Most cardiomyocytes are terminally differentiated and, with ageing, release inflammatory cytokines related to the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP), causing various cardiac dysfunctions. A correlation has been observed between the degree of ‘biological’ ageing, as determined by telomere length, and severity of acute COVID-19. Even more alarming is evidence that prior infection with SARS-CoV-2 may accelerate the epigenetic ‘clock’ by increasing methylation at age-sensitive DNA CpG islands and by shortening telomeres, since significant telomere shortening in blood cells and an acceleration of biological ageing (5 years above normality) have been reported in COVID-19 survivors, suggesting that COVID-19-induced epigenetic alterations could contribute to long-COVID symptoms.
Although the molecular mechanisms underlying this effect are far from being elucidated, it is possible that interaction of the viral S-protein with SARS-CoV-2 cellular receptors induces replicative senescence and overexpression of SASP factors, with long-lasting consequences on cardiomyocyte function or persistent activation of cardiac-resident fibroblasts. In this respect, the use of senolytic drugs to eliminate senescent cells from tissues could help to limit the consequences of accelerated tissue senescence in long COVID, as recently demonstrated in animal models of SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, this research remains at an early stage and current senolytics are unlikely candidates as they are generally untested clinically and present some unwanted toxicity.
Scientific implication: The molecular pathomechanisms of the cardiovascular manifestations of long COVID are largely unexplored, due to the lack of respective cell culture or animal models.

Persistence of viral particles and the role of hidden reservoirs
Although the SARS-CoV-2 virus is typically cleared within the first weeks of infection, viral particles can persist in some patients, leading to sustained T- and B-cell activation and potentially causing long COVID. Viral persistence might be facilitated by immunosuppressive treatment, or by residence within immune-privileged sites or hidden reservoirs such as the intestines. Another possibility is immune exhaustion following prolonged antigen stimulation. The presence of a viral superantigen within SARS-CoV-2 has also been suggested, which could overstimulate the immune response thereby inducing a paradoxical, negative immunological feedback loop. In some patients, reactivation of latent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) or cytomegalovirus infection occurs during acute COVID-19. EBV reactivation anticipates some symptoms of long COVID, despite little viral mRNA remaining in the blood. Nevertheless this suggests antivirals during the acute phase may lessen some long-COVID effects, at least in certain patients.
The extent to which cells of the myocardium can be virally infected during the acute phase is debated. There is some evidence for infection of cardiomyocytes in cardiac biopsies, but differentiating true myocyte infection from stromal, vascular, or inflammatory cell infection precludes any definite conclusions. Furthermore, whether any viral particles isolated would be replication competent is not clear. However, when assessed according to established criteria, there is little evidence for acute or persistent lymphocytic myocarditis even amongst patients with persistent cardiac symptoms after a COVID-19 infection. Since SARS-CoV-2 infects alveolar macrophages, and increased numbers of macrophages have been detected in hearts of patients deceased with COVID-19, another possibility is that there is a unique type of myocarditis associated with diffusely infiltrative cells of monocytes/macrophage lineage.
Scientific implication: Based on current evidence it is unlikely that viral persistence in myocardium contributes to post-acute COVID-19 cardiovascular sequelae. However, the long-term consequences of the viral infected myocardium should be further evaluated.

Persistence of vascular and endothelial dysfunction and pro-thrombotic complications
The endothelium has been proposed to underly the pathology behind the clinical presentation in severe COVID-19 and contribute to long-term cardiovascular complications. (Table 8). Importantly, several pathologic processes persist even once SARS-CoV-2 is no longer detectable. These processes include microthrombosis, deterioration of capillary integrity, capillary flow disturbance, and heterogeneity of capillary transit time with reduced oxygen extraction. The end result is microvascular and alveolar gas exchange malfunction, further leading to hypoxaemia of diverse organs including heart, brain, lung, and kidney, and sequelae of the disease.
Vascular and endothelial dysfunction
Comments and detection time post-infection	References	 	Endothelial dysfunction			 	Endotheliopathy	Together with coagulopathy parameters, endothelial cell activation occurs mostly in hospitalized patients; 68 days to 4 months		 	Reduced oxygen extraction	In spite of normal resting lung function and imaging		 	Vascular dysfunction			 	Capillary flow disturbance, heterogeneity of capillary transit time, deterioration of capillary integrity	Blood-flow limiting conditions, reduced oxygen exchange; 4 months		 	Vasculitis	In several organs		 	Coagulopathies, thrombosis			 	Coagulopathy	With elevated D-dimer, mostly in hospitalized patients; 68–80 days		 	Microthrombosis	In several organs; 80 days		 	Activation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs)	Circulating markers were elevated in acute COVID but returned to baseline by 4 months
Endotheliopathy and coagulation markers remain elevated in a significant proportion of convalescent patients, suggesting that the infection creates a chronic coagulopathy, endotheliitis, or microangiopathy with microthrombosis which may drive myocardial dysfunction, although so far, the effect on heart function appears to be relatively minimal. This condition should be appropriately monitored in the future by studies in larger patient cohorts, taking advantage of advanced imaging systems such as cMRI.
Clinical implication: Micro- and macro-vessel changes are associated with endothelial dysfunction, coagulopathy, and microthrombi, and are likely to be major factors in the persistence of cardiovascular manifestations of long-COVID syndrome.

Genetic underpinnings of long COVID
Women tend to be at higher risk for long COVID, despite the mortality rate being higher for men during the acute phase. Genetic variants were implicated in shaping the immune response in several viral diseases, and preclinical data indicate that ACE2 expression levels are sex dependent. Despite the involvement of ACE2 in SARS-CoV-2–host cell interaction, no association between serum ACE activity and COVID-19 disease severity has been found.
Whole-exome and -genome sequencing of 659 patients with life-threatening COVID-19 pneumonia found genetic variants predicted to be loss-of-function at 13 loci previously associated with other life-threatening viral illness (e.g. influenza pneumonia). Genetic variants associated with poor clinical outcomes in acute COVID-19 patients occurred in genes participating in Type I IFN immunity, suggesting that impaired Type I IFN production might underlie life-threatening COVID-19 pneumonia. Considering that inflammation and immunological alterations have been indicated as potential mechanisms of the cardiovascular sequelae of long COVID, the results of these genetic studies might implicate IFN family members as critical molecules involved in the persistent myocardial inflammatory response after SARS-CoV-2 infection. Despite this, recent data evaluating circulating levels of IFN and COVID-19 severity have concluded that IFNs levels do not reflect the clinical status of COVID-19 patients and are not recommended as a marker of disease severity.
A genome-wide association study involving 1980 patients with COVID-19-induced respiratory failure, found a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at ABO blood group genetic locus to be associated with COVID-19 severity. Despite the association between ABO blood groups and long-term cardiovascular outcomes and the presence of cardiometabolic alterations observed in long-term SARS-CoV-1 survivors, the role of ABO locus genetic variants in the determinism of long-term cardiovascular alterations after SARS-CoV-(1/2) infection is still unknown. However, considering that the ABO locus has been associated with genetic susceptibility for many different diseases (e.g. cancer, cardiovascular diseases, infections, haematologic disorders etc.), it would be hard to pin-point any specific mechanisms involving ABO groups and long-COVID sequalae.
Recently, international, large scale, genetic consortia such as the COVID Human Genetic Effort have been formed, with the aim of defining the genetic determinants of long COVID and its cardiovascular features.
Clinical implication: Considering the variability of presentations and the differences in individual susceptibility to long COVID, genetic research in this field may hold promise. Genetic research in COVID-19, including GWAS studies in COVID-19 and long-COVID populations, focused on host genetic variants associated with specific sub-phenotypes, should be pursued in order to identify mechanistic targets for therapeutic intervention.

Current and future strategies for investigating the mechanism of long COVID
Several animal models expressing human ACE2 have been developed to permit investigation of the acute effects on SARS-CoV-2 infection. This approach was used to demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2-induced senescence, a putative mechanism of long COVID as discussed above, could be eliminated using senolytics in hamster and mouse models of acute COVID-19. Cardiomyocytes derived from iPSC (iCM) have been used to investigate acute infection by SARS-CoV-2, although important caveats arise regarding their maturity. 3D cellular models such as human cardiospheres and engineered cardiac tissue may be better models of the myocardium, even if their utility in investigating long COVID remains to be established. The use of mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 provides the opportunity to study both acute and long-term effects of infection.

Outstanding questions related to long COVID
As can be seen from the discussion above, many aspects about the causes and cardiovascular consequences of long COVID remain to be understood. Some of the key immediate questions are:
Is long COVID a continuation of the active COVID-19 disease in a milder form, or a new multiorgan disease based on the virus-induced morphological and functional changes?
To what extent is long COVID different from the sequelae of infection with other post-respiratory viruses?
What are the long-term (>1 year) cardiovascular consequences of long COVID?
What are the long-term consequences of the subclinical findings, such as haemodynamic non-significant perimyocarditis or pericardial effusion detected after COVID-19 infection?
What are the long-term consequences of the haemodynamic compromise of the patients with POTS or autonomic dysfunction or COVID-induced hypertension?
What are the long-term consequences of the viral load of cardiomyocytes inducing subclinical or clinical myocarditis?
What are the long-term consequences of the activated EBV viremia during active infection; regarding chronic active infection or autoimmune diseases or increased incidence of malignancies?
Does COVID-19 induce dyslipidaemia similar to the previous MERS coronavirus variants, and will it lead to accelerated atherosclerosis processes?
How can long COVID be prevented?
Is there any specific biomarker with high diagnostic value for cardiovascular effects of long COVID?

Approaches for further development of diagnostic procedures and therapeutic options for cardiovascular long-COVID manifestations

Diagnostic procedure
The ESC Council for Cardiology Practice has published a position paper on the evaluation and management of long-COVID patients with new cardiovascular symptoms. Management guidelines apply to people with both suspected or confirmed prior acute COVID-19, irrespective of whether they had a positive or negative SARS-CoV-2 PCR test, but proven infection by the presence of nucleocapsid antibody. The cardiovascular symptoms of long COVID are difficult to distinguish from the cardiac fatigue syndrome caused by other organ diseases, such as lung fibrosis, chronic thromboembolic, or gastroenteric or peripheral muscle or joint diseases.
Here, we focus on the general diagnostics of cardiovascular symptoms and findings, that have been suggested for long-COVID patients at primary, secondary, and tertiary levels, as discussed in more detail in specific guidelines.

Cardiovascular diagnostics that are suggested for long-COVID patients
Routine measurements of troponin T or I in all COVID patients shortly after the first negative PCR test. Hospitalized patients with elevated troponin during acute COVID-19 infection have a substantial higher mortality than patients without troponin elevation. Since troponin is not measured in non-hospitalized patients with no, mild, or moderate symptoms, the subclinical cardiac complications are severely underestimated. However, this option is still of clinical relevance.
Routine laboratory measurements of inflammatory (CRP), coagulation (D-dimer), and organ (kidney, musculoskeletal, rheumatic, haematologic) disease parameter, ECG, and chest X-ray for all long-COVID patients.
Cardiology screening of symptomatic patients with previous heart disease or hospitalized during COVID-19 infection 1 month after the infection with ECG, laboratory investigations, echocardiography, Holter-ECG, chest X-ray, and spirometry/spiroergometry.
Cardiology screening of asymptomatic patients with previous heart disease 3 month after COVID infection with ECG, laboratory investigations, echocardiography. Further specific investigations (e.g. stress testing, Holter-ECG) should be considered if necessary.
Cardiovascular screening of symptomatic, non-hospitalized long-COVID patients without history of pre-existing cardiovascular disease with mild–moderate COVID disease at the primary care with ECG and laboratory investigation. Option to admit the patients to (i) secondary care for echocardiography, Holter-ECG, chest X-ray and spirometry or spiroergometry or (ii) specific long-COVID outpatient clinics.
Cardiac MRI for athletes before starting the active sport.
Cardiovascular rehabilitation to (i) all COVID-19-hospitalized patients; (ii) all patients with the history of cardiovascular diseases; (iii) all long-COVID patients with cardiovascular symptoms of any origin.
Cardiac MRI for all patients with new onset of cardiovascular disease developed after COVID-19 infection.
Clinical implication: Targeted cardiovascular investigations should be performed in long-COVID patients with a history of cardiac or cardiovascular diseases or who were hospitalized during the acute infection, with an individualized diagnostic plan. Symptom-oriented cardiovascular diagnostic screening procedures are useful for patients with a mild or moderate disease course to verify or exclude SARS-CoV-2-induced long-lasting organ disorders.

Therapeutic options for long-COVID patients with cardiovascular symptoms

Symptomatic treatment
To date, no pharmaceutical agents have been shown to ameliorate all symptoms, or improve imaging and biomarker abnormalities caused by long COVID. In most cases, the therapy of cardiac manifestations is limited to symptomatic treatment, for example anti-vasospastic drugs in patients with atypical angina or beta-blockers for palpitations. Medicinal treatment strategies for POTS include alpha-1 agonists, steroids, compression garments, fluid, and salt intake, whereas those for CFS include Toll-like receptor-3 agonists, analgesics, and mitochondrial modulators including Coenzyme Q10. Therapy options for mast cell activation syndromes include anti-histamines, mast cell stabilators, or leucotriene antagonist. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may be used to manage specific symptoms such as fever and pain.

Dietary supplements or other non-specific treatments
Several dietary supplements with putative antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory, cardio- or neuroprotective effects have been recommended, such as high-dose Vitamin C or different Vitamin complexes, iron, selenium, zinc, etc., beside antihistamines, H2-receptor blockers, or low-dose beta-blockers. Several patients report some symptom improvement, with individual reactions to these substances. Anecdotical case reports have been published on hyperbaric oxygen therapy or Aptamer BC007 though without a strong scientific basis.
There are currently more than 300 interventional studies of ‘long COVID’ or ‘post COVID’ registered on clinicaltrials.gov. The NIH has recently provided $470 million to fund the ‘Researching COVID to Enhance Recovery (RECOVER) Initiative’ (https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-builds-large-nationwide-study-population-tens-thousands-support-research-long-term-effects-covid-19).
Clinical implication: There is currently no evidence-based data for therapy of long COVID, and a lack of randomized clinical trials. Until the precise cause of long COVID and its cardiovascular manifestations become clear, it is difficult to predict which interventions are likely to be effective. However, given the increasingly intense investigation in this area, the situation is likely to improve.

Rehabilitation programmes
A personalized multi-disciplinary rehabilitation approach involving breathing, mobilization, ‘paced’ training (pacing), and psychological interventions have improved lung function and physical capacity in post-COVID patients. Therefore, light aerobic exercise paced according to individual capacity may be effective in treating post-COVID in some patients. However, certain long-COVID conditions such as POTS or CFS with post-exertional malaise do not always respond favourably to physical rehabilitation. It is important to emphasize the role of the patient in developing ‘coping’ strategies to fight against long-COVID. There are several e-cardiology programmes or on-line training available (e.g. brain training, fatigue-training, yoga, breathing-training), and also recommendations for home training for patients with POTS and wearable smartwatch measuring heart rate, blood pressure, ECG, and some other physiological parameters. It is important that patients do regular check-ups and maintain their cardiovascular health.
Clinical implication: Individual rehabilitation programmes including ‘pacing’ and ‘coping’, as well as on-line training programmes are important therapeutic strategies for long-COVID patients.

Vaccination
The Office for National Statistics UK study published a 41% decrease in self-reported long-COVID symptoms if the vaccine was applied at least 2 weeks before the infection in more than 1 million infected patients. Two doses of vaccination before infection with SARS-CoV-2 was also associated with substantial decrease in PASC in a smaller Israel study published in pre-print. Vaccination was associated with improved symptoms in 56.7% of patients in a large (n = 900 patients) cohort but also in small case series of 163 patients with long COVID even if some patients reported unchanged symptoms.
Clinical implication: Vaccination before COVID-19 infection significantly prevents the occurrence of long COVID after infection, but also reduces long-COVID symptoms if the patient was previously infected. An undoubted advantage of vaccination is the decrease in new infection and alleviation of the disease course of new infections, thereby reducing the incidence and severity of long COVID.

Conclusion
Emerging evidence points to increasing numbers of patients suffering from long COVID in the future. Many patients with severe COVID-19 illness will exhibit cardiac symptoms and some will show evidence of possible myocarditis. While in some cases these symptoms are likely to revert over time, long-term prognoses are difficult to estimate, and there may be instances where damage to the cardiovascular system is long-lasting. Current therapeutic options for long COVID are limited to symptom-management, rehabilitation programmes, and non-specific dietary interventions. Given the number of potential long-COVID patients, and the likelihood that SARS-CoV-2 and its variants becoming endemic, it is imperative that we gain a better understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms of long COVID. Future investigative and interventional studies will necessitate more accurate and specific diagnosis of long COVID in accordance with established practise. It will be important to determine the precise similarities and differences with other types of post-viral syndromes.

Funding
This work was supported by: University College London Hospitals Biomedical Research Centre to F.W.A. National Institutes of Health, Tufts University COVID19 seed funding (NIH-HL-144477) to P.A. Medizinisch-Wissenschaftlichen Fonds des Bürgermeisters der Bundeshauptstadt Wien, Project Nr: 21176, MUW AP21176BGM and KP21176BGM and Austrian Science Fund (FWF) Project Nr: KLI 1064-B to MG. The British Heart Foundation (PG/19/51/34493 and PG/16/85/32471) to S.M.D. Regione Lombardia (POR FESR 2014-2020-LINEA 2A COVID-grant no. 1850333) and CARDIO-COV project to M.P. Incyte s.r.l. and funds from Ministero dell’Istruzione, dell’Università e della Ricerca (549901_2020_Madonna:Ateneo) to R.M. Swiss Heart Foundation and Swiss National Science Foundation (310030_175546) to G.G.C., Alfred and Annemarie von Sick Grants for Translational and Clinical Research Cardiology and Oncology to G.G.C. H.H. Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani Foundation Assistant Professorship at the Faculty of Medicine, University of Zurich to G.G.C. The European Research Council [Project EVICARE (No. 725229)]to J.P.G.S. The National Research, Development and Innovation Office of Hungary (Research Excellence Program TKP within the framework of the Therapeutic Development thematic programme of the Semmelweis University; National Heart Laboratory; and 2020-1.1.6-JÖVŐ-2021-00013—investment into the future) to P.F., and the EU Horizon 2020 project COVIRNA (101016072) to P.F. P.F. is a vice chair of the COST Cardioprotection action (CA16225) and an MC member of the COST CardioRNA project (CA17129). DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research) JRG to G.G.S. Dutch Cardiovascular Alliance (DCVA) awarded to the Phaedra consortium as well as the Impulse Grant 2018 awarded to the Phaedra IMPACT consortium (2012–08, 2014–11) to P.d.C.M. and by a Dutch Heart Foundation grant (NHS2015T066) to P.d.C.M. DHF and DZKH (DnAFix project 2020B003).

Data availability
No new data were generated or analysed in support of this article.

References
The leading causes of death in the US for 2020
Tracking excess mortality across countries during the COVID-19 pandemic with the world mortality dataset
Attributes and predictors of long COVID
Long COVID in a prospective cohort of home-isolated patients
Historical insight into infections and disorders associated with neurological and psychiatric sequelae similar to long COVID
Taking pandemic sequelae seriously: from the Russian influenza to COVID-19 long-haulers
6-Month neurological and psychiatric outcomes in 236 379 survivors of COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study using electronic health records
6-Month consequences of COVID-19 in patients discharged from hospital: a cohort study
Persistent COVID-19 symptoms are highly prevalent 6 months after hospitalization: results from a large prospective cohort
Incidence, co-occurrence, and evolution of long-COVID features: a 6-month retrospective cohort study of 273,618 survivors of COVID-19
‘Long-COVID': a cross-sectional study of persisting symptoms, biomarker and imaging abnormalities following hospitalisation for COVID-19
Clinical outcomes among patients with 1-year survival following intensive care unit treatment for COVID-19
SARS-CoV-2 vaccines and the growing threat of viral variants
COVID-19 vaccine—long term immune decline and breakthrough infections
Long-term cardiovascular outcomes of COVID-19
Cardiac involvement in the long-term implications of COVID-19
Symptom duration and risk factors for delayed return to usual health among outpatients with COVID-19 in a multistate health care systems network—United States, March–June 2020
Management of post-acute COVID-19 in primary care
Multidisciplinary collaborative consensus guidance statement on the assessment and treatment of fatigue in postacute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC) patients
Assessment and characterisation of post-COVID-19 manifestations
Post-COVID syndrome: a single-center questionnaire study on 1007 participants recovered from COVID-19
Risk predictors and symptom features of long COVID within a broad primary care patient population including both tested and untested patients
Patterns of myocardial injury in recovered troponin-positive COVID-19 patients assessed by cardiovascular magnetic resonance
Emerging potential mechanisms and predispositions to the neurological manifestations of COVID-19
COVID-19: middle aged women face greater risk of debilitating long term symptoms
Long COVID-mechanisms, risk factors, and management
Post-COVID syndrome in non-hospitalised patients with COVID-19: a longitudinal prospective cohort study
Immunoglobulin signature predicts risk of post-acute COVID-19 syndrome
Long COVID-19: a primer for cardiovascular health professionals, on behalf of the CCS rapid response team
Long COVID-19: proposed primary care clinical guidelines for diagnosis and disease management
Cardio-pulmonary sequelae in recovered COVID-19 patients: considerations for primary care
Late phase of COVID-19 pandemic in general cardiology. A position paper of the ESC council for cardiology practice
Long-COVID diagnosis: from diagnostic to advanced AI-driven models
What should a family physician know about nutrition and physical exercise rehabilitation’ advices to communicate to ‘long-term COVID-19’ patients?
Stacking ensemble-based intelligent machine learning model for predicting post-COVID-19 complications
Prevalence of long COVID symptoms in Bangladesh: a prospective inception cohort study of COVID-19 survivors
Multi-disciplinary collaborative consensus guidance statement on the assessment and treatment of cognitive symptoms in patients with post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC)
Cardiology practice and training post-COVID-19: achieving “normalcy” after disruption
Global evaluation of echocardiography in patients with COVID-19
Cardiovascular disease and COVID-19: a consensus paper from the ESC working group on coronary pathophysiology & microcirculation, ESC working group on thrombosis and the association for acute CardioVascular care (ACVC), in collaboration with the European heart rhythm association (EHRA)
Long COVID: long-term effects?
Long-term outcomes of patients with coronavirus disease 2019 at one year after hospital discharge
Cardiorespiratory abnormalities in patients recovering from COVID-19
A review of persistent post-COVID syndrome (PPCS)
Heart rate variability and cardiac autonomic functions in post-COVID period
Cardiac sequelae after coronavirus disease 2019 recovery: a systematic review
Delayed catastrophic thrombotic events in young and asymptomatic post COVID-19 patients
Identifying patients at risk of post-discharge complications related to COVID-19 infection
Relationship between myocardial injury during index hospitalization for SARS-CoV-2 infection and longer-term outcomes
COVID-19 and cardiovascular complications—preliminary results of the LATE-COVID study
SARS-CoV-2 cardiac involvement in young competitive athletes
Autonomic dysfunction in ‘long COVID': rationale, physiology and management strategies
Persisting adverse ventricular remodeling in COVID-19 survivors: a longitudinal echocardiographic study
Short-term cardiac outcome in survivors of COVID-19: a systematic study after hospital discharge
Recovery of cardiac function following COVID-19—ECHOVID-19: a prospective longitudinal cohort study
Associations between the severity of the post-acute COVID-19 syndrome and echocardiographic abnormalities in previously healthy outpatients following infection with SARS-CoV-2
Suspected subclinical myocarditis detected by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging late post COVID-19 recovery
Cardiac involvement in patients recovered from COVID-2019 identified using magnetic resonance imaging
Outcomes of cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging in patients recently recovered from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Cardiac magnetic resonance in recovering COVID-19 patients. Feature tracking and mapping analysis to detect persistent myocardial involvement
Cardiac MRI in patients with prolonged cardiorespiratory symptoms after mild to moderate COVID-19 infection
Cardiac involvement in coronavirus disease 2019 assessed by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging: a meta-analysis
What we (don't) know about myocardial injury after COVID-19
Prospective case–control study of cardiovascular abnormalities 6 months following mild COVID-19 in healthcare workers
Imaging of cardiac infections: a comprehensive review and investigation flowchart for diagnostic workup
Imaging of inflammation in unexplained cardiomyopathy
COVID-19 related multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C): role of (18)F-FDG PET/CT to assess myocardial involvement
Vasculitis changes in COVID-19 survivors with persistent symptoms: an [(18)F]FDG-PET/CT study
Long COVID hallmarks on [18F]FDG-PET/CT: a case–control study
Laboratory and imaging evaluation of cardiac involvement in patients with post-acute COVID-19
Acute kidney injury incidence, recovery, and long-term kidney outcomes among hospitalized patients with COVID-19 and influenza
Long COVID and kidney disease
High rate of renal recovery in survivors of COVID-19 associated acute renal failure requiring renal replacement therapy
Evolution of antibody immunity to SARS-CoV-2
Post-acute effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection in individuals not requiring hospital admission: a Danish population-based cohort study
What's going on following acute COVID-19? Clinical characteristics of patients in an out-patient rehabilitation program
Chilblain-like acral lesions in long COVID-19: management and implications for understanding microangiopathy
Assessment of thirty-day readmission rate, timing, causes and predictors after hospitalization with COVID-19
Post-COVID syndrome in individuals admitted to hospital with COVID-19: retrospective cohort study
Delayed acute myocarditis and COVID-19-related multisystem inflammatory syndrome
Late-onset COVID-19-related multi-system inflammatory syndrome in a middle-aged man
COVID-19 and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children and adolescents
Trends in geographic and temporal distribution of US children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome during the COVID-19 pandemic
Clinical characteristics of 58 children with a pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS-CoV-2
The immune landscape of SARS-CoV-2-associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) from acute disease to recovery
What is the recovery rate and risk of long-term consequences following a diagnosis of COVID-19? A harmonised, global longitudinal observational study protocol
Long-term health sequelae and quality of life at least 6 months after infection with SARS-CoV-2: design and rationale of the COVIDOM-study as part of the NAPKON population-based cohort platform (POP)
Fatigue and cognitive impairment in post-COVID-19 syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis
A dynamic COVID-19 immune signature includes associations with poor prognosis
Long COVID or post-COVID-19 syndrome: putative pathophysiology, risk factors, and treatments
More than 50 long-term effects of COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Persistent fatigue following SARS-CoV-2 infection is common and independent of severity of initial infection
Post-acute COVID-19 syndrome. Incidence and risk factors: a Mediterranean cohort study
Prolonged elevation of D-dimer levels in convalescent COVID-19 patients is independent of the acute phase response
Long-term microstructure and cerebral blood flow changes in patients recovered from COVID-19 without neurological manifestations
Altered vascular endothelium-dependent responsiveness in frail elderly patients recovering from COVID-19 pneumonia: preliminary evidence
Serum metabolic profile in patients with long-COVID (PASC) syndrome: clinical implications
Clinical, virological and imaging profile in patients with prolonged forms of COVID-19: a cross-sectional study
Surviving COVID-19 in Bergamo province: a post-acute outpatient re-evaluation
Medium-term effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection on multiple vital organs, exercise capacity, cognition, quality of life and mental health, post-hospital discharge
Persisting alterations of iron homeostasis in COVID-19 are associated with non-resolving lung pathologies and poor patients’ performance: a prospective observational cohort study
Immunological dysfunction persists for 8 months following initial mild-to-moderate SARS-CoV-2 infection
The long tail of COVID-19’—the detection of a prolonged inflammatory response after a SARS-CoV-2 infection in asymptomatic and mildly affected patients
Immune-based prediction of COVID-19 severity and chronicity decoded using machine learning
Persistent endotheliopathy in the pathogenesis of long COVID syndrome
Evidence of structural protein damage and membrane lipid remodeling in red blood cells from COVID-19 patients
ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction in post-COVID-19 patients: a case series
Follow-up study of the pulmonary function and related physiological characteristics of COVID-19 survivors three months after recovery
Incomplete systemic recovery and metabolic phenoreversion in post-acute-phase nonhospitalized COVID-19 patients: implications for assessment of post-acute COVID-19 syndrome
Serum nitrite and nitrate: a potential biomarker for post-COVID-19 complications?
Circulating cardiovascular microRNAs in critically ill COVID-19 patients
A virus-derived microRNA-like small RNA serves as a serum biomarker to prioritize the COVID-19 patients at high risk of developing severe disease
Cardiovascular RNA markers and artificial intelligence may improve COVID-19 outcome: a position paper from the EU-CardioRNA COST action CA17129
Molecular basis of cardiac and vascular injuries associated with COVID-19
Duration of post-COVID-19 symptoms is associated with sustained SARS-CoV-2-specific immune responses
Persistence of antibody and cellular immune responses in coronavirus disease 2019 patients over nine months after infection
New-onset IgG autoantibodies in hospitalized patients with COVID-19
Establishing the prevalence of common tissue-specific autoantibodies following severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 infection
Cardiovascular consequences of viral infections: from COVID to other viral diseases
How NETosis could drive “post-COVID-19 syndrome” among survivors
Circulating markers of neutrophil extracellular traps are of prognostic value in patients with COVID-19
COVID-19 hyperinflammation and post-COVID-19 illness may be rooted in mast cell activation syndrome
Physical phenotype of blood cells is altered in COVID-19
Role of mitochondria, oxidative stress and the response to antioxidants in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: a possible approach to SARS-CoV-2 ‘long-haulers’?
Marked T cell activation, senescence, exhaustion and skewing towards TH17 in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia
Cellular senescence as a potential mediator of COVID-19 severity in the elderly
From causes of aging to death from COVID-19
Happily (n)ever after: aging in the context of oxidative stress, proteostasis loss and cellular senescence
Short telomeres increase the risk of severe COVID-19
Shorter telomere lengths in patients with severe COVID-19 disease
DNA methylation-based biomarkers and the epigenetic clock theory of ageing
Evidence for biological age acceleration and telomere shortening in COVID-19 survivors
A single-cell RNA expression map of human coronavirus entry factors
Age-dependent effects of the recombinant spike protein/SARS-CoV-2 on the M-CSF- and IL-34-differentiated macrophages in vitro
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein induces paracrine senescence and leukocyte adhesion in endothelial cells
Human cardiosphere-derived stromal cells exposed to SARS-CoV-2 evolve into hyper-inflammatory/pro-fibrotic phenotype and produce infective viral particles depending on the levels of ACE2 receptor expression
Senolytics reduce coronavirus-related mortality in old mice
Virus-induced senescence is a driver and therapeutic target in COVID-19
Association of cardiac infection with SARS-CoV-2 in confirmed COVID-19 autopsy cases
Gastrointestinal symptoms and fecal shedding of SARS-CoV-2 RNA suggest prolonged gastrointestinal infection
Post-acute COVID-19 is characterized by gut viral antigen persistence in inflammatory bowel diseases
A role for T-cell exhaustion in long COVID-19 and severe outcomes for several categories of COVID-19 patients
Superantigenic character of an insert unique to SARS-CoV-2 spike supported by skewed TCR repertoire in patients with hyperinflammation
Multiple early factors anticipate post-acute COVID-19 sequelae
COVID-19-related cardiac complications from clinical evidences to basic mechanisms: opinion paper of the ESC working group on cellular biology of the heart
SARS-CoV-2 infects human engineered heart tissues and models COVID-19 myocarditis
SARS-CoV-2 infects and induces cytotoxic effects in human cardiomyocytes
Endothelium infection and dysregulation by SARS-CoV-2: evidence and caveats in COVID-19
COVID-19 vs. classical myocarditis associated myocardial injury evaluated by cardiac magnetic resonance and endomyocardial biopsy
Circuits between infected macrophages and T cells in SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia
COVID-19 myocarditis: quantitative analysis of the inflammatory infiltrate and a proposed mechanism
Endothelial dysfunction in COVID-19: a position paper of the ESC working group for atherosclerosis and vascular biology, and the ESC council of basic cardiovascular science
Is the endothelium the missing link in the pathophysiology and treatment of COVID-19 complications?
Association of COVID-19 with impaired endothelial glycocalyx, vascular function and myocardial deformation 4 months after infection
SARS CoV-2 related microvascular damage and symptoms during and after COVID-19: consequences of capillary transit-time changes, tissue hypoxia and inflammation
Higher mortality of COVID-19 in males: sex differences in immune response and cardiovascular comorbidities
Depression pandemic and cardiovascular risk in the COVID-19 era and long COVID syndrome: gender makes a difference
Human genetics of life-threatening influenza pneumonitis
The assessment of serum ACE activity in COVID-19 and its association with clinical features and severity of the disease
Inborn errors of type I IFN immunity in patients with life-threatening COVID-19
Autoantibodies against type I IFNs in patients with life-threatening COVID-19
Post-acute COVID-19 syndrome
Circulating type I interferon levels and COVID-19 severity: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Genomewide association study of severe COVID-19 with respiratory failure
Genetically determined ABO blood group and its associations with health and disease
Altered lipid metabolism in recovered SARS patients twelve years after infection
Human ABO blood groups and their associations with different diseases
Scientists set out to connect the dots on long COVID
Genetic mechanisms of critical illness in COVID-19
Mapping the human genetic architecture of COVID-19
Identification of LZTFL1 as a candidate effector gene at a COVID-19 risk locus
Animal models of mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 pathology
A model of persistent post SARS-CoV-2 induced lung disease for target identification and testing of therapeutic strategies
Cardiovascular implications of fatal outcomes of patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Coronavirus fulminant myocarditis treated with glucocorticoid and human immunoglobulin
Types of myocardial injury and mid-term outcomes in patients with COVID-19
Feasibility of vitamin C in the treatment of post viral fatigue with focus on long COVID, based on a systematic review of IV vitamin C on fatigue
Selenium deficiency due to diet, pregnancy, severe illness, or COVID-19 – a preventable trigger for autoimmune disease
Hyperbaric oxygen treatment for long coronavirus disease-19: a case report
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy for the treatment of long COVID: early evaluation of a highly promising intervention
Aptamer BC 007—efficient binder of spreading-crucial SARS-CoV-2 proteins
Post-COVID-19 syndrome and the potential benefits of exercise
Post-COVID-19 rehabilitation: perception and experience of Austrian physiotherapists and physiotherapy students
General practitioners should provide the cardiorespiratory rehabilitation’ ‘minimum advice’ for long COVID-19 patients
Exercise training and cardiac rehabilitation in COVID-19 patients with cardiovascular complications: state of art
Association between vaccination status and reported incidence of post-acute COVID-19 symptoms in Israel: a cross-sectional study of patients tested between march 2020 and November 2021
Symptoms after COVID-19 vaccination in patients with persistent symptoms after acute infection: a case series
A clinical case definition of post-COVID-19 condition by a Delphi consensus
Association between SARS-CoV-2 RNAemia and postacute sequelae of COVID-19
Patient outcomes after hospitalisation with COVID-19 and implications for follow-up: results from a prospective UK cohort
Short-term outpatient follow-up of COVID-19 patients: a multidisciplinary approach
Persistent symptoms in patients after acute COVID-19
Follow-up of adults with noncritical COVID-19 two months after symptom onset
Clinical sequelae of COVID-19 survivors in Wuhan, China: a single-centre longitudinal study
Post-discharge persistent symptoms and health-related quality of life after hospitalization for COVID-19
Subclinical myocardial dysfunction in patients recovered from COVID-19 disease: correlation with exercise capacity
Long COVID: distinction between organ damage and deconditioning
Long COVID 19 syndrome: is it related to microcirculation and endothelial dysfunction? Insights from TUN-EndCOV study
Long-term cardiac sequelae in patients referred into a diagnostic post-COVID-19 pathway: the different impacts on the right and left ventricles
Persistent symptoms 3 months after a SARS-CoV-2 infection: the post-COVID-19 syndrome?
Symptoms and functional impairment assessed 8 months after mild COVID-19 among health care workers
Cardiac dysfunction and arrhythmias 3 months after hospitalization for COVID-19
Inappropriate sinus tachycardia in post-COVID-19 syndrome
Heart rate variability as a marker of cardiovascular dysautonomia in post-COVID-19 syndrome using artificial intelligence
Sixty-Day outcomes among patients hospitalized with COVID-19
Follow up of patients with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): pulmonary and extrapulmonary disease sequelae
Postdischarge symptoms and rehabilitation needs in survivors of COVID-19 infection: a cross-sectional evaluation
Patient symptoms and experience following COVID-19: results from a UK-wide survey
Long COVID in adults discharged from UK hospitals after COVID-19: a prospective, multicentre cohort study using the ISARIC WHO clinical characterisation protocol
Evaluation of 3-month follow-up of patients with postacute COVID-19 syndrome
Post-sequelae symptoms and comorbidities after COVID-19
Incidence and risk factors for persistent symptoms in adults previously hospitalized for COVID-19
Subclinical myocardial dysfunction in patients with persistent dyspnea one year after COVID-19
Importance of cardiopulmonary exercise testing amongst subjects recovering from COVID-19
Dysautonomia following COVID-19 is not associated with subjective limitations or symptoms but is associated with objective functional limitations
Autonomic dysfunction in post-COVID patients with and without neurological symptoms: a prospective multidomain observational study
Autonomic dysfunction following COVID-19 infection: an early experience
Post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 and cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction: what do we know?
Clinical and cardiac magnetic resonance findings in post-COVID patients referred for suspected myocarditis
Multiorgan impairment in low-risk individuals with post-COVID-19 syndrome: a prospective, community-based study
Diagnosing COVID-19 myocarditis in athletes using cMRI
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance evaluation of soldiers after recovery from symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection: a case–control study of cardiovascular post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (CV PASC)
Cardiac involvement in consecutive elite athletes recovered from COVID-19: a magnetic resonance study
Multi-organ assessment in mainly non-hospitalized individuals after SARS-CoV-2 infection: the Hamburg city health study COVID programme
Evolution of echocardiographic abnormalities identified in previously healthy individuals recovering from COVID-19
Symptom persistence despite improvement in cardiopulmonary health—insights from longitudinal CMR, CPET and lung function testing post-COVID-19
Frequent constriction-like echocardiographic findings in elite athletes following mild COVID-19: a propensity score-matched analysis
Persistent endothelial dysfunction in post-acute COVID-19 syndrome: a case–control study
In-vivo evidence of systemic endothelial vascular dysfunction in COVID-19
A cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging-based pilot study to assess coronary microvascular disease in COVID-19 patients
Cardiopulmonary recovery after COVID-19: an observational prospective multicentre trial
Clinical characteristics and the long-term post-recovery manifestations of the COVID-19 patients – a prospective multicenter cross-sectional study
More than 50 long-term effects of COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Convalescent COVID-19 patients are susceptible to endothelial dysfunction due to persistent immune activation
Plasma ACE2 activity is persistently elevated following SARS-CoV-2 infection: implications for COVID-19 pathogenesis and consequences
Functional exhaustion of antiviral lymphocytes in COVID-19 patients
Elevated exhaustion levels and reduced functional diversity of T cells in peripheral blood may predict severe progression in COVID-19 patients
Redox imbalance links COVID-19 and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Indications of persistent glycocalyx damage in convalescent COVID-19 patients: a prospective multicenter study and hypothesis
Impaired systemic oxygen extraction long after mild COVID-19: potential perioperative implications
Abnormality pattern of F-18 FDG PET whole body with functional MRI brain in post-acute COVID-19