Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases
The preference towards colourful patterns generates many aesthetic biases, including in Biology research, leading to taxonomic preferences and understudied groups, including many plant taxa. After reviewing the importance of aesthetics in Turing colour pattern studies and the relative nature of the sense of beauty in Biology, I present a method called SE (せ) that strongly reduces taxonomic preferences in colour pattern formation studies, together with allowing the exploration of colour patterns biodiversity and facilitating the discovery of new morphogenesis processes.

Introduction
In colour patterning, morphogenesis (the study of shape formation) and other studies related to biological shapes and colours, aesthetic biases might be stronger than in the majority of other domains of research, because visual aesthetics are a major source of taxonomic preferences (Adamo et al.,; Dixon,; Thompson & Birkhead,; Troudet et al.,).
Personally, and like many colleagues, I might have chosen this field of study notably according to aesthetical considerations, partly consciously and partly unconsciously. This is the first aesthetic bias I have faced in my young career, and then I try to be careful not to add others in my work. To do that, I try to centre my studies not on biological species but on shape themselves, and for every shape (for instance, repeated patterns, physical cracking patterns or checkerboard patterns etc.), I start the studies by the most exhaustive possible survey thanks to museum specimens, online databases and other sources of data. Then, I chose one or several species to zoom into the morphogenetic processes, with a preference of plant species, when functional experiments are required to completely decipher the mechanisms.
The objective of biodiversity exhaustivity in shape studies permits not only to strongly reduce taxonomic preferences but also to make new discoveries, including deciphering new morphogenetic processes and ways to produce a particular shape. Furthermore, it permits to compare very distant species and to pinpoint evolutionary convergences concerning phenotypes (for instance, colour patterns) and/or processes (i.e., mechanism). Although a consensus on precise common definitions is probably still pending in the morphogenetic field (one of the current works of a collaborative group of morphogeneticians, who started discussions at EuroEvoDevo), I define here a morphogenetic mechanism as follows: a morphogenetic mechanism is a category defined by the set of laws governing a system (whether of molecules, tissues or organs) that are necessary and sufficient to generate the shape of interest regardless of the physico-chemical nature and scale of its agents).
Here, after a quick survey of the importance of aesthetics in colour patterning studies and a discussion about the changing nature of our aesthetic perception of a species during a study, I will then present and outline the main principles of the method I try to apply, named SE (せ), and its benefits.

Colour patterning and the importance of aesthetics
By using Turing colour patterns as an example, we can trace the influence of aesthetics in the history of the field, in particular for the choice of model species.
In our knowledge, the Turing mechanism – initially based on reaction-diffusion and theorised by Alan Turing in 1952 (Turing,, republished in 1990) – has been deciphered or extensively explored for colour patterns in no more than three species or genera (the zebrafish(es) Danio, the flowers of Mimulus, and the domestic cat), and start to be explored in the lizards and snakes (Milinkovitch et al.,). First, Danio rerio, the zebrafish, which was extensively studied by Kondo et al., and by Pr. Christian Nüsslein-Volhard (for instance, Irion et al.,). In the 90s, Shigeru Kondo was about to start a career in another domain than colour patterning when the observation of colour pattern changes during the growth of his Pomacanthus (a common species kept by aquarians) led him to bifurcate his research interests to found the modern biology of Turing patterns (Kondo & Asai,).
Both Pomacanthus and Danio rerio were appreciated by the aquarists for their beauty, so aesthetics are at least partly responsible for their presence in biological studies (Rabinowitz & Myerson,; Stanton,).
According to Mullins et al., Pr. Nüsslein-Volhard’s team article on zebrafish colour pattern has been one of the few (among 37) not accepted in the special issue of Development in 1996, presenting the results of the molecular screening of zebrafish by four teams. Her thought is that at that time in the developmental biology community, colour patterns research might not be considered sufficiently related to development to be published among other papers (Nüsslein-Volhard,), and furthermore, their visual beauty might have acted as an aggravating circumstance to be rejected, because of its alleged superficiality (as she told in a conference at the École Normale Supérieure of Paris, in 2018). Now, my feeling is that this snobbism against colour patterns has almost completely vanished, as many research teams, from developmental biology to ecology focus on them.
Concerning plant colour patterning, processes for Mimulus flower spot patterns have been deciphered recently by Yaowu Yuan and colleagues (Ding et al.,). Most flowers and their colour patterns are seen as aesthetically positive and Mimulus are no exceptions: they are colourful (from yellow to red and pink through orange shades) and patterned (notably spots). The centre of diversification is found in North America, and Mimulus have genetically and evolutionary been studied by local teams in the 90s and then became a model genera (Yuan et al., ).
Finally, Kaelin and colleagues explore the basis of mammalian coat patterning with the cat as a model species (Kaelin et al.,). Initially, Kaelin was interested in Agouti-Related Protein and genetics in mice, and came to colour patterning by the role of the related Agouti protein (ASIP) in colour patterning in mammals. As laboratory mice and rats do not exhibit very interesting colour patterns, the lab investigated cats (and dogs) as candidates. It is not to be demonstrated anymore that these domesticated human companion species are selected notably according to aesthetic considerations.

The very changing nature of aesthetic judgments of species of interest
Our judgment of the beauty of a particular species is evidently dependent on many parameters, and as scientists spending a long time in contact with a species, we may change our taste preferences. To illustrate the changing nature of our aesthetic judgments, I will choose several personal examples.
To begin with a short anecdote, I have not been able to recognise the beauties of the common poplar tree. However, I have recently changed my perception after after sessions of in vivo leaf morphometry with a colleague.
Macroscopic (upper panels) and microscopic (lower panels) views of Callicarpa sp. and Viburnum tinus fruits. Upper panels picture sources: +, . The fruits of Callicarpa sp. and Viburnum tinus were collected in the Université de Rennes Beaulieu campus gardens, dissected in distilled water and observed under a stereomicroscope at a magnification of ×40.
Second, I have recently experienced another example of the complexity of aesthetics with my students. It is commonly accepted that beauty can arise when changing the scale of observation (we might think of the tremendous amount of SEM electronographies generating visual satisfaction on the observers). Less evidently, it could also be the same for colour patterning. When confronted with two trees presenting little rounded and coloured fruits, Viburnum tinus and Callicarpa sp. (beautiful fruit in Greek), most people would choose the latter one as their favourite in terms of visual aesthetics, probably due to their shininess and their bright pink colour, contrary to Viburnum fruits that are more discrete (Figure 1, upper panels). Surprisingly, when peeled and observed under the stereomicroscope, the epicarp tissues bearing the coloured cells trigger an inverted preference. If Callicarpa colouration is based on the common anthocyanin pigments of flowers, Viburnum blue colour relies on ordered lipid droplets generating physical colouration (Middleton et al.,), leading the cells to look like tiny iridescent crystals (Figure 1, lower panels).
Finally, I recently reconsidered my aesthetic judgment on some common flies called Sarcophaga, known as common flesh flies. Most people have a negative view of them (Rozin & Fallon,), partly linked to their behaviour (their larvae feed on flesh), to the cultural disgust towards insects and their grey body colour.
Checkerboard patterns of Sarcophaga sp. and Fritillaria sp. (a) Sarcophaga presents checkerboard patterns on its abdomen, Fritillaria on its sepals and petals. Image source: , . (b) Left: Detail of Sarcophaga sp. abdomen. Squares change their colours depending the angle of light and the angle of observation. This structural (= physical) colouration seems driven by the length and directionality of abdomen bristles. Right: Detail of Fritillaria thunbergii petal pattern. Cells are probably coloured by anthocyanin pigments in their vacuoles. Fruit epicarp and tepal observations. The flowers of Fritillaria sp. in Figure 2b were collected in the Botanical Gardens of the University of Tokyo, dissected in distilled water and observed under a stereomicroscope at a magnification of ×20.
After my PhD supervisor Florian Jabbour laid my attention to one of its favourite plant species, Fritillaria meleagris, famous for its unusual checkerboard pattern on its tepals (Figure 2a), I started to be interested in these rare patterns. A biological survey in Eukaryotes brought me to build a list of species bearing more or less defined checkerboard patterns, and among them many Sarcophaga species. As well as being among the most geometrically well-defined checkerboard patterns of all species we found, I was surprised to discover that the black-and-white pattern they bear on their abdomen changes according to lighting orientation and viewing angle. Black squares become white and vice versa (Figure 2b). This very surprising feature led me to choose this species, along with the aforementioned Fritillaria, to study the formation of checkerboard patterns in Eukaryotes (Galipot & Zalko,, preprint). After spending a few months studying them, my aesthetic taste of these flies has changed to a positive perception, and I will never look at them in the same way again.
Without the preliminary research of checkerboard patterns among Eukaryotes, I would probably not have considered these flies, and would have missed these incredible patterns. This is one of the reasons why I now recognised the importance of exploring biodiversity in morphogenetic studies, and this led me to build and apply a method that I am now going to detail a little more.

The SE (せ), Search for Exhaustivity method to study biological shapes
Left: Japanese hiragana character corresponding to [se] sound, and its orderly way of writing, serving as a visual analogy to the method. Right: The three steps of the SE method represented in a Biodiversity VS Biological scale graph. First step: species survey; second step: processes deciphering by zoom into tissue, cells and/or molecules scales and third step: use of related species to help deciphering pattern processes.
Whether kanjis (Sino-Japanese ideograms), hiraganas or katakanas (Japanese syllabics), Japanese characters are written using strokes in a precise order and direction, inherited from calligraphy. For the hiragana せ [se], the horizontal stroke is the first to be drawn, followed by the small and large vertical strokes that become horizontals at their ends (Figure 3, left).
I used this character as a visual analogy for the morphogenetic approach I am proposing, named ‘SE’ method, which also serves as an acronym for ‘Search for Exhaustivity’, one of its main principles.
The main steps are as follows:

Step 1
After choosing a shape of interest (e.g., checkerboard patterns), I start with a horizontal exploration of pattern diversity, by finding as many species as possible presenting these patterns and described the latter. This could require the use of multiple sources, including non-academic ones such as image browsers (e.g., Google Images); wikis (e.g., Wikimedia Commons and Wikipedia) or semi-professional amateurs (e.g.,  by Jay Pfahl and colleagues). This could compensate the lack of scientific literature, or the impossibility to efficiently navigate sources and process information. Then ideally, every data should be double-checked by peer-reviewed academic sources. If these are not available (or require an unreasonable time of human processing), a proper citation of the source (mandatory) and the (non-mandatory) possibility for the database to be open and collaborative (like the Gephebase compiling genotype-phenotype relationships (Courtier-Orgogozo et al.,) would improve your database and the conclusions you draw from it. Some studies try to rationalise risk assessment (Forstmeier et al.,), that is, to avoid errors (false positives and negatives, unbalanced representation of taxonomic diversity etc.) but still are often too generalist to be able to provide tailored advice for your particular database.
Concerning the representativity issue, as the extend of the natural biodiversity often prevents a complete exhaustivity and because a look at every discovered species would take too much time for the researcher, strategics choices are required. A possible way is to choose a given taxonomic rank (e.g., orders for Animalia), and to explore every taxon at this taxonomic rank. An unbiased random selection of species could be another solution, and many papers – notably coming from Biology of Conservation studies – propose techniques that would guide you to the more appropriate way to reach representativity (e.g., Sastre & Lobo,). Then, of course data might not be available for every species, and generate a new bias, possibly in the favour of beautiful species (see Section 1). Nevertheless, a big advantage of colour pattern studies is that photographs or at least text description of the exterior colour patterns of the species is very rarely missing, as an account of the optical appearance of the species is one of the very first steps of species description (see Braby et al.,; Rainey,; Seifert & Rossman,).
In the Putative Growth Turing Colour Patterns (PGTCPs) project, to reach a satisfying level of exhaustivity compatible with the time allowed for a research project (for this particular one, 4 months full-time were required to make the survey), I applied a method adapted to the project and the number of species (represented under a flow chart in supplementary figure 3B of Galipot,).

Step 2
Choose some phylogenetically distant species, including at least one outside the most studied group in colour pattern studies – animals – in order to study the potential evolutionary convergences and to propose an interesting discussion on homology or analogy of the studied trait.
Choose species presenting a very clear pattern (in terms of geometrics, of motif number on a single individual etc.), present in a large proportion of the population, but ideally facing some inter-individual polymorphism (or alternatively variation in closely-related species). This will allow to facilitate the reproducibility of the experiments in order to reach an appropriate sample size and in the same time to use variation to better understand the processes (see examples of non-mandatory Step 3 in the next section).
Choose species presenting a pattern compatible with the planned experimental design (e.g., on a tissue accessible at the right developmental time). To determine this, it might of course require preliminary studies or literature exploration. The timing of pattern formation could be crucial; if patterns only appear very early in development or in hardly accessible tissue. For colour patterning, it is very common that pattern formation takes place before colour production, therefore being not directly accessible to the eyes or classical observation instruments (Galipot,).
Following this preliminary study, I choose ideally two or more appropriate species to study the ontogeny of these patterns, that is, a vertical study of morphogenesis. Although there is no universal definition of what is the best species for processes deciphering, here are my personal criteria, additional to the classical criteria (easy to breed/grow, short life cycle, relatively small individuals, genetic or molecular tools eventually available etc. (Jenner & Wills,):

Step 3
(Non-mandatory but often informative), I use related or outgroup species (a return to horizontality) to help decipher the patterning processes and their recent evolutionary history, which is a corollary of the founding principles of evo-devo (the study of the evolution of developmental mechanisms, Richardson,).
The biodiversity approach in these first steps should bring three advantages:
First, it increases our knowledge of biodiversity, here from the angle of particular traits, colour patterns. This work can join one of the missions of museums of natural history and if the database is well organised and accessible, data can be exploitable for future studies of evolutionary biology, ecology and various other fields of research.
Second, the search for exhaustivity permits to reveal novel patterns in understudied species. It is of course completely dependent on data availability. A species lacking pictures, drawings or precise descriptions will be out of the scope, but still, it permits to avoid many biases, including the aesthetic ones evoked earlier. The more species are described with the pattern of interest, the more comfortable will be the choice of species to study pattern formation, thanks to a large range of candidates.
Third, this permits the choice of very distant species (typically, a plant/a fungi and an animal) to study pattern formation in two taxa in parallel, and could bring useful information for the presence or absence of evolutionary convergences. If evolution considerations are not a direct objective of the SE method, the latter may generate informative data which can be used in upcoming studies.

Examples of application of the SE (せ) method
In this section, I illustrate and comment each step of the method with previous or ongoing works.

Step 1: Biodiversity survey
The complete species survey I have produced was done to study of a particular category of periodic colour patterns, the PGTCPs. They consist of classic Turing patterns whose shapes and/or colours are disrupted by tissue growth, the most famous example being leopard rosettes (Galipot,). Before this study, they were described in only a few animal species (leopard, a dendrobates frog, a rodent and a whale shark), but not in any plant species. To increase our knowledge about these colour patterns, I tried to find at least one example of PGTCPs in every animal order, and every Angiosperm family. Then, I made an exhaustive survey of orchid and mammalian species, two groups where photographic or drawing data were available for every described species. The results were beyond expectation quantitatively and qualitatively, because not only many diverse species all around the Eukaryotic phylogeny were found bearing these particular patterns, but also new varieties of PGTCPs (in terms of shape) were described, notably in orchid, sea slug and cephalopod species. This amount of new data allows to build strong hypotheses for putative biological functions of PGTCPs (in a nutshell, being more and less visible) and to pinpoint many evolutionary convergences.
For the checkerboard pattern study (Galipot & Zalko,, preprint), even if the biodiversity survey was not as exhaustive as the precedent example, it permits to find very diverse examples of this quite rare pattern: Actinopterygii, snakes and lizards, cephalopods and flies species joined the Liliacea Fritillaria meleagris, the starting point of the study.

Step 2: Pattern formation deciphering
The PGTCPs study allows us to find the best species of interest to perform functional experiments. From the four or five animal species described before the survey , we could make a choice between thousands of species, including more than 300 orchids (Galipot,). Finally, we selected a Lamiaceae plant, Scutellaria rubropunctata, known for its purple rosettes on its petals (Fujita et al.,). This plant met almost all of our criteria (Galipot and Tsukaya, in prep).
For the checkerboard patterns, like evoked before, it permits to add the flies from Sarcophaga genus to the study, and the comparison between their pattern morphogenesis to the Fritillaria ones showed two completely opposite ways to produce alternate squares, a perfect example of convergence of shapes but not of processes. Briefly, in Fritillaria, Turing pattern dots are transformed into squares by geometric constraining, while in Sarcophaga, two orthogonal groups of stripes combined to produce checkerboard patterns (Galipot & Zalko,, preprint).

Step 3: The use of related species to reveal patterning processes
In the case of our study on checkerboard patterns (see Galipot & Zalko, and Figure 2), even if the biological survey was not as exhaustive as the precedent example, Step 1 of the SE method permits to find very diverse examples of this quite rare pattern. Pattern variations among the Fritillaria and Sarcophaga genera, together with the use of outgroups (notably the sister genus Lilium), were crucial to suggest processes of pattern formation and to bring indirect proofs. More precisely, all intermediaries between dots and squares are present in the Fritillaria genus, showing that checkerboard patterns could be modified classic Turing spot patterns, like those bared by the sister genus Lilium. The observation of rare individuals of Fritillaria meleagris presenting spot patterns instead of checks, together with the tremendous diversity of patterns present in the other species of the genus, allowed us to strongly suggest a role of the parallel venation network in the formation of the pattern.
In the PGCTPs project, together with the use of related species, I added multi-scale comparisons: intraspecific and intra-individual (between tissues or developmental stages) to build a cluster of clues pointing to the role of growth in PGTCPs formation.

Conclusion

Deep-learning-assisted studies are the future of SE (せ) method
Although SE (せ) method seems to provide promising results in colour pattern analyses, it is a time-consuming workflow. As an example, the PGTCP study biodiversity survey took me between 3 and 4 months, full-time and only two groups were almost exhaustively analysed (orchids and mammals). Furthermore, the relative abundance of PGTCPs among animals and angiosperms accelerated the search, because the project was to find at least one example of species for each animal order and each plant family, so I could switch to the next clade as soon as an example was found. If I had wanted to apply the same technique to checkerboard patterns, it might have taken a year or more. Instead , I leveraged the fact that checkerboard patterns are rare in nature and visually appealing. This led many scientists to mention and describe them during the descriptions of the concerned species in their articles, so I use a mix of keyword-based searches to species-by-species exploration, but still, this survey is far from exhaustivity.
To solve this problem, the most promising tool for the next few years will be artificial intelligence (AI) and especially deep learning networks, which are already extremely powerful in image analysis and shape recognition. If typically there is a need for 10000 images to train a deep-learning network (Lhermitte et al.,) and therefore could be incompatible with the amount of species available before the study, this could be solved by using both real and simulated patterns to train the network. If every species where a pattern is detected by the AI tools would be systematically verified by a human, it could greatly accelerate studies and make them many times more exhaustive than what humans could do. It could then contribute to build a large, open-access colour pattern database centred on shapes, which could serve for basic knowledge and biodiversity descriptions, but also for evolutionary and ecology studies, as well as helping functional studies to decipher processes of pattern formation.

From natural patterns to human-made patterns
(a) Low-resolution version of an illustration of Arzach comic cover, considered of one of the masterpieces of Jean Giraud/Moebius, and a photograph of him. (b) Title drawing of the first comic of the series ‘Notes’ published by Gilles Roussel/Boulet, containing many strips drawn with (or talking about) the ‘petits-traits’ technique, and a photograph of him. Images sources, from left to right, up to bottom: , , , .
Trying to reduce aesthetic biases does not mean to completely exclude aesthetic considerations in my work, just being more aware of it. In an upcoming project, I would like to try to apply the SE (せ) method to very particular colour patterns, the human-made ones and particularly in artistic productions. In collaboration with artists and specialists on the basis of aesthetics, I would like to perform pattern analyses to understand the links between micro-patterns (the local techniques of drawing) and macro-patterns (the overall drawing and its aesthetics perception). A starting point might be the very famous technique of ‘petits-traits’ (small lines), theorised by the comic cartoonist Boulet (Gilles Roussel, notably in its website/blog ‘Bouletcorp’ , see Figure 4b) and used in comics and manga with many variations. Although value judgments in art and comparisons between artists are areas to be considered with caution, I would like to shed some light on why so many artists consider Jean Giraud/Moebius (see the official website in French , and the Wikipedia page in English ) to be the greatest in his field, and in particular what are the particularities of his mastery of ‘petits-traits’ (see Figure 4a).

Data availability statement
All information in contained within the text.

Author contributions
P.G. conceived and designed the study and wrote the article.

Funding statement
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.

Competing interest
The author declares none.

Open peer review
To view the open peer review materials for this article, please visit .

References
Plant scientists’ research attention is skewed towards colourful, conspicuous and broadly distributed flowers
How to describe a new species in zoology and avoid mistakes
Gephebase, a database of genotype–phenotype relationships for natural and domesticated variation in Eukaryotes
Two MYB proteins in a self-organizing activator-inhibitor system produce spotted pigmentation patterns
Nobody cares about ugly flowers. Scientists pay more attention to pretty plants
Detecting and avoiding likely false-positive findings – A practical guide
And growth on form? How tissue expansion generates novel shapes, colours and enhance biological functions of Turing colour patterns of Eukaryotes
The choice of model organisms in evo–devo
Developmental genetics of color pattern establishment in cats
A reaction–diffusion wave on the skin of the marine angelfish Pomacanthus
Studies of Turing pattern formation in zebrafish skin
Deep learning and entropy-based texture features for color image classification
Viburnum tinus fruits use lipids to produce metallic blue structural color
The unreasonable effectiveness of reaction diffusion in vertebrate skin color patterning
The zebrafish issue: 25 years on
The zebrafish issue of Development
Exposure of aquarium fish to dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) with special reference to toxicity and effects on uptake of radioactive dyes
Theories, laws, and models in evo-devo
A perspective on disgust
Taxonomist survey biases and the unveiling of biodiversity patterns
How to describe a new fungal species
Diethylnitrosamine-induced hepatic degeneration and neoplasia in the aquarium fish, brachydanio rerio
Avian egg collections: Museum collection bias driven by shape and size
Taxonomic bias in biodiversity data and societal preferences
The chemical basis of morphogenesis
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr2

Review: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R0/PR2
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
In this “Theories” manuscript, the author tells a personal scientific and conceptual journey; asking the question of potential subjective biases in choosing a biological object to study color patterns or morphogenesis, due to aesthetic attraction (or repulsion); and proposing a method to control such bias and to build more objective and exhaustive surveys of species of interest, and decipher the underlying mechanisms.
I enjoyed reading the manuscript, for the first person and natural writing, and the different thread of thinking proposed, including the question of subjectivity; and the meaningful, elegantly called, “hiragana”(SE) morphogenetic method; which provides, via simple rules, a way to deepen the scope of the important biological questions of patterning and morphogenesis, by exploring phylogeny. Such endeavor appears timely, at the “post-model species era”, and for biodiversity studies.
In the conclusion, the author opens perspectives on 1) the use of patterns recognition AI tools to extend the power of the method, and 2) applying the method to study art works to ask the question of patterns and aesthetics at multiple scales. These perspectives are very interesting, in terms of developmental and evolutionary biology; and of epistemology and art-science actions, respectively.
In conclusion, this manuscript provides food for thought, nicely fits the scope of the “Theories” format of QPB, and engage the reader to look forward reading the future works in preparation mentioned in the text.
Minor points:
- Figure 2B: the picture at right is not mentioned in the legend. I guess it is a closer view of Frittilaria tepal? Does the pattern also depend on light direction in this specie, as in the fly?
- Line 30: « …concerning phenotypes (patterns) and/or mechanisms (morphogenesis).”: The vocabulary might need some clarification here, indeed both “phenotype” and “mechanisms” are both general terms which can relate both to either patterns or morphogenesis. Could it be rephrased, for instance, as “… concerning phenotypes and/or mechanisms of patterning and/or morphogenesis.”?
- Line 50: after “… species or genera.”, it would help clarifying/structuring the text to list the 3 current model species for color patterns: Danio rerio, Mimulus, and cats, which are described in the next paragraphs.
- Line 84: the sentence on the author’s experience of changing his vision on poplar leaves appears a bit short and isolated, and might be separated from the introductory sentence (“Our judgment…”) and extended to a short paragraph (with introduction and conclusion or transition with the next paragraph).
- Line 216: “in prep” is repeated.
- Lines 247 and 252 : please explicit abbreviation IA, and change to “AI” in second occurrence.
- Line 270: Since the « Material and methods » section is very succinct, it might be integrated in the respective figures’ legends.
- As a suggestion, a concluding figure illustrating the “petits traits” pattern could nicely explicit the proposed idea (ie, the link between micro-patterns and macro-patterns and aesthetics perception)? This would “loop” the article on aesthetics - however I don’t know if “open access” images of this author are available.
- I was curious about the technique "of “petits-traits” (small lines), theorized by the comic cartoonist Boulet (Gilles Roussel)14 “. But in reference 14, I could not find the information (it seems rather a general review on cartoons' web publishing).
- Please review the formatting of the references (notably #9).
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr3

Review: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R0/PR3
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
The presented study addresses a rather transdisciplinary subject, i.e. that aesthetic biases in colour patterns of plants and animal might affect biological research through “taxonomic preferences”. The authors suggest a new method (SE) evidencing and, thus, reducing biases in study priority and in this way fostering discoveries of new mechanisms.
While I found the fundamental principles in this approach rather convincing, in the end I was mainly lost with the manuscript. From its structure, it is presented as a combination of a research proposal surrounding an interesting idea/method, presenting unclear results (but interesting biological phenomena). In the end, the reader is not able to follow and, thus, repeat the considerations as there are no results/analyses included in the study. While the main point of the manuscript is the relevance of the SE method, providing a theoretical framework, data and clear examples are missing. Otherwise, the reader is not able to follow the potential theoretical impact of the method presented.
I found part of the text confusing and not very focused on the main aim – I guess that is to invent/present/promote an unbiased view on colour patterns in nature and avoiding aesthetic biases. I also missed an introduction, why such biases might be disadvantageous in research. Only if the scientific community is presently “wasting time” as aesthetic biases channel our research such a method would be very important for unbiased research questions.
I found the use of terms also hard the follow – what is exactly meant by “mechanism” or “morphogenesis” – it is very necessary to define these terms in such a theoretical context.
The examples given I found interesting as “colour” and “pattern” is a highly important evolutionary driver and is depending on physiology, but also morphological structure of surfaces. The fruit epidermis photos and all others would need a scale/size bar. This is scientific standard.
Although I tried I could not fully follow the SE method (Figure 3) and many statements as no data are included in the study and the method is comparatively presented for the surveys of the author.
In summary, while I can imagine that the SE method might have its value, as the article is presented I doubt that is will have any impact as the reader cannot repeat the considerations.
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr4

Review: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R0/PR4
Wingen
Luzie
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
Review for Manuscript ID QPB-2024-0031
The manuscript “Color pattern studies and aesthetic biases: the SE (せ) method to avoid them” by Galipot addresses the issue of bias in the choice of species for studies of colour patterns, and particularly a bias by aesthetic choice. The author recounts his own experience on selecting study species for a Turing colour pattern study in Eukaryotes.
A method is then presented, the “Search for Exhaustivity method” (SE), which aims to reduce the bias in the selection of possible study species. The steps of the method are: 1) selection of a shape of interest, 2) selection of study species from a preliminary study, 3) (optional) selection of an outgroup species.
The article was submitted to the theories section.
Developing rigorous and quantifiable methods to avoid bias in the selection of study organisms is in my opinion a worthwhile endeavor. It might aid the investigation of structural and/or molecular basis of biological processes, like pattern formation. Moreover, it could help to unravel the question if similarities in processes are due to evolutionary relatedness or if they have evolved independently.
The work presented here does, however, only achieves this goal partly. The proposed method remains vague as the description of it is very short. The intention of the method is applaudable, to aim from the beginning of a study to find the most suitable study organisms. However, as a user I would hope for some objective rules, so that I would feel confident that I have conducted a sufficiently robust search for possible study species. Instead, the author of the manuscript simply suggests to conduct an exhaustivity study, without defining exhaustivity. From my understanding, what is suggested is a thorough study, but the decision if it was exhaustive will be by made by the researcher themselves without specific criteria, and thus it would be a subjective decision.
Another problem with the manuscript is, that it is not written in a very scientific language. It is more an account of observations of the author, which would possibly fit a popular science magazine, but not a scientific journal that promotes quantitative plant sciences.
Additionally, the use of references is quite sparse and important statements are not supported. A few examples:
line 19: ... aesthetic biases are stronger than in the majority of other domains of research … (no reference)
line 49: theorized by Alan Turing in 1952 (no correct reference)
line 52: ... Shigeru Kondo was about to start a career in immunology ... (no reference)
line 55: Both Pomacanthus and Danio rerio were appreciated by the aquarists for their beauty ... (no reference)
Furthermore, it is common practice to use the last name of the first author (or both authors if only two contributed to the work) and the date to reference published work of other researchers in a manuscript text. Here, titles are used (Dr. and Pr., e. g. ll 48-52) and it seems that the most senior member of the lab is named, e.g. when an article from Nüsslein-Vollhard is mentioned it should instead have been Haffner (1996; https://doi.org/10.1007/s004270050051).
Where the author remarks on human perception of beauty (ll 82-86), this seems to belong into the field of Psychology and I feel that one should be reluctant to make those deductions without involving experts from that field.
I would have hoped that the introduction would present some overview on the topic of bias and possibly sampling strategies in (plant) sciences and to present the introduced method in the context of the common practices in the field. However, this is lacking.
The discussion is missing the critical consideration if the data base of the search, the data available online, is already biased towards aesthetically pleasing species. I assume that there is more information available for “beautiful” species than for “ugly” species. What impact such a bias would have on the suggested method is not sufficiently considered.
The manuscript needs a major rewrite. Clearer and more objective instructions are needed on how to conduct the SE method, so that it would be a tool for researchers to decide if they conducted a sufficiently rigorous search for study species. The logic on which the instructions are based should be explained. I also suggest to improve the language to make it more scientific and to follow the conventions of QPB for references.
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr5

Recommendation: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R0/PR5
Autran
Daphné
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
Dear Dr Galipot,
We have now received the comments from three reviewers for your manuscript. Again, I apologize for the very long delay in the process due the difficulties in finding reviewers as I wrote you before.
As you will see, the interest and originality of your point of view and proposed method are recognized, yet some clarifications and improvements are needed. Based on the reviewers comments I would suggest to resubmit the manuscript after rewriting and addressing the corrections asked in the comments. Notably it would be important to add an introduction on the topic of bias, clear examples/data and objectives rules, to make the method more convincing to potential users.
I thank you very much for your contribution to Quantitative Plant Biology.
Best regards
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr6

Decision: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R0/PR6
Hamant
Olivier
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
No accompanying comment.
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr8

Review: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R1/PR8
Wingen
Luzie
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
This is my second review of this article.
I have seen with delight that the author has meticulously addressed all comments from all three reviewers in a very positive way.
All of my main issues with the article have been resolved. By choosing a better title, the focus of the article is now clearer, concentrating more on the exploration of biodiversity in colour pattern studies than in a quantifyable method to avoid bias.
The style of writing has also improved, being sufficiently scientific. However, I still feel that the English could be improved (to be more beautiful).
Some of the English style suggestions are:
l.8: remove the first ‘aesthetical’
l12: that (instead of which)
l29 replace ‘are needed’ by ‘have not or only rarely been performed’
l31 replace ‘to avoid’ by ‘reduce’
l62 what is a ‘fish pet’ ? replace by ‘a common species kept by aquarians’ or similar ?
l62: Kondo did not bifurcate, but his research did. Improve to ‘... led him to bifurcate his research interests ..’
l68: special issue (instead of exceptional issue)
l75 ‘research’ is missing after color pattern(s)
l79: remove ‘Pr.’
l82: The center of diversification is found in North America (remove ‘possess’)
l82: and Mimulus has genetically (instead of just ‘have’)
l86 and l87 remove ‘Dr.’
l88 by studying the role of ... (insert ‘studying’)
l90 rephrase: ... patterns, the lab investigated cats (and dogs) as candidates.
l91 insert before ‘companion’: ‘domesticated human companion species’
l91 remove ‘appreciated and’ as just ‘selected’ if fully sufficient here.
l97: would ‘we may change our taste preferences’ be better here than ‘reconsider our taste’ ?
l99/100: I suggest: To illustrate this with a personal example, initilly I have not been able to recognize the beauties of the common poplar tree. However, i have recently chanbed my perception after ...
l102/103: this sentence can go, as there is no further reference what thappened with the taste perception of the students.
l108: replace ‘last’ with ‘latter’
l110: replace ‘Nevertheless’ with something like ‘Surprisingly’
l111: replace ‘reveal’ with ‘trigger’
l112: replace ‘tendency’ with ‘preference’.
l126: replace ‘opinion on’ with ‘view fo’
l128 replace ‘colorless body’ (which would mean no colour) with ‘bland body color’ or similar.
l139, replace: ‘has inevitably changed for the better’ to: ‘has changed to a positive pereption’
l143: replace: ‘set my sights on’ by ‘considered’
l171: replace ‘describing’ by either ‘identifying’ or ‘finding’ or similar.
l172: replace ‘even’ by ‘including’
l175: Not sure what is meant with 'the impossibility to browse efficiently information."
l177: remove ‘must’ from ‘must require’
l180: rationalize (no end d)
l181: replace ‘personalized’ by ‘taylored’
l183: insert ‘extend of the’ natural biodiversity
184: replace ‘and because a look at’ by ‘as the consideration of ’
l185: replace ‘humans’ by ‘the researcher’
l185 strategic choices are required. (remove ‘needs to be done’).
l193: replace ‘as external phenotype’ by ‘an account of the optical appearance’.
l196: replace‘ Thanks to’ by ‘Following’
l198/199: ..., here are my personal criteria, additional to the classical criteria ...
l202: replace ‘a couple’ by ‘some’
l203: remove ‘animals’ (?)
l214/215: The timing of pattern formation could be crucial, if patterns only appear very early in development or in hardly accessible tissue.
l220: I don’t understand the worde ‘eventually’ here.
l222: it would be good to mention the refered too founding principle of evo-devo here.
l231 to 234 should be rephrased to be clearer and less extreme (e.g. undeniable).
l239 to 241 should be rephrased.
l244: remove ‘automatically’ and replace ‘precious’ by ‘useful’ or similar.
l246: replace ‘generate’ by ‘may generate’
l267: replace ‘biological’ by ‘biodiversity’
l308 to 310: Rephrase. What does ‘pinpoint’ mean. And what is meant by ‘classical exploration’ ?
l312: is ‘evident’ correct here? Rather ‘promising’?
l317: repace ‘IA might’ by ‘AI tools would’
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr9

Review: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R1/PR9
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
Many thanks to the author for all the improvements on the manuscript, which has been significantly modified and is clearly improved. The author’s choices are explained in his response to the reviewers.
However, I think that a few additional modifications are required to have the manuscript ready for publication, including some major and minor points.
Major points:
-Line 35: “These terms need a precise definition in the morphogenesis domain of research, which is one of the current works of a collaborative group of morphogeneticians”: Please provide a reference for this work (conference?), or, if a reference doesn’t exist, simply start more generally the next sentence, for instance: “Although a consensus on precise common definitions is probably still pending in the morphogenetic field, I define here a morphogenetic mechanism as a set….”
-Lines 43 to 52: this summary paragraph should start by “Here, …” (to clarify that it is a summary), and should be remodeled: in the current version, it gives more importance on the first part of the article which is actually short, in comparison with the rest of the article explaining the SE method. It would be better to balance the two parts in this summary, by shortening the first part, and elaborate a bit more on the SE method (its aims and virtues etc..).
-Line 54: I would remove “Discussion” section title, which seems awkward without a “result” section as in classical articles. I think this manuscript format would have sufficient structure based only on “introduction”, and then the sub-sections titles.
-Lines 102-158: the whole section (” The very changing nature of aesthetic judgments of species of interest”) is not easy to follow. To structure it more clearly, I would propose the following modifications:
Line 105: After the first sentence, add an introductory sentence, such as: “To illustrate the changing nature of our aesthetic judgments, I will choose several personal examples.”. Then the 3 examples can be described, starting, for each example, by explaining the main point, and then the illustrative situation: First (Line 106): the point “spending a long time in contact…” and the illustrative situation of poplar leaves. Second (Line 112/113): the point “changing scale” and the illustrative situation of discovering with students the Viburnum and Callicarpa colored fruits. Third (Line 137): the example of Sarcophaga.
-Line 150: “Galipot and Zalko, 2024, in prep”: this reference is not listed in the reference list, while I could see that a preprint was published.
In addition, the usage for preprints citation in the text is to mention “preprint” after the year. Please correct accordingly all along the text.
-Line 194 : “Some studies try to rationalized risk assessment (Forstmeier et al., 2017), but still are often too generalist to be able to provide personalized advice for your particular database.” : please reformulate this sentence as the meaning is unclear.
-Lines 196-204: this important paragraph regarding representativity/exhaustivity could be improved by giving an example, such as the process used in Galipot et al. 2023, which is nicely described with graphical representation in supplemental figure 3B of the preprint.
-Line 204: please explain briefly why beautiful species would be favored.
-Line 223: “, to use variation to better understand the processes (see non-mandatory step 3)”: this point is unclear, since it is not explained in step 3 how variation is used to better understand the process ?
-Line 264: Please provide an introduction sentence for the section.
-Line 269: please cite “Galipot, 2023” after “(Putative Growth Turing Color Patterns)”
-Line 302: Step 3: to balance the text, it would be nice to explain also briefly how Step 3 was used in the sudy Galipot et al 2023. (or alternatively, why it was not appropriated in that case?).
-Figure 4: Unfortunately, it seems that the iconography available does not convey clearly the ideas developed in the last section. From the current figure, I could not understand the “petits traits” technique. To simplify, I would suggest to drop the figure, and simply provide the curious readers with websites in the text. The website of Boulet is already cited in the text, and websites for Moebius/Jean Giraud can be added: for instance, Wikipedia (exists in english) and the official Jean Giraud website – where actually a nice example of “petit traits” drawing is visible: https://www.moebius.fr/page-Biographie.html ).
Minor points:
-Line 25: replace “like” by “for instance”.
-Line 26: add “, etc.” at the end of the list of patterns into parenthesis.
-Line 28: “with a preference of plant species when functional experiments are needed”: do you mean: ““with a preference for plant species where functional experiments are possible”?
-Line 34: add “for instance”: “(for instance, color patterns)”.
-Line 35: replace “synonym:” by “i.e.,”
-Line 82: replace “in the ENS de Paris” by « at the Ecole Normale Supérieure of Paris, »
-Line 82: “snobbism”: do you mean “reluctance”?
-Line 84: to clarify the sentence, replace “, are focused on them” by “, focus on them”.
-Line 89: to clarify the sentence, add “they are” before “colorful…”
-Line 157: to clarify the following sentence : “…, and led me to build and apply a method that I am now going to detail a little more.”, add “this” before “led”.
-Line192: “the possibility for the database to be open and collaborative (non-mandatory) would improve your database and the conclusions you draw from it”: it would be interesting to mention examples of citizen science-based databases that can be useful or that you have used?
-Line 245: add “e.g.,” before “color pattern”
-Line 246: “...if it is well done,”: could you please explain further “well done”? what are the important criteria?
-Line 271: “Before the study”: do you mean “Before our study” or “Before this study”?
-Line 282: To better introduce the paragraph, please cite Figure 3 and the preprint of the study, and precise that it refers to Step1 of the method:
For instance: “In the case of my study on checkerboard pattern (Figure 3, Galipot & Zalko, 2024 preprint), even if the biological survey was not as exhaustive as the precedent example, the step1 of the SE method permits to find very diverse examples of this quite rare pattern: …”.
-Line 291-293: “Finally, we selected a Lamiaceae plant, Scutellaria rubropunctata, which combined almost all of our criteria (Galipot and Tsukaya, in prep).”: Since the reference “Galipot & Tsukaya, in prep” is not a reference in the reference list, could you explain the criteria and provide a reference describing Scutellaria rubropunctata?
-Line 330: please correct the following sentence: “If typically there is a need of 10000 images to be trained (Lhermitte et al., 2022) and could be incompatible with the amount of species available before the study,..”. Do you mean: “If typically there is a need of 10000 images to trained a model (Lhermitte et al., 2022) and this could be incompatible with the amount of species available before the study,...” ?
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr10

Recommendation: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R1/PR10
Autran
Daphné
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
Dear Dr Galipot,
We have now received the reviewers comments on the new version of your manuscript. All the improvements were greatly appreciated by the reviewers and myself. Both reviewers ask however minor revisions. I recommend to follow their suggestions to finalize the manuscript.
Many thanks again for your contribution to QPB,
Looking forward to reading you.
Best regards
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr11

Decision: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R1/PR11
Hamant
Olivier
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
No accompanying comment.
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr13

Review: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R2/PR13
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
Many thanks to the author for the revised version in which most of my comments were addressed, or a justification is provided in the author’s response for those comments which were not followed. Overall, I think the manuscript reads very well, expect a minor point of which must be corrected:
The complete reference for the preprint “Galipot and Zalko, 2024” should be added to the reference list, and the way it is cited in the text should be homogenized:
-Line 293: the reference is here correctly cited: e.i., “(Galipot and Zalko, 2024; preprint).”
-Line 297: the biorxiv link should be replaced by the reference’s citation as above.
-Lines 137-138: “ , see https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.02.07.579346v2” should be removed.
-Line 276: “For the checkerboard pattern study…”: the reference should be cited here.
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr14

Recommendation: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R2/PR14
Autran
Daphné
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
Dear Dr Galipot,
Many thanks for your manuscript which appears almost ready for publication. All the reviewers comments were correctly addressed in this new version, except very minor points regarding a reference, which needs to be corrected before acceptance (see reviewer comment). Please provide a revised version including these minor corrections.
Thank you again for your contribution to Quantitative Plant Biology.
Best regards
10.1017/qpb.2025.8.pr15

Decision: Colour pattern studies: the SE (せ) method, a shape-centred approach to explore biodiversity and avoid aesthetic biases — R2/PR15
Hamant
Olivier
This is an Open Access article, distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (), which permits unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
No accompanying comment.