Evaluation of postoperative stability of the mandibular midline widening osteotomy technique with concurrent genioplasty for correction of bimaxillary transverse discrepancy
Objectives
Mandibular midline widening is a known technique to correct transverse deficit. The osteotomy can be combined with bimaxillary orthognathic surgery and genioplasty in patients who require surgical correction of mandibular transverse width. The purpose of this study was to assess postoperative stability in patients who underwent bilateral sagittal split ramus osteotomy (BSSRO) setback and widening of mandibular midline to reinstate ideal transverse width.
Patients and Methods This retrospective cohort study included patients wherein single stage Le Fort I, BSSRO setback with mandibular midline widening and genioplasty was performed within August 2020 to March 2024; 24 patients underwent surgery and a 6-month postoperative follow-up. Three patients requiring surgery first approach, two stage bimaxillary surgery and titanium osteosynthesis placement without genioplasty were excluded (n=21). Pre- and postoperative radiographs at specific timepoints were used to compare same landmarks at the first molar and gonial regions, representative of mandibular transverse width change. Condylar angulations were assessed once before and after surgery. Postoperative complications were assessed during follow-up. Statistical analysis was done using Friedman’s test, Wilcoxon signed rank test, t-test and Spearman’s correlation. P<0.05 indicated significance.
Results
Total sample consisted of 21 (10 male, 11 female) patients. Mean patient age was 27.9±10.8 years. Simulated preoperative widening mean was 3.23±0.76 mm. There was no statistical significance between postoperative immediate and 1-month, 3-months, 6-months widening at gonial region; molar widening showed significance at 6-months (P=0.03). Molar widening correlation to right and left condylar angulation had very weak relation to both condyles in the immediate postoperative period. One patient sustained gingival tear and plate exposure which healed eventually.
Conclusion
BSSRO setback with mandibular midline widening and genioplasty is ideal for correction of mild to moderate (≤5 mm) transverse mandibular discrepancies with good stability and fewer postoperative complications.

I. Introduction
Dentofacial deformities occur during the developmental phase, affecting maxillo-mandibular relationship and manifest as mild to severe forms, requiring orthodontic correction and surgical treatment or both. The transverse aspect shows the least growth and fastest growth arrest at most by the time patients report to the dental office. It has been noted that bimaxillary transverse discrepancies without crossbites can be masked by molar teeth inclination during the mixed dentition stage. Bimaxillary transverse discrepancies can be diagnosed by clinical assessment of the patient, dental models and radiographs. Utilization of multi-dimensional computed tomography (MDCT) and cone-beam CT enables more accurate assessment, simulation and treatment of discrepancies in bimaxillary basal bone width and inter-jaw relationship.
Literature has several reports that encourage management of bimaxillary transverse discrepancies at the mixed dentition stage, either by orthodontic decompensation mainly by re-establishing alignment, space closure, torque control, levelling, and arch width compatibility and camouflage or early expansion in case of maxilla. The above-mentioned methods of management are potentially challenging in the mandible as transverse problems in the lower jaw occur concurrently with dental and with or without facial/skeletal asymmetries, majority warranting the need for surgical correction. Orthodontic tipping of mandibular posterior teeth may relapse into posterior crossbite; a large curve of Wilson may render orthodontic treatment impossible. Specially in cases where the maxilla presents with little to no variation pertaining to the transverse dimension that of which can be manageable by orthodontic intervention, isolated surgical mandibular widening is useful in correction of bimaxillary transverse discrepancies. The normal jaw requiring little to no correction must be managed as such with stress on correction of the specific dimension in the affected jaw. Techniques for surgical management of transverse discrepancies such as rapid palatal/maxillary expansion are well established for maxilla. Le Fort I with multi-piece maxillary segmental osteotomies have been conducted to enable expansion; albeit the technique has been used for constriction of maxilla previously. The incidence of a bimaxillary dentofacial deformity with the presentation of narrow mandible has not yet been clearly described as opposed incidence of other skeletal deformities and malocclusions which have been elucidated in detail among different populations and races. Very few reports exist on mandibular midline widening, raising concerns relative to reliability of the procedure and postoperative stability. Unfamiliarity with the surgical technique, long-term stability and relapse are commonly quoted reasons for the same. The conventional vertical symphyseal osteotomy has been synonymous with numerous complications such as tooth root and thereby periodontal damage, gingival recession, need for bone grafting, risk of relapse and segment torsion necessitating rigid fixation, possible midline diastema, gingival tear, infection, plate exposure, malunion or non-union. There is superior, medial, and posterior temporomandibular joint (TMJ) space reduction post-surgically relative to the type of bone movement performed owing to changes in condylar topography. When complex dentofacial deformities are managed by surgical means, multi-segment osteotomies are needed for precise correction which can increase the probability of TMJ problems.
It has been proposed that involvement of the innate basal bone provides for improved outcomes with regard to stability in the long-term15. Experience from our former case series publication employing mandibular midline widening for bimaxillary transverse discrepancy management with simultaneous genioplasty showed that this technique had better stability than the conventional mid-symphyseal widening due to the involvement of mandibular basal bone.
Based on the above background, we set a hypothesis that mandibular midline widening with concurrent genioplasty is reliable for provision of stability in the long-term, that midline widening does not cause significant changes to condylar rotation with insignificant complication rates. In our previous paper we elaborated the novel surgical technique, a modification of the conventional symphyseal osteotomy. In the current research article, we aimed to assess stability results over a 6-month observation period retrospectively following application of our surgical technique and the effects of midline mandibular widening on condylar changes, its relevance to TMJ problems and postoperative complications encountered in our sample patient population.

II. Patients and Methods

1. Study protocol
The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Shimane University (IRB approval reference number: 20240506-2). Patient recruitment for the retrospective cohort study was done from August 2020 until March 2024. All patients reported to the outpatient clinic at the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Shimane University Hospital for correction of malocclusion and concurrent dentofacial deformity. Twenty four male and female patients diagnosed with dentofacial deformity and bimaxillary transverse width discrepancy who underwent pre-surgical orthodontics and single stage bimaxillary surgical correction encompassing Le Fort I osteotomy, bilateral sagittal split ramus osteotomy (BSSRO) setback, genioplasty with mandibular midline widening with placement of bioactive/bioresorbable osteosynthesis were included in this study within the above-mentioned recruitment period. Patients who required surgery first orthognathic approach, two stage bimaxillary surgery, had craniofacial syndromes, needed titanium osteosyntheses placement and those for whom genioplasty was not performed were excluded from the study. From the 24 patients recruited - a total of 21 patients satisfied the inclusion criteria and 3 patients were excluded from further analyses. Informed consent was obtained from all the patients prior to the procedure and all the surgeries were conducted by the same members of the surgical team.

2. Preoperative planning
We routinely perform dental model analysis as well as preoperative virtual surgical planning using PROPLAN CMF software (Materialise) for all patients. Through virtual surgical planning, we simulated the precise bone movements and predetermined the amount of midline mandibular widening needed for each patient. After completion of pre-surgical orthodontic treatment, patient dental impressions were taken and models were created for study of arch length and width, incisor angulation, tooth size, tooth arch symmetry, cuspid-to-molar relation, and curve of Spee/Wilson. Width of existing arch was measured with the help of a caliper considering the mesiobuccal cusp of first molar as landmark bilaterally. Facebow transfer and centric relation bite enabled mounting of maxillary and mandibular models onto a semi-adjustable articulator respectively. Model surgery for bimaxillary surgery and mandibular midline widening amount was done and acrylic splints were fabricated for intra-operative usage. The amount of widening ranged from mild to moderate (measured in millimeters-mm) and was 2-5 mm respectively. Simulated preoperative mean after widening was estimated to be 3.23±0.76 mm.

3. Surgical procedure
Treatment planning was discussed and decided with the orthodontist and surgical team members. The surgical procedure was carried out in the following manner for purpose of standardization in all patients: (1) Le Fort I osteotomy and fixation, (2) BSSRO setback and fixation, (3) genioplasty - either with or without change in genial position (in patients who did not need alteration of genial morphology), (4) midline widening osteotomy with fixation, and finally (5) fixation of the genial fragment. The mandibular midline widening osteotomy was performed with as a variation of the conventional mid-symphyseal osteotomy. Fig. 1 displays the simulated preoperative virtual planning before and after surgery in order to facilitate better understanding of all the osteotomy cuts and bone movement effected. The detailed description of the procedure, also mentioned in our previous technical note is as follows: Local anesthetic solution of 2% lignocaine with adrenaline was infiltrated at the surgical site. Soft tissue marking was done with sutures. Vestibular incision was made and a healthy cuff of attached gingiva was retained. The anterior mandible was exposed up to the lower border; the soft tissues were reflected carefully only to expose the osteotomy site. Bilateral mental nerves were identified and preserved. We employed the sliding osteotomy design for genial correction. The osteotomy was performed using saw. Once the cut was completed, the genial fragment was down fractured. Then, we followed with the midline osteotomy. A straight saw was used to cut in between the central incisor roots, taking care to avoid periodontal ligament damage. The attached gingiva in the osteotomy region was gently retracted. The lingual side was palpated to identify the movement and direction of the cutting blade. Once the saw usage was complete, the osteotomized fragments were widened with osteotomes and gently separated. The split mandibular segments were mobilized and brought into position using the final interocclusal splint and stabilized with elastics and wires. The genium was repositioned accordingly (advancement, reduction, asymmetry correction) and fixation was carried out; first at the genium (2 stepped – four-hole three-dimensional [3D] plates on either side), then followed by the midline (eight-hole 3D plate with gap). We were able to perform various combinations of Genioplasties suited to the patient’s specific deformity as anterior advancement and vertical height reduction. Osteotomized segments were stabilized using third generation bioactive/bioresorbable osteosynthesis commercially available as SuperFIXORB-MX or OSTEOTRANS-MX (Teijin Medical Technologies), composed of unsintered hydroxyapatite and poly-L-lactic acid (u-HA/PLLA); midline was fixed using 3D plates and screws.(Fig. 2) Post widening and fixation, excessive gonial angle flaring was checked for and the bone fragment at the angle was osteotomized and reduced to beget a more esthetic result, when the amount of widening was 4-5 mm.(Fig. 2. E) Intra-operative passive occlusion was assessed, and the preoperative simulation was achieved in all patients. Intraoral wound was closed with 3-0 vicryl resorbable sutures. Recovery was uneventful in all patients. Liquid and semi solid diet was resumed from postoperative day 2. The final interocclusal splint was used at night postoperatively for a duration of 4 weeks and soft elastics were placed for occlusal training. The patients were discharged between postoperative day 7-10 and routine follow-up was done at the outpatient clinic. Postoperative orthodontics was resumed 4 weeks following surgery.

4. Data collection and analysis
Medical records were accessed from database to collect information for the retrospective study. Orthopantomogram (OPG), cephalogram (frontal and lateral) at specific intervals and MDCT imaging once pre- and postoperatively were obtained for all patients undergoing surgery for dentofacial deformity correction for purpose of diagnostic evaluation and postoperative comparison. OPG and cephalogram were collected from all patients after the last orthodontic treatment preoperatively and at immediate, 1-month, 3-months and 6-months intervals postoperatively. We utilized the frontal cephalogram set at 100% magnification to measure the width between the mesiobuccal cusp of the first molar on the right side to the distal aspect of the molar left side.(Fig. 3. A, 3. B) Gonial width measurements were taken from the gonial prominence on the right to gonial prominence left side.(Fig. 3. C, 3. D) We decided to use a two-dimensional (2D) radiograph for assessment, since postoperative MDCT data was obtained only once and not at specific timepoints. To assess the condylar rotation in the axial plane associated with the mandibular mid-symphyseal widening, we used patients’ preoperative and postoperative MDCT data. The condylar angulation was attained as follows: In axial section, a midsagittal plane-reference line was constructed by a line passing through the anterior and posterior nasal spine (ANS-PNS). A second line traversing through the largest mediolateral dimension of the condyle was traced in a way to intercept with the midsagittal reference line creating an angle. DICOM datasets were imported into ProPlan CMF software. Using multiplanar reformation, we reoriented the axial plane to pass through the ANS-PNS for both pre- and postoperative scans, aligned to the midsagittal (true sagittal) plane. The axial slice with maximum mediolateral condylar width was then standardized, and condylar angulation was measured relative to the midsagittal reference line. This approach ensured consistent overlay and reliable side-by-side comparison.(Fig. 3. E-3. H) The above-mentioned evaluations were conducted thrice by a single researcher, and the average value was considered for further assessments. Patient medical records were checked for TMJ complaints and postoperative complications until the 6-months’ timeframe. The flowchart depicted as Fig. 4 describes data collection and analyses.

5. Statistical analysis
All statistical analyses were performed with IBM SPSS Statistics ver. 27.0 (IBM). Non-parametric tests were used to analyze data for our heterogenous sample. Friedman test and Wilcoxon Signed Rank test were performed to identify significant differences in molar and gonial width postoperatively. Independent samples t-test was done to assess changes in right and left condylar angulation. We used Spearman’s correlation analysis to visualize association between condylar rotation and widening, separately for both right and left sides. P<0.05 was set to indicate statistical significance.

III. Results
This study had a total sample population of 21 patients (10 males and 11 females) with a mean age of 27.9±10.8 years. Condylar rotation as well as relevant correlation was conducted in 18 patients wherein the pre- and postoperative MDCT data was accessible. It was observed that the mandibular movement performed in all patients was BSSRO setback. Sample demographic data with type of genial movement is listed in Table 1.

1. Comparison of transverse skeletal stability
Comparison of widening stability at the molar region (Fig. 5. A) showed no significant difference between immediate postoperative with 1-month (P=0.53) and 3-months (P=0.10) timepoints, indicating stability during the initial healing period. However, we observed significant difference between immediate and 6-months timepoint (P=0.03). Molar intercuspation achieved intra-operatively remained stable across all time points. With regard to stability of gonial widening (Fig. 5. B) comparison of immediate postoperative widening showed insignificant difference with other timepoints; 1-month (P=0.08), 3-months (P=0.13), and 6-months (P=0.74).

2. Correlation of transverse skeletal widening to condylar rotation
There was no significant change in condylar rotation for both right (P=0.19) and left (P=0.24) sides between pre- and immediate postoperative periods.(Fig. 6) There was insignificant and negative correlation of right (rs=–0.12; P=0.60) and weak positive correlation of left (rs=0.07; P=0.74) condylar rotation to molar widening in the immediate postoperative period. Comparison between pre- and immediate postoperative condylar rotation with molar widening revealed insignificant and weak positive correlation of the right (rs=0.10; P=0.66) and negative correlation of the left (rs=–0.32; P=0.17) condyles.(Table 2) Gonial widening correlation had insignificant negative correlation with respect to both condyles (Right: rs=–0.13; P=0.57 and Left: rs=–0.07; P=0.75). Very weak positive right condylar (rs=0.01; P=0.94) and negative left (rs=–0.06; P=0.79) condylar rotation was seen during the pre- and immediate postoperative comparison with gonial widening.(Table 2) Scatter plots demonstrating correlation of right and left condylar rotation to preoperative and immediate postoperative timepoints with molar and gonial widening respectively are provided in Supplementary Fig. 1, 2. Postoperative follow-up revealed no registered patient complaints relative to TMJ clicking, pain, trismus, muscular/joint tenderness, difficulty in mastication, ear fullness/congestion; radiographic examination did not show any evidence of inflammatory or degenerative derangament related morphological change in any of the condyles. The resultant post-surgical condylar rotation was well tolerated by all patients in the sample population.

3. Complications
Bony union across every osteotomized site was uneventful in all patients. One patient sustained gingival tear intra-operatively followed by wound gaping and plate exposure at postoperative month 3. There were no signs of infection or plate loosening hence any further invasive intervention was avoided. Patient was advised strict oral hygiene measures and follow-up was continued for up to one year. The wound showed healing by secondary intention at postoperative month 8 and complete resolution by postoperation month 10.(Fig. 7) The result summary of postoperative complications is listed in Table 3.

IV. Discussion
Long-term postoperative stability and attainment of esthetics to achieve facial, dental and functional harmony are the main goals of orthognathic surgery. Mandibular midline constriction has long been regarded as a more stable movement compared to symphyseal widening, because the latter may require bone grafts and the presence of muscular torsional forces pose instability and relapse concerns. Symphyseal distraction osteogenesis has time and again shown good stability in the long-term of >5 years; basis of bone-borne distraction rests on the fact that involvement of the basal bone provides increased dento-alveolar stability. Early studies on stability and relapse after mid-symphyseal widening showed no significant relapse or long-term stability issues and favorable results.
In our study, we chose a 6-month observation period as most cases of skeletal relapse are likely to occur during this timeframe. Occlusal stability is a rather vital postoperative goal of bimaxillary surgery; it can be a factor that indicates progressive skeletal changes. The following factors contribute to evidence of stability. Passive occlusion was checked intra-operatively, cusp-to-fossa interdigitation with 3-point molar occlusal contact was achieved in every patient after osteofixation. Molar occlusion during clinical follow-up remained stable until 6th postoperative month, which was considered as a marker for dental stability. Usage of intermaxillary elastics for occlusal guidance and muscular adaptation in the immediate postoperative stage has been shown to augment stability. Proper planning and execution of postoperative orthodontic treatment in our case helped maintenance of dental stability. Complete bone union was observed in every patient at the end of postoperative 6th month. No diastema was seen between the lower incisors as a result of widening due to meticulous splint usage, soft diet and orthodontic occlusal adjustments. Favorable stability outcomes are typically observed after bimaxillary surgery with BSSRO setback rather than single- jaw surgery, possibly owing to control of ramus inclination. Although minor physiological adjustment occurs within a few weeks after surgery, rigid fixation generally enhances better stability in the long-term25. We utilized 3D plate and screws across the midline widening osteotomy and five bioactive/bioresorbable 12 mm bicortical screws for BSSRO osteofixation, that has shown to be equivalent in strength to three titanium bicortical screws. This helped retain position of the osteotomized segments without interfragmentary mobility. Since vertical symphyseal osteotomy is linked to long-term relapse, this modified technique can provide reliable outcomes with stable results. Additional osteotomy with osteosynthesis, blood loss and increased intra-operative time are concerns associated. However, without mandibular correction, maxillary multi-piece osteotomy may be necessary for transverse dimension adjustment. It would be ideal to preserve maxillary shape and avoid diastema relative to the maxillary anterior teeth, which is difficult to correct in the postoperative phase. Our technique can be safely employed for management of mild to moderate discrepancies in the range of 2-5 mm; mandibular distraction osteogenesis or combined maxillary osteotomy is necessary for widening >5 mm. From our results, we noticed an overall trend of stability maintained during all time points. Six-month postoperative result of molar widening had a significant change, which we speculate could be attributed more to the 2D analysis method rather than instability. We believe that proper prediction and intra-operative gonial prominence reduction in patients with flaring contribute to ideal remodeling and stability seen at the end of the 6-month period. There was insignificant and minimal difference in condylar rotation pre- and postoperatively, which hints at less possibility for the occurrence of TMJ dysfunction in the long-term. Increase in maxillary vertical dimension along with mandibular prognathia is a common occurrence in patients who have associated transverse discrepancy as was the observation in our patient sample as well. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this is the first retrospective cohort study which analyzed the postoperative stability of mandibular widening with simultaneous genioplasty to correct bimaxillary transverse discrepancies, without the aid of distractor devices.
Of importance is the assessment of condylar rotation, especially when multiple osteotomies are used to correct complex 3D deformities; such bony movements can cause rotational forces around vertical axis and soft tissue stretching. BSSRO setback can affect topography and may alter condyle to fossa relationship as a result of displacement and remodeling, which can be attributed to initiation of abnormal post-surgical clinical signs and symptoms. Factors that influence condyle displacement are distal segment positioning, fixation method coupled with muscular tension. Clockwise mandibular rotation movement is found to have better soft tissue outcome than counterclockwise movement wherein more muscular tenderness has been observed. In a study wherein linear symphyseal distraction was done condyles assumed a more lateral position; the authors observed that TMJ adaptation to post-surgical changes are generally favorable. A former study reported that there were no histologic changes in the TMJ after distraction osteogenesis within a range of 3.5 mm to 8.5 mm. Although there was weak positive correlation, molar widening did cause additional rotational changes as per our results. However, we did not encounter any patient complaint or clinical/radiographic signs of TMJ issues or condylar morphological change during our follow-up period, given that the amount of widening was mild to moderate. It is a known fact that splint usage can relieve symtptoms associated with TMJ dysfunction. The continual use of a final interocclusal splint in our sample population could have helped alleviate the development of TMJ derangement postoperatively.
Iatrogenic injury or damage to periodontium and incisor roots can potentially ensue due to inadequate preoperative assessment or improper intra-operative technique which may be bothersome at a later stage. To avoid such complications, we planned and performed the osteotomy precisely between mandibular central incisor roots. We stressed upon continual usage of the final interocclusal splint for a period of four weeks to avoid postoperative midline diastema. None of our patient presented with dental complications in the postoperative phase. Attached gingiva was retained and care was taken to prevent injury to lingual soft tissues. Gingival tear, wound gaping and plate exposure that presented in one patient without infection healed gradually with local hygiene measures, highlighting the need for rigorous peri-operative care.
Preoperative virtual surgical planning permits the operator to simulate precise intra-operative bony movements and aid prediction of both hard and soft tissue outcomes in all dimensions. Comparison of pre-surgical planning accuracy has shown favorability toward virtual surgical planning over conventional techniques in bimaxillary surgeries with very low error margins thus, enhancing subjective inter-jaw harmony and relationship. We routinely employ virtual surgical planning preoperatively for all patients in our clinical setting and in agreement with the above-mentioned literature, have found excellent results in terms of occlusion achievement with little to no error margin.
Bone segment stabilization was brought forth by fixation of third generation bioactive/bioresorbable systems in all patients. The system has bioactive/osteoconductivity owing to the presence of hydroxyapatite, which is beneficial for bioactive cell accumulation and faster fracture bridging through new bone formation. Stability has been cited as a key concern when choosing bioresorbable osteosynthesis due to gradual loss of molecular weight and resorption. According to molecular studies conducted previously, u-HA/PLLA systems retain good tensile strength and degrade slowly owing to the PLLA component for an average period of 8-9 weeks sufficient to prevent fragment displacement during the healing phase. Furthermore, we utilized 3D plates to stabilize the midline in order to resist torsional movements from muscles. Fixation of the genial segment on either side renders immobility during healing. Complete degradation of the plates and screws occurs at a time frame of 2-5.5 years in vivo. PLLA degradation can cause release of acidic byproducts and inflammation, which may manifest as soft tissue swelling, pain with resultant plate extrusion; however, combining PLLA with calcium phosphate ceramics reduces inflammatory conditions. The authors have been using biodegradable osteosynthesis for all patients who undergo bimaxillary orthognathic surgery at the department and have observed good results with regard to patient tolerance as well as long-term stability.
There was a smaller number of subjects in our study even though the sample inclusion was done for nearly four years, highlighting the low incidence of bimaxillary transverse discrepancies. We used a 2D radiograph for assessment due to non-availability of CT data at every postoperative timepoint for all patients. It is noteworthy that bioresorbable systems are more commonly utilized in experiments as well for clinical applications in Japan and Asia in comparison to other countries. The possibility of complications are present in any kind of surgical procedure, we would like to state that the benefits far outweigh the potential risks. We aim to include a larger sample, modify sample criteria to include other mandibular movements (advancement, differential rotation) and conduct a long-term evaluation with regard to stability and TMJ changes in our future research.

V. Conclusion
Based on our clinical experience, we conclude that our technique rather than maxillary multi-piece osteotomy is a useful procedure of in management of mild to moderate bimaxillary transverse discrepancies with good prognosis. The bimaxillary surgery employing BSSRO setback, mandibular midline widening osteotomy with simultaneous genioplasty and bioactive/bioresorbable osteosynthesis placement is beneficial in correction of mild to moderate transverse deficits ranging from 2-5 mm. Our patients demonstrated excellent healing with bony union of osteotomized fragments, good stability, and negligible postoperative complications during the 6-month evaluation period.

Supplementary Materials
Supplementary data is available at https://www.jkaoms.org.
Authors’ Contributions
M.R., A.S., N.S., and R.S-O. participated in data collection, coordination, statistical analysis and drafting of the manuscript. M.F-K. and T.K. helped design the study and provided critical input and editing of the final version of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
This work was supported by Shimane University Hospital Foundation for the Promotion of Advanced Medical Care.
Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
The study protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Shimane University (IRB approval reference number: 20240506-2). Informed consent was obtained from all the patients prior to the procedure.
Conflict of Interest
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.

References
Correlation between mandibular condylar position and clinical dysfunction index after bilateral sagittal split osteotomies
Orthognathic surgery: the correction of dentofacial deformities
The complexity of skeletal transverse dimension: from diagnosis, management, and treatment strategies to the application of collaborative cross (CC) mouse model
A study of transverse maxillomandibular discrepancy and dental compensation in early mixed dentition with skeletal Class III malocclusion without posterior crossbite
In search of anatomic truth: 3-dimensional digital modeling and the future of orthodontics
3D diagnosis and treatment planning in orthodontics
A review on transverse discrepancies
[Investigation of the facial symmetry of cases with cross bites needing surgical orthodontic treatment using postero-anterior roentgenographic cephalometrics]
Prevention and management of relapses after correction of maxillo-mandibular transverse discrepancies-a narrative review
Severe unilateral scissor bite and bimaxillary protrusion treated by horseshoe Le Fort I osteotomy combined with mid-alveolar osteotomy
Mandibular symphyseal distraction osteogenesis: review of three techniques
Evaluation of soft and hard tissue changes after anterior segmental osteotomy
Vertical symphyseal osteotomy
Management of bimaxillary transverse discrepancy with vertical excess
Mandibular midline osteotomy for correction of bimaxillary transverse discrepancy: a technical note
Stability of mandibular constriction with a symphyseal osteotomy
Midline mandibular osteotomy in an asymmetric patient
Dental stability and radiographic healing patterns after mandibular symphysis widening with distraction osteogenesis
Mandibular symphyseal distraction osteogenesis: 20 years of experience treating transverse deficiencies with an internal hybrid device
Long-term (6.5 years) follow-up of mandibular midline distraction
Long-term dental stability after orthognathic surgery: a systematic review
Saghafi H, Benington P, Ju X, Ayoub A
Stability after mandibular setback: mandible-only versus 2-jaw surgery
Stability and relapse in orthognathic surgery
Assessment of biomechanical strength of titanium versus unsintered-hydroxyapatite/poly-L-lactic acid (u-HA/PLLA) osteosynthesis screws in bilateral sagittal split ramus osteotomy
Reactive changes in the temporomandibular joint after mandibular midline osteodistraction
Studies on function and dysfunction of the masticatory system. II. Index for anamnestic and clinical dysfunction and occlusal state
Mandibular condyle displacements after orthognathic surgery-an overview of quantitative studies
Condylar displacement related to mandibular symphyseal distraction
Oral splint for temporomandibular joint disorders with revolutionary fluid system
What is the accuracy of bimaxillary orthognathic surgery using occlusally-based guides and patient-specific fixation in both jaws? A cohort study and discussion of surgical techniques
One-year postoperative skeletal stability of 3D planned bimaxillary osteotomies: maxilla-first versus mandible-first surgery
Comparison of the accuracy of maxillary position between conventional model surgery and virtual surgical planning
Outcome study of computer-aided surgical simulation in the treatment of patients with craniomaxillofacial deformities
Overview of innovative advances in bioresorbable plate systems for oral and maxillofacial surgery
A narrative review of u-HA/PLLA, a bioactive resorbable reconstruction material: applications in oral and maxillofacial surgery
Biodegradation behavior of ultra-high-strength hydroxyapatite/poly (L-lactide) composite rods for internal fixation of bone fractures
Evaluation of hard and soft tissue responses to four different generation bioresorbable materials-poly-l-lactic acid (PLLA), poly-l-lactic acid/polyglycolic acid (PLLA/PGA), uncalcined/unsintered hydroxyapatite/poly-l-lactic acid (u-HA/PLLA) and uncalcined/unsintered hydroxyapatite/poly-l-lactic acid/polyglycolic acid (u-HA/PLLA/PGA) in maxillofacial surgery: an in-vivo animal study
Evaluation of long-term inflammatory responses after implantation of a novel fully bioabsorbable scaffold composed of poly-L-lactic acid and amorphous calcium phosphate nanoparticles
Three-dimensional (3D) virtual simulation depicting comparison of bone movement before and after surgery using PROPLAN CMF software (Materialise). A. Patient 3D images before virtual surgery. B. 3D simulation showing maxillary and mandibular osteotomy cuts. C. Final 3D rendering highlighting midline mandibular widening and position of all bony segments.
Intraoperative images of bimaxillary surgery. A. Le Fort I osteotomy and fixation. B. Bilateral sagittal split ramus osteotomy setback and fixation. C. Genioplasty and midline widening osteotomy. D. Anterior segment osteofixation. E. Gonial bone ostectomy. F. Postoperative three-dimensional computed tomography (left lateral, frontal, right lateral).
Demonstration of width difference between molar-to-molar and gonial region measurements as well as change in preoperative and postoperative condylar angulation measurements. A. Preoperative frontal cephalogram of molar width (left). B. Postoperative frontal cephalogram of molar width (right). C. Preoperative frontal cephalogram of gonial width (left). D. Postoperative frontal cephalogram of gonial width (right). E. Right condyle preoperative. F. Left condyle preoperative. G. Right condyle postoperative. H. Left condyle preoperative.
Flowchart displaying data collection methodology and variables. (BSSRO: bilateral sagittal split ramus osteotomy)
Boxplot displaying changes in condylar rotation between preoperative and immediate postoperative time point. A. Right condyle. B. Left condyle. (NS: not significant)
Boxplot depicting stability of widening across postoperative immediate, 1-month, 3-months and 6-months (*denotes significant difference; P=0.03). A. Molar widening stability. B. Gonial region widening stability. (NS: not significant)
Intra-operative gingival tear sustained (A), plate exposure seen at post-operative 3-months follow-up (B).
Patient demographic data and type of genioplasty performed
Sample demographic		Genial movement		 	Total number of patients	24	Reduction	5	 			Advancement	10	 	Total analyzed	21	Fixation at original position	6	 	Male	10			 	Female	11			 	Mean±standard deviation (yr)	27.9±10.8
Bivariate analysis results
Right side condyle rotation relative to molar widening	Molar widening comparison - immediate	 	Preoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	–0.142	 	 P-value	0.529	 	Postoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	–0.124	 	 P-value	0.602	 	Pre-Postoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	0.107	 	 P-value	0.663	 	Left side condyle rotation relative to molar widening	Molar widening comparison - immediate	 	Pre-operative		 	Correlation coefficient	0.246	 	 P-value	0.271	 	Postoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	0.077	 	 P-value	0.748	 	Pre-Postoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	–0.326	 	 P-value	0.173	 	Right side condyle rotation relative to gonial widening	Molar widening comparison - immediate	 	Preoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	–0.193	 	 P-value	0.390	 	Postoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	–0.134	 	 P-value	0.573	 	Pre-Postoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	0.016	 	 P-value	0.949	 	Left side condyle rotation relative to gonial widening	Molar widening comparison - immediate	 	Pre-operative		 	Correlation coefficient	–0.096	 	 P-value	0.671	 	Postoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	–0.074	 	 P-value	0.755	 	Pre-Postoperative		 	Correlation coefficient	–0.064	 	 P-value	0.794
Summary of postoperative complications
Possible complication	Sample affected	 	Infection	-	 	Hardware failure	-	 	Plate exposure	1	 	Gingival tear	1	 	Gingival recessionTooth root damage	-	 	Tooth root damage	-	 	Periodontal damage	-	 	Malunion	-	 	Non-union	-	 	Midline diastema	-