Pediatric Supracondylar Humerus Fractures: Evaluation and Management Approach in Resource-limited Settings
Supracondylar humerus fractures (SCHFs) are common injuries among children and typically occur after a fall on an outstretched hand. SCHFs may present with neurovascular injury specifically to the brachial artery and/or median nerve (or its deep motor branch), ulnar nerve, and/or radial nerve. Thorough examination of a patient's neurovascular status is imperative to appropriately guide treatment and determine whether a referral is needed. Minimally displaced SCHFs may be treated nonsurgically, whereas displaced injuries often require surgery. Displaced SCHFs may be treated nonsurgically with traction and splinting, but providers should expect a high rate of complications and notable disability. Of equal importance to consider is the status of the soft tissues. In resource-limited settings, such as rural or district hospitals, surgery for more severe SCHFs may not be feasible because of lack of fluoroscopy, implants, or staff adequately trained in musculoskeletal trauma. In these situations, referral to a hospital with increased resources and surgical capabilities is recommended when possible. We present an approach to the triage and treatment of SCHFs in various resource-constrained environments, broadly applicable to low- and middle-income countries.
Supracondylar humerus fractures (SCHFs) account for 20% of all pediatric musculoskeletal injuries and 60% of all elbow injuries in children age 16 years or younger, making them the second most common musculoskeletal injury and the most common elbow injury healthcare providers may encounter when caring for children. Pediatric SCHFs have a slightly higher incidence in boys and a slight predominance in the nondominant arm.
The epidemiology of these injuries varies greatly by geography, climate, demographics, and socioeconomics. Generally, most SCHFs occur after a fall from height onto an outstretched hand, which can occur while a child is playing at a playground, on the roof of their home, or climbing a tree. Road traffic accidents are becoming a rising cause of pediatric elbow injuries.
Inadequate management of SCHFs can cause serious complications. Malunions are common in LMICs because of the limited availability of appropriate surgical treatment and the prevalence of traditional bone setting practices.
Minimal orthopaedic expertise and limited resources. This includes settings such as a rural health center, community hospital, or basic district hospital with minimal to no surgical facilities and staff with basic training in mainly nonsurgical musculoskeletal trauma care.
Basic orthopaedic surgical expertise and limited resources. This tier could be a general or district hospital with limited surgical facilities and some presence of orthopaedic-trained surgeons with training in basic surgical musculoskeletal trauma management.
Advanced orthopaedic surgical expertise and surgical capacity.
In this article, we aim to provide recommendations for the evaluation and treatment of pediatric SCHFs in resource-limited settings, with a target audience of any healthcare provider at any level of experience and expertise who may manage patients with musculoskeletal injuries. Recognizing that a spectrum of settings exists in LMICs, with differing levels of support and resources, this article will provide recommendations regarding the management of pediatric SCHFs based on three generalized levels:

Anatomy of the Elbow

Osseous Anatomy
The elbow is a complex joint formed by the articulation of three bones: the distal humerus, the proximal radius, and the proximal ulna (Figure 1). The distal humerus can be thought of as an inverted Y with lateral and medial columns, between which the articular surface of the distal humerus sits, with a medial and lateral condyle, named the trochlea and capitellum, respectively (Figure 2).
Osseous anatomy of the elbow. Image showing anterior (left) and posterior (right) views of the elbow joint. The images outline the three bones around the elbow, the bony anatomy, and the elbow joint configuration.
The trochlea articulates with the proximal ulna to create the hinge-like ulnohumeral joint for elbow flexion and extension. Normal elbow extension-flexion is from 0° (full extension) to 145° (full flexion). A functional range of motion is considered to be 30° to 130°.
Biomechanical structure of the humerus. Figure showing the columns of the humerus (A), the distribution of forces in the “inverted y” (B), and the valgus tilt of the distal humerus articulation with respect to the long axis of the humerus.
The capitellum articulates with the radial head to form the radiocapitellar joint which allows forearm pronation and supination, with a normal range 90° from neutral in each direction. Most activities of daily living require 50 degrees of pronation and supination.
With the elbow in full extension, the long axes of the humerus and ulna are not perfectly in line and in fact form a slight angle called the carrying angle. The normal carrying angle is 11° to 14° in male and 13° to 16° in female children (Figure 3).
Elbow carrying angles. Picture showing female carrying angle (left) and male carrying angles (right). This is the angle (cubital valgus) formed between the arm and forearm when the upper limb is resting in the anatomical position—that is, elbow extended and forearm in supination. It allows the forearm to swing when walking. The normal angles are between 13° and 16° in female and 11° to 14° in male children.
In children, many of the bony structures many not yet be ossified. Table 1 lists the ossification centers of the elbow—which can be remembered with the mnemonic CRITOE—in the order of their average age of ossification (Figure 4).
Ossifications Centers of the Pediatric Elbow
Ossification Center	Age of Ossification	 	Capitellum	1	 	Radial head	3	 	Internal (medial) epicondyle	5	 	Trochlea	7	 	Olecranon	9	 	External (lateral) epicondyle	11
There are six ossification centers around the elbow. The first one to appear is the capitellum at about 1 year and the last one to appear is the lateral epicondyle at 11 years. This is important to note when radiologically evaluating the pediatric elbow.
Radiographs showing elbow ossification centers. Ossifications centers on AP (left, 6 YO) and lateral (right, 13 YO) radiograph imaging. The image on the left is an AP view and the one on the right is a lateral view. C- Capitellum, R – Radial head, I -Internal epicondyle/medial epicondyle, T -Trochlea, O – Olecranon, E- External epicondyle/ lateral epicondyle. Left: Courtesy of Ian Bickle, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 46507. Right: Courtesy of Jeremy Jones, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 26814.

Neurovasculature Anatomy
Numerous important nerves and arteries cross the elbow and can be damaged either at the time of injury or during treatment of a patient (Figure 5).
Key neurovascular anatomy of the elbow. Major peripheral nerves of the elbow (left) and vascular anatomy (right). The three main nerves and the arteries can be seen as labeled with their close relationship to the bones, hence the risk of injury with fractures around the elbow.
The median nerve, with its main branch the anterior interosseous nerve, and the brachial artery pass over the anteromedial aspect of the elbow near the anterior ulnohumeral joint.
The ulnar nerve travels medially between the medial epicondyle and the olecranon process.
The radial nerve and its main branch the posterior interosseous nerve lie in near the radiocapitellar joint and radial neck.
The brachial artery spans the anteromedial distal humerus superficial to the brachialis muscle. It then emerges in the cubital fossa bifurcating into the radial and ulnar arteries just distal to the cubital fossa.

Mechanism of Injury
The inherent anatomy of the distal humerus makes it susceptible to injury, with the supracondylar region representing a relatively weak area prone to fracture (Figure 6). Most (95% to 98%) SCHFs are extension-type, occurring when a child falls on an outstretched hand with the elbow in full extension (Figure 7A). The elbow experiences a hyperextension force, which first breaks the anterior cortex of the supracondylar humerus. Only 2% to 5% of SCHFs are flexion-type fractures, which typically occur when a child falls onto a bent elbow (Figure 7B).
Typical supracondylar fracture lines. The typical location of a fracture of the supracondylar region and its relationship to the lateral and medial columns (left) and an example of a supracondylar fracture (right) crossing through from the medial column, olecranon fossa and lateral column. Left: courtesy of Jeremy Jones, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 26814. Right: courtesy of Frank Gaillard, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 10342.
Supracondylar fractures. (A) Extension type fracture, where the distal segment is posteriorly displaced relative to the proximal segment and in extension. Courtesy of Amir Mahmud, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 79074. (B) Flexion type fracture, where the distal segment is anterior to the proximal fragment and tends to be flexed anteriorly. Courtesy of Jason Szczepanski, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 97523.

Clinical Examination

Inspection
A child with a SCHF will present with a painful and swollen/deformed elbow, often with limited elbow range of motion because of the pain (Figure 8A). SCHFs may appear in conjunction with other fractures, so assessment of the entire extremity is important.
Inspect the skin for wounds that may indicate an open fracture. Always inspect the color and temperature of the skin. A sign of possible injury to the brachial artery as well as the median nerve is the brachialis or “pucker” sign (Figure 8B). This sign occurs when the skin dimples, or “puckers,” with ecchymosis present on the anterodistal aspect of the humerus. This sign may also serve as an indication of a difficult reduction because of the anteriorly displaced fragment buttonholing through the brachialis muscle and the subcutaneous layer.

Neurovascular Examination
A cool, pale limb indicates an arterial injury, which must be identified and addressed immediately. Palpate a radial and ulnar pulse at the wrist and assess capillary refill of the nail bed. A pulse oximeter placed on a finger of the injured limb can also be helpful to assess and closely monitor perfusion. Importantly, pulses can slowly weaken and eventually disappear if the vascular injury involves the intimal layer of the artery, thus resulting in a progressive occlusion over several hours—this is why serial vascular examinations are critical (Figure 8C).
Pulse present, perfused hand
Pulseless, perfused hand
Pulseless, nonperfused hand
Based on the vascular status, SCHFs can be classified into three categories that dictate management.
Figure 9 summarizes a quick examination of the three main nerves.
Physical Examination Findings in Supracondylar Fractures. (A) Blisters and skin contusion on the anterior elbow in the setting of a supracondylar humerus fracture, in this case suggesting a high energy, displaced injury. (B) The Brachialis sign, where the proximal fragment penetrates the brachialis muscle, puckering the anterior skin. (C) Thrombosed artery and interposed median nerve seen in an open exposure of the anterior elbow in a case of supracondylar humerus fracture with vascular compromise noted on pre-operative examination.
Motor testing of major peripheral nerves that cross the elbow. The OK sign formed by flexing the index finger proximal and distal interphalangeal joints (flexor digitorum profundus and flexor digitorum superficialis tendons) and the thumb flexion (flexor pollicis longus tendon) all innervated by the median nerve. The thumbs up sign formed by extending the thumb (extensor pollicis longus and brevis) which are innervated by radial nerve and the cross-finger sign formed by abducting the middle finger, adducting the index finger (interosseous muscles) innervated by ulnar nerve.

Compartment Syndrome
Compartment syndrome is about 0.1% to 0.3% of SCHFS. Risk factors for compartment syndrome in SCHFs include displaced fractures, ipsilateral forearm fractures, high-energy injuries, concomitant anterior interosseous nerve palsy, tight bandaging including bamboo splints, or circumferential long arm casting in >90° of flexion. However, compartment syndrome can also develop in children without any risk factors. Unfortunately, the diagnosis of compartment syndrome is more difficult in younger children because they often have a difficult time communicating symptoms or cooperating with an examination. Warning signs of impending compartment syndrome include increasing pain that is out of proportion and not relieved by standard analgesics, pain with passive stretching of the muscles, and tight compartments on palpation. The 3 A's—anxiety, agitation, and increasing analgesic needs—should be kept in mind in a pediatric patient.

Diagnosis and Imaging

Radiographs
Appropriate imaging is imperative for determining both the diagnosis and appropriate treatment. If no radiograph machine is available, referral is necessary. Obtain both anterior-posterior (AP) and lateral radiographs of the patient's affected elbow. In younger children with unossified bony structures, radiographs of the contralateral uninjured elbow may be helpful.

Classification Systems
The Gartland classification is the most widely used system to categorize pediatric extension-type SCHFs (Figure 10). Flexion-type fractures are considered separately. Our preferred system is the Wilkins-modified Gartland classification explained in Table 2.
The Gartland classification for elbow fractures. Type I is a nondisplaced fracture, type II is usually displaced with an angulation but the cortex on the posterior aspect remains intact, and type III is a completely displaced fracture (no cortical contact), posteriorly but the periosteal hinge is intact.
Radiographic Features of Wilkins-Modified Gartland Supracondylar Humerus Fractures
Variant	Cortices	Fracture Lines	Translation	AHL Transects Capitellum?	 	Type I	A and P intact	±	−	Yes	 	Type IIA	A separated, P intact	+	−	Noa	 	Type IIB	A separated, P intact	+	+	Noa	 	Type III	A and P separated	+	+	Noa
A = anterior, P = posterior, AHL, Anterior humeral line
AHL is anterior to capitulum.
Wilkins modified the Gartlands classification to make it more clinically relevant. This classification further divides the type II fractures based on translational and rotational deformity of the fragments.

Radiographic Parameters

Anterior Humeral Line
On the lateral view, the anterior humeral line, is an imaginary line drawn along the anterior humeral cortex and should intersect the middle-third of the ossified capitellum (Figure 11).
Radiographs showing the anterior humeral line dissecting the capitellum. Using a lateral radiograph of the elbow, this is a line traced over the distal, anterior border of the humerus down to the capitellum. In a normal radiograph the line will intersect the long axis of the capitellum in the mid third. Right: Courtesy of Jeremy Jones, Radiopaedia.org, rID: 26814.

Baumann Angle
On AP view, Baumann angle is formed by the intersection of a line through the humeral shaft and a line that is parallel to the lateral condyle physis and should be approximately 75° (Figure 12).
Radiographs showing Baumann angle. Using an AP view of the elbow, this is the angle measured between the long axis of the humerus shaft and the lateral epicondyle physis. Normal angle range between 64° and 82°. Original image courtesy of Ian Bickle, Radiopaedia.org (46507).

Posterior Fat Pad Sign
The posterior fat pad sign is useful for diagnosing nondisplaced or subtle fractures. The anterior fat pad sign is often visible in normal elbow radiographs, but the posterior fat pad sign should not be visible at all.

Tiered Management of Pediatric Supracondylar Humerus Fractures in Resource-limited Settings
Below are management options for the treatment of pediatric SCHFs based on the level of support and resources available.

Universal Principles to Guide All Settings

Immediate Trauma Care
Advanced Trauma Life Support (ATLS) protocols to manage any life-threatening injuries.
Immediately transfer a patient with a possible vascular injury or compartment syndrome to a hospital capable of performing surgery.
With open fracture, give IV antibiotics and tetanus immunization/booster as soon as possible. Irrigate and dress the wound, splint and transfer for débridement.
Identify and address limb-threatening injuries.
Once the patient is stable, perform a thorough clinical examination of the entire patient to identify all injuries. Obtain necessary radiographic imaging to characterize injuries and guide treatment.
Splint the injured limb and/or arm sling. Avoid flexion more than 90° to reduce the risk of compartment syndrome and vascular occlusion. Provide multimodal analgesics.

Setting #1: Minimal Orthopaedic Expertise and Limited Resources
Care at this level still requires the availability of basic supplies, radiograph capability, splinting materials, staff capable of performing a neurovascular examination, hospital beds, and analgesia. Nondisplaced/minimally displaced fractures may be safely treated in this setting with good outcomes. Patients with more displacement should be referred to a higher-level facility. If no referral option is available, the treatment described below may be of some benefit to patients compared with no treatment at all.
In settings with minimal support and limited resources, patients can be treated nonoperatively. Patients with minimal swelling and type I fracture are treated with immobilization in a simple arm sling and advised to wear this arm sling for 3 weeks with radiographs follow-up to check for fracture healing. For patients with notable swelling and fracture displacement, we recommend well-padded, loose splinting first, straight arm traction if splinting is poorly tolerated (Figure 13).
Image showing a child in straight-arm traction. As shown above, straight arm traction is applied for patients with notable swelling and fracture displacement. The patient remains on traction until the swelling improves. This may be followed by closed reduction and splinting/closed reduction percutaneous pinning or open reduction and percutaneous pinning.

Straight Arm Traction Technique
First, apply long strips of adhesive plaster or cloth tape directly to the volar and dorsal aspects of the forearm. The cloth tape strips should be placed parallel to the long axis of the forearm and should extend from the proximal forearm to the wrist.
Next, gauze is wrapped over the cloth tape to secure the strips of cloth tape in place.
The distal ends of the volar and dorsal tape strips are connected to form a loop construct and a cord is attached to the loop. Connect the cord to an overhead beam so that the affected upper extremity is suspended above the patient.
The patient should remain in traction until their swelling improves. Patients with notable swelling can have fragile skin that may blister with the application of skin traction, so monitor the skin closely. Once the patient is released from traction, the next steps of management will depend on the patient's fracture pattern. For nondisplaced Gartland type I fractures, the patient may proceed with a simple arm sling or a posterior slab with elbow flexed at 90° to 100° for three weeks. During immobilization, caution should be taken to avoid excessively tight bandaging or dressings, which can result in devastating complications (Figures 14)..
Images showing type 1 supracondylar fracture that was treated in a tight splint, complicated by a missed compartment syndrome, which subsequently developed limb ischemia. Supracondylar fractures are prone to compartment syndrome either from marked swelling, from tight splints and dressings or a combination of the two. Hence, it is recommended that serial monitoring of the limb be done in the acute phase after injury/surgery.
Recommended management treatment algorithm. The first part of the flow diagram indicates the initial assessment required to rule out potentially limb-threatening neurovascular injuries that could affect functional outcome, hence requiring immediate diagnosis and appropriate management. The lower part of the diagram shows the authors' recommended treatment approach to supracondylar fractures based on degree of fracture displacement. *Indicates preference for surgical management.
Radiographs should be obtained after immobilization to assess the quality of reduction. If the reduction is acceptable, the splint remains in place for 3 to 4 weeks. Once the splint is removed, elbow range of motion exercises should be initiated.
Patients with nondisplaced/minimally displaced fractures can be expected to have excellent outcomes. For patients with flexion-type or Gartland type II/III, there is a much higher risk of poor outcome with nonsurgical treatment. Thus, surgical treatment of these injuries is much preferred and should be made available to these patients whenever possible.

Setting #2: Basic Orthopaedic Surgical Expertise and Limited Resources
The following resources are expected to be available in Setting #2: operating theater, Kirshner wires, complete wire set, and a surgeon who is comfortable with percutaneous pinning and safe open approaches to the elbow.
Any patient with a suspected vascular injury should still be transferred urgently for exploration and repair.
Nondisplaced/minimally displaced fractures may be treated nonsurgically in the same ways described in setting #1. Without the availability of intraoperative fluoroscopy in this setting, displaced fractures may be treated surgically with open reduction and percutaneous pinning (ORPP), with preference given to type III and flexion type injuries. If fluoroscopy is available, see the technique for closed reduction percutaneous pinning (CRPP) described in setting #3.

Open reduction and Percutaneous Pinning Technique
Surgical exposure through anterior, medial, lateral or posterior approaches. If the fracture is open, an approach that includes the open wound should be selected to allow for an adequate débridement.
Once the fracture is accessed using the surgeon's preferred approach, reduction is done.
Acceptable reduction is stabilized with two or three percutaneous Kirshner wires across the fracture, either as cross pins or from lateral.
Postoperatively, a posterior splint is applied with the elbow at 45° to 90° of flexion. Postoperative radiographs confirm reduction and at 3 weeks healing. Splint and Kirshner wires removed at 3 weeks.
CRPP is preferred over ORPP, unless fluoroscopy is unavailable or if there is a large open wound or failed closed reduction. Furthermore, outcomes for SCHFs are comparable in all-lateral versus cross-pinning techniques.

Setting #3: Advanced Orthopaedic Surgical Expertise and Capabilities
This setting has intraoperative fluoroscopy, orthopaedic surgeons, instruments, and microvascular surgery capabilities. With increased operative capacity, we recommend that all displaced SCHFs be treated surgically.
The CRPP technique requires intraoperative fluoroscopy and may be used for Gartland type II and type III extension fractures. This closed reduction technique should not be used for flexion SCHF. If the patient presents within seven days of injury, closed reduction is usually possible; however, if the patient presents >1 week after injury with a displaced fracture, the patient will likely require open reduction.

Closed Reduction and Percutaneous Pinning Technique
Closed reduction of the SCHF is performed using traction on the forearm with the arm in approximately 10° of flexion. An assistant can apply countertraction at the proximal humerus. Traction should be held for about 5 to 10 minutes to allow for the muscular spasms to release. Massaging the biceps and brachialis muscle may facilitate soft-tissue release.
Use C-arm to confirm the reduction on the AP view. While maintaining traction on the forearm and applying pressure to the olecranon, flex the elbow maximally and check alignment on the lateral fluoroscopic view.
Once reduction has been achieved, use two Kirshner wires inserted percutaneously from a lateral start point at the lateral condyle and directed medially across the fracture. Older children (>6 years) typically require 2.0 mm Kirshner wires, whereas younger children typically require 1.6 mm Kirshner wires. Do not attempt to insert the same Kirschner wire more than 2 times as failure to successfully insert a Kirschner wire may signal that the bone is damaged or weak in that area and excessive attempts of Kirschner wire insertion may further harm the bone or physis. In addition, a pin may be inserted from the medial epicondyle/condyle, but this should never be done percutaneously to avoid injuring the ulnar nerve. A small incision should be made for blunt dissection and to protect the nerve.
After fixation, obtain AP, lateral, and column views. If unsatisfied with the reduction or if there is insufficient Kirschner wire spread appreciated on imaging, a third Kirschner wire may be required.
Postoperatively, a posterior slab is applied with the elbow at 45° to 90° of flexion for approximately three weeks. Postoperative radiographs should be done. Pins are removed 3 to 4 weeks postoperatively.
For patients with a pink and pulseless hand, in a resource-constrained environment, we recommend an open exploration of the antecubital fossa through an extensile “lazy-S” incision (see Figure 8C), extrication of neurovascular structures from the fracture site with possible repair or thrombectomy as needed, followed by open reduction and pinning of the fracture.
Our recommended treatment algorithm for SCHF is summarized in Figure 15.

Take Home Messages
SCHF may be associated with vascular injuries, nerve injuries, and/or compartment syndrome. If present, it is important to recognize the signs for these emergencies for prompt treatment/referral.
AP and lateral radiographs of the patient's injured elbow are essential to diagnose and treat SCHF. Imaging of the contralateral uninjured elbow may also be helpful for comparison's sake.
Minimally displaced fractures may be treated nonsurgically with a sling/splinting while displaced fractures often require surgery. Open versus closed reductions of SCHFs depend on the availability of intraoperative C-arm.
For open reductions, surgeons should use the approach they are most comfortable with.
As with all fractures, always respect the soft tissues.
None of the following authors or any immediate family member has received anything of value from or has stock or stock options held in a commercial company or institution related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article: Dr. Chomba, Dr. Mavrommatis, Dr. Krishna, Dr. Challa, Dr. Simister, Dr. Dooregekant, Dr. Mengesha, Dr. Agarwal-Harding.

References
Supracondylar humerus fractures in low- and lower middle-income countries: A scoping review of the current epidemiology, treatment modalities, and outcomes
Supracondylar fractures in children: Management and treatment
Outcomes of nonoperatively treated pediatric supracondylar humeral fractures at the Nkhotakota District Hospital, Malawi
Epidemiology and pattern of paediatric injuries in a developing country: An analysis of 170 injuries
Anatomy and biomechanics of the elbow joint
Elbow instability: Anatomy, biomechanics, diagnostic maneuvers, and testing
The anatomy and biomechanics of the elbow
A biomechanical study of normal functional elbow motion
Clinical anatomy and biomechanics of the elbow
Radiographic evaluation of common pediatric elbow injuries
Anatomy, shoulder and upper limb, median nerve
Anatomical study on the innervation of the elbow capsule
Radial tunnel syndrome
Fracture supracondylar humerus: A review
Anatomy, shoulder and upper limb, cubital fossa
Delaying treatment of supracondylar fractures in children: Has the PENDULUM swung too far?
Acute compartment syndrome in children
Compartment syndrome in children with a supracondylar fracture: Not everyone has risk factors
Supracondylar humeral fractures with isolated anterior interosseous nerve injuries: Is urgent treatment necessary?
A catastrophic presentation of dead limb secondary to traditional bone setter's treatment in Sorong, West Papua: A case report
Does posterior approach always lead to poor functional and cosmetic outcomes in displaced pediatric supracondylar humeral fractures?
Comparison of clinic-radiological outcome of cross pinning versus lateral pinning for displaced supracondylar fracture of humerus in children: A randomized controlled trial
Closed reduction; K-wire fixation. In: Monsell F, editor; Colton C, general editor. AO Surgery Reference [Internet]