Radiation Recall Pneumonitis: The Open Challenge in Differential Diagnosis of Pneumonia Induced by Oncological Treatments
The treatment of primary and secondary lung neoplasms now sees the fundamental role of radiotherapy, associated with surgery and systemic therapies. The improvement in survival outcomes has also increased attention to the quality of life, treatment compliance and the management of side effects. The role of imaging is not only limited to recognizing the efficacy of treatment but also to identifying, as soon as possible, the uncommon effects, especially when more treatments, such as chemotherapy, immunotherapy and radiotherapy, are associated. Radiation recall pneumonitis is an uncommon treatment complication that should be correctly characterized, and it is essential to recognize the mechanisms of radiation recall pneumonitis pathogenesis and diagnostic features in order to promptly identify them and adopt the best therapeutic strategy, with the shortest possible withdrawal of the current oncological drug. In this setting, artificial intelligence could have a critical role, although a larger patient data set is required.

1. Introduction
Lung cancer is one of the most common tumors, ranking second place in terms of incidence rate and first in mortality rate. In addition, the lungs remain a metastatic disease common site for primary lung cancer and patients with extrathoracic tumors. Although the possibility that a patient is fit for surgical resection is correlated to the disease stage, radiotherapy (RT) is a standard of care for advanced or non-operable lung cancer patients or oligometastatic patients. Nowadays, the treatment of lung tumors is complex, involving multiple therapies, such as surgery, systemic therapies (chemotherapy-targeted agents and immunotherapy) or ablation treatment; however, RT is the only modality for which there are indications in all stages of disease and across all categories of patient performance status as an only modality or in association with others.
In recent years, it has been possible to guarantee a highly conformal radiotherapy treatment plan thanks to use of intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) and volumetric- modulated arc therapy (VMAT), image guidance radiotherapy (IGRT) and modern respiratory–motion management. In addition, the increased survival of cancer patients has led to increased attention on adjacent organs at risk (OARs). This leads to higher savings of the organs surrounding the disease.
Despite the clear RT advantages both in terms of overall survival (OS) and the patient’s quality of life, the possibility of the use of a trimodal approach for primary or metastatic malignancies has notably increased; however, the combination of more strategies may also lead to an increase in side effects, which should be identified as soon as possible.
One of the main side effects that could occur is pneumonitis, which should be characterized as related to the treatment or a possible infection in an immunocompromised patient. This complication, also, should be differentiated from a new lesion to avoid a misdiagnosis of progression disease.
Regarding pneumonia related to cancer therapy, it is possible to identify three main causes: it is induced by drugs, radiotherapy and the combination of both.
Drug-induced pneumonia may be related to cytotoxic drugs, such as gemcitabine, target therapies (e.g., everolimus) or checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) that modulate the immunological response (e.g., nivolumab, atezolizumab, pembrolizumab, ipilimumab), which can cause checkpoint inhibitors pneumonitis (CIP).
Radiation pneumonitis (RP) and radiation fibrosis (RF) are, respectively, two examples of acute and chronic damage. RP and RF occur in 5–20% of patients treated with radiotherapy and are generally dose-limiting toxicities. The diagnosis is based on the combination of several elements, such as the evaluation of radiotherapy treatment planning, diagnostic imaging pre and post radiotherapy and the exclusion of other lung diseases, such as infections. Treatment is recommended only when symptoms appear.
Radiation recall is an acute inflammatory reaction following the administration of a drug confined to a previous radio-treated area, which can arise several weeks or months after the end of radiotherapy, involving different anatomical districts, including skin, the gastroenteric tract and lungs. Usually, the reaction is resolved with drug suspension and the use of steroids. Radiation recall pneumonitis (RRP) is, therefore, a lung inflammatory reaction, determined by the interaction of at least two agents, and it is necessary to differentiate RRP from pneumonia induced by individual agents or a new lesion for proper patient management.
In this narrative review, we report the damage underlying mechanisms, the diagnostic management and the differential diagnoses for patient risk stratification and proper management.

2. Mechanisms of Lung Radiation Damage
The underlying mechanisms of lung radiation damage are well known and lead to acute and chronic damage. Radiation causes direct damage to the DNA and indirect damage through the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), causing changes in vascularity and capillary permeability, activation of the inflammatory response and alteration of immunological response (Figure 1). In most cases, radiation-induced damage tends to resolve over the course of a few weeks, either spontaneously or with corticosteroids therapy. Conversely, continuous production of cytokines and the procrastination of inflammatory responses determine excessive fibroblast proliferation resulting on fibrosis areas.
Radiation recall, on the other hand, is the reactivation of the damage at the level of the previously treated site, at a distance of several times from the radiotherapy treatment, following the administration of a drug. The phenomenon can occur following the administration of chemotherapy, target therapy, immunotherapies or vaccinations, and it is not radiation dose-related. Radiation recall reactions were first described in 1959 by D’Angio et al. who described the onset of dermatitis in patients treated with actinomycin D, after having previously undergone radiotherapy treatments, demonstrating the absence of such reactions after only treatment with actinomycin and the significant increase of the same in patients treated with the combination of actinomycin and radiotherapy compared to those treated exclusively with radiotherapy. Radiation recall can be an unpredictable subclinical or clinical event, even severe, that can impact the continuity of patients’ systemic care. Radiation recall is enigmatic with histopathological and clinical features of acute or chronic inflammation, self-limiting once the trigger drug is stopped. Rechallenge with drug does not necessarily cause reactivation of the reaction.
The underlying mechanisms are not yet well known but can be researched in the pathophysiological alterations induced by radiotherapy and subsequently by the drug administered. Various hypotheses have been proposed as to the mechanism of RRR; a non-immune fixed drug reaction-like condition, a dysregulated release of reactive oxygen species, abnormalities of tissue vasculature and impaired DNA repair. Alteration of the proliferative capacity of stem cells in the irradiated tissue causes increased sensitivity to the cytotoxic drug. In addition, the depletion of progenitor cells and increased cell cycle lead to increased susceptibility to drugs that inhibit cell renewal. The previous radiation-induced inflammatory response may lead to an impaired immune response which may lead to a hypersensitivity reaction at the level of the previously irradiated area, following the administration of immunostimulant drugs, such as immunotherapy or vaccines.

3. Diagnostic Management
During RT treatments, imaging is employed in different phases: planning, supervising and treatment response assessment, including complications.
With regard to “technique efficacy”, it refers to the “complete necrosis” of the tumor; a feature that may be confirmed with imaging follow-up at precise time points. Complications refer to any unexpected variation from a procedural course or adverse events that include any possible damage correlated to the treatment; these events should be analyzed according to the severity and occurrence time (early or late). In post treatment phases, different imaging tolls may be employed, alone or in combination.
With regard to treatment-related pneumonitis chest radiography, due to its low specificity, it can be used as a screening investigation, while the role of PET is still unclear due to the potential overlap of the metabolic activity of infectious processes with malignant tumors. Chest CT allows early parenchymal changes and their evolution to be evaluated, thus representing the gold standard for the study of lung parenchyma. Nevertheless, diagnosis is complicated due to the overlapping of the various CT patterns, and in this scenario, we should consider radiation pneumonia (RP), pneumonia by immune checkpoint inhibitors (CIP) and the possibility that the lung involvement is due to disease progression that may be manifested as pulmonary lymphangitis. In addition to these, a differential diagnosis must also be undertaken regarding infectious pneumonia. Regarding this last point, it is necessary to also focus on COVID-19 pneumonia and RRP trigged by COVID-19 vaccinations, considering the pandemic conditions.

3.1. Radiological and Clinical Setting

Radiation Recall Pneumonia
Radiation recall pneumonia (RRP) and CIP show similar findings on CT scans; however, the distinctive element is the location. In fact, RRP CT findings include consolidative (Figure 2) or ground-glass opacities limited to a prior radiation field, and the main common radiological pattern is a cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP). It should be supposed in any patient subjected to radiation therapy with new airspace changes sharply delineated from the adjacent lung in the radiation field appearance. The main differential diagnosis is infection, which occurs outside of the prior radiation field.
Cousin et al., in their retrospective study, evaluated the incidence, risk factors and CT characteristics of RRP in a cohort of 348 patients treated with ICI, of whom 80 had received thoracic radiotherapy previously. The purpose of the study was to identify diagnostic patterns that allowed the differential diagnosis between radiation pneumonia, immunotherapy pneumonia and radiation recall. They identified a time limit: RPP was defined as pneumonia that occurred 6 months after the previous conventional radiotherapy and a year after the previous stereotactic radiotherapy (SBRT). The time factor is crucial (Figure 3) given the similar radiological features between RP and RRP (homogeneous or patchy areas of ground-glass opacity or consolidation, progressing towards fibrosis).
Lu et al. also identify the time factor as a fundamental element for differential diagnosis. In their cohort, the overall rates of different types of pneumonia were, respectively, 8.2% (n = 16) CIP, 46.9% (n = 92) RP and 7.1% (n = 14) RRP. In this study, the major differences between the various post-treatment pneumonias concern their timing of onset and CT features. Indeed, RP usually happened less than 6 months after RT within or at the edge of the radiation field, but CIP had a wider range of CT manifestations and a longer time window. RRP was defined as inflammatory reactions in previously irradiated fields on chest CT after ICI administration and more than 6 months after TRT. As far as CT characteristics are concerned, the most characteristic results concern CIP with the finding of diffuse patches (47.4%), consolidation (26.3%) and ground-glass opacity (26.3%), unlike RP and RRP pneumonias which have similar chest CT with consolidation-type lesions and streaks within the irradiation field.
In both studies and in clinical practice, the severity of pneumonia is graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events Version (CTCAE) 5.0.
The latest version of CTCAE was published in 2017, and thanks to these criteria, it is possible to standardize and classify the severity of adverse reactions to oncology therapy and assess the interruption or non-interruption of treatment.

3.2. Immune-Related Pneumonia
Immune-related pneumonia (CIP) is an adverse event that occurs in 0 to 10% of cases after treatment with anti-PD-1/PD-L1 mAbs as focal or diffuse inflammation of the lung parenchyma and has very variable onset times from a few days to more than a year after the start of treatment. The most frequently pattern is an organized pneumonia (OP) with peribronchovasal and subpleural distribution bilaterally, characterized by consolidated opacities, ground-glass areas (Figure 4) or a combination of both and circumferential consolidative opacity surrounding an interior area of ground-glass attenuation (reversed halo sign), with a prevalent localization to the mid-lower lobes. Pulmonary nodules may also be present, generally with a diameter of less than 10 mm; however, in some cases, the nodules may be larger and with spiculated edges, imitating and entering into differential diagnosis with malignant nodules. The second frequency pattern is non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP), which occurs with ground-glass and reticular opacities with lower lobe predominance, while consolidative opacities are uncommon. Airspace disease is synchronous and relatively symmetrical. The subpleural sparing of the posterior and lower lobes and the absence in most cases of consolidative opacities are characteristics that allow us to distinguish NSIP from the OP pattern.
Less frequent are the hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) pattern and acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP)–acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) pattern (Figure 5). The HP model is associated with lower-grade symptoms and is characterized by diffuse or predominant ground-glass centrolobular nodules in the upper lobe, which may be related to air entrapment. This pattern should be distinguished from HP exposure, respiratory and follicular bronchiolitis and atypical infection. In addition, here, for differential diagnosis is important the anamnesis and occupational exposure in the first case, the smoking habit, connective tissue disease or autoimmune diseases in the second and laboratory investigations and response to therapy in the last.
Acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP)–acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is associated with a more severe clinical course but is not usually related to ICI therapy.

3.3. Radiation Pneumonia
Radiation pneumonia (RP) typically occurs between 4 and 12 weeks following completion of radiotherapy; the most common results at chest CT are ground-glass opacities associated or not with areas of airspace consolidation, often with a halo sign or reversed halo sign (Figure 6). RP can occur as early density alterations (in 3–4 months), with a picture of pneumonitis or late when evolved into a fibrosis pattern (after 9 months). There is a current interest in imaging biomarker use to predict the RP risk. Several researches assessed pre-treatment [18F]-2-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) imaging towards this aim. The justification is linked to the idea that pretreatment inflammation would make pulmonary parenchymal more susceptible to treatment and hence RP. Anyway, the open question is correlated to the diagnosis of RP in a setting of multimodality treatment, in particular when administrating immunotherapy. In fact, differentiating between RP and CIP has implications for clinical management; although the typical pattern of these entities is reported, these findings are only suggestive as pneumonitis can have a wide spectrum of appearance. In this scenario, artificial intelligence (AI) could allow proper patient management.

3.4. COVID-19 Pneumonitis and COVID-19 Vaccine Radiation Recall
Globally, on 23 December 2022, there were 651,918,402 confirmed cases of COVID-19, including 6,656,601 deaths. As of 22 December 2022, a total of 13,073,712,554 vaccine doses had been administered. At the end of 2022, according to the Italian Medicines Agency, COVID-19-related mortality on a global estimate stood at 0.045% compared to 1–2% when it debuted in our country.
On chest CT, the typical findings of COVID-19 pneumonia are the multifocal and bilateral distribution of ground-glass opacities (Figure 7) and consolidations and the thickening of the peripherally interlobular septa. These findings go into differential diagnosis with the other patterns of pneumonia mentioned above for which they should be integrated with an RT-PCR test (that represents the gold standard for patients with ongoing COVID-19 pneumonia) or with an accurate history to exclude a previous infection.
With regard to adverse reactions after vaccination for COVID-19, in the literature, there are several cases of RRP that see vaccination as a trigger (Figure 8). The latter, just like the COVID-19 infection, could determine an uncontrolled state of inflammation that favors the development of radiation recall. On chest CT, scan areas of ground glass and consolidations are appreciated, but this time the localization in the same previously irradiated area allows us to make a differential diagnosis regarding the other infections. In this scenario and, considering the possibility that the patient is infected but without specific symptoms, proper management is crucial in order to avoid treatment discontinuation.

3.5. Progression Disease: Pulmonary Lymphangitis Carcinomatosa
With regard to the involvement of pulmonary parenchymal, in an oncological setting, an accurate diagnosis of disease progression is crucial. An atypical lung involvement is the pulmonary lymphangitis carcinomatosa (PLC), which is a metastatic lung disease of malignant tumors that spread through pulmonary lymphatic vessels. Although this condition may be considered rare, in patients with advanced disease status, it could be present. The primary cancers that are most frequently correlated with PLC are breast (17.3%), lung (10.8%) and gastroenteric (10.8%) cancers (Figure 9).
Dyspnea is the main symptom, but often and especially in the early stages, it starts asymptomatically.
On CT images of the chest, the diffusion is variable; it can be unilateral or bilateral, localized or diffuse and is characterized by nodular or diffuse intrapulmonary infiltrates, irregular thickening of the interlobular septum, smooth thickening (initial stage) or nodular (late development), hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy and the opacity of ground glass. These features are also present in other interstitial lung diseases, thus having a low diagnostic specificity, but despite this, CT, and in particular high-resolution CT (HRCT), is the suggested technique for the study of patients with suspected PLC.

3.6. Machine Learning
Some promising tools in the diagnosis and follow-up of cancer patients who develop adverse reactions to treatments are artificial intelligence (AI) and radiomics. Computers are able to accumulate and evaluate higher volumes of data compared to the human brain, so AI can resolve unsolved complexities in cancer patient management. Machine learning (ML) is a sub-area of AI which uses mathematical algorithms and can learn specific tasks. These models are supervised and unsupervised, depending on the knowledge of the desired outcome of interest. The ML models analyze the input producing the necessary adjustments to obtain the desired output, or the models assess uncurated data and classify thanks to defined features within the dataset that can be grouped and analyzed further to reach a specific outcome, respectively,. These models have made possible the development of a new approach named radiomics.
In addition, deep learning (DL), a form of AI, is becoming a promising support for medical imaging due to its capability of feature extraction and analysis. It has been successfully employed in chest CT imaging to distinguish COVID-19 pneumonia from other infections and offer a qualitative and quantitative disease evaluation. With regard to adverse events, Giordano et al., in their retrospective study, investigated if a deep learning algorithm was capable of discriminating COVID-19 from radiation therapy-related pneumonitis. They saw that the deep learning algorithm showed good sensitivity in recognizing cases of COVID-19 pneumonia and treated-related pneumonia (RP) but with a very low specificity (2%); in fact, almost all patients with RP were classified as suspected patients with COVID-19 pneumonia. However, specificity improved; instead of a binary analysis, a risk analysis was carried out with a 30% cut-off rate, whereas CT images of the chest were associated with a low risk of COVID-19 disease; above this threshold, patients were at high risk. In addition, this study supports the idea that deep learning algorithms based solely on CT images do not allow us to make differential diagnosis with high specificity between COVID-19 pneumonia and other interstitial lung diseases with very similar CT patterns. Therefore, adding clinical and laboratory data to the assessment of the algorithm should improve the diagnostic performance. The algorithm demonstrated a good performance in CT finding segmentation, including ground-glass opacities, in order to help radiologist practice. However, as reported by the authors, with these unclear CT patterns and especially in oncological settings in which more treatments are associated and each one could to be responsible for pneumonitis, a multidisciplinary approach based on clinical history is mandatory.

4. Discussion
Knowing the CT features correlated to RT treatment is crucial to avoid confusing results and discontinuing treatments that are essential to the patient’s survival; although several features are typical, for example, PLC, COVID-19 and ICI-related pneumonitis show a diffuse parenchymal involvement, while RP and RRP are usually confined to the target volume. However, during COVID-19 infection, at the first phase, the parenchymal involvement could be restricted to a single lobe. In addition, PLC pneumonia shows an irregularly interlobular septal thickening or nodular thickening, while septal thickening is common in COVID-19 pneumonitis, RP and RRP. These features, during CT assessments, are the main findings for a proper diagnosis (Table 1). However, differentiating the dissimilar lung pathologies, based only on imaging assessment may be difficult, mainly during the pathologies’ early or late phases. Therefore, despite several characteristics, they could orient towards one or the other pneumonia; the differential diagnosis of the various lung diseases still represents a great challenge for the radiologist and the multidisciplinary team. In fact, when the cause of the lung involvement is ambiguous, as CT findings are unspecific, multidisciplinary management is necessary to establish the proper treatment. Although oncological patient management should contemplate the possibility of disease progression or adverse effects, in pandemic conditions, an undetected infection and the possibility that COVID-19 vaccine may be a trigger for RRP should also be considered. Therefore, the clinical data evaluation, based on the medical and pharmacological history, analysis of radiological imaging and assessment of the response or not to proceed with therapy, have a fundamental role in the classification of the patient’s lung disease.
In the near future, further help with differential diagnosis will come from the use of AI software and the analysis of radiomics features; although the reported literature data showed a great AI potential in pneumonitis diagnosis. However, most of the published papers are experimental, and the analysed data sets suffer from selection bias as symptomatic patients are included. Moreover, most studies employed imbalanced data sets. Therefore, the reported performance of various AI algorithms employed may have been affected by polarization of the context. More effort is required to handle imbalanced data sets prior to the application of AI. In addition, the assessed CT features were from patients with severe disease. A larger database, which includes patients at different stages of disease, is required to optimize the diagnostic system.

5. Conclusions
The management of oncological patients, subjected to combined therapies, is challenging, especially in treatment-adverse event setting. Knowledge of pneumonia related to cancer therapy is critical, as often the CT findings are similar. In this scenario, the AI software and the analysis of radiomics features could help multidisciplinary team diagnosis.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Author Contributions
F.G., V.G., R.G., written the original manuscript. F.G., V.G., R.F., F.D.M., C.C., M.G., A.B. (Alessandra Borgheresi), G.D., C.P., A.G., V.M., N.G., A.B. (Antonio Barile), V.N., R.G. performed Investigation, revised and approved the final manuscript. Each author has participated sufficiently to take public responsibility for the content of the manuscript. The authors confirm that the article is not under consideration for publication elsewhere. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Institutional Review Board Statement
Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement
Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement
All data are reported in the manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors have no conflict of interest to be disclosed.

References
Global Cancer Statistics 2020: GLOBOCAN Estimates of Incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 Cancers in 185 Countries
Palliative efficacy and local control of conventional radiotherapy for lung metastases
Prospective Evaluation of Radiotherapy-Induced Immunologic and Genetic Effects in Colorectal Cancer Oligo-Metastatic Patients with Lung-Limited Disease: The PRELUDE-1 Study
Palliative radiotherapy indications during the COVID-19 pandemic and in future complex logistic settings: The NORMALITY model
Sequential chemo-hypofractionated RT versus concurrent standard CRT for locally advanced NSCLC: GRADE recommendation by the Italian Association of Radiotherapy and Clinical Oncology (AIRO)
Characterization of KRAS Mutational Regression in Oligometastatic Patients
Adequacy of Cytologic Samples by Ultrasound-Guided Percutaneous Transthoracic Fine-Needle Aspiration Cytology of Peripheral Pulmonary Nodules for Morphologic Diagnosis and Molecular Evaluations: Comparison with Computed Tomography–Guided Percutaneous Transthoracic Fine-Needle Aspiration Cytology
The Italian Association for Radiotherapy and Clinical Oncology (AIRO) position statements for postoperative breast cancer radiation therapy volume, dose, and fractionation
Early GLS changes detection after chemoradiation in locally advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
Are you planning to be a radiation oncologist? A survey by the young group of the Italian Association of Radiotherapy and Clinical Oncology (yAIRO)
Preliminary Experience of Liquid Biopsy in Lung Cancer Compared to Conventional Assessment: Light and Shadows
Preliminary Report on Computed Tomography Radiomics Features as Biomarkers to Immunotherapy Selection in Lung Adenocarcinoma Patients
Structured Reporting of Lung Cancer Staging: A Consensus Proposal
Quantitative imaging decision support (QIDSTM) tool consistency evaluation and radiomic analysis by means of 594 metrics in lung carcinoma on chest CT scan
Update 2020: Management of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
Lung cancer: Current therapies and new targeted treatments
Treating disease progression with osimertinib in EGFR-mutated non-small-cell lung cancer: Novel targeted agents and combination strategies
Radiomics for prediction of response to EGFR-TKI based on metastasis/brain parenchyma (M/BP)-interface
A narrative review on current imaging applications of artificial intelligence and radiomics in oncology: Focus on the three most common cancers
A comparative analysis of thermal ablation techniques in the treatment of primary and secondary lung tumors: A single-center experience
Radiotherapy treatment for lung cancer: Current status and future directions
Observational multicenter Italian study on vulvar cancer adjuvant radiotherapy (OLDLADY 1.2): A cooperation among AIRO Gyn, MITO and MaNGO groups
Rotational positional error-corrected linear set-up margin calculation technique for lung stereotactic body radiotherapy in a dual imaging environment of 4-D cone beam CT and ExacTrac stereoscopic imaging
Differences in patterns of recurrence of squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma after radiotherapy for stage III non-small cell lung cancer
The impact of modern radiotherapy on radiation-induced late sequelae: Focus on early-stage mediastinal classical Hodgkin Lymphoma. A critical review by the Young Group of the Italian Association of Radiotherapy and Clinical Oncology (AIRO)
Home-based pulmonary rehabilitation in patients undergoing (chemo)radiation therapy for unresectable lung cancer: A prospective explorative study
Combination Use of First-Line Afatinib and Proton-Pump Inhibitors Reduces Overall Survival Among Patients with EGFFR Mutant Lung Cancer
Combination Treatment with Iodine 125 Seeds Implant and Systemic Therapy vs. Systemic Therapy Alone for Non-small Cell Lung Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis
The Role of Brain Radiotherapy Before First-Line Afatinib Therapy, Compared to Gefitinib or Erlotinib, in Patients with EGFR-Mutant Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer
High Frequency of Radiation Pneumonitis in Patients with Locally Advanced Non-small Cell Lung Cancer Treated with Concurrent Radiotherapy and Gemcitabine after Induction with Gemcitabine and Carboplatin
Everolimus-Related Pneumonitis in Patients with Metastatic Breast Cancer: Incidence, Radiographic Patterns, and Relevance to Clinical Outcome
Everolimus-Induced Pneumonitis in Patients with Neuroendocrine Neoplasms: Real-World Study on Risk Factors and Outcomes
Management of cutaneous melanoma: Radiologists challenging and risk assessment
Radiation-Induced Lung Injury (RILI)
Radiation-Induced Lung Injury-Current Perspectives and Management
Ionizing radiation-induced metabolic oxidative stress and prolonged cell injury
Heterogeneity of PD-L1 Expression in Lung Mixed Adenocarcinomas and adenosquamous Carcinomas
Radiation-Induced Lung Injury: Assessment and Management
Radiation Recall Pneumonitis Induced by Gemcitabine
Radiation recall pneumonitis induced by chemotherapy after thoracic radiotherapy for lung cancer
RRP induced by erlotinib after palliative thoracic radiotherapy for lung cancer: Case report and literature review
Dramatic RRP Induced by Osimertinib after Palliative Thoracic Radiotherapy for Lung Cancer
RRP After Treatment with Checkpoint Blockade Immunotherapy: A Case Series and Review of Literature
The impact of particle radiotherapy on the functioning of cardiac implantable electronic devices: A systematic review of in vitro and in vivo studies according to PICO criteria
Radiation Recall Pneumonitis COVID-19 Infection Induced After Adjuvant Breast Cancer Radiotherapy a Known Phenomenon in a Unknown Pandemic Disease, A Case Report
RRP after COVID-19 vaccination
Potentiation of x-ray effects by actinomycin D
Relationship Between Prior Radiotherapy and Checkpoint-Inhibitor Pneumonitis in Patients with Advanced Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer
Radiation recall in a patient with breast cancer treated for tuberculosis
Introduction to Special Issue of Radiology and Imaging of Cancer
Pancreatic cancer detection and characterization: State of the art and radiomics
The multidisciplinary team for gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours: The radiologist’s challenge
Abbreviated MRI Protocol for the Assessment of Ablated Area in HCC Patients
Comparison between two packages for pectoral muscle removal on mammographic images
CT pulmonary angiography appropriateness in a single emergency department: Does the use of re-vised Geneva score matter?
To vaccinate or not: Literacy against hesitancy: Vaccination hesitancy
What will our children do when we are gone? Italian legislature does not tackle the worries of parents of disabled children. Reflections on disability
Late Presenters with ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction: A Call to Action
Post-mortem computer tomography in ten cases of death while diving: A retrospective evaluation
Periodontitis and italians (2016-2020): Need for clinical guidelines to perform effective therapy
Cervical Spine Manipulations: Role of Diagnostic Procedures, Effectiveness, and Safety from a Rehabilitation and Forensic Medicine Perspective: A Systematic Review
Addendum to the sonographic medical act
Talking about medicine through mass media
Radiomic features of breast parenchyma: Assessing differences between FOR PROCESSING and FOR PRESENTATION digital mammography
Complications Risk Assessment and Imaging Findings of Thermal Ablation Treatment in Liver Cancers: What the Radiologist Should Expect
Complications after Thermal Ablation of Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Liver Metastases: Imaging Findings
Post-Procedural Follow-Up of the Interventional Radiology’s Management of Osteoid Osteomas and Osteoblastomas
Local ablation of pancreatic tumors: State of the art and future perspectives
Assessment of Ablation Therapy in Pancreatic Cancer: The Radiologist’s Challenge
Liver metastases in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: A predictive model based on CT texture analysis
Structured reporting of computed tomography in the staging of colon cancer: A Delphi consensus proposal
Radiomics and machine learning analysis based on magnetic resonance imaging in the assessment of liver mucinous colorectal metastases
Structured reporting of x-ray mammography in the first diagnosis of breast cancer: A Delphi consensus proposal
Validation of the standardized index of shape tool to analyze DCE-MRI data in the assessment of neo-adjuvant therapy in locally advanced rectal cancer
Immunotherapy Assessment: A New Paradigm for Radiologists
CTLA-4 blockade enhances polyfunctional NY-ESO-1 specific T cell responses in metastatic melanoma patients with clinical benefit
Incidence of Pneumonitis With Use of Programmed Death 1 and Programmed Death-Ligand 1 Inhibitors in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Trials
The role of nasoenteric intubation in the MR study of patients with Crohn’s disease: Our experience and literature review
COVID-19 and low back pain: Previous infections lengthen recovery time after intradiscal ozone therapy in patients with herniated lumbar disc
COVID-19 safety measures at the Radiology Unit of a Transplant Institute: The non-COVID-19 patient’s confidence with safety procedures
Impact on mental health of the COVID-19 pandemic in a radiation oncology department
Stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT) for differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) oligometastases: An AIRO (Italian association of radiotherapy and clinical oncology) systematic review
Radiation recall reactions: An oncologic enigma
Diagnostic accuracy of magnetic resonance, computed tomography and contrast enhanced ultrasound in radiological multimodality assessment of peribiliary liver metastases
Peribiliary liver metastases MR findings
Multicenter assessment of augmented reality registration methods for image-guided interventions
CT-based radiomics for prediction of therapeutic response to Everolimus in metastatic neuroendocrine tumors
Quantitative Analysis of Residual COVID-19 Lung CT Features: Consistency among Two Commercial Software
COVID-19 pneumonia: Computer-aided quantification of healthy lung parenchyma, emphysema, ground glass and consolidation on chest computed tomography (CT)
Pulmonary Lymphangitis Poses a Major Challenge for Radiologists in an Oncological Setting during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Clinical implications of microvascular CT scan signs in COVID-19 patients requiring invasive mechanical ventilation
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Italy: Double Reading of Chest CT Examination
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Italy: Features on chest computed tomography using a structured report system
Imaging Severity COVID-19 Assessment in Vaccinated and Unvaccinated Patients: Comparison of the Different Variants in a High Volume Italian Reference Center
Chest CT in the emergency department for suspected COVID-19 pneumonia
Radiologic manifestations of immune-related adverse events in patients with metastatic melanoma undergoing anti-CTLA-4 antibody therapy
COVID-19, intradiscal ozone therapy and back pain: A correspondence
Deep vein thrombosis in COVID-19 patients in general wards: Prevalence and association with clinical and laboratory variables
CT radiomic models to distinguish COVID-19 pneumonia from other interstitial pneumonias
Use of the COVID-19 Reporting and Data System (CO-RADS) classification and chest computed tomography involvement score (CT-IS) in COVID-19 pneumonia
Role of CT angiography in detecting acute pulmonary embolism associated with COVID-19 pneumonia
A meta-analysis of the diagnostic test accuracy of CT-based radiomics for the prediction of COVID-19 severity
Inter-reader agreement of high-resolution computed tomography findings in patients with COVID-19 pneumonia: A multi-reader study
The lingering manifestations of COVID-19 during and after convalescence: Update on long-term pulmonary consequences of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Quantitative Chest CT analysis in discriminating COVID-19 from non-COVID-19 patients
Lymphadenopathy after BNT162b2 Covid-19 Vaccine: Preliminary Ultrasound Findings
Not only lymphadenopathy: Case of chest lymphangitis assessed with MRI after COVID 19 vaccine
Radiation recall pneumonitis induced by PD-1/ PD-L1 blockades: Mechanisms and therapeutic implications
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor Therapy-related Pneumonitis: Patterns and Management
Incidence, risk factors, and CT characteristics of radiation recall pneumonitis induced by immune checkpoint inhibitor in lung cancer
Comprehensive Pneumonitis Profile of Thoracic Radiotherapy Followed by Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor and Risk Factors for Radiation Recall Pneumonitis in Lung Cancer
Toxicities of the anti-PD-1 and anti-PD-L1 immune checkpoint antibodies
Immune-checkpoint inhibitors associated with interstitial lung disease in cancer patients
A Case of Organizing Pneumonia (OP) Associated with Pembrolizumab
Drug-Related Pneumonitis in the Era of Precision Cancer Therapy
Lung CT: Part 2—The interstitial pneumonias: Clinical, histologic, and CT manifestations
CT characteristics allow identification of patient-specific susceptibility for radiation-induced lung damage
[18F] fluorodeoxyglucose uptake patterns in lung before radiotherapy identify areas more susceptible to radiation-induced lung toxicity in non-small-cell lung cancer patients
Biomarkers for Radiation Pneumonitis Using Noninvasive Molecular Imaging
Management of immune-related adverse events in patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy: American Society of Clinical Oncology clinical practice guideline
Pneumonitis resulting from radiation and immune checkpoint blockade illustrates characteristic clinical, radiologic and circu- lating biomarker features
Differentiation between immune checkpoint inhibitor-related and radiation pneumonitis in lung cancer by CT radiomics and machine learning
Use of CT and artificial intelligence in suspected or COVID-19 positive patients: Statement of the Italian Society of Medical and Interventional Radiology
Artificial Intelligence and COVID-19 Using Chest CT Scan and Chest X-ray Images: Machine Learning and Deep Learning Approaches for Diagnosis and Treatment
Impact of COVID-19 on workload burden of a complex radiotherapy facility
The sensitivity and specificity of chest CT in the diagnosis of COVID-19
Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) in COVID-19 patients: A pocket guide for radiologists
Tocilizumab effects in COVID-19 pneumonia: Role of CT texture analysis in quantitative assessment of response to therapy
Assessment of cerebrovascular disease with computed tomography in COVID-19 patients: Correlation of a novel specific visual score with increased mortality risk
A snapshot on radiotherapy for head and neck cancer patients during the COVID-19 pandemic: A survey of the Italian Association of Radiotherapy and Clinical Oncology (AIRO) head and neck working group
Cross-sectional analysis of follow-up chest MRI and chest CT scans in patients previously affected by COVID-19
Third-generation iterative reconstruction on a dual-source, high-pitch, low-dose chest CT protocol with tin filter for spectral shaping at 100 kV: A study on a small series of COVID-19 patients
Diagnostic performance of CT lung severity score and quantitative chest CT for stratification of COVID-19 patients
Prognostic significance of peripheral consolidations at chest x-ray in severe COVID-19 pneumonia
Chest X-ray versus chest computed tomography for outcome prediction in hospitalized patients with COVID-19
Correction to: Chest CT for early detection and management of coronavirus disease (COVID-19): A report of 314 patients admitted to Emergency Department with suspected pneumonia
Correction to: Clinical and laboratory data, radiological structured report findings and quantitative evaluation of lung involvement on baseline chest CT in COVID-19 patients to predict prognosis
Lower skeletal muscle mass on CT body composition analysis is associated with adverse clinical course and outcome in children with COVID-19
Short fractionation radiotherapy for early prostate cancer in the time of COVID-19: Long-term excellent outcomes from a multicenter Italian trial suggest a larger adoption in clinical practice
AI-SCoRE (artificial intelligence-SARS CoV2 risk evaluation): A fast, objective and fully automated platform to predict the outcome in COVID-19 patients
Potentials of post-mortem CT investigations during SARS-COV-2 pandemic: A narrative review
Radiation dose reduction considerations and imaging patterns of ground glass opacities in coronavirus: Risk of over exposure in computed tomography
Association of serum Krebs von den Lungen-6 and chest CT as potential prognostic factors in severe acute respiratory syndrome SARS-CoV-2: A preliminary experience
CT evaluation of lung infiltrates in the two months preceding the Coronavirus disease 19 pandemic in Canton Ticino (Switzerland): Were there suspicious cases before the official first case?
Acute pulmonary embolism in hospitalized patients with SARS-CoV-2-related pneumonia: Multicentric experience from Italian endemic area
Chest X-ray in the emergency department during COVID-19 pandemic descending phase in Italy: Correlation with patients’ outcome
Postoperative moderately hypofractionated radiotherapy in prostate cancer: A mono-institutional propensity-score-matching analysis between adjuvant and early-salvage radiotherapy
Pulmonary lymphangitic carcinomatosis secondary to ureteral cancer
Pulmonary lymphangitis carcinomatosis: Systematic review and meta-analysis of case reports, 1970–2018
Systemic mastocytosis revisited with an emphasis on skeletal manifestations
Carcinomatosis lymphangitis and pleurisy after allo-SCT in two patients with secondary leukemia after breast cancer
Pulmonary lymphangitis sarcomatosis: A rare cause of severe progressive dyspnoea
Signet ring cells in carcinomatous lymphangitis due to gastric adenocarcinoma
Diagnostic Bias in the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Series of Short Cases
COVID-19 pneumonia and its lookalikes: How radiologists perform in differentiating atypical pneumonias
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the selection of chest imaging modalities and reporting systems: A survey of Italian radiologists
Vessel wall MR imaging in neuroradiology
Blockchain in radiology research and clinical practice: Current trends and future directions
Analysis of a monocentric computed tomography dosimetric database using a radiation dose index monitoring software: Dose levels and alerts before and after the implementation of the adaptive statistical iterative reconstruction on CT images
Application of radiomics and artifcial intelligence for lung cancer precision medicine
A Systematic Review about Imaging and Histopathological Findings for Detecting and Evaluating Electroporation Based Treatments Response
Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (GEP-NENs): A radiomic model to predict tumor grade
Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and its differential diagnosis at MRI: How radiologist should assess MR features
Italian Clinical Practice Guidelines on Cholangiocarcinoma—Part I: Classification, diagnosis and staging
Radiomics textural features by MR imaging to assess clinical outcomes following liver resection in colorectal liver metastases
Nail and enthesis assessment in patients with psoriatic disease by high frequency ultrasonography: Findings from a single-centre cross-sectional study
Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging as diagnostic tools for sarcopenia in immune-mediated rheumatic diseases (IMRDs)
2D shear wave elastography in evaluation of prognostic factors in breast cancer
Diagnostic performance of 2D-shear wave elastography in the diagnosis of breast cancer: A clinical appraisal of cutoff values
3D-Arterial analysis software and CEUS in the assessment of severity and vulnerability of carotid atherosclerotic plaque: A comparison with CTA and histopathology
Advanced MRI imaging of nerve roots in lumbar radiculopathy due to discoradicular conflict: DWI, DTI, and T2 mapping with clinical and neurophysiological correlations
Radiological assessment of dementia: The Italian inter-society consensus for a practical and clinically oriented guide to image acquisition, evaluation, and reporting
Role of percutaneous CT-guided radiofrequency ablation in treatment of intra-articular, in close contact with cartilage and extra-articular osteoid osteomas: Comparative analysis and new classification system
Preoperative estimation of the survival of patients with unresectable hepatocellular carcinoma achieving complete response after conventional transcatheter arterial chemoembolization: Assessments of clinical and LI-RADS MR features
Diagnostic value of various criteria for deep lobe involvement in radiologic studies with parotid mass: A systematic review and meta-analysis
CT Chest Severity Score for COVID 19 Pneumonia: A Quantitative Imaging Tool for Severity Assessment of Disease
Radiomics in medical imaging: Pitfalls and challenges in clinical management
Radiomics in hepatic metastasis by colorectal cancer
EOB-MR Based Radiomics Analysis to Assess Clinical Outcomes following Liver Resection in Colorectal Liver Metastases
CT-Based Radiomics Analysis to Predict Histopathological Outcomes Following Liver Resection in Colorectal Liver Metastases
Radiomics and Machine Learning Analysis Based on Magnetic Resonance Imaging in the Assessment of Colorectal Liver Metastases Growth Pattern
Radiomics-Derived Data by Contrast Enhanced Magnetic Resonance in RAS Mutations Detection in Colorectal Liver Metastases
Contrast MR-Based Radiomics and Machine Learning Analysis to Assess Clinical Outcomes following Liver Resection in Colorectal Liver Metastases: A Preliminary Study
Radiation-Induced Pneumonitis in the Era of the COVID-19 Pandemic: Artificial Intelligence for Differential Diagnosis
Schematic representation of radiation recall pneumonitis. RILI = radiation-induced lung injury.
CT assessment ((A): axial plane) of RRP (arrow) in radio-treated melanoma metastasis during ICI therapy; resolved ((B): CT in sagittal plane) after steroid therapy (arrow).
Graphical representation of the different pneumonia related to RT, considering the onset timing.
CT assessment (A) of CIP: OP pattern with peribronchovasal and subpleural distribution bilaterally of ground-glass opacities (arrow). Resolution of pneumonitis (B) after steroids (arrow) treatment.
CT assessment ((A): sagittal plane) of CIP: acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP)–acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) pattern (arrow). After steroids treatment ((B): sagittal plane); subpleural distribution bilaterally of ground-glass opacities (arrow).
CT assessment of radiation pneumonia RP in RT-treated lung cancer. In (A), ground glass opacities (arrow) at about 8 weeks following completion of radiotherapy. In (B), consolidative pattern (arrow) at 12 weeks.
CT assessment of COVID-19 pneumonia (A,B): multifocal and bilateral distribution of ground-glass opacities (arrows).
CT evaluation (A,B) of RRP induced by COVID-19 vaccine in RT-treated patients with lung metastases: consolidative pattern (arrows).
CT assessment ((A): axial plane; (B): coronal plane of PLC in pancreatic cancer patient: irregularly interlobular septal thickening or nodular thickening (arrows).
Lung involvement and CT pattern for pneumonia type.
Type of Pneumonia	Lung Involvement	CT-Patter	Mechanisms of Lung Radiation Damage	 	RRP	Target area	Ground-glass opacities and consolidative opacities.	Unknown(A non-immune fixed drug reaction-like condition, dysregulated release of reactive oxygen species, abnormalities of tissue vasculature and impaired DNA repair).	 	RP	Target area	Ground-glass opacities and consolidative opacities.	Direct damage to the DNA and indirect damage through the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), causing changes in vascularity and capillary permeability, activation of the inflammatory response and alteration of immunological response	 	ICI-related pneumonitis	Diffuse(related to the phase of disease)	Ground-glass and reticular opacities; consolidative opacities; interlobular septal thickening; “crazy-paving” pattern	Autoimmune	 	COVID-19 pneumonia 	Diffuse(related to the phase of disease)	Ground-glass opacities; crazy-paving pattern; consolidative opacities; interlobular septal thickening(according to the phase of disease)	Unknown, supposedcytokine storms	 	Pulmonary lymphangitis carcinomatosa	Diffuse(related to the phase of disease)	Irregularly interlobular septal thickening; smooth (early stage) or nodular thickening(late development); ground-glass opacities; pleural effusions.	Tumor spread through lymphatic vessels