A re-evaluation study and literature review on AD8 as a screening tool for dementia
Background
The Eight-Item Informant Interview to Differentiate Aging and Dementia (AD8) was developed as a screening tool for dementia, with a cutoff score of 2 suggested by the initial study. However, various studies have reported different cutoff values, and many have found that a cutoff of 2 may result in a high false positive rate. Furthermore, a high false positive rate has repeatedly been shown when the AD8 is self-administered in local government screening programs in Taiwan.
Objectives
This study aimed to test the AD8’s performance, define its best cutoff value, review factors that may affect its performance, and reconsider its role in clinical practice.
Methods
We recruited 118 participant-informant dyads from a university teaching hospital. For each informant, the AD8 was administered before the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) to minimize recall bias. Two geriatric psychiatrists made a consensus clinical diagnosis for each participant based on the DSM-5 criteria. Receiver operating characteristic analysis was used to assess the performance of the AD8.
Results
Thirty-seven participants had a CDR of 0, 61 had a CDR of 0.5, and 20 had a CDR ≥ 1. To discriminate between the participants with CDR 0 and those with CDR 0.5, the optimal cutoff score for the AD8 was 2. Including those with CDR ≥ 1 changed the best cutoff value to 3. In terms of the DSM-5 criteria, 59 participants had normal cognition, 28 had mild neurocognitive disorder, and 31 had major neurocognitive disorder or dementia. To discriminate between those with and without dementia, an AD8 cutoff value of 4 maximized the Youden index with more balanced sensitivity and specificity.
Conclusion
The AD8 may have different cutoff values depending on different purposes. Our findings suggest that the AD8 may perform better with a cutoff value of 4 to discriminate between those with and without dementia.

Introduction
Dementia is a heterogeneous neurocognitive disorder that compromises the activities of daily living. The global prevalence of dementia has been estimated to be around 7%, with a higher prevalence with advancing age. Given the burden of aging and aged societies in many countries, the early prevention, recognition, and treatment of dementia has become an important issue. Many screening tests have been developed to detect dementia early, and several are routinely used in primary care.
Performance-based tests, such as the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment, provide quantitative assessments of multiple cognitive domains. However, the ceiling effect may limit their sensitivity to subtle impairment in highly educated individuals. Longer tests, such as the Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument, require more time and expertise to administer. Although objective, performance measurement may misclassify cases as false-positive or false-negative absent collateral information.
Informant-based assessments provide a long-term outlook, allowing observation for early cognitive and functional change. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), for example, evaluates memory, orientation, judgment and problem-solving, community affairs, home and hobbies, and personal care. This assessment requires trained clinicians or psychologists to conduct semi-structured interviews with the patients and informants. Instead of summing category scores, a scoring algorithm helps transform category scores into a global score. Evidence has proved its face validity, inter-rater reliability, independence from performance-based assessments, and limited influence of age, education level, language, culture, and practice effect. However, its lengthy administration and requirement for experienced judgment limit its use for screening.
Accordingly, brief instruments that help identify individuals with unrecognized dementia are needed. One such instrument is the Eight-Item Informant Interview to Differentiate Aging and Dementia (AD8), which has been validated and translated into various languages. It explores memory, orientation, judgment, and function in three minutes. Minimal training is required.
The initial AD8 study was conducted in the United States, and its validation study suggested the cutoff value 2 to differentiate between signs of normal aging and very mild dementia. However, many studies have reported different cutoff values in other regions. For example, a cutoff of 3 and above has been suggested in studies from Brazil, China, India, Iran, Japan, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, whereas minimum scores of 4 and 5 have been reported in Spain and Turkey, respectively.
Only some of these studies pointed out that responders’ education, regional socioeconomic status, reference standard for diagnosis, and sampling may account for the variation of cutoff values, and the rest explained less for the difference. Studies that used informant-based assessment other than AD8 found caregiver awareness and lack of training, care burden, anxiety, depression, personality, and management styles can bias reported symptoms and functions. Caregiver suffering may reduce the acceptance of screening as well. These suggest training and support for accurate caregiver assessment. Yet, to what extent influential factors affect the response to AD8 and its cutoff values needs further investigation.
Several articles on AD8 have further indicated that a cutoff of 2 may result in a high false positive rate. The first validation study of AD8 in Taiwan also reported a cutoff value of 2, and a high false positive rate has repeatedly been shown when the AD8 is self-administered in local government screening programs in Taiwan. A false positive result can lead to unnecessary referral, further evaluation, expense, and psychological distress. In addition, although some AD8 studies reported remarkable accuracy, limited information was available regarding the specific administration process of the test. Therefore, optimizing the cutoff value and application process of the AD8 is essential to improve its accuracy.
We hypothesized that the AD8 would accurately reflect the cognitive status of the subjects only if administered in a standard manner and that a cutoff value higher than 2 may reduce false positive results. Therefore, this study aimed to test the performance of the AD8 in screening for dementia, define its best cutoff value based on widely accepted diagnostic guidelines for dementia, review factors that may affect its performance, and reconsider its role in clinical practice based on the latest published evidence.

Methods

Study design
In this cross-sectional study, we recruited subjects with or without cognitive complaints to validate the properties of the AD8 in discriminating cognitively normal subjects from those with mild cognitive impairment or dementia. Potential participants and informants were recruited from the geriatric psychiatry clinics at the National Taiwan University Hospital from June 15, 2018 through August 12, 2022. The National Taiwan University Hospital Institutional Review Board approved this study with the approval number 201802039RINB. All participants and informants involved in the study were informed and provided written informed consent to participate in this study and to have the results published in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki of 1975.

Participants
The inclusion criteria for the study participants were (1) age ≥ 50 years, with the ability to speak Mandarin or Taiwanese, and (2) having family or caregivers who could accompany them to the hospital or live with them to serve as informants. The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) a history of significant head injury, meningitis, encephalitis, substance use, or major depressive episode within the previous year, (2) acute or significant psychiatric disorders or medical conditions (such as acute heart failure) within the past two months, (3) a diagnosis of schizophrenia or other psychotic disorders, bipolar disorder, or obsessive-compulsive disorder, (4) a diagnosis of major neurological disorders, such as epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, Huntington’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, or frontotemporal dementia, and (5) severe visual or hearing impairments that prevented them from completing the assessment procedures, (6) severe dementia defined as a CDR ≥ 3, and (7) other reasons based on which they were deemed unsuitable to participate by the physicians.

Informants
The inclusion criteria for the informants were age ≥ 20 and daily contact, including phone calls, with the participants for at least one hour per day. The informants were excluded if they had been diagnosed with (1) neurological disorders (such as epilepsy, dementia), (2) major psychiatric disorders (such as schizophrenia, bipolar disorder), (3) substance use disorder within the past year, (4) an acute medically unstable condition or significant psychiatric disorder within the past two months, (5) severe visual or hearing impairments that prevented them from completing the assessment procedures, or (6) other condition deemed unsuitable to participate by the physicians.

Assessments
An initial interview session was to collect participants’ demographic data, such as sex, age, and education level, and determine the eligibility of participants and informants. Enrolled participants underwent history taking, physical and mental status examination, the MMSE, other neuropsychological tests, laboratory testing, and brain imaging.
The clinical psychologists interviewed their informants to complete the AD8 and CDR. To avoid recall bias, the AD8 was administered before the CDR because the CDR involves a more structured and detailed assessment that could influence the response to the AD8.
In the AD8 part, psychologists read the instructions and eight items verbatim without providing cues or clarification. The informants selected one of the three presented answers: (1) yes, a change, (2) no, no change, and (3) N/A, don’t know. The number of items that received the yes answer was the AD8 score.
In the CDR part, psychologists conducted structured interviews to probe and clarify participants’ decline from their previous level. Psychologists also considered and discussed additional factors that may cause impairment. Each category received a box score of 0, 0.5, 1, 2, or 3. The CDR scoring algorithm helped transform the six box scores into a global score of 0, 0.5, 1, 2, or 3. The CDR sum of boxes is the sum of the six box scores.
Two geriatric psychiatrists considered all clinical information to reach an agreed diagnosis for each participant based on The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5). The criteria for mild and major neurocognitive disorders correspond to mild cognitive impairment and dementia.

Statistical analysis
Descriptive statistics were used to report the demographic and cognitive characteristics of the selected sample. The participants were categorized into three groups based on their CDR global scores. The participants’ age, MMSE scores, CDR sum of boxes, and AD8 scores were compared using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and post hoc analysis, and their sex was compared using a chi-square test. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were generated to display the performance of the AD8 to discriminate between participants with CDR 0 and CDR 0.5, between those with CDR 0 and CDR ≥ 0.5, and between those without dementia and those with dementia. The sensitivity, specificity, positive and negative predictive values, and the Youden index were calculated. These analyses were all performed using the SAS statistical software, version 9.4M8 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA).

Results
A total of 118 participant-informant dyads were recruited, of whom 37 had a CDR of 0, 61 had a CDR of 0.5, 17 had a CDR of 1, and 3 had a CDR of 2. Their demographic and cognitive characteristics are summarized in Table 1. The average ages, education years, MMSE scores, AD8 scores, and CDR sum of boxes differed significantly among groups based on the CDR global score classification (p < 0.001). After post hoc analysis, those with CDR 0 had a lower age and more years of education. The CDR global scores correlated negatively with MMSE scores and positively with AD8 scores and CDR sum of boxes; there was a significant difference between any two CDR groups (p < 0.001).
Participants’ demographic and cognitive characteristics.
(1) CDR 0	(2) CDR 0.5	(3) CDR ≥ 1	p-value	Post hoc analysis	 	(n = 37)	(n = 61)	(n = 20)	 		N	(%)	N	(%)	N	(%)			 	Gender, Men	9	(24)	17	(28)	5	(25)	0.919		 										 		Mean	(SD)	Mean	(SD)	Mean	(SD)			 	Age	64.8	(9.3)	72.6	(8.8)	74.8	(9.1)	< 0.001	(3),(2)>(1)	 	Education years	14.4	(3.8)	10.3	(4.9)	9.7	(4.9)	< 0.001	(1)>(2),(3)	 	MMSE	28.6	(1.2)	25.3	(3.8)	16.8	(6.5)	< 0.001	(1)>(2)>(3)	 	CDR sum of boxes	0.0	(0.1)	1.5	(1.3)	7.0	(2.1)	< 0.001	(3)>(2)>(1)	 	AD8 score	0.6	(0.9)	2.6	(2.1)	5.3	(1.9)	< 0.001	(3)>(2)>(1)
To discriminate between participants with CDR 0 and those with CDR 0.5, the area under the ROC curve (AUC) was 0.800. The optimal cutoff was 2, according to the Youden index, with a sensitivity of 0.64 and specificity of 0.86; however, the sensitivity was inadequate for screening (Table 2 and Fig 1). After including the participants with CDR ≥ 1, the AUC was 0.844, with a sensitivity of 0.72 and specificity of 0.86, and the suggested cutoff value became 3 (Table 3 and Fig 2). Results from studies using similar reference standards are listed for comparison.
CDR 0 vs. CDR 0.5.
Study	AUC	Cutoff	SEN	SPE	PPV	NPV	Youden	 	This study	0.800	2	0.64	0.86	0.89	0.59	0.50	 	Galvin 2005 	0.834	2	0.74	0.86	0.76	0.84	0.60	 	Ryu 2009 	0.820	2	0.68	0.90	0.92	0.61	0.58	 	Yang 2011 	0.961	2	0.96	0.78	0.74	0.97	0.74	 	Correia 2011 	0.769	3	0.61	0.73	0.34	0.89	0.34
AUC = area under the ROC curve, SEN = sensitivity, SPE = specificity, PPV & NPV = positive & negative predictive value, Youden = Youden index
Receiver operating characteristic curve for CDR 0 versus CDR 0.5.
The area under the curve was 0.800.
CDR 0 vs. CDR ≥ 0.5.
Study	AUC	Cutoff	SEN	SPE	PPV	NPV	Youden	 	This study	0.844	3	0.62	0.97	0.98	0.54	0.59	 	Galvin 2005 	0.904	2	0.85	0.86	0.87	0.83	0.71	 	Ryu 2009 	0.880	2	0.78	0.90	0.96	0.59	0.68	 	Yang 2011	0.948	2	0.98	0.78	0.83	0.97	0.76	 	Correia 2011 	0.861	3	0.78	0.73	0.54	0.89	0.51	 	Dominguez 2021 	0.939	3	0.92	0.78	0.75	0.93	0.69
Receiver operating characteristic curve for CDR 0 versus CDR
≥
0.5. The area under the curve was 0.844.
In terms of the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria, 59 participants had normal cognition, 28 had mild neurocognitive disorder (mild NCD), and 31 had major NCD or dementia. To discriminate between those with and without dementia, the AUC was 0.893. A cutoff of 4 maximized the Youden index, with a more balanced sensitivity of 0.77 and specificity of 0.86. A cutoff of 2 resulted in a higher sensitivity of 0.90 and a lower specificity of 0.60 (Table 4 and Fig 3). Results from studies using similar reference standards are also listed for comparison.
Participants without dementia vs. participants with dementia.
Study	AUC	Cutoff	SEN	SPE	PPV	NPV	Youden	 	This study	0.893	4	0.77	0.86	0.67	0.91	0.64	 	Usarel 2019 	0.999	5	1.00	0.96	0.94	1.00	0.96	 	Thaipisuttikul 2022 	N/Aa	3	0.92	0.90	0.85	0.94	0.82
aThe AUC was unavailable because it was not provided in the published part of the study.
Receiver operating characteristic curve comparing the AD8 scores of the participants without and with dementia according to the DSM-5 diagnostic criteria.
The area under the curve was 0.893.

Discussion
A literature review revealed several factors that may affect the performance of the AD8. For example, Correia et al. found that education level affected individual understanding of questions and that the accessibility of devices asked in the questionnaire may differ under certain socioeconomic situations. These may account for different cutoff values recommended in various geographical areas.
The mode of questionnaire administration and respondents’ personality traits may impact the AD8 score as well. Although the AD8 was developed for informant interviews, many studies have evaluated its performance when the AD8 is self-administered, including one conducted by the initial study team. Buchanan et al. reported that raters with higher levels of neuroticism tended to overestimate the severity of the cognitive problems of study participants. Other studies reported that self-reported cognitive ability on the AD8 may be less accurate than that reported by their informants; this may be attributable to the level of insight retained throughout the disease course of dementia.
The sequence of assessment instrument administration has also been shown to affect performance on the AD8. The initial study used the CDR as their reference standard, regarding a global score of 0.5 as very mild dementia, and numerous other studies have adopted similar strategies in defining dementia and its severity. It is evident that the CDR evaluates cognitive function in a more structured and detailed manner than the AD8, and applying the CDR before the AD8 in the assessment procedure may, whether intended or not, enhance the accuracy of the AD8. In our literature review, at least one study specified their sequence of test administration as such, and their data generated an extremely high AUC of 0.999, sensitivity of 1.00, and specificity of 0.96.
Moreover, a CDR global score of 0.5 does not necessarily mean that individuals have dementia or are undergoing an irreversible, ever-worsening dementing process. A systematic review classified CDR 0.5 as mild cognitive impairment. They regarded the target condition of the initial AD8 study as mild cognitive impairment rather than dementia. In our study, the participants with CDR 0.5 could eventually be diagnosed as cognitively normal, with mild NCD, or with major NCD according to the DSM-5. Other studies have demonstrated that the CDR sum of boxes is a strong predictor of the reversion to normal cognition and the conversion to dementia. On a population level, a nationwide study reported an age-adjusted prevalence of all-cause dementia in Taiwan of 8.04% based on standard clinical evaluation. In another survey that used the AD8 as the only measurement, the estimated prevalence increased to 13.8%. Similarly, when using a cutoff value of 2 in this study, as suggested in the analysis using CDR 0.5 instead of criteria such as the DSM-5 to diagnose dementia, the estimated prevalence was higher with many more false positive cases, and this may also be true in real-world practice. Although an increasing number of studies use AD8 to assess cognitive impairment, it would be wise to reconsider the generalizability of their results.
The sampled participants and disease prevalence may influence the performance of a diagnostic instrument. In theory, disease prevalence should not impact the sensitivity and specificity inherent to a test method. However, incorporating participants with more severe dementia increased the sensitivity of the AD8. For this reason, when applying a screening tool to the general population, it is crucial to consider whether the initially studied population was representative. A critical concern regarding most AD8 studies is that the participants had a significantly higher prevalence of dementia than that of the general population. Applying such a screening tool in the general population can result in a low positive predictive value, which raises concerns over its use during regular health examinations for older individuals in the community. Moreover, inadequate specificity or a high false positive rate (up to 40% or more) would further curtail the usefulness of the AD8. In 2020, the US Preventive Services Task Force reviewed the evidence on screening for cognitive impairment in community-dwelling adults and found insufficient direct evidence regarding the benefits or harms of screening in older adults without recognized signs or symptoms of cognitive impairment.
The limitations of this study include its small sample size and sampling from the geriatric psychiatric outpatient clinic. Before applying AD8 to community-dwelling adults, studies with large samples representative of the general population may be necessary to reduce selection bias. In Taiwan, for example, one possible solution is to involve the health authorities to collect relevant data from its dementia screening program. Subsequent analysis of classification accuracy, the cost-effectiveness of referral and further evaluation, and the emotional consequence of regular screening may respond to the concern of over-diagnosis. Future studies comparing different sequences of test administration may verify our inference about recall bias.

Conclusion
The AD8 is a brief screening test for dementia, but the cutoff values vary in different countries. Many factors can affect its performance, including disease prevalence across various medical settings, level of development in the geographical region, education, raters’ personality, and the mode and sequence of test administration. Our findings suggest that the AD8 may perform better and have a lower false positive rate with the cutoff value 4 to discriminate between those with and without dementia. Before advocating a screening tool such as the AD8, it is reasonable to consider its psychometric properties, the vulnerability of the targeted population, and the purpose of such a screening program. Appropriate strategies can be employed to maximize benefits, especially for older individuals with undiagnosed dementia at the community level. Carefully selecting appropriate screening targets with symptoms or signs of cognitive impairment can reduce false positive test results, prevent unnecessary anxiety, and justify further medical examinations.

Supporting information

References
The changing prevalence and incidence of dementia over time - current evidence
Dementia
Estimation of the global prevalence of dementia in 2019 and forecasted prevalence in 2050: an analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019
Psychometric limitations of the mini-mental state examination among nondemented older adults: an evaluation of neurocognitive and magnetic resonance imaging correlates
Relationship between the Montreal Cognitive Assessment and Mini-mental State Examination for assessment of mild cognitive impairment in older adults
The AD8: a brief informant interview to detect dementia
Predictors of dementia misclassification when using brief cognitive assessments
The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules
Evaluation of the Electronic Clinical Dementia Rating for Dementia Screening
Validity and reliability of the AD8 informant interview in dementia
Validity and reliability of the Korean version of the AD8 informant interview (K-AD8) in dementia
AD8-Brazil: cross-cultural validation of the ascertaining dementia interview in Portuguese
Application of AD8 questionnaire to screen very mild dementia in Taiwanese
The informant AD8 is superior to participant AD8 in detecting cognitive impairment in a memory clinic setting
The diagnostic accuracy of the Ascertain Dementia 8 questionnaire for detecting cognitive impairment in primary care in the community, clinics and hospitals: a systematic review and meta-analysis
The Chinese version of informant AD8 for mild cognitive impairment and dementia screening in community-dwelling older adults
Comparison of two screening instruments to detect dementia in Indian elderly subjects in a clinical setting
Validity and reliability of the Farsi version of the ascertain dementia 8-item (AD8-F) informant interview in Iranian patients with mild neurocognitive disorder
Reliability and validity of the Japanese version of the AD8
Validation of AD8-Philippines (AD8-P): A Brief Informant-Based Questionnaire for Dementia Screening in the Philippines
Development and validation of the Ascertain Dementia 8 (AD8) Thai version
Assessing the diagnostic accuracy (DA) of the Spanish version of the informant-based AD8 questionnaire
The AD8 (Dementia Screening Interview) is a valid and reliable screening scale not only for dementia but also for mild cognitive impairment in the Turkish geriatric outpatients
Awareness in early-stage Alzheimer’s disease: a review of methods and evidence
Factors associated with the variability in caregiver assessments of the capacities of patients with Alzheimer disease
Contributions of Caregiver Management Styles to the Discrepancy Between Reported and Observed Task Performance in People with Dementia
Caregiver and noncaregiver attitudes toward dementia screening
Pilot Evaluation of a Dementia Case Finding Clinical Service Using the Informant AD8 for At-Risk Older Adults in Primary Health Care: A Brief Report
The Informant AD8 Can Discriminate Patients with Dementia From Healthy Control Participants in an Asian Older Cohort
Performance of the Eight-item Informant Interview to Differentiate Aging and Dementia within a context similar to the Swedish primary healthcare sector: a systematic review of diagnostic test accuracy studies
Detection of cognitive impairment using self-rated AD8 and informant-reported AD8
Dementia screening: can a second administration reduce the number of false positives?
Estimating Dementia Risk Using Multifactorial Prediction Models
Patient’s rating of cognitive ability: Using the AD8, a brief informant interview, as a self-rating tool to detect dementia
Informant Personality Is Associated With Ratings of Memory Problems in Older Adults
Anosognosia increases caregiver burden in mild cognitive impairment
Self- and informant-reported cognitive functioning and awareness in subjective cognitive decline, mild cognitive impairment, and very mild Alzheimer disease
AD8 patient-informant discrepancy predicts insight and cognitive impairment in Alzheimer’s disease
Sum of boxes of the clinical dementia rating scale highly predicts conversion or reversion in predementia stages
A nationwide survey of mild cognitive impairment and dementia, including very mild dementia, in Taiwan
A walk-in screening of dementia in the general population in Taiwan
Reply: The impact of dementia prevalence on the utility of the AD8
The impact of dementia prevalence on the utility of the AD8. Brain
Physical Examination in the Evaluation of Dementia
AD8 Informant Questionnaire for Cognitive Impairment: Pragmatic Diagnostic Test Accuracy Study
Screening for Cognitive Impairment in Older Adults: US Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement
10.1371/journal.pone.0321570.r001

Author response to Decision Letter 0
11 Oct 2024
10.1371/journal.pone.0321570.r002

Decision Letter 0
Shakaib
Muhammad
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
9 Dec 2024
PONE-D-24-43514A re-evaluation study and literature review on AD8 as a screening tool for dementiaPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Hwang,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
The authors are suggested to consider various comments of the reviewers, in particular, improve methods section and provide significance of the work.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jan 23 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Muhammad Shakaib, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
3. We note that there is identifying data in the Supporting Information file <Raw data.xlsx>. Due to the inclusion of these potentially identifying data, we have removed this file from your file inventory. Prior to sharing human research participant data, authors should consult with an ethics committee to ensure data are shared in accordance with participant consent and all applicable local laws. Data sharing should never compromise participant privacy. It is therefore not appropriate to publicly share personally identifiable data on human research participants. The following are examples of data that should not be shared: -Name, initials, physical address -Ages more specific than whole numbers -Internet protocol (IP) address -Specific dates (birth dates, death dates, examination dates, etc.) -Contact information such as phone number or email address -Location data -ID numbers that seem specific (long numbers, include initials, titled “Hospital ID”) rather than random (small numbers in numerical order) Data that are not directly identifying may also be inappropriate to share, as in combination they can become identifying. For example, data collected from a small group of participants, vulnerable populations, or private groups should not be shared if they involve indirect identifiers (such as sex, ethnicity, location, etc.) that may risk the identification of study participants. Additional guidance on preparing raw data for publication can be found in our Data Policy (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-human-research-participant-data-and-other-sensitive-data) and in the following article: http://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c181.long. Please remove or anonymize all personal information (<specific identifying information in file to be removed>), ensure that the data shared are in accordance with participant consent, and re-upload a fully anonymized data set. Please note that spreadsheet columns with personal information must be removed and not hidden as all hidden columns will appear in the published file.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Partly
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: The article titled "A re-evaluation study and literature review on AD8 as a screening tool for dementia" explores an important area of dementia screening, specifically the use of the AD8 tool. Several aspects of the methodology and presentation could benefit from further clarification.
1. CDR is mentioned as an important factor in the study, but it is not adequately explained in the background and methods sections. The article should include a brief introduction to the CDR scale, explaining its role in assessing dementia severity. For example, what is the difference between CRD and AD8 in the assessment. Furthermore, the methods section should clarify how CDR scores were assessed and provide information on the reliability and validity of the CDR assessments used in the study.
2. The article lacks a thorough description of both the participants and the informants in relation to the assessment of AD8.
3. Clarification of "Their" in the sentence: "An initial interview session was to determine their eligibility and collect basic information."
4. How is dementia defined? Diagnosis or self-report?
Reviewer #2: Introduction:
Provides a good context and justification for the research on the AD8 as a screening tool for dementia. It is suggested that the authors enrich it with the following points:
1. Delve into the theoretical aspects underlying the creation of the AD8 questionnaire, especially in terms of its conceptualization in relation to other screening tools. This will make it possible to place it more accurately in the field of dementia diagnosis and to recognize its potential as a complementary tool in the evaluation of people with signs of cognitive impairment. It is appropriate to make a brief comparison with widely accepted tests such as the MMSE and MoCA, highlighting both the advantages and disadvantages of the AD8. This analysis will allow us to better position the AD8 in the field of dementia detection. More specifically, the AD8 is distinguished by its approach based on an interview with an informant close to the patient (family member, friend or caregiver) who can provide important information about changes in the individual's memory, behavior and cognitive abilities. This approach can be particularly valuable when used in conjunction with other cognitive tests, as it allows the objective assessment to be supplemented with insights from the patient's environment.
2. More detailed description of discrepancies in cut-off values: Although it is mentioned that there are discrepancies in the cut-offs used in different studies, there is not much detail on the possible reasons for these differences. Are there cultural, linguistic, or educational differences that explain the different cut-offs? A more detailed mention of the factors that might be behind these discrepancies would have enriched the introduction and provided more context for the subsequent analysis. At this point, it is also crucial to address clinical aspects, such as the family's emotional difficulty in accepting the severity of the patient's symptoms.
3. Evidence of high false-positive rate: It is mentioned that the AD8 has a high false-positive rate, especially with a cut-off of 2, but the impact of these false-positives, both on the diagnosis and on the consequences of a possible misdiagnosis, is not discussed. It would be useful to introduce more directly how this high false positive rate could affect the practical application of the AD8 and the importance of optimizing the cut-off value to improve the accuracy of the test.
4. Further discussion of the practical challenges of using the AD8 in the community or in daily clinical practice is suggested. For example, the impact of factors such as informant training and the influence of the informant's personality are aspects that could be mentioned in this section to provide a more complete picture of the challenges addressed in the study.
Clear and well-defined objective:
The study has a very clear objective: to evaluate the performance of the AD8 in discriminating between people with and without dementia and to define the optimal cut-off value of the test. In addition, several factors that could influence the accuracy of the tool, such as socioeconomic context and mode of administration, will be examined, which is a very useful and relevant approach for clinical practice.
Use of sound diagnostic criteria:
The use of the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) as a reference standard is a strength because it is a widely accepted tool for classifying the severity of cognitive impairment. In addition, the use of DSM-5 criteria for the classification of neurocognitive disorders (including dementia) ensures rigorous and consistent assessment.
I suggest adding the following to the Ethical Principles:
All participants involved in the study were informed and provided written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki of 1975.
Robust statistical analysis:
The use of ROC curves to determine the discriminative ability of AD8 is appropriate as it allows for accurate assessment of sensitivity and specificity at different cut-off points. In addition, the study explores different cut-offs and presents comparisons with other similar studies, providing a broader context.
Consideration of contextual factors:
The study takes into account important factors such as level of education, type of test administration (informant vs. self-administered), and rater personality, which may influence the accuracy of the DA8. This approach is useful because many previous studies have not accounted for these factors, which may explain the variability in results obtained in different geographic or demographic contexts.
Limitations:
I suggest adding a possible solution to the drawbacks of your study. It would be useful to conduct studies with larger samples representative of the general population, explaining that there is a selection bias in most studies using the AD8, as they tend to select participants with a higher prevalence of dementia, which may affect the accuracy of the test when applied to the general population. This bias may also explain the high false positive rate observed when a low cut-off was used in this study. As mentioned above, a cut-off value of 2 may result in high sensitivity but low specificity, leading to many false positives.
Another limitation is the effect of the order in which the assessment instruments are administered, in this case the CDR first and then the AD8, as this may influence the results. The fact that the CDR is more detailed and structured may bias responses to the AD8 if administered later, which may inadvertently improve the accuracy of the AD8. This raises an important question about the validity of the AD8 when it is not administered in a standard manner.
It is suggested that some consideration be given to where it is proposed to be used. It may be useful for discriminating between those with and without dementia, but it also raises concerns about its use in clinical practice, especially in the general population. The fact that the test has a high false positive rate, especially at low cut-offs, may make it not reliable enough to be used in mass public health screening or in regular assessment of older people without obvious symptoms of cognitive impairment.
Conclusion:
Overall, the study provides valuable information on the accuracy and performance of the AD8 as a screening tool for dementia, especially in terms of defining optimal cut-off values and analyzing factors that could influence its performance. However, it also highlights important limitations, such as sample size, selection bias, and applicability to the general population.
To improve the validity and usefulness of the AD8 in clinical practice, it would be necessary to conduct larger studies with representative samples of the general population and to analyze how contextual factors, such as mode of administration and sociodemographic characteristics, may influence its performance.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Yes:  Ruth Alcalá-Lozano
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0321570.r003

Author response to Decision Letter 0
3 Jan 2025
Response to the Academic Editor and Reviewers
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
Response: We reviewed PLOS ONE’s requirements and changed the file names.
2. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
Response: We added Supporting Information section at the end of manuscript (page 16, line 291), included captions for the files (line 292), and updated in-text citations.
3. We note that there is identifying data in the Supporting Information file <Raw data.xlsx>. Due to the inclusion of these potentially identifying data, we have removed this file from your file inventory. Prior to sharing human research participant data, authors should consult with an ethics committee to ensure data are shared in accordance with participant consent and all applicable local laws. Data sharing should never compromise participant privacy. It is therefore not appropriate to publicly share personally identifiable data on human research participants. The following are examples of data that should not be shared: -Name, initials, physical address -Ages more specific than whole numbers -Internet protocol (IP) address -Specific dates (birth dates, death dates, examination dates, etc.) -Contact information such as phone number or email address -Location data -ID numbers that seem specific (long numbers, include initials, titled “Hospital ID”) rather than random (small numbers in numerical order) Data that are not directly identifying may also be inappropriate to share, as in combination they can become identifying. For example, data collected from a small group of participants, vulnerable populations, or private groups should not be shared if they involve indirect identifiers (such as sex, ethnicity, location, etc.) that may risk the identification of study participants. Additional guidance on preparing raw data for publication can be found in our Data Policy (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-human-research-participant-data-and-other-sensitive-data) and in the following article: http://www.bmj.com/content/340/bmj.c181.long. Please remove or anonymize all personal information (<specific identifying information in file to be removed>), ensure that the data shared are in accordance with participant consent, and re-upload a fully anonymized data set. Please note that spreadsheet columns with personal information must be removed and not hidden as all hidden columns will appear in the published file.
Response: We carefully examined the collected data in the S1 Table and noticed that the serial numbers were not sequential. This occurred because of a change in numbering while our study was ongoing and the merge of duplicate data. We corrected it with a sequential number.
Reviewer #1:
The article titled "A re-evaluation study and literature review on AD8 as a screening tool for dementia" explores an important area of dementia screening, specifically the use of the AD8 tool. Several aspects of the methodology and presentation could benefit from further clarification.
1. CDR is mentioned as an important factor in the study, but it is not adequately explained in the background and methods sections. The article should include a brief introduction to the CDR scale, explaining its role in assessing dementia severity. For example, what is the difference between CDR and AD8 in the assessment. Furthermore, the methods section should clarify how CDR scores were assessed and provide information on the reliability and validity of the CDR assessments used in the study.
Response: We added a paragraph to introduce the CDR (page 4, line 46 and line 54) and compared skill and time requirement for AD8 (page 5, line 67). We also clarified how CDR is scored in the Methods section (page 8, line 147). These revisions are as follows.
page 4, line 46
Dementia is a heterogeneous neurocognitive disorder that compromises the activities of daily living[1]. The global prevalence of dementia has been estimated to be around 7%, with a higher prevalence with advancing age[2]. Given the burden of aging and aged societies in many countries, the early prevention, recognition, and treatment of dementia has become an important issue[3]. Many screening tests have been developed to detect dementia early, and several are routinely used in primary care[4].
page 4, line 54
Informant-based assessments provide a long-term outlook, allowing observation for early cognitive and functional change. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), for example, evaluates memory, orientation, judgment and problem-solving, community affairs, home and hobbies, and personal care. This assessment requires trained clinicians or psychologists to conduct semi-structured interviews with the patients and informants[7]. Instead of summing category scores, a scoring algorithm helps transform category scores into a global score[9]. Evidence has proved its face validity, inter-rater reliability, independence from performance-based assessments, and limited influence of age, education level, language, culture, and practice effect. However, its lengthy administration and requirement for experienced judgment limit its use for screening[7, 10].
4. Patnode CD, Perdue LA, Rossom RC, Rushkin MC, Redmond N, Thomas RG, et al. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Evidence Syntheses, formerly Systematic Evidence Reviews. Screening for Cognitive Impairment in Older Adults: An Evidence Update for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US); 2020.
7. Galvin JE, Roe CM, Powlishta KK, Coats MA, Muich SJ, Grant E, et al. The AD8: a brief informant interview to detect dementia. Neurology. 2005;65(4):559-64.
9. Morris JC. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules. Neurology. 1993;43(11):2412-4.
10. Nosheny RL, Yen D, Howell T, Camacho M, Moulder K, Gummadi S, et al. Evaluation of the Electronic Clinical Dementia Rating for Dementia Screening. JAMA Netw Open. 2023;6(9):e2333786.
page 5, line 67
Accordingly, brief instruments that help identify individuals with unrecognized dementia are needed. One such instrument is the Eight-Item Informant Interview to Differentiate Aging and Dementia (AD8)[7], which has been validated[11] and translated into various languages[12-15]. It explores memory, orientation, judgment, and function in three minutes[16]. Minimal training is required[4].
16. Chen HH, Sun FJ, Yeh TL, Liu HE, Huang HL, Kuo BI, et al. The diagnostic accuracy of the Ascertain Dementia 8 questionnaire for detecting cognitive impairment in primary care in the community, clinics and hospitals: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Fam Pract. 2018;35(3):239-46.
page 8, line 147
In the CDR part, psychologists conducted structured interviews to probe and clarify participants’ impairment as decline from their previous level. Psychologists also considered and discussed additional factors that may cause impairment. Each category received a box score of 0, 0.5, 1, 2, or 3. The CDR scoring algorithm helped transform the six box scores into a global score of 0, 0.5, 1, 2, or 3. The CDR sum of boxes is the sum of the six box scores.[9]
9. Morris JC. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules. Neurology. 1993;43(11):2412-4.
2. The article lacks a thorough description of both the participants and the informants in relation to the assessment of AD8.
Response: We described how AD8 was administered and scored as follows.
page 8, line 143
In the AD8 part, psychologists read the instructions and eight items verbatim without providing cues or clarification. The informants selected one of the three presented answers: (1) yes, a change, (2) no, no change, and (3) N/A, don’t know. The number of items that received the yes answer was the AD8 score.[7]
7. Galvin JE, Roe CM, Powlishta KK, Coats MA, Muich SJ, Grant E, et al. The AD8: a brief informant interview to detect dementia. Neurology. 2005;65(4):559-64.
3. Clarification of "Their" in the sentence: "An initial interview session was to determine their eligibility and collect basic information.”
Response: we followed the reviewer’s suggestion to clarify “their” (page 8, line 135) as follows.
page 8, line 136
An initial interview session was to collect participants’ demographic data, such as sex, age, and education level, and determine the eligibility of participants and informants.
4. How is dementia defined? Diagnosis or self-report?
Response: For eligibility, dementia was defined by self-report or previous medical records. For assessment in this study, dementia is diagnosed using all clinical information and DSM-5 criteria for major neurocognitive disorder.
Reviewer #2:
Introduction:
Provides a good context and justification for the research on the AD8 as a screening tool for dementia. It is suggested that the authors enrich it with the following points:
1. Delve into the theoretical aspects underlying the creation of the AD8 questionnaire, especially in terms of its conceptualization in relation to other screening tools. This will make it possible to place it more accurately in the field of dementia diagnosis and to recognize its potential as a complementary tool in the evaluation of people with signs of cognitive impairment. It is appropriate to make a brief comparison with widely accepted tests such as the MMSE and MoCA, highlighting both the advantages and disadvantages of the AD8. This analysis will allow us to better position the AD8 in the field of dementia detection. More specifically, the AD8 is distinguished by its approach based on an interview with an informant close to the patient (family member, friend or caregiver) who can provide important information about changes in the individual's memory, behavior and cognitive abilities. This approach can be particularly valuable when used in conjunction with other cognitive tests, as it allows the objective assessment to be supplemented with insights from the patient's environment.
Response: We appreciate the reviewer’s insightful recommendation to map AD8 among widely used screening tests for comparison. This helps enrich our introduction.
page 4, line 46
Dementia is a heterogeneous neurocognitive disorder that compromises the activities of daily living[1]. The global prevalence of dementia has been estimated to be around 7%, with a higher prevalence with advancing age[2]. Given the burden of aging and aged societies in many countries, the early prevention, recognition, and treatment of dementia has become an important issue [3]. Many screening tests have been developed to detect dementia early, and several are routinely used in primary care[4].
Performance-based tests, such as the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), provide quantitative assessments of multiple cognitive domains. However, the ceiling effect may limit their sensitivity to subtle impairment in highly educated individuals[5, 6]. Longer tests, such as the Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument, require more time and expertise to administer. Although objective, performance measurement may misclassify cases as false-positive or false-negative absent collateral information[7, 8].
Informant-based assessments provide a long-term outlook, allowing observation for early cognitive and functional change. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), for example, evaluates memory, orientation, judgment and problem-solving, community affairs, home and hobbies, and personal care. This assessment requires trained clinicians to conduct semi-structured interviews with the patients and informants[7]. Instead of summing category scores, a scoring algorithm helps transform category scores into a global score[9]. Evidence has proved its face validity, inter-rater reliability, independence from performance-based assessments, and limited influence of age, education level, language, culture, and practice effect. However, its lengthy administration and requirement for experienced judgment limit its use for screening[7, 10].
Accordingly, brief instruments that help identify individuals with unrecognized dementia are needed. One such instrument is the Eight-Item Informant Interview to Differentiate Aging and Dementia (AD8)[7], which has been validated[11] and translated into various languages[12-15]. It explores memory, orientation, judgment, and function in three minutes[16]. Minimal training is required[4].
4. Patnode CD, Perdue LA, Rossom RC, Rushkin MC, Redmond N, Thomas RG, et al. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Evidence Syntheses, formerly Systematic Evidence Reviews. Screening for Cognitive Impairment in Older Adults: An Evidence Update for the US Preventive Services Task Force. Rockville (MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (US); 2020.
5. Spencer RJ, Wendell CR, Giggey PP, Katzel LI, Lefkowitz DM, Siegel EL, et al. Psychometric limitations of the mini-mental state examination among nondemented older adults: an evaluation of neurocognitive and magnetic resonance imaging correlates. Exp Aging Res. 2013;39(4):382-97.
6. Trzepacz PT, Hochstetler H, Wang S, Walker B, Saykin AJ. Relationship between the Montreal Cognitive Assessment and Mini-mental State Examination for assessment of mild cognitive impairment in older adults. BMC Geriatr. 2015;15:107.
7. Galvin JE, Roe CM, Powlishta KK, Coats MA, Muich SJ, Grant E, et al. The AD8: a brief informant interview to detect dementia. Neurology. 2005;65(4):559-64.
8. Ranson JM, Kuźma E, Hamilton W, Muniz-Terrera G, Langa KM, Llewellyn DJ. Predictors of dementia misclassification when using brief cognitive assessments. Neurol Clin Pract. 2019;9(2):109-17.
9. Morris JC. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules. Neurology. 1993;43(11):2412-4.
10. Nosheny RL, Yen D, Howell T, Camacho M, Moulder K, Gummadi S, et al. Evaluation of the Electronic Clinical Dementia Rating for Dementia Screening. JAMA Netw Open. 2023;6(9):e2333786.
16. Chen HH, Sun FJ, Yeh TL, Liu HE, Huang HL, Kuo BI, et al. The diagnostic accuracy of the Ascertain Dementia 8 questionnaire for detecting cognitive impairment in primary care in the community, clinics and hospitals: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Fam Pract. 2018;35(3):239-46.
2. More detailed description of discrepancies in cut-off values: Although it is mentioned that there are discrepancies in the cut-offs used in different studies, there is not much detail on the possible reasons for these differences. Are there cultural, linguistic, or educational differences that explain the different cut-offs? A more detailed mention of the factors that might be behind these discrepancies would have enriched the introduction and provided more context for the subsequent analysis. At this point, it is also crucial to address clinical aspects, such as the family's emotional difficulty in accepting the severity of the patient's symptoms.
Response: We added a paragraph in the introduction to address influential factors as follows.
page 5, line 76
Only some of these studies pointed out that responders’ education, regional socioeconomic status, reference standard for diagnosis, and sampling may account for the variation of cutoff values[13, 23], and the rest explained less for the difference. Studies that used informant-based assessment other than AD8 found caregiver awareness and lack of training, care burden, anxiety, depression, personality, and management style can bias reported symptoms and functions[25-27]. Caregiver suffering may reduce the acceptance of screening as well[28]. These suggest training and
10.1371/journal.pone.0321570.r004

Decision Letter 1
Shakaib
Muhammad
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
9 Mar 2025
A re-evaluation study and literature review on AD8 as a screening tool for dementia
PONE-D-24-43514R1
Dear Dr. Hwang,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Muhammad Shakaib, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #3: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #3: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #3: The authors have fully revised their manuscript according to the suggestions asked by the reviewers.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .
Reviewer #3: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0321570.r005

Acceptance letter
Shakaib
Muhammad
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
PONE-D-24-43514R1
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Hwang,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Muhammad Shakaib
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE