pH variation in medical implant biofilms: Causes, measurements, and its implications for antibiotic resistance
The advent of implanted medical devices has greatly improved the quality of life and increased longevity. However, infection remains a significant risk because bacteria can colonize device surfaces and form biofilms that are resistant to antibiotics and the host’s immune system. Several factors contribute to this resistance, including heterogeneous biochemical and pH microenvironments that can affect bacterial growth and interfere with antibiotic biochemistry; dormant regions in the biofilm with low oxygen, pH, and metabolites; slow bacterial growth and division; and poor antibody penetration through the biofilm, which may also be regions with poor acid product clearance. Measuring pH in biofilms is thus key to understanding their biochemistry and offers potential routes to detect and treat latent infections. This review covers the causes of biofilm pH changes and simulations, general findings of metabolite-dependent pH gradients, methods for measuring pH in biofilms, effects of pH on biofilms, and pH-targeted antimicrobial-based approaches.

Introduction and motivation
Most people in developed countries will receive one or more implanted devices during their lifetime, including orthopedic, cardiovascular, dental, and catheter implants. These devices have been a triumph of modern medicine and can improve quality of life and extend life expectancy. However, the device surfaces can be colonized by bacteria and can serve as nidi for infection. The initial infection can occur either during surgery or afterward (hematogenous). Infection rates vary among different implant types, patient profiles, and co-morbidities. Risk factors include traumatic injuries (especially if there is debris in the wound and compromised tissue envelopes), immunosuppressed states, diabetes, smoking, advanced age, and revision of previously infected devices. For elective procedures such as knee and hip replacements, average infection rates are around 1% but climb to 40% in battlefield injuries due to the traumatic and unclean nature of injuries, and average infection rates are ~50% for cardiac assist devices due to patient profile and co-morbidities.
Implant-associated infections are especially concerning because bacteria growing in biofilms on the device surface are highly resistant to antibiotics and the host’s immune system. For many devices, surgical irrigation and debridement coupled with antibiotic therapy are often successful at relatively early stages (within 1 week of surgery or 3 weeks of symptoms); however, at later stages, implants often need to be removed to treat the underlying infection with associated surgeries, hospitalizations, and cost. These costs can be staggering; for example, several studies estimate $100,000 in hospital charges per episode of prosthetic joint infection and $390 k over the lifetime of a 65-year-old. Over half of hospital-acquired infections are associated with implanted medical devices; therefore, methods are urgently needed for the early detection and treatment of implant infections. Since acidic (low pH) biofilm microenvironments are indicative of poorly perfused and dormant regions, and pH also directly affects biofilm and antibiotics biochemistry, this review seeks to explain how pH is measured in biofilms, how it varies, and how that might affect treatment strategies.

Structure of this review
First, we provide a brief background on biofilms and their persistence (Section “Background on biofilms”); next, we discuss why pH can be lower or higher in some regions of biofilms (Section “Causes of pH variation”); how pH can be measured in biofilms and what the typical findings are (Section “Measurement of pH variation”); different methods used to measure and image local pH near implants (Section “Bacterial infection diagnosis”); the effect of pH on biofilm, host and antibiotic activity (Section “Effect of pH”), and finally, we cover strategies that target low pH regions of biofilms to treat implant infections (Section “pH targeted bacterial infection treatment”).

Background on biofilms
Biofilms are groups of microorganisms in which cells stick together on a surface; these adherents are attached within a self-produced matrix of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). These EPSs usually consist of extracellular DNA, proteins, and polysaccharides. The special three-dimensional structure of biofilms provides an environment for the microorganisms to live as a community that can form on different biotic and abiotic surfaces in industrial, hospital, and natural environments. Presumably, this structure serves as protection for microorganisms from the environment and host immunity to increase their chances of survival. In addition, the microorganisms inside this structure are often resistant to antimicrobial agents, showing higher antibiotic resistance rates than planktonic bacteria. Biofilms can also form in nutrient conditions that do not permit the growth of planktonic cells and when the bacterial growth rate is decreased. In this section, we will briefly review factors affecting biofilm formation and its stages (Section “Biofilm formation”) and the relevance of pH on biofilm formation (Section “Biofilm antibiotic resistance and relevance of pH”).

Biofilm formation
Biofilms can form on many different surfaces, such as living tissues, medical devices, and industrial or natural aquatic systems, and several factors may affect their formation. The ideal environment for the attachment of microorganisms onto a surface is the solid–liquid interface between that surface and a liquid medium, such as water or blood. The characteristics of the solid surface, such as surface roughness, surface hydrophobicity, and surface-associated structures, can also be important in the attachment process. Surface roughness is one of the surface characteristics that affect the colonization of microorganisms. Rough surfaces have more surface area; therefore, colonization increases when the surface roughness increases. Surface hydrophobicity can also play a role in the initial attachment; many studies showed that microorganisms attach faster to hydrophobic, nonpolar surfaces, such as Teflon and plastics, than hydrophilic surfaces like glass or metals. These studies’ results could be complex and contradictory because of the other variables that are present in biofilm formation, such as surface proteins, fimbriae, or other microbial surface-associated structures. The liquid medium has characteristics, such as pH, nutrient level, ionic strength, and temperature that could affect the microorganisms’ attachment. Seasonal changes affecting biofilm formation in aqueous systems might be ascribed to differences in temperature. A laboratory study also demonstrated that increased microbial attachment occurs when nutrient concentrations are higher. Cell surface features like hydrophobicity, fimbriae, flagella, and EPS production can influence the attachment rate. Most bacteria studied are negatively charged and contain hydrophobic surface components. Different bacterial strains might vary in hydrophobicity. Some studies did not find a relationship between the bacterial surface hydrophobicity and the extent of initial binding to either a hydrophilic or hydrophobic substrate.
Biofilm development involves several steps: initial attachment of microorganisms, biofilm maturation, and finally, the dispersal of biofilm cells. Figure 1 shows how the biofilm structure changes over time in vitro from a few bacteria which initially grow exponentially. As shown in Figure 1D, the first step is the initial attachment of microorganisms. On Staphylococcus aureus, one of the most prevalent bacteria in implant-associated infection, the microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules (MSCRAMMS) are expressed. These MSCRAMMs help the bacteria to attach to different surfaces via various mechanisms. Polysaccharide intercellular adhesin (PIA), with the chemical composition poly-N-acetylglucosamine (PNAG) produced by the ica gene locus, is the main molecule responsible for intercellular adhesion. De-acetylation of N-acetylglucosamine in PIA positively charges the molecule. Hence, PIA attaches by electrostatic interaction to the bacterial surface that is normally negatively charged due to its teichoic acid contents. When the matrix develops a complex structure, the attachment becomes irreversible. The next step is the maturation phase, known by extracellular aggregation of adhesive proteins and polysaccharides with biofilm structural forces that make three-dimensional mushroom-like cell towers and fluid-filled channels between the towers through which nutrients are delivered to cells deeper in biofilm. The final step is the dispersal phase, which leads to dissemination of the bacteria to new infection sites. Single cells or large cell clusters may detach from the biofilm surface area, which is also controlled by the quorum sensing in staphylococci. In vivo biofilms are usually poly-colonial and consist of many species with complex structures, as shown in Figures 1E,F of oral biofilms.
Biofilm growth and structure.
(A) Confocal microscopy images of Vibrio cholerae cells constitutively expressing a green fluorescent protein at three different z planes. (B) 3D reconstruction of the biofilm shown in (A), cells are colored according to the nematic order parameter S = <3_2 (n_i _ n_j) −1_2 > 2 in its vicinity. High-time-resolution (Δt = 5–10 min) imaging allows tracking of cell lineages. White cells are not direct descendants of the biofilm founder cell. (C) Shows the extracellular matrix protein RbmA that mediates cell–cell adhesion and is distributed throughout the biofilm. (D) Biofilm growth series over time. Starting from initial attachment to irreversible attachment, maturation and dispersion. Cells are colored according to the cellular alignment with the z axis. (E) Localization of Actinomyces within hedgehogs, in patches within the base region of hedgehogs, and adjacent to them in a dental plaque microbiome. (F) Cauliflower structure in plaque composed of Lautropia, Streptococcus, Haemophilus/Aggregatibacter, and Veillonella. Scattered cells of Prevotella, Rothia, and Capnocytophaga are also visible. These figures were reproduced with permission from.

Biofilm antibiotic resistance and relevance of pH
Four mechanisms of biofilm antibiotic resistance have been described (see Figure 2), and these are either the cause or the effect of pH changes within the biofilm. (1) The first mechanism is poor antimicrobial penetration, in which the antimicrobial agents penetrate slowly or incompletely through the biofilm. Co-metabolism of the antimicrobial agents by the biofilm as it consumes other substrates will decrease the concentration of the antimicrobial agents to a level that would be ineffective in the deeper regions of the biofilm. Regions that have low perfusion of drugs also show slow penetration of oxygen into the biofilm and slow removal of carbon dioxide and acidic byproducts out of it. Anaerobic respiration, due to low oxygen levels, and poor clearance of metabolic products result in low pH in these regions. (2) With the second mechanism, the altered microenvironment and slow growth enable bacteria in a biofilm to become more resistant to antimicrobial agents. Within a biofilm, there is a micro-gradient found in the concentration of critical metabolic substrates and products that leads to the slow-growing or stationary phases of bacterial cells. Bacteria in the slow-growing phase are less susceptible than bacteria in the growing phase and can survive antibacterial challenges. pH gradients in the biofilm may positively or negatively impact the activity of antibiotics, depending on the type of antibiotic used. (3) The third mechanism of biofilm protection is stress response defenses induced by biofilm-forming bacteria when they encounter an environmental challenge. These stresses alter gene expression patterns and cell physiology resulting in specific and highly regulated adaptive responses. These stress responses may impact antimicrobial susceptibility either directly or indirectly. Initiation of stress responses that result in recruitment of resistance determinants (e.g., antimicrobial efflux), development of resistance mutations, changes to antimicrobial targets, alterations to the membrane barrier functions, and promotion of resistant growth modes directly affect antimicrobial activity. Low pH has been found to promote the expression of a gene encoding multidrug resistance efflux pump NorB resulting in reduced susceptibility to moxifloxacin in S. aureus. The rpoS gene, which encodes the general stress response sigma factor, has been found to respond to a pH downshift from pH 7 to pH 5 in Escherichia coli. The stress responses may promote physiological changes that indirectly affect antimicrobial activity; for example, stress-induced slow growth rate or dormancy in regions under nutrient stress will impact antimicrobials that target rapidly growing cells. Therefore, pH may also be considered to indirectly affect antimicrobial susceptibility, since low pH can be observed in regions under oxidative stress and low nutrients. (4) The fourth mechanism of biofilm antimicrobial resistance is the possibility of a highly protected phenotype of microorganisms in a biofilm. Cells in this state are called persisters. There may be a possible link between persisters and stress. Genes responsible for the persister state may include those that code for factors that determine the entry into and exit out of the persister state as well as those affecting stress responses. The rpoS gene, which encodes the general stress response factor (also responsive to pH), has been linked to persister formation in E. coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In response to acidic pH, E. coli produced increased levels of ampicillin-resistant persisters compared with wild-type or untreated cells. It seems likely that a combination of these factors determines the overall protection of the biofilm, and pH indirectly or directly affects the antimicrobial susceptibility of these cells.
Four mechanisms of reduced susceptibility to antimicrobials in biofilm: slow antibiotic penetration (antibiotics shown in yellow), stress response (e.g., green cells), altered microenvironment (pink), and resistant phenotype [purple persister cells; reproduced with permission from ].
Antibiotics can be divided into two groups based on their effect on the growth of cells with the bactericidal antibiotics killing the bacteria and the bacteriostatic antibiotics suppressing the growth of bacteria. The susceptibility of bacteria to an antibiotic could be distinguished as resistant, tolerant, or persistent based on their modes of survival. Antibiotic resistance describes the bacteria with reduced susceptibility to an antibiotic and continues to grow in its presence. The level of antibiotic resistance can by quantified by the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), which is defined as the minimum concentration of an antimicrobial required to prevent the growth of cells. Antibiotic tolerance, on the other hand, describes bacteria with an increased minimum duration (MDK) for killing but with little or no change in the MIC than their susceptible counterparts. Whereas, antibiotic persistence describes a subset of non-replicative population with similar MIC but significantly higher MDK for killing enabling them to persist in an environment.
Mechanisms of reduced susceptibility to antimicrobials in biofilm are shown in a cross-section of a biofilm (Figure 2). The attachment surface is shown in gray. The yellow phase contains the antibiotic at the top, where antimicrobial penetration is restricted in the presence of EPSs. In the green areas, some bacteria change their activity in response to antimicrobial stress. The microenvironment in the deeper area is altered to resist eradication (pink). Persister cells are present at a higher ratio deep in the biofilm (violet). Biofilms provide an excellent environment for transferring extrachromosomal DNA (plasmids) through conjugation because the cells in a biofilm are closer in proximity, and there is a higher chance for cell-to-cell contact. These plasmids may encode for resistance to antimicrobial compounds.
In summary, biofilms have multiple stages that can be targeted: initial attachment, irreversible attachment, growth, etc. Once mature, microorganisms in the heterogeneous and persistent/quiescent regions of the biofilm are hard to eradicate. Biofilm resistance develops for multiple reasons, which can correlate with low pH and/or are influenced by pH changes. Therefore, understanding the microenvironment is a key factor in the development of detection and treatment strategies.

Causes of pH variation
A key feature of a biofilm is the development of gradients of various biochemical parameters resulting in a heterogeneous microenvironment. The metabolic activities of microbial cells and diffusional processes result in concentration gradients of metabolic substrates and products within the biofilm. Generally, due to low oxygen levels, anaerobic fermentation in the biofilm leads to local depletion of nutrients and accumulation of metabolic waste products, such as lactic acid, citric acid, carbon dioxide, propionic acid, glycerol, ethanol, etc., within the biofilm (Figure 3A). Therefore, it is observed that the concentration of substrate/nutrients decreases with an increase in depth of a biofilm and distance from source (; Figure 3B). In contrast, metabolic product concentrations are found to increase with an increase in depth into the biofilm (Figure 3B). The products are transported from the source, down the concentration gradient, and out of the biofilm. Thus, the production and accumulation of acidic metabolites and waste products from cellular processes will result in higher concentrations of these within the biofilm in comparison to the outside, which may lead to a lowering of the local pH and affect the physiological state of the bacteria.
Mechanisms of local acidosis and hypoxia with the comparison between reaction–diffusion simulations and experiments. (A) Schematic diagram of cellular glucose metabolic pathways resulting in acidic metabolites. (B) Concentrations of the metabolic substrate and metabolic product with distance from the biofilm. (C) The pattern of GFP expression (green) and biomass counterstain (red) in a cell cluster demonstrating a growth rate gradient within a biofilm. The scale bar represents 50 μm. (D) Calculated concentration profiles of a substrate in a hemispherical cluster for varying values of the Thiele modulus, ϕ1 under first-order reaction kinetics. (E) Fit of a theoretical curve (ϕ1 = 4.5) fitted to an experimental GFP intensity. (F) Determination of Thiele modulus by fitting experimental data versus cluster radius. (G) The relative growth rate of a biofilm using acridine orange-stained frozen section (red/orange represent regions of relatively rapid growth; green/yellow regions represent slow growth). The scale bar represents 100 μm. (H) Simulated glucose concentration in mg L−1 (bulk fluid glucose concentration of 30 mg L−1). (I) Simulated growth rate in h−1 (bulk fluid glucose concentrations of 10 mg L−1). (J) Simulated growth rate in h−1 (bulk fluid glucose concentrations of 25 mg L−1). (K) Experimental oxygen concentration profile in a biofilm (gray circles – exposed to air, open circles – exposed to oxygen-enriched gas, solid lines – theoretical curves fitted to two data sets). (L) Theoretical concentration profile for a metabolic substrate with varying values of Thiele modulus, ϕo, under zero-order reaction kinetics. These figures were reproduced with permission from and.
The distribution of solutes in the biofilm is governed by the simultaneous production, consumption, and diffusion of solutes. The reaction–diffusion theory has been widely applied to understand microscale chemical gradients in biofilms, and mathematical models have been developed to simulate these gradients. Stewart and coworkers used a bacterial strain with an inducible fluorescent protein in order to visualize the growth rate gradient in a biofilm and compared the experimental results with the mathematical simulations. The experiment was performed by growing a P. aeruginosa biofilm containing isopropylthio-β-D-galactoside-inducible green fluorescent protein (GFP) in the absence of an inducer. After induction of GFP and counter-staining with a red dye, a green color was developed corresponding to the local expression of GFP; the red stain shows the distribution of biomass independent of metabolic activity. As seen in Figure 3C, the green GFP expression pattern is brighter near the periphery of the cluster (showing more GFP expression) and dimmer toward the center (less GFP expression), demonstrating the relative growth rate of bacteria in the different regions of the biofilm. However, it is worth noting that since the induction of GFP gene requires the diffusion of IPTG inducer and the maturation of GFP chromophore could be impacted by oxygen concentration gradient, the data only suggest that organisms located on the peripheral of biofilm exhibited higher metabolic activity. The calculated concentration profiles of a substrate in a hemispherical cluster for several values of the Thiele modulus, ϕ1 (Figure 3D), can be compared and fitted with the image analysis of GFP intensity in the biofilm cluster (Figure 3E). The image analysis of multiple biofilm clusters was used to determine the Thiele modulus for each, and Figure 3F shows the linear dependence of the Thiele modulus with the cluster radius, which is as expected, and the slope of the fitted line can be used to estimate the first-order reaction rate coefficient.
In an in vitro study by, the relative growth rate of a Klebsiella pneumoniae biofilm was compared to the simulated distribution of glucose. The experimental results (Figure 3G) show higher growth rates (orange or red color) on the biofilm-bulk interface and lower growth rates (yellow and green colors) within the biofilm. The variation in the growth rates can be clearly seen in the thicker, denser regions compared to the thinner regions. The simulation of the glucose concentration also shows similar results in that the glucose concentration is diminished within the larger clusters (Figure 3H). Changing the bulk glucose concentration also changed the growth rate patterns, with a low growth rate at low glucose concentrations (Figure 3I), and higher growth rates at high glucose concentrations (Figure 3J). The simulated growth pattern at a bulk glucose concentration of 25 mg L−1 fitted with the experimental growth pattern (Figure 3J). The utilization of a fluorescence acridine orange nucleic dye to stain the K. pneumoniae biofilm cross sections to determine the growth rate of K. pneumoniae in biofilm is oxygen- and inducer-independent, which minimized the potential drawbacks.
Oxygen concentration profiles in biofilms demonstrate a rapid decline in oxygen concentration with increased depth due to respiration by cells in the upper level of the biofilm. The local oxygen concentration depends on the balance between consumption and diffusion of oxygen. The experimental oxygen concentration profile of a P. aeruginosa biofilm (Figure 3K) fits well with the theoretical concentration profile for a metabolic substrate with zero-order reaction kinetics (Figure 3L), showing low oxygen levels with an increase in depth of the biofilm. The low oxygen levels in these regions result in a local acidic microenvironment within the biofilm. Anaerobic fermentation at low oxygen levels causes the production of organic acids, such as lactic acid and acetic acid, and the slow diffusion causes the accumulation of these products. As a result, a local acidic microenvironment is created within the biofilm, and the presence of the extracellular polymer matrix enables the pH to be relatively unaffected by external pH.
Many studies have measured extracellular pH in biofilms since the variation of pH within a biofilm may have implications on the microbial physiology and biofilm structure. Hou et al. studied the pH distribution on an anodic biofilm using a pH microelectrode. As the pH microelectrode tip moved from the bulk solution (~3,500 mm) toward the anode biofilm surface (0 mm), the pH decreased gradually. A study by Siegrist and Gruger demonstrated the effect of mass transfer and pH on ammonium uptake of nitrifying bacteria. The ammonium oxidation rate was observed to decrease with lower pH due to decreasing volume uptake rate, whereas nitrite oxidation increased with lower pH. Similar gradients can also be seen in bacterial quorum sensing molecules, which are intercellular signaling molecules produced by bacteria. Since low pH regions are indicative of high concentrations of bacteria, it is expected that quorum sensing molecules produced by these bacteria will also be in relatively high concentrations within a biofilm.

Measurement of pH variation
The extracellular pH in normal tissue and interstitial fluid around an implant surface is typically around 7.4, but during bacterial infection, the local pH around the implant can drop to 5.5. As a result of aerobic respiration and anaerobic fermentation, bacteria produce acidic metabolites, such as lactic acid, acetic acid, formic acid, and carbonic acid. Production of these acidic metabolites generates local acidic and hypoxic regions within a biofilm. The pH drop around the implant can be an indication of infection. Inflammatory responses by the human immune system also contribute to local acidosis. Local pH drops due to massive infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages. Acute inflammation caused by surgery can lead to a pH decrease in the local site. The level of pre-inflammatory markers is highest hours after the surgery and will decrease drastically over 24 h depending on the magnitude of the damage.
Biochemical parameters are in a gradient within a biofilm. Different methods have been used to measure the pH gradient within biofilms, using pH microelectrodes, pH-responsive dyes, and pH-responsive nanoparticles. Each has its own advantages and limitations (see Table 1) and will be described below.
Summary of the methods used to measure pH gradient in biofilms.
pH microelectrodes	pH fluorescent dyes	Fluorescent nanoparticles	 	pH measurement method				 	Advantages	High resolution Simple	Imaging of a large region of the biofilm simultaneouslyDoes not damage biofilm structureDoes not drift compared to microelectrodes	Able to add reference dyes, additional indicator dyes, and other analytesAbility to change surface characteristics and size for specific targetingDoes not damage biofilm structureReduced interference from proteins	 	Disadvantages	FragilepH driftingBiofoulingRequire frequent calibrationDestructive to biofilmCannot evaluate the horizontal pH profiles in real-timeVariable accuracy and precision between different electrodes	Interference due to interactions with biofilm proteinsPoor photostability; undergo quenching, photobleachingLimited brightnessRequire calibration in situ	Not typically available commerciallyLow diffusion rates within biofilmPotential for leaching over long term if not covalently boundPotentially different intracellular and extracellular distribution based on surface chemistry, size, and biofilmChange in calibration graph of the dye due to change in local environment. May also cause the calibration graph to be stretched

pH microelectrodes
Extracellular pH at a specific location in a biofilm can be measured using pH microelectrodes. Microelectrodes are electrochemical sensors with a tip diameter of less than 20 μm. pH microelectrodes consist of an ion-permeable membrane that reports the log of the hydronium ion activity (concentrations) as changes in current or potential within the electrode system (reference and sensing electrode). Among the microelectrodes used to study biofilms, iridium/iridium oxide-based microelectrodes have been found to be effective with respect to rigidity, range, calibration, and reproducibility. Measuring pH using microelectrodes provides simplicity and high pH resolution over a wide pH range; however, they can be fragile, undergo potential drift and biofouling over time (requiring frequent recalibration), and show variable accuracy and precision between different electrodes. In addition, the technique requires the insertion of the microelectrode into the biofilm itself, which can be destructive to the biofilm and only allows for measuring one position at a time (need to control position with a stage), and it does not allow for evaluation of the horizontal pH profiles in real-time.
For example, Allan et al. used pH microelectrodes to measure pH as a function of distance from a surface in Citrobacter sp. biofilms with either a carbon-limiting medium and/or a phosphate-limiting medium (Figure 4). No pH variations were observed in a carbon-limiting medium (constant pH 7.15). By contrast, in the phosphate-limiting medium, the biofilm became more acidic near the surface, dropping as low as pH 5.2 with a maximum gradient of about 1 pH unit/100 μm. This pH drop is attributed to the generation of acidic fermentation products with slow diffusion through the biofilm resulting in a pH gradient (Figure 4). Although using pH microelectrodes can provide a pH depth profile, the spatial resolution is not very good (relatively coarse), and the “image” is usually one-dimensional.
The specimen pH profile of Citrobacter biofilm. The circle denotes the specimen pH profile of a Citrobacter biofilm pre-grown and measured under carbon limitation; measurements were recorded under laminar flow (9.5 ml/min). The electrode penetrated through the biofilm to the substratum. The square and triangle denote the specimen pH profiles of two locations measured in a Citrobacter biofilm pre-grown under carbon limitation and then imaged with a phosphorus limiting medium; laminar flow conditions were the same. The profiles suggest that the diffusion boundary layer is approximately 400 mm in depth. The inset illustrates the overview of the pH microelectrode measurement set-up; (A) power supply, (B) preamplifier, (C) chart recorder, (D) measurement electrode and reference electrode, (E) glass culture flow cell, (F) culture inflow, (G) culture outflow. Data digitized and replotted from.

Fluorescent pH indicator dyes
Extracellular pH in biofilms can also be imaged using fluorescent pH indicator dyes in combination with a confocal microscopy readout. pH-driven changes in dye protonation results in changes in the fluorescence emission intensity, spectrum, or lifetime. As with any pH indicators, the response of a fluorescent pH dye is a function of the concentration of the acidic and basic forms of the dye, according to the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation. The largest change in protonated and deprotonated dye concentrations occurs when the pH is equal to the log of the acid dissociation constant of the dye (pKa) and the dynamic range is usually within +/− 1 pH unit of the pKa. Thus, for in vivo studies, the indicator dye pKa should be within the physiologically relevant pH range (around 7). For imaging through highly scattering media, it is also helpful to have red or near-infrared excitation and emission (650–900 nm).
The performance of fluorescence probes based on intensity measurements at a single excitation and emission wavelength, however, is influenced by fluctuations in excitation source intensities, varied emission collection efficiencies, dye concentration, photobleaching of dye, and optical path length, which makes quantification challenging. Ratiometric fluorescent indicators are able to overcome these limitations since they allow for pH measurements independent of dye molecule concentration. This method requires a fluorescent dye that is differentially sensitive to pH for two excitation or emission wavelengths. The ratio between the signals can be calibrated, and thus the pH-dependent shift of the dye can be used to determine pH independent of dye concentration and optical collection efficiency (assuming the background signal is small or known). For example, seminaphthorhodafluor (SNARF) and its derivatives are commonly used ratiometric pH indicators with a pKa in the neutral region. Figure 5A shows the chemical equilibria between the acidic (protonated) and basic (deprotonated) forms of a SNARF derivative. The SNARF derivative showed maximum absorption at 544 nm (in pH 5) and 573 nm (in pH 9), and maximum emission intensities for the dye were at 583 nm in pH 5 and 627 nm in pH 9. Figures 5B,C show the fluorescence emission spectra of a commercially available SNARF derivative as a function of pH for two different excitation wavelengths. Since the equilibrium ratio of protonated and deprotonated species depends upon the local pH according to the Henderson–Hasselbalch equation, the expected pH-dependent fluorescence for different fluorescence emission wavelengths can be modeled, and the results correspond well with the experimental data (Figure 5D). Generally, the dyes function well within 1 pH unit above or below the dye’s pKa but are not sensitive for larger pH ranges. The use of fluorescent dyes enables imaging of a large region of the biofilm simultaneously, without damaging the structure of the biofilm, and does not typically drift compared to microelectrodes. Ratiometric or lifetime fluorescent measurements solve the issue of intensity depending on both pH and dye concentration because increased dye concentration increases both peaks equally.
Fluorescent pH indicator dye sensing mechanism. (A) pH-dependent molecular equilibria structures of pH indicator dye SNARF derivative (SNARF-OH). (B) Fluorescence emission spectra of C-SNARF-1 (5-(and-6)-Carboxy SNARF®-1) at 514 nm. (C) Emission spectra of C-SNARF-1 at 534 nm. (D) Mathematical modeling of C-SNARF-1 emission wavelength as a function of pH. These figures were reproduced with permission from and.
In a study by Vroom et al., the pH gradient within a mixed culture biofilm of oral bacteria was determined by fluorescence lifetime imaging of carboxyfluorescein indicator dye. The images showed that the average pH in a polymicrobial biofilm at a depth of 5 μm is around pH 7.0 ± 0.3 and is around pH 6.0 ± 0.4 on average at a depth of 70 μm (Figure 6A). After overlaying the biofilm with sucrose, the pH in the biofilm dropped to 5.5 in 1 h due to fermentation of the sugar. The graph in Figure 6A shows the decrease in pH as a result of treatment with sucrose, even at depths of 70 μm. Oral biofilm pH can also be measured by fluorescence lifetime imaging using two-photon microscopy. Two-photon microscopy involves excitation of a fluorophore through simultaneous absorption of lower energy two photons and has the advantage of providing high 3-D spatial resolution and low background. Dige and co-workers used two-photon microscopy to excite the fluorescent indicator dye carboxyfluorescein in an oral biofilm and measured its emission lifetime to determine pH. This method is based on time-gated detection of the fluorescence for a monoexponential decay, as shown in Figure 6B. Fluorescence is detected in two-time windows after excitation of fluorochromes with the laser pulse. Fluorescence decay time can be measured by calculating the ratio of intensities, IA/IB. The technique measures fluorescence decay instead of fluorescence emission intensity, enabling concentration-dependent measurement in real-time. They found that the pH in the biofilm at a depth of 10–35 μm decreased over time after adding a glucose pulse, with most of the response occurring within 10 min but with significant variation between regions and patients.
Time-dependent pH in oral biofilm after sucrose addition. (A) In a mixed culture of 10 oral bacteria grown in a chemostat system, the mean biofilm pH in a 100-μm biofilm decreased following a sucrose pulse at depths of 5, 35, and 90 μm from biofilm-coverslip assembly. (B) Graph of window ratio (W1/W4) vs. biofilm pH (solid line); graph of relative fluorescence intensity of carboxyfluorescein as a function of pH (dashed line). (C–E) Extracellular pH curves of three individuals with different pH drop patterns in the sucrose-free group from 1-h experiment. Each curve shows the average pH of a field of view; different specimens are represented by the different colors (depth of biofilm: 10–35 μm). These figures were reproduced with permission from and.
Extracellular pH dropped in all biofilms from the sucrose-free group in Dige’s study after the addition of saliva containing 0.4% glucose. They also showed that the pH changes are time-dependent. The pH drops differ between sites from different individuals, between sites from different specimens, and within single biofilms grown on one glass slab. Figures 6C–E shows extracellular pH curves from three individuals with different pH drop patterns over the 60-min analysis experiment. Similarly, Schlafer and coworkers designed a five-species laboratory biofilm model and imaged it using pH-sensitive ratiometric probe Seminaphtorhodafluor-4F 5-(and-6) carboxylic acid (C-SNARF-4) to analyze the extracellular pH landscape at the interface between bacterial biofilm and underlying substrate (Figure 7A). They were able to visualize horizontal pH gradients in the young dental model biofilms. After the addition of 0.4% glucose, the pH dropped differently in various regions, from pH 7 to pH 5.5–5.9, up to a depth of 70 μm in the biofilm. Although fluorescence imaging of the biofilm can provide good quality images of pH spectra and a 3D view of the pH imaged in the biofilm, there can be issues with possible interference of the dye with cell proteins.
pH variation in biofilms measured via fluorescence. (A) Extracellular pH landscape in the model biofilm exposed to sterile saliva with 0.4% (w/v) glucose and C-SNARF-4 (pH-sensitive ratiometric probe). The scale bar represents 20 μm. (B) Functional 3-D tomographic imaging of side volumetric projections of the reconstructed biofilm pH map of E. coli. (C) Representative 3D CLSM reconstruction of axial pH distribution within intact microcolony of P. fluorescens biofilms, showing orthogonal slices I-V. (D) Corresponding ratiometric orthogonal slices from (C) showing spatially distinct pH gradients in the y, z direction within microcolonies of P. fluorescens biofilms. Scale bars represent 20 μm. These figures were reproduced with permission from, and.
These results generally show that the pH within biofilms decreases when stimulated with glucose due to the production of various organic acids by the fermentation of glucose by biofilm microorganisms. In addition, the studies demonstrate the pH heterogeneity in biofilm models due to different rates of acid production and oxygen depletion within the biofilm microenvironment.
However, several fluorescent dyes have some limitations. The dyes may interact with the biofilm by binding to proteins in cells and the extracellular matrix, which can affect their effective pKa and spectrum. Ideally, these also should be calibrated in situ, especially for absolute values. These dyes may also undergo quenching, and photobleaching, resulting in cellular toxicity and limited brightness. In addition, confocal microscopy and two-photon scanning microscopy, which are needed to obtain spatial information on pH distribution within a biofilm, are time-consuming and require specialized equipment and personnel.

Fluorescent nanoparticles
Fluorescent nanoparticle-based systems can be used to probe biofilm pH depending on the pKa of the dye. To insulate the dye from large proteins that can affect its pKa and performance, the dye can be encapsulated in nanoparticles. These consist of pH-sensitive dyes bound to nano-sized polymer matrices resulting in fast, bright responses that can be measured using real-time fluorescence microscopy. Usually, a reference dye with an emission intensity insensitive to pH is also incorporated into the polymer matrix to enhance signal stability. Several different pH dyes can be combined into a single nanoparticle, enabling measurement in a range of pH, and targeting is possible by controlling the surface functionalization of the nanoparticles. Similarly, other analytes can be detected fairly easily as well since they allow the attachment of multiple components. This method provides a robust system for sensing in situ pH gradient in a biofilm without disrupting the biofilm structure. The polymer matrix insulates the dye from the environment, which reduces interference from adsorption to proteins such as BSA, reduces concerns on toxicity and solubility, and improves their photostability. A major drawback of this method is that pH-sensitive nanoparticles are not typically available commercially. Further, nanoparticles are larger than dyes, which affects penetration into the biofilm and can be limited by low diffusion rates. The dye can also leach over the long term if not covalently bound. Another drawback would be that based on surface chemistry, size, and biofilm, their intracellular and extracellular distribution will be different. Due to encapsulation of the dye, the calibration curve dye changes from its free form due to the changes in its local environment. In addition, the curve may also be stretched due to the presence of multiple environments within the nanoparticle resulting in response over a larger pH range but with less sensitivity.
For example, Hidalgo and coworkers used ratiometric fluorescent silica nanoparticle sensors as tools for high-resolution 3D and time-domain functional fluorescence imaging of pH gradients in microbial biofilms. Their study showed pH values ranged from the acidic core (pH 5) to the neutral outside surface of biofilm (pH > 7), confirming the heterogeneity of the pH profiles within the water waste biofilms (Figure 7B). Adding glucose resulted in a more acidic pH due to glucose metabolism causing the release of tricarboxylic acid cycle acids and CO2 (Hidalgo et al.,). Changes in pH of dental biofilm in response to 0.4% glucose are studied with ratiometric pH-sensitive dye C-SNARF-4 with digital image analysis.
In another study by Fulaz et al., pH-responsive nanoparticle sensors were used to image through the biofilm. The sensors made of mesoporous silica nanoparticles conjugated to fluorescein (pH-sensitive dye) and rhodamine-B (pH insensitive dye) were able to penetrate through the Pseudomonas fluorescens biofilm and enable ratiometric analysis of pH gradients. As shown in Figures 7C,D, confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) images show distinct heterogeneous regions in the biofilm, with more acidic regions within the biofilm compared to the outer regions.
Table 1 summarizes the pH measurement methods for determining the biofilm pH gradient and the advantages and disadvantages of those methods. Table 2 lists the studies on the pH gradient in biofilms, their results, and the effect of carbon sources.
Studies on pH gradient in biofilm and the effect of carbon source.
Study method	Biofilm type	pH Range	Findings	Effect of carbon source	References	 	pH microelectrodes	Monospecies Citrobacter sp. biofilms(can be found in food and water)	From pH around 7 to the lowest pH of 5.12	The pH in phosphate-limited biofilm fell within the biofilm (pH shift of 0.4 and 1.2 pH units in 0–400 μm from the substratum), whereas that of carbon-limited biofilm remained constant.	Biofilm on phosphate-limiting medium became more acidic.		 	Fluorescent dyes	C-SNARF-4confocal microscopy	Dental biofilmmulti-species	7 to 5.5–5.9	Heterogeneous pH in the basal layer of young dental biofilm model (7–100 μm), no obvious correlationbetween biofilm thickness and pH drop in the bottom layer.	Adding glucose caused pH drop.		 	7 to 4.5	Highly heterogeneous pH landscapes due to supply of glucose and buffering ions, bacterial acid production, bacterial acid consumption, and diffusion of acids within and out of biofilm.	The pH dropped in deeper layers of five-species laboratory biofilms (up to 70 μm) upon exposure to 0.4% glucose.		 	*TPE and CLSM with fluorescence lifetime imaging	Mixed cultureoral biofilm	Within 10 min of exposure to glucose, pH fell from 7.0 ± 0.3 to 6.0 ± 0.4	Sharp gradients of pH within microbial biofilms.	Adding sucrose resulted in pH drop, especially in layers at depths of 35 and 70 μm.		 	Fluorescent nanoparticles	Silica nanoparticle sensorsconfocal microscopy	Mixed-culture wastewater biofilms	5 to >7	Heterogeneity of the pH profiles within these biofilms. The pH is more heterogeneous throughout the mixed culture than the axenic one at 77 μm from the substratum.	By adding glucose, pH becomes more acidic.		 	pH-responsive nanoparticlesconfocal microscopy	P. aeruginosa (opportunisticpathogen) and Streptococcus mutants (oral pathogen)	3.5 to 7.5	pH gradient across the biofilm thickness and over time and an acidic core of microcolonies.	pH dropped after the addition of carbon sources (glucose and sucrose).		 	P. fluorescens(soil and water)	5 to 8	pH gradient at different depths of biofilm (0–40 μm).	Biofilm produced more acidic by-products under oxygen-limiting conditions found in the deepest regions of the biofilm.
Two-photon excitation microscopy (TPE) and conventional confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM).

Bacterial infection diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis of bacterial infection on implant surfaces is mainly based on signs and symptoms of infection, such as inflammation or pain. The criteria of these diagnosis methods are not standard and can result in false positive or false negative detection of infection. The existing diagnosis methods are divided into culture-based and non-culture-based methods. Tissue samples and synovial fluid are cultured to confirm the presence of pathogens. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a non-culture-based method and a molecular pathogen-based technique being used to identify the pathogen. Tracking inflammatory cytokine biomarkers like procalcitonin (PCT), interleukins (IL-6 and IL-1ß), and alpha-defensin are also non-culture-based methods. These methods are time-consuming and require expensive equipment and specialized personnel. In addition, bacteria colonizing the implant surface forming biofilms will be resistant to antibiotics and the host’s immune system, and the diagnostic tests are performed only upon the development of infection symptoms. None of the currently available diagnosis methods provide enough sensitivity, specificity, and simplicity for early and effective noninvasive detection of microenvironment changes around implant surfaces. If these infections are not detected early, surgical debridement and device removal will be necessary to treat infections. Therefore, it is necessary to develop fast, cost-effective, and accurate methods to effectively detect and treat implant infections as early as possible.
As discussed above, biofilms generate acidic regions which both correlate with antibiotic-resistant regions and influence local biochemistry. Measuring and imaging local pH near the implant surface, where the persistent and antibiotic-resistant bacteria reside, would be useful for both detecting/monitoring infections and understanding the environment in order to develop treatments for these resistant regions. It is necessary to develop ways to measure the local pH since the pH can change over 20 μm distances (Figure 7). Sensing systems based on the light-addressable potentiometric sensor (LAPS) provide a simple platform to measure pH locally. Figure 8A shows the principal metabolic pathways that lead to extracellular acidification. Anaerobic respiration of bacteria results in the production and accumulation of acidic byproducts. This extracellular acidification can be measured using a LAPS-based instrument called a microphysiometer. The LAPS can be considered as a working electrode in a three-electrode electrochemical setup consisting of a working electrode, reference electrode, and counter electrode (; Figure 8B). LAPS consists of a photoconductive substrate, an insulating layer, and a sensing layer in contact with an electrolyte (usually silicon nitride). When the sensor chip is illuminated, electron–hole pairs are generated in the photoconductor layer, resulting in a localized “short circuit,” where current and voltage can be applied and measured to determine pH. The typical LAPS response varies with pH, as shown in Figure 8C, for a p-type semiconductor photoconducting layer, with the photocurrent shifting to higher potential values with an increase in pH. In the study by Shaibani et al., the sensing layer is composed of polyacrylic acid/ polyvinyl alcohol nanofibers. They were able to detect changes in pH in the media upon sugar fermentation by E. coli (Figure 8D). A linear response was observed from the graph showing the change in pH at different concentrations of E. coli after 1 h, with a detection limit of 20 CFU/ml (Figure 8E). This method provides an inexpensive, rapid method for measuring pH. However, LAPS is currently limited to in vitro measurements, as it requires addressable light source and complex electronics to operate, and those are currently impractical to miniaturize and apply to medical implant surfaces. In order to measure pH near implant surfaces, it is necessary to develop passive devices and coatings with wireless readout.
Different approaches to measuring local biofilm pH. (A) Principle of cellular metabolism pathways resulting in extracellular acidification, which can be measured using pH as a microphysiometer. (B) Schematic of a light addressable potentiometric sensor (LAPS) with hydrogel nanofibers (NFs) as part of a three-electrode electrochemical sensing and imaging system; working electrode (WE), refere1nce electrode (RE), counter electrode (RE). (C) A typical response of LAPS to changes in pH for a p-type semiconductor. (D) Variation of pH over time at different E. coli concentrations measured with LAPS. (E) Changes in pH versus E. coli concentrations measured with LAPS. (F,G) pH measurement using an implantable upconversion particle sensor film. (F) Luminescence spectra of pH sensor film after passing through porcine tissue in standard pH buffers, normalized to peak at 671 nm. (G) pH response of pH sensor film (black dots – no porcine tissue; red triangles – passing through porcine tissue). Inset shows a photograph of the pH sensor film between porcine tissue, with the red arrow showing the pH sensor. (H) Real-time pH monitoring with pH sensor film through tissue (red dots indicate pH variation due to S. epidermis growth; black dots indicate pH variation due to the control, which was phosphate buffer saline). (I) Image of pH sensor film inoculated with S. epidermidis after acquisition. (J) Image of pH sensor film control sample after acquisition. (K) Image of the sample S. epid. 12,228 at pH sensor film and TSA plate interface at 37°C. (L–N) pH mapping using XELCI. Peak intensity at 620 nm over intensity at 700 nm is represented by the color bar. Step size is 300 μm; the scale bars represent 1 mm (L) pH ratio map of the reference region through XELCI. (M) pH ratio map of sample region through XELCI (after 1 h growth). (N) pH ratio map of sample region through XELCI (after 3 h growth). (O) Schematic of the prosthetic hip implant with attached pH sensor. Inset shows the mechanism of pH sensing. (P) X-ray images of pH sensor at pH 6.5 and 7.5 in bovine synovial fluid.
MICs and MBCs of two antibiotics (gentamicin and oxacillin) as a function of pH on S. aureus.
These figures were reproduced with permission from, and.
Biomedical sensors responsive to pH can be used for detecting and monitoring biofilm formation and bacterial infection on orthopedic implants. A sensor based on a film consisting of upconverting particles (UCPs), which act as a light source, and pH indicator dye (bromocresol green) can be used to measure local pH. Irradiation of the film with 980 nm light causes the UCPs to emit red light, and the indicator dye would absorb more at 661 nm than at 671 nm, and the resulting spectral ratio would indicate pH. The luminescence spectra of the pH sensor at different pHs under porcine tissue are shown in Figure 8F, and it was observed that the presence of tissue did not have a significant effect on the calibration graph of the sensor (Figure 8G). The pH sensor film was used to study the variation in pH due to bacterial growth of Staphylococcus epidermis, which showed that the pH decreased gradually after the inoculation of bacteria (Figure 8H). The image of the TSA plate after acquisition for the bacteria-inoculated sample showed colonies of bacteria growing on the edges of the pH sensor with a change in color of the film from green to yellow indicating acidosis (Figure 8I). In contrast, as expected, the control TSA plate remained green and did not have any bacteria growing on it (Figure 8J).
X-ray excited luminescent chemical imaging (XELCI) is a novel medical imaging technique used to non-invasively detect and monitor bacterial biofilm on implant surfaces. In the XELCI technique, a combination of X-ray excitation to provide high-resolution images and optical detection of infection is used. A layer of X-ray scintillators that generate visible near-infrared light when irradiated with an X-ray beam is used to coat the implant. The light first passes through a pH indicator dye-loaded film placed over the scintillator film to modulate the luminescence spectrum according to pH. The light that passes through tissue is then collected, and the spectral ratio is measured to determine the pH. A focused X-ray beam irradiates a point in the scintillator film, and a pH image is formed point-by-point by scanning the beam across the sample. A pH sensor film was developed by Wang et al. and can be coated on implant surfaces to noninvasively map pH ex vivo in porcine tissue using XELCI. The pH map showed a decrease in pH due to bacterial growth on the interface between the pH sensor film and the tryptic soy agar (TSA) plate (Figures 8K–N). A similar pH sensor attached to implants was developed to noninvasively detect local implant pH. Both these sensors enabled noninvasive mapping of local pH, with high spectral resolution. A hydrogel sensor that can be attached to a prosthetic hip implant is able to measure synovial fluid pH using plain radiography. The sensor consists of a pH-responsive hydrogel with a radiodense tantalum bead and a metal wire at the two ends. Once the sensor is attached to the prosthetic implant, the change in length of the hydrogel in response to the pH of synovial fluid can be monitored via plain radiography (Figure 8O). X-ray images of the sensor attached to a hip implant clearly show the radiopaque markers, and the pH response can be determined from the radiographs by measuring the movement of the tantalum bead with respect to the radio-opaque metal wire (Figure 8P). This would enable simple, noninvasive pH measurements in vivo at the site of infection.

Effect of pH

Effect of pH on biofilm
The majority of biofilm infections on implant surfaces are caused by staphylococci, of which S. aureus and S. epidermidis are the most common causative agents. A study by Stewart et al. showed variation in the distribution of S. aureus and S. epidermidis at different pHs. In a multiple species biofilm, S. epidermidis was seen to grow more at low pH conditions such as pH 5 and 6 compared to neutral pH. At higher pH values (pH 7, 8, and 9), S. aureus was the dominant species in the biofilm. S. epidermidis did not incorporate well into the biofilm at high pH and was seen to remain as individual cells or clusters of cells. The dominant behavior of S. epidermidis at low pH may be due to its ability to survive in low pH conditions since they typically reside in the skin with low pH conditions ranging from pH 4.0 to 7.0. Another study by Stewart et al. showed that the biofilms of both S. aureus and S. epidermis soften at high pH (>7), which can be used as a potential method to disrupt staphylococcal biofilms. Hostacka et al. studied the effect of pH on other pathogens related to infections, including P. aeruginosa, Klebsiella spp., and V. cholerae. These microorganisms demonstrated an increase in biofilm production at higher pHs (pH 7.5 and 8.5) compared to pH 5.5. Therefore, the effect of pH on the biofilm depends mainly on the type of species in the biofilm.
Low pH can affect the extracellular matrix material (polysaccharides, proteins, and DNA) and cellular interactions with it. For example, Foulston et al. reported that extracellular proteins produced by S. aureus (or exogenously added) attached to the bacteria in a pH-dependent manner, and that biofilms were not formed at pH 7.5. Similarly, Antikainen et al. found a pH-dependent association of proteins such as glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and enolase attachment to the surface of Lactobacillus crispatus. Foulston hypothesized that the low pH may have caused the proteins to become positively charged and better associated with negatively charged molecules on the cells and extracellular DNA. They also suggested that the need for low pH may contribute to the increase in biofilm production at high glucose concentrations. While more studies are needed, these results show that pH can influence biofilm growth and behavior in multiple ways.

Effect of pH on host
The effect of local acidosis at the site of infection on the immune system directly influences the functions of immune cells. Studies on polymorphonuclear leukocytes show impaired chemotaxis, respiratory activity, and bactericidal capacity at lower pH. Clinical acidosis is usually accompanied by immunodeficiency characterized by severe neutropenia, lymphopenia, and infection. Some of the other effects on the immune system include activation of oxygen burst in neutrophils, production of reactive oxygen species, neutrophil phagocytosis, and neutrophil apoptosis. A positive effect of low pH on immune function has been shown with acid-induced activation of complement proteins and alternative complement pathways. Increased antibody-binding to leukocytes at lowered pHs due to pH-dependent conformational change has been demonstrated in a study by Miyazawa and Inoue.
It has been found that the F-ATPases from oral lactic-acid bacteria can play a role as ATP synthases and lead to a decrease in pH. These bacteria use glycolysis as their ATP source for survival, and it protects these bacteria from being killed in the lethal acidic pH environment. In addition, acid tolerance of bacteria depends on the rate at which ATP can be supplied from the catabolism of various substrates.
Studies show that oxygen levels may affect resistance to infection of some bacteria. Since areas of low oxygen levels in biofilms are closely linked to low pH, it is expected that the same effects may be seen in low pH regions as well. In a study by Jönsson et al., high oxygen levels decreased the extent of test infections by S. aureus, whereas a reduced oxygen supply had the opposite effect, especially when tissue pO2 was below 40 mmHg. In vitro studies demonstrated that low oxygen levels (in the range of 0–40 mmHg) reduced the rate at which leukocytes generated oxygen radicals, which help kill bacteria. Simultaneously, carbon dioxide levels may also affect the activity and function of neutrophils. Neutrophils at the low pCO2 sites had a higher inflammatory response than intracellular acidification caused by high pCO2. Therefore, acidification of the environment surrounding the immune cells affects immune responses and healing of infections since chronic inflammation delays the healing progress.

Effect of pH on antibiotic activity
The activity of some antibiotics is highly pH-dependent and depends on their structure and mode of action. An antibiotic’s susceptibility and resistance are measured by the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimum bactericidal concentrations (MBCs). MIC is defined as the lowest concentration of an antimicrobial that will inhibit the visible growth of a microorganism after overnight incubation. MBC is the lowest concentration of an antimicrobial that will prevent the growth of an organism after subculturing onto antibiotic-free media. Therefore, the acidic pH of biofilms will affect the antibiotic activity and, in turn, affect the therapeutic response to a particular drug. For three classes of antibiotics, lincosamides, macrolides, and aminoglycosides, lowering the pH has been shown to increase their MICs (Table 3)., demonstrated that the MIC of Azithromycin, a broad-spectrum macrolide used for treating invasive salmonellosis, can be greatly influenced by pH shifts. Under different buffered conditions, the MIC values could vary almost 1,000 folds. In a study by, the MIC and MBC of gentamicin (an aminoglycoside class antibiotic) increased with a decrease in pH, where the MIC was approximately 70 times higher at pH 5 than at pH 7.4 (Figure 8). Acidic pH was shown to drastically reduce the activity of gentamicin. This is considered one of the main reasons for treatment failures of aminoglycosides in infections where the pH is acidic and for the poor efficacy against intracellular forms of S. aureus. Conversely, acidic pH has been shown to decrease the MIC of antibiotic classes β-lactams and tetracyclines (Table 3). In the same study by Baudoux et al., lowering the pH increased the activity of oxacillin (a β-lactam class antibiotic), with a decrease in both MIC and MBC (Figure 8). Other studies have shown that at values lower than physiological pH, vancomycin inhibits the growth of S. aureus more effectively (Table 3). A possible explanation may be due to the hydrolysis of β-lactams at ambient pH conditions compared to acidic pH.
Effects of pH on MIC of various classes of antibiotics.
Mode of Action	Class	Antibiotic	Optimal pH (lowest MIC)	pI	Organism	Findings	References	 	Peptide Synthesis Inhibition	Aminoglycoside	Gentamicin	8.5 (a);7.5 (b); 7.3 (c)	9.5 (d)	S. aureus (b-c)	MIC is 70x higher at pH 5 compared with pH 7.4 (b).	(a), (b), (c), (d) 	 	Peptide ElongationInhibition	Lincosamides	Lincomycin	8.5 (a)	< 7.6 (b,c)	Group D Streptococcus (Enterococci) (a)	MIC is smaller at more alkaline pHs (7.4–8.5) than at 5.0 (a).	(a), (b), (c) 	 	Clindamycin	8.5 (a); > 4.5 (b)	< 7.5 (c)	Group D Streptococcus (Enterococci) (a) Clostridium acetobutylicum (b)	Similar MICs at pH 7.4–8.5, gets larger at acidic pH (a). At pH 4.5 the antibiotic was completely ineffective against C. acetobutylicum (b).	(a), (b), (c) 	 	Macrolides	Erythromycin	8.5 (a); 8.0 (b)	10.41 (c)	Group D Streptococcus (Enterococci) (a) E. coli (b)	4-fold more effective at pH 8.5 than at pH 7.4 (a); Erythromycin extremely effective at alkaline pH (8.0). Completely loses efficacy at pH ≤ 6 (b).	(a), (b), (c) 	 	Prevention of DNAUnwinding	Quinolones	Ciprofloxacin	7.4–8.4 (a); 7.3 (b); 7–10 (c)	7.39 (d)7.4 (e)	Staphylococcus (a); S. aureus (b) Proteus mirabilis (c)	Loses efficacy at acidic pH (5.4–6.4) when compared to neutral or alkaline pH (7.4–8.4) (a); 8x larger MIC at pH 5.0 compared to pH 7.4.	(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) 	 	Levofloxacin	7.4–8.4 (a); 7.3 (b); 7.2 (c)	6.8 (c)	Staphylococcus (a); S. aureus (b) Enterobacteriaceae, K. pneumoniae (c)	Retains antimicrobial efficacy at neutral (7.4) or alkaline pH (8.4) but not at acidic pHs. (a); 8-fold larger MIC at pH 5.0 than at pH 7.4 (b); 4–32 times smaller MIC at pH 7.2 compared to pH 5.8 (c).	(a), (b), (c) 	 	Folate SynthesisInhibition	Sulfanolamides	Sulfanilamide		6.41				 	Sulfadiazine	6.0 (a)	4.24 (b)	Daphnia magna (a)	11 times more effective at pH 6.0 than at pH 8.5 (a).	(a), (b) 	 	mRNA Translation Inhibition	Tetracyclines	Tetracycline	> 5.0 (a)	5.4 (b)	Group D Streptococcus (Enterococci) (a)	The MIC of tetracycline is slightly lower at pH than at pH 7.4 or 8.0 (a).	(a), (b) 	 	Doxycycline	5.0 (a, b)	5.5 (c)	Group D Streptococcus (Enterococci)E. coli, S. epidermidis (b)	MIC at pH 5.0 was approximately 4x lower than at 7.4 (a). Increased susceptibility of E. coli at pH 5.0 when compared with pH 8.0 (b).	(a), (b), (c)
Effects of pH on MIC of various classes of antibiotics.
Mode of Action	Class	Antibiotic	Optimal pH (lowest MIC)	pI	Organism	Findings	References	 	Cell Wall Biosynthesis Inhibition	Penicillin	Ampicillin	≥ 4.5 (a)5.0 (b,c)	5.03 (d);4.9 (e)	Helicobacter pylori (a); Group D Streptococcus (Enterococci) (b); S. aureus (c)	At lower pH (3.0), ampicillin ceased to be effective against Helicobacter due to the non-replicative state of the bacteria (a). At lower pHs, the efficacy of ampicillin against Gram-positive Enterococcus increased relative to alkaline pHs (b). In human serum, ampicillin had increased efficacy against S. aureus at lower pHs (c).	(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) 	 	Amoxicillin	6.0 (a)	4.7 (b)	E. coli (a)	100% of tested ampicillin-resistant E. coli strains were susceptible to amoxicillin at pH 6 compared to only 28% resistance at pH 7.4 (a).	(a), (b) 	 	Oxacillin	5.5 (a); 5.0 (b)	1.82 (c)	S. aureus	At pH 5.0, the MIC is ten times lower than at pH 7.4 (a). At pH 5.0 in blood serum, the MIC is lower than at 7.4 (b).	(a), (b), (c) 	 	Cephalosporins	Ceftriaxone		3.68				 	Cephalothin	5.0 (a)	<3.8 (b)		At pH 7.4–8.0, the MIC is 5x larger than at pH 5.0 (a).	(a), (b) 	 	Carbapenems	Meropenems	5.8–7.1 (a)	5.15 (b)	B. fragilis (a)	At a range of pH 5.8–7.1, the change in MIC only slightly increased at lower pHs (a).	(a), (b) 	 	Glycopeptides	Vancomycin	6.4 (a); 5.0–7.3 (b)	8.1 (c,d)	S. aureus (a-b)	Vancomycin demonstrated on average slightly smaller MICs at a low pH of 6.4 vs. 7.4–8 (a). In blood serum, the MIC remained unaffected at either 5.0 or 7.3 pH (b).	(a), (b), (c), (d)
For the quinolone class of antibiotics, acidic pH has been shown to reduce antimicrobial activity. This reduction in activity is thought to be caused by ionization of the agents at a lower pH, which results in the inability to penetrate bacterial membranes. Ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin have been demonstrated to retain antimicrobial activity within a range of pH 5.4–8.4 and decrease the MIC in increasingly alkaline conditions.
The antibiotic mode of action can be adversely affected as the environmental conditions change (Figure 9). Aminoglycosides, for example, rely on aerobic bacterial respiration creating an electrical potential for uptake into the cell, so an anaerobic environment deep in the biofilm strata reduces their efficacy. With quinolones, it has been shown that, although ciprofloxacin can penetrate P. aeruginosa biofilms, it is only active against cells in zones with high pO2 and high metabolic activity.
pH-mediated potentiation of aminoglycosides has been shown to kill bacterial persisters and eradicates in vivo biofilms. The application of gentamicin and the clinically compatible basic amino acid L-arginine together affects the sensitivity of bacterial (S. aureus, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa) biofilm persisters to gentamicin in an in vivo model as the aminoglycoside efficiency under alkaline conditions increases. The addition of EDTA, a cation chelator that destabilizes the biofilm matrix, or non-toxic alkaline amino acid L-arginine, which increases the pH of the antibiotic solution in an in vitro study, enhanced the activity of gentamicin, amikacin, and vancomycin against biofilms formed by a broad spectrum of bacterial strains responsible for catheter-related bloodstream infections.

pH targeted bacterial infection treatment
Implant-associated infections are commonly treated with antibiotics, such as rifampicin, cotrimoxazole, linezolid, clindamycin, minocycline, moxifloxacin, fusidic acid, vancomycin, or daptomycin. However, once biofilms mature, microorganisms in biofilms demonstrate increased tolerance, as discussed earlier. At this stage, device removal surgery is necessary for treatment, which is not always practical since the procedure itself may be prone to complications. Therefore, it is necessary to develop innovative and effective treatment strategies for bacterial infections, with emphasis on targeted and responsive delivery of therapeutics. New treatment strategies as alternatives to antibiotics include repurposed drugs, antimicrobial peptides and polymers, nucleic acids, small molecules, and bacteriophages. Another treatment to prevent infection is by modification of materials already used in the medical industry. It is based on modifying the device surfaces so that no bacterial adhesion can occur. Modification of materials that are currently being used by the medical industry is preferred, as they are biocompatible as well as economical. Most of the approaches use materials that are resistant to bacterial adhesion or degradation. Although these strategies are shown to be effective, they are still under development and study. Therefore, it is essential to study the nature and characteristics of biofilms to achieve a more effective strategy against infections.
Biofilm acidosis can be used not only as a diagnostic reporter but also as a useful feature for targeting therapies to antibiotic-resistant regions. Three principal approaches are used: (1) directly raising pH in the biofilms to mitigate pH-dependent resistance (e.g., with L-arginine, although this may have other biochemical effects too, or increasing local oxygen to encourage aerobic respiration); (2) simultaneously using multiple antibiotics optimized for different microenvironments; and (3) targeting low pH regions near implant coatings or within biofilms for controlled drug release.
In the treatment approach to directly raise the biofilm pH, several studies demonstrate that alkalinization of the medium enhanced the effects of aminoglycosides, resulting in an increase in the antibiotic treatment efficiency. For example, Lebeaux and co-workers found that raising pH using the harmless basic amino acid L-arginine, resulted in an increase in the killing efficiency of the aminoglycoside gentamicin toward persisters in both in vitro and in vivo biofilms. Figure 10A shows the growth curves of luminescent variants of S. aureus, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa (S. aureus Xen36) in tryptic soy broth (TSB) glucose solutions, with increasing concentrations of L-arginine without antibiotics.
Results of different therapeutic strategies used to target biofilm pH to improve antibiotic activity in biofilms. (A) Growth curves in TSB glucose solutions without antibiotics, with increasing concentration of L-arginine for S. aureus Xen36. (B) Bacterial susceptibility to ciprofloxacin (calculated as log10 colony forming units/mL) after 4 h HBOT treatment of agarose-embedded P. aeruginosa PAO1 biofilms.. (C) Fluorescence microscopy images of MRSA on metal surface treated with clarithromycin, daptomycin, and combination of clarithromycin and daptomycin (green indicates live cells and red indicates dead cells). (D) The cumulative amount of levofloxacin released (Qt) with respect to the initial amount of levofloxacin in the scaffold (Q0) versus time at pH 5.5, pH 6.7, and pH 7.4.
Biofilm regions with low oxygen demonstrate antibiotic resistance, partly due to decreased efficiency of oxygen-dependent antibiotics and also due to reduced metabolism. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT; 100%, 2.8 bar) has been used to reoxygenate P. aeruginosa biofilms, which resulted in an increase in the efficiency of antibiotic treatment. Figure 10B shows that 4 h of HBOT treatment of an oxygen-depleted P. aeruginosa biofilm increased the efficiency of the fluoroquinolone, and ciprofloxacin, compared with normoxic conditions. Raising the oxygen levels in the biofilm by HBOT is used as an adjunct or main treatment of infectious diseases, which involves breathing in 100% oxygen at a pressure higher than 1 atm absolute.
Biofilms are differentiated microbial communities with distinct metabolic environments; therefore, different antimicrobial agents can be combined to target specific regions to prevent or delay resistance. Combination therapy involves using a combination of antimicrobials to treat biofilm-related infections. A combination of ciprofloxacin and colistin (an amphipathic polypeptide) or tetracycline and colistin completely eradicated all P. aeruginosa biofilm cells in vitro in a study by. Bactericidal activity of the antimicrobials was based on targeting different metabolic states of the biofilm cells, where colistin killed the biofilm cells with low metabolic activity and ciprofloxacin or tetracycline specifically killed the subpopulation of metabolically active biofilm cells. In vitro studies on biofilms formed on metal medical devices showed eradication of staphylococcal biofilms by using clarithromycin with either daptomycin, cefazolin, or vancomycin. Figure 10C shows fluorescence microscope images of methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) on a metal surface stained with a combination of SYTO9 and propidium iodide (PI). The biofilms were treated with antibiotics, clarithromycin, and daptomycin (alone and in combination); clarithromycin is known to have antibiofilm activity, and daptomycin has the ability to readily penetrate biofilms. The results revealed the complete eradication of S. aureus biofilms after 72 h of exposure to clarithromycin and daptomycin in combination. Other combinations shown to eradicate MRSA biofilms include ceftaroline and daptomycin, or vancomycin with fosfomycin. Therefore, using multiple antimicrobials provide an effective treatment option for eradicating biofilms. Similarly, pH should be one of the considerations due to the pH-dependence of some antibiotics. It is possible to target the pH micro-gradient existing in biofilms by choosing a combination of antibiotics that will work in high and low pH.
A promising approach to treating biofilms is to specifically target the low pH regions for therapy. Similar approaches are used to target acidic regions of tumors. Synthetic polymers that respond to pH have been developed and studied to detect, monitor, or treat infection. Using pH-responsive polymers in drug delivery systems can increase drug efficiency, decrease toxic side effects, facilitate drug absorption and access to the target site, and regulate the drug input with the required timing. To achieve these therapeutic results, polymeric carriers play an important role. Different polysaccharides, such as amylose, guar gum, pectin, chitosan, inulin, cyclodextrin, chondroitin sulfate, dextran, and locust bean gum, have also been used for drug delivery. pH-sensitive polymers contain pendant acidic or basic groups that either accept or donate protons in response to the environmental pH. The total number of charged groups on polymer chains determines the overall response of the system to changes in the external pH. In acidic conditions, the polybasic groups are protonated, and the internal charge repulsions between neighboring protonated polybasic groups are increased. These charge repulsions can lead to an expansion in the overall dimensions of the polymer containing the groups. At higher pH values, the groups become less ionized, the charge repulsion is reduced, and the polymer-polymer interactions increase, leading to a decreased overall hydrodynamic diameter. These characteristics are used, for example, to obtain pH-responsive hydrogels, which are widely used as carriers in drug delivery systems.
pH-triggered drug release can be done by incorporating a pH-responsive moiety to the polymer structure, destabilizing a self-assembled polymeric aggregate, or by chemical conjugation of pH-liable linkage between polymers and drugs. designed pH-sensitive 3D hierarchical meso-macroporous scaffolds with mesopores loaded with the antibacterial agent levofloxacin (Levo). Figure 10D shows the in vitro drug release assays from 3D Levo scaffolds at different pH values. The scaffolds demonstrate controlled and pH-dependent Levo release, with increased release at pH relevant to infection (pH 6.7 and 5.5). Pavlukhina and coworkers designed poly (methacrylic acid; PMAA) ultrathin hydrogel coatings that release antimicrobial agents (AmAs) in response to pH variations. Gentamicin and an antibacterial cationic peptide L5 were used as AmAs. Adipic acid dihydrazide (AADH) was used as a cross-linker that increases the hydrogel hydrophobicity and provides centers for hydrogen bonding to AmAs. S. epidermidis adhesion and colonization were inhibited by releasing the AmAs in response to pH decreases due to bacterial growth. In addition, they could change the antimicrobial release by varying the type of cross-linker. In another study, silver nanoparticles triggered by low pH with antibacterial properties were used. The pH level around the implant surface was 7.4, while during bacterial infection, it dropped to pH 5.5. The pH change was used as a trigger to release silver nanoparticles with antimicrobial properties from the implant surface. Silver has broad-spectrum antimicrobial properties at low concentrations. Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) are biocompatible with mammalian cells. pH-responsive chitosan nanoparticles from a novel twin-chain anionic amphiphile for controlled and targeted vancomycin delivery is another example. The mechanism involved in greater drug release at pH 6.5 could be due to the decrease in ionization of surfactant, a new anionic Gemini surfactant AGS 7, under mildly acidic conditions, resulting in a destabilization of the nanoparticles’ structure. A similar kind of triggered release of methotrexate under acidic conditions was observed for pH-responsive chitosan nanoparticles that were prepared using an anionic surfactant 77 Kl. A summary of the studies on treatment of infection is listed in Table 4.
Summary of various studies on treatment of infection.
Approach	Treatment technique	Characteristics	Mechanism	References	 	Directly raising pH in the biofilms to mitigate pH-dependent resistance	Combination of L-arginine and gentamicin against planktonic persisters	Gentamicin supplemented with L-arginine enables eradication of in vivo biofilms formed by S. aureus and E. coli via both a pH-mediated and a pH-independent effect.	L-arginine is basic, which raises the pH resulting in increased efficiency of gentamicin.		 	Hyperbaric oxygen treatment with 100% O2 at 2.8 bar increases bactericidal activity of ciprofloxacin	Enhanced bactericidal activity of ciprofloxacin on oxygen-deficient P. aeruginosa biofilms.	Reoxygenation of oxygen-deficient biofilms using hyperbaric oxygen treatment.		 	Multiple antibiotics optimized for different microenvironments	Combination of ciprofloxacin and colistin or tetracycline and colistin	Combination of antimicrobials completely eradicated all P. aeruginosa biofilm cells in vitro.	Bactericidal activity of combination of antimicrobials targeting different metabolic states of cells.		 	Combination of clarithromycin and daptomycin	Complete eradication of S. aureus biofilms after 72 h of exposure.	Combined antibiofilm activity of clarithromycin and ability of daptomycin to readily penetrate biofilms.		 	Combination of clarithromycin with cefazolin or vancomycin	Complete eradication of S. aureus biofilms on titanium medical devices in vitro.	Combined antimicrobial activity of clarithromycin with cefazolin or vancomycin.		 	Targeting low pH regions for controlled drug release	pH-sensitive 3D hierarchical meso-macroporous (MGHA) nanocomposite	Release of antibacterial agents sustained over time at physiological pH (7.4) and notably increased at infection pH (6.7 and 5.5).	Different protonation state of antibiotic can lead to different interactions between Levo and silanol groups of the mesoporous matrix.		 	pH-responsive poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) ultrathin hydrogel	Releasing the antimicrobial agents in response to low pH due to bacterial growth.	Increased swelling of hydrogels at pH > 5.5 due to deprotonation and the resulting repulsion between ionized carboxylic acid groups releases the antimicrobial agents.		 	pH-dependent release of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) from titania nanotube arrays (TNT)	Low pH (pH 5.5) trigger release of AgNPs from TNT.	Release of AgNPs which have broad-spectrum antimicrobial properties.		 	pH-responsive chitosan nanoparticles	Controlled and targeted vancomycin release.	Decrease in ionization of nanoparticles under acidic conditions.		 	pH-responsive alginate dialdehyde-gentamicin (ADA-Gen) polymer	The acidic environment could trigger the release of ADA-Gen from the multilayer films.	Disruption of the Schiff base bonds of ADA-Gen molecule in an acidic environment.		 	pH-responsive tobramycin-loaded micelles in nanostructured multilayer-coatings of chitosan/heparin (Tob-loaded CHT/HET)	The coating showed fast release at pH 7.4 and sustained release in acidic conditions.	The polymeric micelles acted as nanovehicles for efficiently loading antibiotic drugs in multilayer coating.Long-term release in acidic conditions with excellent antibacterial activity.		 	Polyaniline (PANI) and glycol chitosan (GCS) functionalized persistent luminescent nanoparticles (PLNP@PANI-GCS)	PLNP@PANI-GCS act as pH switchable nanoplatforms for precise photothermal therapy. Low pH causes a change in the charge of the PLNP@PANI-GCS due to the pH-dependent photothermalconversion property of PANI and pH-dependent surface charge transition of GCS.	PLNP@PANI-GCS have a positive charge in acidic microenvironments, interacts with the negatively charged cell wall of bacteria, and activates photothermal effect inacidic microenvironment.

Conclusion and recommendations
Implant-associated infection is a significant problem affecting a large patient population. Conventional oral or systematic antibacterial treatments do not control infections because the drugs cannot penetrate the biofilms and/or are ineffective in dormant or low pH regions. The lack of an effective treatment method to remove the infection, and the bacterial resistance to most therapeutic approaches when they form biofilms on the implant surfaces, highlights the need for more effective and accurate diagnosis methods to detect and monitor implant-related infection. Understanding the biofilm formation process and infection progress can help us to develop and design better and more effective diagnosis and preventive technologies to overcome this problem. In many in vitro experiments, single culture biofilms are studied, which makes the experiments easier and capture many essential elements of the growth and physiology, but it should be considered that in vivo biofilms are often multi-species. Medical biofilms also have multiple host cell types that influence the local environments.
Low pH is usually associated with infections related to medical implants and can be localized at implant surfaces. The degree of pH drop depends on the type of implant, its location, infection, and patient immune response. The effect of pH on the biofilm depends on the kind of species in the biofilm. The acidic pH of biofilms will affect the antibiotic activity and affect the therapeutic response to a particular drug. This review covered the implant-associated infection process, biofilm formation, and the pH changes during biofilm establishment. The causes and effects of biofilm formation and pH changes were discussed. Different pH measurement techniques showed a pH gradient in the biofilm, which gets more acidic with depth and is heterogeneous throughout the matured biofilm. Regions that have low pH in the biofilm also have low oxygen, which could be a reason for the different effects of heterogeneous regions on compound functions. pH can affect the antibiotic activity and immune cell functions as well as the extracellular matrix. These effects are related to the bacterial species and type of antibiotics. These findings can be used to select the proper antibiotic treatment for a specific biofilm or use of a combination to target different microenvironments. We reviewed in vitro studies that used pH changes to detect infection growth. More studies are needed to understand the in vivo environment, where additional factors from immune response and antibiotics may affect pH, and low pH from aseptic inflammation may also reduce pH, especially at the early stages of wound healing. While in vivo measurements are much more difficult due to optical scattering, attaching sensors directly to the implant surface offers a way forward. In addition to potentially providing measurements for early infection detection and treatment monitoring, elucidating the in vivo pH environment will be useful in informing biofilm-specific treatments.

Author contributions
SB, SK, UW, and CT conducted literature review. SB took the lead in writing the manuscript with support from SK, UW, and CT. JA and T-RT conceived and coordinated the writing of the manuscript. All authors provided critical feedback and contributed to the final manuscript.

Funding
This study was supported by NIH NIAMS R01 AR070305-01.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

References
Single and combination antibiotic susceptibilities of planktonic, adherent, and biofilm-grown Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates cultured from sputa of adults with cystic fibrosis
Prosthetic joint infections: an update
PAB: a newly designed potentiometric alternating biosensor system
Development of a pH gradient within a biofilm is dependent upon the limiting nutrient
Determination of minimum inhibitory concentrations
Effect of pH on the toxicity and bioconcentration of sulfadiazine on Daphnia magna
pH-dependent Association of Enolase and Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase of lactobacillus crispatus with the Cell Wall and Lipoteichoic acids
Efficacy of single-stage revision with aggressive debridement using intra-articular antibiotics in the treatment of infected joint prosthesis
Biofilm formation in staphylococcus implant infections. A review of molecular mechanisms and implications for biofilm-resistant materials
Definitions and guidelines for research on antibiotic persistence
Antifouling coatings: recent developments in the Design of Surfaces that Prevent Fouling by proteins, bacteria, and marine organisms
Evaluation of ceftaroline alone and in combination against biofilm-producing methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus with reduced susceptibility to Daptomycin and Vancomycin in an in vitro pharmacokinetic/Pharmacodynamic model
Pharmacodynamic evaluation of the intracellular activities of antibiotics against Staphylococcus aureus in a model of THP-1 macrophages
Combined effect of pH and concentration on the activities of gentamicin and oxacillin against Staphylococcus aureus in pharmacodynamic models of extracellular and intracellular infections
Revisiting structure-property relationship of pH-responsive polymers for drug delivery applications
Catabolite modification of acid tolerance of Streptococcus mutans GS-5
Acid tolerance, proton permeabilities, and membrane ATPases of oral streptococci
Two-photon excitation microscopy for the study of living cells and tissues
Near-infrared fluorescence lifetime pH-sensitive probes
Effect of different variables in the solubility of ampicillin and corresponding solid phase
Meropenem: evaluation of a new generation carbapeneml
Rhamnolipids mediate detachment of Pseudomonas aeruginosa from biofilms
The impact of infection after total hip arthroplasty on hospital and surgeon resource utilization
Symptoms and signs in organic acidurias
Increasing rates of cardiac device infections among Medicare beneficiaries: 1990–1999
The significance of infection related to orthopedic devices and issues of antibiotic resistance
Quantitative analysis of adhesion and biofilm formation on hydrophilic and hydrophobic surfaces of clinical isolates of Staphylococcus epidermidis
A three-dimensional computer model of four hypothetical mechanisms protecting biofilms from antimicrobials
Multifunctional pH sensitive 3D scaffolds for treatment and prevention of bone infection
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy as an anti-infective agent
Antibiotic treatment of biofilm infections
Ambient pCO2 modulates intracellular pH, intracellular oxidant generation, and interleukin-8 secretion in human neutrophils
5.16 – Ionization constants and ionization profiles
Biofilm in implant infections: its production and regulation
Biofilms, the customized microniche
The intercellular adhesion (Ica) locus is present in Staphylococcus aureus and is required for biofilm formation
An infectious disease and pharmacokinetic perspective on oral antibiotic treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract infections due to multidrug-resistant Gram-negative uropathogens: the importance of urinary antibiotic concentrations and urinary pH
Pharmacodynamics of finafloxacin, ciprofloxacin, and levofloxacin in serum and urine against TEM- and SHV-type extended-Spectrum-β-lactamase-producing enterobacteriaceae isolates from patients with urinary tract infections
Emergent robustness of bacterial quorum sensing in fluid flow
Methane microprofiles in a sewage biofilm determined with a microscale biosensor
Treatment of infections associated with surgical implants
Recent innovations in bacterial infection detection and treatment
Monitoring of extracellular pH in young dental biofilms grown in vivo in the presence and absence of sucrose
pH dependent silver nanoparticles releasing titanium implant: a novel therapeutic approach to control peri-implant infection
Biofilms: microbial life on surfaces
Biofilms: survival mechanisms of clinically relevant microorganisms
Treatment of lung infection in patients with cystic fibrosis: current and future strategies
Bacterial adhesion: seen any good biofilms lately?
Acidosis activates complement system in vitro
Unravelling the interplay between extracellular acidosis and immune cells
Effect of pH on in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility of the Bacteroides fragilis group
Crystallization of amoxicillin trihydrate in the presence of degradation products
Biofilms: an emergent form of bacterial life
The extracellular matrix of Staphylococcus aureus biofilms comprises cytoplasmic proteins that associate with the cell surface in response to decreasing pH
Anaerobic gene expression in Staphylococcus aureus
Combined efficacy of clarithromycin plus cefazolin or vancomycin against Staphylococcus aureus biofilms formed on titanium medical devices
Antimicrobial efficacy of combined clarithromycin plus daptomycin against biofilms-formed methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus on titanium medical devices
Ratiometric imaging of the in situ pH distribution of biofilms by use of fluorescent mesoporous silica nanosensors
Effects of oxygen tension and pH on the respiratory burst of human neutrophils
What are the inpatient and day case costs following primary total hip replacement of patients treated for prosthetic joint infection: a matched cohort study using linked data from the national Joint registry and Hospital Episode Statistics
Stimuli-reponsive polymers and their bioconjugates
Formation of microbial biofilm in hygienic situations: a problem of control
Formulation and release behavior of doxycycline–alginate hydrogel microparticles embedded into pluronic F127 thermogels as a potential new vehicle for doxycycline intradermal sustained delivery
Optical pH sensor covering the range from pH 0–14 compatible with Mobile-device readout and based on a set of rationally designed indicator dyes
Hydrogels: from controlled release to pH-responsive drug delivery
Light-addressable potentiometric sensor for biochemical systems
Activation of the fifth and sixth components of the human complement system: C6-dependent cleavage of C5 in acid and the formation of a bimolecular lytic complex, C5b,6a
Fluorescent indicators for intracellular pH
Study of the electrophoretic behavior of cephalosporins by capillary zone electrophoresis
Antibiotic tolerance among clinical isolates of bacteria
Emergence of three-dimensional order and structure in growing biofilms
Identification and characterization of a novel autolysin (Aae) with adhesive properties from Staphylococcus epidermidis
Signal transduction and regulatory mechanisms involved in control of the σ S (RpoS) subunit of RNA polymerase
Isoelectric focusing and electrophoretic titration of antibiotics using bioautographic detection
Characterization and gross structure
Functional tomographic fluorescence imaging of pH microenvironments in microbial biofilms by use of silica nanoparticle sensors
Making antimicrobial susceptibility testing more physiologically relevant with bicarbonate?
Fluorescent nanosensors reveal dynamic pH gradients during biofilm formation
Bacterial persistence increases as environmental fitness decreases
CIEF separation, UV detection, and quantification of ampholytic antibiotics and bacteria from different matrices
Temperature and pH affect the production of bacterial biofilm
An experimental study of pH distributions within an electricity-producing biofilm by using pH microelectrode
A novel microphysiometer based on high sensitivity LAPS and microfluidic system for cellular metabolism study and rapid drug screening
The effect of varying ambient oxygen tensions on wound metabolism and collagen synthesis
Effect of pH on the in vitro susceptibility of planktonic and biofilm-grown Proteus mirabilis to the quinolone antimicrobials
Improving antibiotic treatment of bacterial biofilm by hyperbaric oxygen therapy: not just hot air
Oxygen as an isolated variable influences resistance to infection
pH-responsive chitosan nanoparticles from a novel twin-chain anionic amphiphile for controlled and targeted delivery of vancomycin
Influences of urinary pH on ciprofloxacin pharmacokinetics in humans and antimicrobial activity in vitro versus those of sparfloxacin
Modeling of C-SNARF-1 pH fluorescence properties: towards calibration free optical fiber pH sensing for in vivo applications
Science review: extracellular acidosis and the immune response: clinical and physiologic implications
Persisters and beyond: mechanisms of phenotypic drug resistance and drug tolerance in bacteria
Reinforcement of the bactericidal effect of ciprofloxacin on Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm by hyperbaric oxygen treatment
Economic burden of Periprosthetic joint infection in the United States
Natural skin surface pH is on average below 5, which is beneficial for its resident flora
Internal diffusion and reaction in biological films
C. in vitro pharmacodynamic effects of concentration, pH, and growth phase on serum bactericidal activities of daptomycin and vancomycin
The effects of extracellular pH on immune function
In vitro activity of gentamicin, vancomycin or amikacin combined with EDTA or L-arginine as lock therapy against a wide spectrum of biofilm-forming clinical strains isolated from catheter-related infections
pH-mediated potentiation of aminoglycosides kills bacterial persisters and eradicates in vivo biofilms
Alkaline conditions accelerate polymorphonuclear leukocyte apoptosis in vitro
Activity of three β-lactams (ertapenem, meropenem and ampicillin) against intraphagocytic listeria monocytogenes and Staphylococcus aureus
Effects of hyperbaric oxygen on Pseudomonas aeruginosa susceptibility to imipenem and macrophages
Effect of pH on the activity of erythromycin against 500 isolates of gram-negative bacilli
In vitro cytotoxicity and drug release properties of pH-and temperature-sensitive core–shell hydrogel microspheres
Mechanisms of biofilm resistance to antimicrobial agents
The effects of varying acidity on helicobacter pylori growth and the bactericidal efficacy of ampicillin
Thermodynamic study of the solubility of some sulfonamides in octanol, water, and the mutually saturated solvents
Phagolysosomal alkalinization and intracellular killing of Staphylococcus aureus by Amikacin
Biofilm interfacial acidity evaluation by pH-responsive luminescent nanoparticle films
Evaluation of macrolide and lincosamide antibiotics for plasmid maintenance in low pH Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824 fermentations
pH and temperature effects on the hydrolysis of three β-lactam antibiotics: ampicillin, cefalotin and cefoxitin
Complement activation induced by human C-reactive protein in mildly acidic conditions
Looking for Chinks in the Armor of Bacterial Biofilms
Effect of pH on the antimicrobial susceptibility of planktonic and biofilm-grown clinical Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates
Orthopaedic device-related infection: current and future interventions for improved prevention and treatment
Hydrogen peroxide metabolism in human monocytes during differentiation in vitro
A novel strategy to design latent ratiometric fluorescent pH probes based on self-assembled SNARF derivatives
Fluorescence ratiometric pH sensor prepared from covalently immobilized porphyrin and benzothioxanthene
Non-toxic, non-biocide-release antifouling coatings based on molecular structure design for marine applications
Low pH immobilizes and kills human leukocytes and prevents transmission of cell-associated HIV in a mouse model
Staphylococcal biofilms
Inhibition of Pseudomonas aeruginosa by hyperbaric oxygen I. sulfonamide activity enhancement and reversal
Tolerance to the antimicrobial peptide colistin in Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms is linked to metabolically active cells, and depends on the pmr and mexAB-oprM genes
Polymer multilayers with pH-triggered release of antibacterial agents
Reaction–diffusion model of nutrient uptake in a biofilm: theory and experiment
pH-controlled delivery of gentamicin sulfate from orthopedic devices preventing nosocomial infections
Bacterial stress responses as determinants of antimicrobial resistance
Metabolic microenvironments drive microbial differentiation and antibiotic resistance
Surface charge-switching polymeric nanoparticles for bacterial Cell Wall-targeted delivery of antibiotics
Polymer brushes and self-assembled monolayers: versatile platforms to control cell adhesion to biomaterials (review)
pH-responsive polymers: properties, synthesis and applications
Microscale hydrogels for medicine and biology: synthesis, characteristics and applications
Rapid microassays for clindamycin and gentamicin when present together and the effect of pH and of each on the antibacterial activity of the other
A review of chemosensors and biosensors for monitoring biofilm dynamics
Extracellular carbohydrate-containing polymers of a model biofilm-producing. Strain, Staphylococcus epidermidis RP62A
pH landscapes in a novel five-species model of early dental biofilm
Drug transport mechanisms and release kinetics from molecularly designed poly(acrylic acid-g-ethylene glycol) hydrogels
The detection of Escherichia coli (E. coli) with the pH sensitive hydrogel nanofiber-light addressable potentiometric sensor (NF-LAPS)
Fluorescent pH nanosensors: design strategies and applications
Enhanced acid resistance of oral streptococci at lethal pH values associated with acid-tolerant catabolism and with ATP synthase activity
Efficacy of combined vancomycin and fosfomycin against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in biofilms in vivo
Demonstration of mass transfer and pH effects in a nitrifying biofilm
Effect of peritoneal fluid pH on outcome of aminoglycoside treatment of intraabdominal infections
Theoretical aspects of antibiotic diffusion into microbial biofilms
Mechanisms of antibiotic resistance in bacterial biofilms
Diffusion in biofilms
Antibiotic resistance of bacteria in biofilms
Physiological heterogeneity in biofilms
Artificial biofilms establish the role of matrix interactions in staphylococcal biofilm assembly and disassembly
Effect of antimicrobial and physical treatments on growth of multispecies staphylococcal biofilms
Reaction–diffusion theory explains hypoxia and heterogeneous growth within microbial biofilms associated with chronic infections
Comparative acid tolerances and inhibitor sensitivities of isolated F-ATPases of oral lactic acid bacteria
Time-course analysis of injured skeletal muscle suggests a critical involvement of ERK1/2 signaling in the acute inflammatory response
Prosthetic joint infection
BMP2-loaded titania nanotubes coating with pH-responsive multilayers for bacterial infections inhibition and osteogenic activity improvement
Characterization of variables that may influence ozenoxacin in susceptibility testing, including MIC and MBC values
Effect of pH of medium and size of inoculum on activity of antibiotics against group D
Catheters: a suitable surface for biofilm formation
Extracellular acidification induces human neutrophil activation
Implication of the NorB efflux pump in the adaptation of Staphylococcus aureus to growth at acid pH and in resistance to moxifloxacin
Noninvasively imaging pH at the surface of implanted orthopedic devices with X-ray excited luminescence chemical imaging
Conformal coating of orthopedic plates with X-ray scintillators and pH indicators for X-ray excited luminescence chemical imaging through tissue
Versatility of aminoglycosides and prospects for their future
Implantable device-related infection
Iridium oxide pH microelectrode
Improving the diagnosis of orthopedic implant-associated infections: optimizing the use of tools already in the box
Bacterial adherence and biofilm formation on medical implants: a review
pH-dependent oxacillin tolerance of Staphylococcus aureus
pH monitoring: a review
Depth penetration and detection of pH gradients in biofilms by two-photon excitation microscopy
Contributions of antibiotic penetration, oxygen limitation, and Low metabolic activity to tolerance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms to ciprofloxacin and tobramycin
In situ measurements of dissolved oxygen, pH and redox potential of biocathode microenvironments using microelectrodes
X-ray excited luminescence chemical imaging of bacterial growth on surfaces implanted in tissue
Development of luminescent pH sensor films for monitoring bacterial growth through tissue
The Fibronectin-binding MSCRAMM FnbpA of Staphylococcus aureus is a bifunctional protein that also binds to fibrinogen
Acidosis of synovial fluid correlates with synovial fluid leukocytosis
Biofilm, city of microbes
Biogeography of a human oral microbiome at the micron scale
Spatial variations in growth rate within Klebsiella pneumoniae colonies and biofilm
Understanding biofilms and novel approaches to the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of medical device-associated infections
Probing cellular chemistry in biological systems with microelectrodes
Synovial fluid pH sensor for early detection of prosthetic hip infections
Immunodeficiency in methylmalonic acidaemia
A framework for multidimensional modelling of activity and structure of multispecies biofilms
In situ probing the effect of potentials on the microenvironment of heterotrophic denitrification biofilm with microelectrodes
pH switchable nanoplatform for in vivo persistent luminescence imaging and precise photothermal therapy of bacterial infection
The influence of urinary pH on antibiotic efficacy against bacterial uropathogens
Competition for substrate and space in biofilms
Novel pH-responsive tobramycin-embedded micelles in nanostructured multilayer-coatings of chitosan/heparin with efficient and sustained antibacterial properties
Staphylococcus aureus biofilm metabolism and the influence of arginine on polysaccharide intercellular adhesin synthesis, biofilm formation, and pathogenesis
Chemotaxis by polymorphonuclear leukocytes