Integrated approach of scalp electroacupuncture and pharmacotherapy in managing Parkinson’s disease: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and trial sequential analysis of randomized clinical trials
Background:
Parkinson disease (PD) is a progressive neurological disorder that may be managed with therapies like scalp electroacupuncture (SEA). The combination of SEA and medication could potentially offer a new approach for managing PD symptoms. The systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to assess the combined impact of SEA and medication on PD through a comprehensive analysis of randomized clinical trials, focusing on outcomes like effective rate and various scores (total Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), UPDRS III, and Webster).
Methods:
It was conducted an unrestricted search from the beginning of each database until April 19, 2024, across 7 databases. These included 4 international databases: PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, and Cochrane Library, and 3 Chinese databases: CNKI, VIP, and Wanfang. Review Manager, version 5.3 was used to calculate the mean difference (MD) or risk ratio along with a 95% confidence interval (CI). The Comprehensive Meta-Analysis version 3.0 was employed for conducting bias analyses, meta-regression, and sensitivity analyses.
Results:
From 1422 records identified in the databases, 17 articles were included in both the systematic review and meta-analysis. The pooled risk ratio and its 95%CI in the intervention (SEA + medication) group compared to the control (medication) group for the effective rate is 1.24 [1.17, 1.32] with a P < .00001. The pooled MD and its 95%CI for the Webster score is −0.51 [−6.36, 5.35] with a P = .86. The pooled MD and its 95%CI for total UPDRS is 8.73 [2.88, 14.58] with a P = .003. The pooled MD and its 95%CI for UPDRS III is 4.42 [3.23, 5.61] with a P < .00001. The results for total UPDRS and UPDRS III showed that intervention reduced the severity and progression of PD in patients more than medication.
Conclusions:
The intervention (SEA + medication) has shown significant effectiveness compared to the control (medication) in terms of the effective rate, total UPDRS, and UPDRS III in PD patients. However, it did not show a significant effect on the Webster score.

1. Introduction
Parkinson disease (PD) is a degenerative neurological condition that predominantly affects the elderly. The disease is characterized by symptoms such as resting tremors, stiffness in muscles, and slowed movements, and is often accompanied by mental disorders, dementia, and memory loss. The motor symptoms associated with PD contribute to a high rate of disability. It is estimated that at least 1% of individuals over the age of 60 are affected by PD, and only about 10% of these cases, which are typically observed in younger individuals, have a genetic origin. Risk factors for PD include age, being male, and certain environmental factors. Current treatments can effectively manage motor symptoms but do not alter the progression of the disease.
PD is a complex condition that manifests in forms that progress at different rates: some rapidly, others slowly. Advances are being made in understanding the pathophysiology of PD and in the development of therapies that target the fundamental pathophysiology of the disease. The treatment strategy typically involves a combination of pharmacological methods (usually involving prescriptions of levodopa (L-dopa) alone or in combination with other medications) and non-pharmacological methods, which include exercise and physical, occupational, and speech therapies. These medications can significantly alleviate symptoms, they come with notable limitations. Over time, patients often experience diminished efficacy and complications such as motor fluctuations and dyskinesias, which can substantially impact their quality of life.
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) operates on the principles of “holistic concepts and dialectical treatment,” striving to “balance yin and yang” through various techniques such as prescriptions, natural remedies, acupuncture, and physical exercises to prevent and treat diseases. Symbols representing PD have been documented in ancient Chinese medical texts, and many of these traditional PD treatments are still prevalent in China today. Current evidence indicates that TCM could potentially serve as a beneficial adjunctive treatment for alleviating nonmotor symptoms in PD. However, despite assertions in published research about the efficacy of TCM for nonmotor symptoms in PD, there is a lack of evidence from rigorous clinical studies due to small sample sizes and methodological flaws.
Existing reviews often conflate manual and electrical acupuncture. However, recent database searches show an increase in EA studies for PD, indicating a need for a meta-analysis to objectively evaluate EA’s therapeutic effect, safety, and potential mechanisms in PD treatment. Also, based on our knowledge of English and Chinese literature, there was one meta-analysis reporting combination therapy of scalp electroacupuncture (SEA) and medication for PD treatment including 9 randomized clinical trials (RCTs) published in 2019. SEA is theorized to work in PD by stimulating specific points on the scalp with electrical impulses. This stimulation is believed to activate brain regions involved in motor control and reduce symptoms of PD. Combining SEA with pharmacotherapy offers several potential advantages over using either treatment alone: (A) SEA may enhance the efficacy of medications by promoting better absorption or targeting specific neural pathways, leading to more pronounced therapeutic outcomes. (B) Combining treatments can allow for lower doses of medication, potentially reducing the risk of side effects while still achieving significant symptom relief. (C) SEA targets neurological functions and motor control, while pharmacotherapy addresses biochemical imbalances. Together, they provide a more holistic treatment.
Personalized treatment: this approach allows for tailored treatments based on individual patient needs, optimizing the therapeutic benefits for each person.
Therefore, the objective of this systematic review and meta-analysis is to evaluate the collective influence of SEA and pharmacotherapy on PD. This is achieved by conducting an exhaustive analysis of 17 RCTs, with a focus on outcomes such as the effective rate and various metrics including the total Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), UPDRS III, and Webster score. This study is significant because it aims to provide a comprehensive understanding of the combined effect of SEA and medication on PD with a trial sequential analysis (TSA). By focusing on multiple outcome measures, it offers a holistic view of the potential benefits of this combined approach. The use of RCTs in the analysis also ensures a high level of evidence, which can guide clinical decisions and future research in this area. Furthermore, the findings could potentially lead to improved treatment strategies for PD, enhancing the quality of life for patients.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Literature search
We conducted an unrestricted search from the beginning of each database until April 19, 2024, across 7 databases. These included 4 international databases: PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, and Cochrane Library, and 3 Chinese databases: CNKI, VIP, and Wanfang. The keywords used for the search were either “Parkinsonism,” “Parkinson’s disease,” or “Parkinson disease” in combination with “Electroacupuncture” or “Electro-acupuncture.” In addition to this, we manually examined the references of suitable studies and reviewed articles to find potentially related publications. The search strategies for each database are included in Figure S1, Supplemental Digital Content, http://links.lww.com/MD/O100. Electronic resources like Google Scholar were also utilized in our search. It is important to note that ethical approval was not required as this study involved retrieving and synthesizing data from previously published studies.

2.2. Study selection
The PICOS framework was utilized as the inclusion criteria for this study. The Population (P) consisted of adult participants who were diagnosed with PD. The Intervention (I) was the application of SEA. The Comparison (C) involved a case group receiving SEA combined with medication, compared to a control group receiving medication. The Outcome (O) measures included the effective rate, total UPDRS, UPDRS III, and Webster score. The Study Design (S) was RCT. The medication for PD in this meta-analysis typically involved Madopar (levodopa and benserazide hydrochloride) or L-dopa.
Number of Effective Cases: this is the number of patients who showed improvement or a positive outcome after the treatment.
Total Number of Cases: this is the total number of patients who received the treatment.
UPDRS: it is a rating tool used to gauge the severity and progression of PD in patients.
Webster Scale: it is a tool used to quantify the degree of disability in PD.

2.3. Criteria
The inclusion criteria for this study are all RCTs where the case group consists of individuals with PD receiving both SEA and medication and a control group that is only on medication. The exclusion criteria include studies with participants who have a history or diagnosis of any systemic diseases that may coincide with PD, cases of PD that are receiving treatments other than Western medicine, case reports or articles that do not provide statistical data, and studies without a control group. Additionally, meta-analyses, reviews, book chapters, letters to the editors, and articles that lack any data are also excluded.

2.4. Data extraction
The literature review and data extraction were independently performed by 2 authors to ensure uniformity in the screening of core criteria and the process of data collection. If there were any disagreements, they were resolved through further discussions or by involving an additional person in the conversation until a consensus was reached. The analyses were also independently executed by 2 authors, and all decisions were made with unanimous agreement.

2.5. Statistical analysis and data synthesis
For the meta-analysis, we utilized Review Manager, version 5.3, and displayed the data as mean difference (MD) or risk ratio (RR) along with a 95% confidence interval (CI). This was done to assess the relationships between the levels and incidence of outcomes and PD, respectively.
The heterogeneity of the studies was assessed using the I2 statistic, with a significance level established at P < .05. Given the expected heterogeneity of the studies, a random-effects model was employed in the meta-analysis when the Pheterogeneity was <.10 (I2 exceeding 50%). If this was not the case, a fixed-effect model was used.
The presence of publication bias was assessed using a funnel plot and Begg and Egger tests, with a significance level established at P < .10. The Comprehensive Meta-Analysis version 3.0 (CMA 3.0) software was employed for conducting bias analyses, meta-regression, and sensitivity analyses. We used the “risk-of-bias tool” recommended by the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Intervention to evaluate the methodological quality of the studies included. This two-part tool focuses on 6 specific areas: sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data, selective outcome reporting, and other potential sources of bias. Each area comprises one or more specific entries. The second part of the tool involves making a judgment about the risk of bias for each entry.
We conducted a TSA using the TSA software (version 0.9.5.10 beta). The required information size (RIS) was calculated with an alpha risk of 5% and a beta risk of 20%. The MD was based on empirical assumptions. If the Z-curve crossed the RIS, it suggested that the studies had an adequate number of cases, and the conclusion could be deemed trustworthy. GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation) is a tool for evidence quality assessment and strength-of-evidence recommendation.

3. Results

3.1. Study selection
Figure 1 is a flowchart representing the process of a systematic review and meta-analysis. Identification: records are identified through database searching. There are 2 categories: one for general databases (435 records) and another for Chinese databases (987 records). Screening: duplicates are removed, resulting in 856 unique records. The records are screened, leading to 57 full-text articles assessed for eligibility. Included: 17 articles are included in both the systematic review and meta-analysis. Forty articles are excluded for some reasons (Fig. 1).
Flowchart of the study selection.

3.2. Characteristics of the studies
Table 1 appears to be a summary of various studies on the effects of SEA combined with Madopar or L-dopa treatment on PD. Each study varies in terms of the number of participants, their average age, gender distribution, specific intervention used, control treatment, duration of treatment, and measured outcomes. The interventions involve a combination of Madopar or L-dopa and SEA, with the acupoints used for SEA varying across studies. The control treatment is either Madopar or L-dopa alone. The outcomes measured include the effective rate, total UPDRS, UPDRS III, and Webster score. This data can be used to compare the results of different studies and draw conclusions about the effectiveness of the intervention.
Characteristics of the studies included in the meta-analysis.
First author, publication year	Country	No. (case/control)	Mean age, years (case/control)	Male:female (case/control)	Intervention	Acupoints	Control	Treatment duration	Outcome	GRADE score	 	Wang (2003)	China	100/80	Range: 41–70/40–69	56:44/43:37	Madopar + SEA	Fengchi (GB 20), Xuanli (GB 6), Qianding (GV 21), Xuanlu (GB 5), and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar 250 mg/time	NA	Effective rate + Webster	Moderate	 	Jiang (2006)	China	15/15	Range: 53–75/40–72	NA	Madopar + SEA	MS6, MS4, MS8, MS9, MS14, and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar	6 weeks	Effective rate + Webster	Moderate	 	Wang (2006)	China	37/39	62.1/59.1	25:12/21:18	Madopar + SEA	EX-HN1, GB 6, Qianding (GV 21), Xuanlu (GB 5), Naohu (GV 17), Fengfu (GV 16), Yuzhen (BL 9), Tianzhu (BL 10), GB 19, GB 20, and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar	4 weeks	Effective rate + UPDRS III	Moderate	 	Tian (2007)	China	40/40	Range: 43–77/42–75	23:17/22:18	Madopar + SEA	Bilateral Sishencong (EX-HN1), Xuanli (GB 6), Baihui (GV 20), Qubin (GB 7), Naokong (GB 19), GB 20, and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar 125–250 mg/time	4 weeks	Effective rate	Moderate	 	Huang (2009)	China	15/15	66/70	8:7/6:9	Madopar + SEA	MS6, Epangxian III (MS4), Dingpangxian I (MS8), Dingpangxian II (MS9), Zhenxia Pangxian (MS14), and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar 125–250 mg/time	5 weeks	UPDRS III	Moderate	 	Gu (2013)	China	23/25	66/70	10:13/15:10	Madopar + SEA	Dingnie Qianxiexian (MS6), Fengchi (GB 20), Quchi (LI 11), Hegu (LI 4), Taichong (LR 3), Taixi (KI 3), Yanglingquan (GB 34), and retained for 20 minutes.	Madopar	12 weeks	Total UPDRS + UPDRS III	Moderate	 	Xia (2013)	China	30/30	71.84/71.93	22:8/20:10	Madopar + SEA	Baihui (GV 20), Yintang (EX-HN3), Sishencong (EX-HN1), Taichong (L R3) and Sanyinjiao (SP6), and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar 200 mg/time	12 weeks	Effective rate	Moderate	 	Suo (2015)	China	35/35	67.2/66.8	23:12/25:10	Madopar + SEA	GB 20, Gongxue (new acupoint, 1 finger cun inferior GB 20), chorea trembling control area, and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar 125 mg/time	4 weeks	Total UPDRS + effective rate	Moderate	 	Wang (2015)	China	41/29	62.1/59.1	13:28/9:20	L-Dopa + SEA	GB20 (Fengchi) and LI4 (Hegu) and central Du14 (Dazhui), and Du16 (Fengfu) retained for 30 minutes	L-Dopa	8 weeks	UPDRS III	Moderate	 	Liu (2016)	China	20/20	59/63	9:11/12:8	Madopar + SEA	Bilateral chorea trembling control area and retained for 20 minutes	Madopar	10 weeks	UPDRS III	Moderate	 	Yang (2016)	China	20/20	56/55	14:6/11:9	L-Dopa + SEA	GV 16, GV 17, GV 20, Yintang (GV 29), Shuigou (GV 26), and retained for 30 minutes	L-dopa	4 weeks	Total UPDRS + effective rate + Webster	Moderate	 	Tian (2016)	China	50/50	62.4/60.8	41:9/38:12	Madopar + SEA	Baihui, Taichong, Yintang, Sanyinjiao, and Sishencong, and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar 200 mg/time	12 weeks	Effective rate	Moderate	 	Zhou (2017)	China	80/80	55.5/57.8	40:40/38:42	Madopar + SEA	The scalp and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar	NA	Effective rate	Moderate	 	Wang (2018)	China	30/30	56/55	20:10/22:8	Madopar + SEA	MS6, MS4, MS8, MS9, MS14, chorea trembling control area and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar	4 weeks	UPDRS III + effective rate	Moderate	 	Dong (2018)	China	36/36	60.25/59.06	19:17/21:15	Madopar + SEA	Fengchi (double), Wangu (double), Tianzhu (double) and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar	4 weeks	Effective rate + Webster	Moderate	 	Li (2020)	China	30/30	71/68	14:16/13:17	Madopar + SEA	Xuanli, Xuanshu, Qianshencong and retained for 30 minutes	Madopar	12 weeks	Total UPDRS	Moderate	 	Qian (2021)	China	52/52	60.45/60.33	26:26/28:24	Madopar + SEA	Bilateral suboccipital, parietotemporal anterior oblique, paraparietal retained for 30 minutes	Madopar 125 mg/time	4 weeks	Effective rate	Moderate
NA = not available, UPDRS = Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale.

3.3. Pooled analyses
Figure 2 represents the pooled RR and its 95%CI when all the studies are combined for the effective rate. In this case, the pooled RR is 1.24 [1.17, 1.32], P < .00001, and I2 = 0%, indicating that the intervention (SEA + medication) is significantly more effective than the control (medication) in PD patients. It means that patients receiving the intervention are 1.24 times more likely to experience a positive outcome compared to those receiving only medication. Essentially, this RR suggests a significant improvement in effectiveness with the combined treatment compared to the medication alone.
Forest plot analysis of risk ratio of effective rate in the intervention group compared to the control group.
Figure 3 represents the pooled MD and its 95%CI when all the studies are combined for the Webster score. In this case, the pooled MD is −0.51 [−6.36, 5.35], P = .86, and I2 = 99%. This suggests that there is no significant overall effect of the intervention (SEA + medication) on the Webster score compared to the control (medication) in PD patients.
Forest plot analysis of the mean difference of Webster score in the intervention group compared to the control group.
Figure 4 shows the pooled MD and its 95%CI when all the studies are combined for the total UPDRS. In this case, the pooled MD is 8.73 [2.88, 14.58], P = .003, and I2 = 58%. This suggests that there is a significant overall effect of the intervention (SEA + medication) on the total UPDRS compared to the control (medication) in PD patients.
Forest plot analysis of the mean difference of total UPDRS in the intervention group compared to the control group. UPDRS = Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale.
Figure 5 shows the pooled MD and its 95%CI when all the studies are combined for the UPDRS III. In this case, the pooled MD is 4.42 [3.23, 5.61], P < .00001, and I2 = 46%. This suggests that there is a significant overall effect of the intervention (SEA + medication) on the UPDRS III compared to the control (medication) in PD patients.
Forest plot analysis of the mean difference of UPDRS III (motor part) in the intervention group compared to the control group. UPDRS = Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale.

3.4. Bias risk assessment
Figure 6 shows that most studies have a low risk of bias in random sequence generation, incomplete outcome data, and selective reporting. However, the risk is unclear for a significant number of studies when it comes to allocation concealment, blinding of outcome assessment, and other biases. All studies were found to have a high risk of bias in performance bias.
Bias risk assessment. (A) Risk of bias summary. (B) Risk of bias graph.

3.5. Publication bias
Figure 7 shows the funnel plot analyses in the intervention group compared to the control group based on effective rate, Webster score, total UPDRS, and UPDRS III (motor part). There is no publication bias based on Egger and Begg tests (P > .10).
Funnel plot analyses in the intervention group compared to the control group. (A) Risk ratio of effective rate. (B) Mean difference of Webster score. (C) Mean difference of total UPDRS. (D) Mean difference of UPDRS III (motor part). UPDRS = Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale.

3.6. Sensitivity analysis
Both “Cumulative” and “one-study-removed” analyses reported the stability of the pooled results.

3.7 . Meta-regression analysis
Table 2 shows the meta-regression analysis of 2 outcomes of the effective rate and UPDRS III with included sufficient studies based on the publication year and sample size. The results showed that just the publication year was a moderator for the effective rate (P < .05).
Meta-regression analysis of 2 outcomes based on 2 variables.
Outcome	Variable	Coefficient	Standard error	95% lower	95% upper	Z-value	2-sided P-value	 	Effective rate	Publication year	0.0001	<0.0001	<0.0001	0.0002	2.65	.0079	 	Sample size	−0.0002	0.0007	−0.0015	0.0012	−0.23	.8173	 	UPDRS III	Publication year	0.0035	0.0023	−0.0009	0.0080	1.56	.1139	 	Sample size	−0.0398	0.0734	−0.1835	0.1040	−0.54	.5877
UPDRS = Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale.

3.8. TSA
Figure 8 represents TSA graphs in the intervention group compared to the control group for effective rate, Webster score, total UPDRS, and UPDRS III (motor part). The results showed that the z-curve line (blue line) crossed the RIS line (vertical line) for effective rate, total UPDRS, and UPDRS III (motor part), and therefore, there were sufficient cases for these outcomes. In contrast, the z-curve line (blue line) did not cross the RIS line (vertical line) for the Webster score, and therefore, there were no sufficient cases for reporting this outcome and more information is needed.
Trial sequential analyses in the intervention group compared to the control group. (A) Risk ratio of effective rate (D2 = 0%). (B) Mean difference of Webster score (D2 = 100%). (C) Mean difference of total UPDRS (D2 = 63%). (D) Mean difference of UPDRS III (motor part) (D2 = 62%). UPDRS = Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale.

4. Discussion
The text provides an analysis of the effectiveness of an intervention (SEA + medication) compared to a control (medication) across several measures. The intervention was found to be significantly more effective overall, with a pooled RR of 1.24 and P < .00001. Significant effects were observed on the total UPDRS and UPDRS III, with pooled MDs of 8.73 and P = .003 and 4.42 and P < .00001, respectively. The studies generally had a low risk of bias, but there were some areas of uncertainty and a high risk of performance bias. No publication bias was detected. Meta-regression analysis showed that the publication year was a significant moderator for the effective rate. TSA indicated sufficient cases for effective rate, total UPDRS, and UPDRS III, but not for Webster’s score.
A meta-analysis in 2019 reported that SEA combined with medication can exert considerable effects in the treatment of PD, including improvements in the effectiveness rate and the total UPDRS and Webster scale. However our meta-analysis with more studies reported that the SEA + medication has shown significant effectiveness compared to the medication in terms of the effective rate, total UPDRS, and UPDRS III, not the Webster scale. One of the reasons can be insufficient cases for the analysis of the Webster score that our meta-analysis reported by TSA.
Progress in molecular biology and biochemistry has significantly enhanced the treatment options for PD. Dopaminergic medications, particularly Levodopa (L-dopa), have proven to be the most effective in managing motor symptoms and extending life expectancy. However, prolonged use of L-dopa can result in motor complications, including dyskinesias. Acupuncture, a noninvasive technique, has shown positive effects in PD patients by stimulating qi and blood to maintain body balance. When used in conjunction with L-dopa, acupuncture can enhance the therapeutic effect, reduce the required dosage, and mitigate the side effects of L-dopa. EA, a crucial component of acupuncture, serves as a significant complementary and alternative approach for PD patients. It helps alleviate motor symptoms, improve nonmotor symptoms such as pain, depression, and autonomic symptoms, and enhance daily life activities. Therefore, the advancements in molecular biology and biochemistry have improved PD treatment, and the combination of traditional methods like acupuncture and modern medications like L-dopa offers a promising approach. This combination not only enhances the therapeutic effect but also reduces potential side effects. However, further research is needed to fully understand and optimize this combined approach for the benefit of PD patients.
The therapeutic benefits of EA in PD patients could be linked to several mechanisms.. One potential mechanism could be the anti-neuroinflammatory effect of EA, which reduces the increase in nitric oxide levels, thereby potentially improving both motor and nonmotor symptoms in PD patients. EA has been found to alleviate key pathological characteristics of PD, such as the degeneration of dopamine neurons and the accumulation of α-synuclein in neurons in the substantia nigra. Furthermore, EA stimulation at ST36 and SP6 at 100 Hz has demonstrated antioxidative properties in the 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine model of PD. While the precise mechanisms of EA’s neuroprotective effects on PD are not fully understood, several potential pathways have been identified. These include anti-neuroinflammatory effects, alleviation of key pathological features of PD, and antioxidative properties. Further research is needed to fully elucidate these mechanisms and optimize the therapeutic use of EA in PD patients.
In summary, the nonsignificant effect on the Webster score, despite significant effects on other measures, can stem from several factors: sensitivity of measures: the Webster score might be less sensitive to changes compared to UPDRS, thus not capturing subtle improvements. UPDRS includes more comprehensive evaluations of motor skills, which might be more responsive to the intervention. Measurement focus: the Webster score mainly focuses on motor function, while total UPDRS and UPDRS III include a broader range of symptoms and impacts of PD, such as daily living activities and mental status. Sample size and power: the studies combined for the Webster score might not have had enough power to detect a significant effect, leading to nonsignificant results.

4.1. Limitations
Variability in study parameters: the studies vary significantly in terms of participant demographics, intervention specifics (i.e., acupoints) control treatments, treatment durations, and measured outcomes. This variability could potentially affect the comparability and generalizability of the results. Some strategies to address these issues: (A) Standardization: establish standardized protocols for acupuncture points and treatment durations. Consistency in these parameters can reduce variability. (B) Stratification: divide participants into subgroups based on the acupuncture points used, drugs administered, and treatment duration. Analyze these subgroups separately to identify specific effects. (C) Detailed reporting: ensure detailed and transparent reporting of all study parameters. This allows for better assessment of heterogeneity and more accurate interpretation of results.
Risk of bias: some studies have a high risk of bias in random sequence generation, and all of them in performance bias. This could potentially affect the validity of the results.
Insufficient cases for certain outcomes: the Z-curve line did not cross the RIS line for the Webster score, indicating that there were not enough cases to report this outcome. This suggests that more information is needed to draw definitive conclusions about the effect of the intervention on the Webster score.
Publication year as a moderator: the publication year was a moderator for the effective rate. This suggests that the year of publication due to different technologies and increasing mechanistic knowledge and effective sites of the scalp during time for the effect of EA on PD factors might have influenced the results, which could potentially introduce bias into the meta-analysis. Further investigation is needed to understand this relationship.
Lack of subgroup analysis: due to a low number of studies in each analysis, we could not use the subgroup analysis. Therefore, this issue can increase heterogeneity, results may not accurately reflect specific subpopulations, reducing the generalizability and applicability of findings to broader contexts, risk of bias, and important confounding factors that could influence the outcomes might be overlooked, affecting the validity and interpretation of the results.

5. Conclusions
The intervention (SEA + medication) has shown significant effectiveness compared to the control (medication) in terms of the effective rate, total UPDRS, and UPDRS III. However, it did not show a significant effect on the Webster score. The studies were generally low in bias, but there were areas of uncertainty and a high risk of performance bias. No publication bias was detected. The publication year was found to be a significant moderator for the effective rate.
The clinical significance of these findings is that SEA when combined with medication, could potentially improve patient outcomes in terms of the effective rate, total UPDRS, and UPDRS III. However, more research is needed to understand its impact on the Webster score.
For future research, it would be beneficial to address the areas of uncertainty and high risk in performance bias identified in the studies. Additionally, more studies are needed to provide sufficient cases for reporting the outcome of the Webster score. The role of the publication year as a moderator for the effective rate also warrants further investigation. This could lead to more robust and comprehensive evidence for the effectiveness of SEA in combination with medication.

Author contributions
Conceptualization: Hanzhang Li, Geyongqin Ju.
Data curation: Hanzhang Li, Jiayi Chen.
Formal analysis: Geyongqin Ju, Yao Wang.
Funding acquisition: Jiayi Chen.
Investigation: Hanzhang Li.
Methodology: Hanzhang Li, Geyongqin Ju.
Project administration: Hanzhang Li, Geyongqin Ju.
Resources: Yao Wang.
Software: Geyongqin Ju, Yao Wang.
Supervision: Hanzhang Li.
Validation: Jiayi Chen.
Visualization: Hanzhang Li, Geyongqin Ju.
Writing – original draft: Yao Wang.
Writing – review & editing: Hanzhang Li, Geyongqin Ju, Jiayi Chen, Yao Wang.

Supplementary Material
Abbreviations:
CI
confidence interval
MD
mean difference
PD
Parkinson disease
RCT
randomized clinical trial
RIS
required information size
RR
risk ratio
SEA
scalp electroacupuncture
TCM
Traditional Chinese Medicine
TSA
trial sequential analysis
UPDRS
Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale
The authors have no funding and conflicts of interest to disclose.
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article [and its supplementary information files].
Supplemental Digital Content is available for this article.
How to cite this article: Li H, Ju G, Chen J, Wang Y. Integrated approach of scalp electroacupuncture and pharmacotherapy in managing Parkinson’s disease: A systematic review, meta-analysis, and trial sequential analysis of randomized clinical trials. Medicine 2024;103:50(e40786).
HL and GJ contributed equally to this work.

References
Parkinson disease-associated cognitive impairment.
Caregiving concerns and clinical characteristics across neurodegenerative and cerebrovascular disorders in the Ontario neurodegenerative disease research initiative.
Personalized care in late-stage Parkinson’s disease: challenges and opportunities.
Parkinson disease.
Parkinson disease.
Diagnosis and treatment of Parkinson disease: a review.
Recent advances in drug therapy for Parkinson’s disease.
Levodopa, motor fluctuations and dyskinesia in Parkinson’s disease.
Parkinson’s disease in traditional Chinese medicine.
Effectiveness of traditional Chinese medicine as an adjunct therapy for Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Chinese herbal products for non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease in Taiwan: a population-based study.
Pingchan granule for motor symptoms and non-motor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Systematic review of traditional Chinese medicine for depression in Parkinson’s disease.
Electroacupuncture in treatment of Parkinson disease: a protocol for meta-analysis and systematic review.
Combination therapy of scalp electro-acupuncture and medication for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Meta-analysis in clinical trials revisited.
Statistical aspects of the analysis of data from retrospective studies of disease.
Assessing risk of bias in a non‐randomized study.
Analysing data and undertaking meta-analyses.
Trial sequential analysis in systematic reviews with meta-analysis.
GRADE guidelines 28: use of GRADE for the assessment of evidence about prognostic factors: rating certainty in identification of groups of patients with different absolute risks.
Assessment of the strength of recommendation and quality of evidence: GRADE checklist. A descriptive study.
A randomized controlled study of scalp electroacupuncture in the treatment of sleep disorders in Parkinson’s disease.
Clinical observations on combined treatment of Parkinson’s disease using acupuncture and medicine.
Effect of scalp acupuncture on regional cerebral blood flow in Parkinson’s disease patients.
Therapeutic effect of scalp electroacupuncture on Parkinson disease.
Clinical study of electroacupuncture combined with medication for Parkinson’s disease.
Clinical effect observation of scalp electroacupuncture combined with levodopa-benserazide tablets in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease with motor dysfunction.
Effects of Scalpe electtroacupuncture on mood and cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson’s disease.
Clinical observation on 70 patients with Parkinson’s disease treated by electro-acupuncture at neck points plus scalp.
Clinical effect observation of scalp electroacupuncture in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
Efficacy of electro-acupuncture combined with drug therapy on Parkinson disease with deprsssion and its influence on serum BDNF.
Effect and potential mechanism of electroacupuncture add-on treatment in patients with Parkinson’s disease.
Effects of head point-through-point electroacupuncture on SOD and LPO in the patient of Parkinson’s disease.
Clinical study of head electroacupuncture on acupoint therapy in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
Therapeutic effect of scalp electroacupuncture combined with benserazide on 30 cases of Parkinson’s disease symptoms of myotonia.
Clinical study on electroacupuncture in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease complicated with depression.
Efficacy of electroacupuncture combined with levodopa in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
Observation on the efficacy of Madopar combined with electroacupuncture at acupoints in the treatment of Parkinson’s disease.
Risk and course of motor complications in a population-based incident Parkinson’s disease cohort.
Combined treatment with acupuncture reduces effective dose and alleviates adverse effect of L-dopa by normalizing Parkinson’s disease-induced neurochemical imbalance.
Acupuncture alleviated the nonmotor symptoms of Parkinson’s disease including pain, depression, and autonomic symptoms.
Effect of electroacupuncture on function and quality of life in Parkinson’s disease: a case report.
The effects of acupuncture and electroacupuncture on Parkinson’s disease: current status and future perspectives for molecular mechanisms.
The Neuroprotective effects of electroacupuncture on Parkinson’s disease and the underlying molecular mechanisms.
The antioxidative effect of electro-acupuncture in a mouse model of Parkinson’s disease.