Unraveling the causes of sarcopenia: Roles of neuromuscular junction impairment and mitochondrial dysfunction
Abstract
Sarcopenia is a systemic skeletal muscle disease characterized by a decline in skeletal muscle mass and function. Originally defined as an age‐associated condition, sarcopenia presently also encompasses muscular atrophy due to various pathological factors, such as intensive care unit‐acquired weakness, inactivity, and malnutrition. The exact pathogenesis of sarcopenia is still unknown; herein, we review the pathological roles of the neuromuscular junction and mitochondria in this condition. Sarcopenia is caused by complex and interdependent pathophysiological mechanisms, including aging, neuromuscular junction impairment, mitochondrial dysfunction, insulin resistance, lipotoxicity, endocrine factors, oxidative stress, and inflammation. Among these, neuromuscular junction instability and mitochondrial dysfunction are particularly significant. Dysfunction in neuromuscular junction can lead to muscle weakness or paralysis. Mitochondria, which are plentiful in neurons and muscle fibers, play an important role in neuromuscular junction transmission. Therefore, impairments in both mitochondria and neuromuscular junction may be one of the key pathophysiological mechanisms leading to sarcopenia. Moreover, this article explores the structural and functional alterations in the neuromuscular junction and mitochondria in sarcopenia, suggesting that a deeper understanding of these changes could provide valuable insights for the prevention or treatment of sarcopenia.
We believe that this paper will be of interest to the readership of your journal because the dysfunction of mitochondria and the neuromuscular junction may be one of the key pathophysiological mechanisms leading to sarcopenia. The structural and functional changes of the neuromuscular junction and mitochondria in sarcopenia from the perspective of the neuromuscular junction and mitochondrial pathology might be new targets for the prevention or treatment of sarcopenia in the future.

INTRODUCTION
Sarcopenia, a progressive and systemic skeletal muscle disease (Cruz‐Jentoft & Sayer, ; Dent et al., ), is categorized into primary and secondary types. Primary sarcopenia is age‐associated and has become one of the major health problems in older adults (Gustafsson & Ulfhake, ; Papadopoulou, ), leading to an increased risk of falls, disability, and mortality (Senior et al., ; Westbury et al., ). In contrast, secondary sarcopenia is associated with various diseases (Figure 1) (Bauer et al., ; Chen et al., ; Nishikawa et al., ), such as intensive care unit‐acquired weakness (ICU‐AW), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and muscular atrophy due to inadequate exercise and nutrition, and often results in prolonged hospital stays and higher mortality rates (Cacciani et al., ; Mitobe et al., ; Riancho et al., ; Schweickert et al., ; Wieske et al., ). However, it is important to distinguish between cachexia and sarcopenia. Cachexia, a systemic wasting condition, is typically considered a late‐stage manifestation of chronic diseases, such as cancer, organ failure, or infections (Ferrer et al., ). At present, the exact pathogenesis of sarcopenia remains unclear. Nevertheless, some studies have found abnormalities in the morphology of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) (Carnio et al., ; Iyer et al., ; Shi et al., ; Sirago et al., ) and changes in mitochondrial function (Baraldo et al., ; Dupuis et al., ; Spendiff et al., ; Stephenson et al., ; Xiao et al., ) in individuals with sarcopenia. These findings suggest that impairments in the NMJs and mitochondrial function could be potential contributing factors to the development of sarcopenia (Ahn et al., ; Jang et al., ).
Classification of sarcopenia: primary sarcopenia is mainly age‐related sarcopenia, while secondary sarcopenia includes exercise‐related sarcopenia, disease‐related sarcopenia, and nutrition‐related sarcopenia.
The NMJ, the contact point between the motor neuron axon and skeletal muscle, is composed of motor nerve endings, perisynaptic Schwann cells, and skeletal muscle fibers (Court et al., ; Li et al., ; Sanes & Lichtman, ). The primary function of this junction is to convert action potentials of presynaptic motor neurons into contraction of postsynaptic muscle fibers. As impairment of the NMJs can lead to muscle weakness or even paralysis (Lepore et al., ; Ohkawara et al., ; So et al., ), NMJ instability is considered to be an initiating and driving factor of the pathology of sarcopenia (Deschenes et al., ; Dobrowolny et al., ; Rodrigues et al., ). In fact, some scholars even describe sarcopenia as a “disorder of the NMJs.” (Alchin, ; Gatti et al., ) Moreover, mitochondria, which are enriched on both sides of the NMJs (Lee & Peng, ; Vos et al., ), play an important role in maintaining NMJ stability and transmission (Martinez‐Pena et al., ). Mitochondrial dysfunction is increasingly recognized as a critical contributor to NMJ instability, which leads to skeletal muscle atrophy (Anagnostou & Hepple, ; O'Connor et al., ; Kim et al., ; Rygiel et al., ). Given that the causal relationship between NMJ instability and mitochondrial dysfunction in sarcopenia remains unclear, this review explores the pathological mechanisms underlying the relationship between the NMJs and mitochondria in sarcopenia. The objective is to provide insights and perspectives that could aid in the prevention or treatment of this condition.

CHANGES OF THE NMJS AND MITOCHONDRIA IN SARCOPENIA
Recent studies have increasingly demonstrated that NMJ instability is closely related to the occurrence and development of sarcopenia (Ang et al., ; Gonzalez‐Freire et al., ; Monti et al., ). In primary sarcopenia, aging affects the structure and physiological functions of the NMJs, leading to NMJ fragmentation (Kurokawa et al., ; Pratt et al., ; Valdez et al., ), axon remodeling (Smith & Rosenheimer, ), reduction of presynaptic vesicles and nerve endings (Rosenheimer, ), decreases in both the number (Courtney & Steinbach, ) and affinity (Moreira‐Pais et al., ; Smith & Chapman, ) of acetylcholine receptors (AChRs), and changes in terminal Schwann cells, such as contraction or intrusion into the synaptic cleft (Rahiminezhad et al., ; Wang et al., ). In secondary sarcopenia, the NMJs also play a key role. NMJ abnormalities, such as axonal depolarization and axonal degeneration, have been observed in patients with ICU‐AW (Batt et al., ; Lacomis et al., ; Rahiminezhad et al., ). Additionally, in patients with chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia, NMJ abnormalities in the extraocular muscles lead to increased neuromuscular jitter (Zou & Pan, ). Moreover, NMJ function is impaired in patients with ALS (Alhindi et al., ; Gulino, ) and myasthenia gravis (Vecchio et al., ).
Mitochondria are highly dynamic organelles with the capacity to modify their function through various mechanisms, including changes in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), fusion or fission (Westermann, ), and autophagy. In primary sarcopenia, age‐related point mutations in mtDNA are a contributing factor (Wallace, ). Mitochondrial fusion proteins 1 and 2 and optic atrophy 1, along with fission proteins such as dynamin‐related protein 1, mitochondrial fission factor, and fission protein 1 (Detmer & Chan, ), are critical for maintaining mitochondrial function (Archer et al., ). Notably, the inhibition of mitochondrial fusion by knock‐out of mitochondrial fusion proteins 1 and 2 in skeletal muscle can lead to mtDNA deficiency and the accumulation of small muscle sizes (Chen et al., ); moreover, mitochondrial autophagy, which facilitates the removal of dysfunctional mitochondria, is essential for the maintenance of muscle mass (Masiero et al., ).
Mitochondria have multiple functions, including adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production (Altman et al., ), neurotransmitter release (Misgeld & Schwarz, ), calcium regulation (Wu, Zheng, et al., ), signaling (Ly & Verstreken, ), and amino acid and lipid metabolism (Spinelli & Haigis, ). Both presynaptic nerve endings and postsynaptic endplate regions are rich in mitochondria (Anagnostou & Hepple, ; Lepore et al., ; Spendiff et al., ), which provide a large amount of ATP for neuromuscular transmission. Moreover, regulation of the mitochondrial network plays a key role in determining muscle size (Herbst et al., ; Rahman & Quadrilatero, ; Romanello & Sandri, ; Xu et al., ). In critically ill patients with ICU‐AW, there is evidence of ultrastructural damage and functional impairment of mitochondria in skeletal muscles (Batt et al., ; Felix Klawitter, ; Friedrich et al., ). Additionally, an animal study also found that mitochondrial swelling, mitochondrial cristae remodeling, and membrane rupture in motor neuron terminals were followed by functional failure of the NMJs in aging rats (García et al., ). These structural changes in skeletal muscle mitochondria both in critically ill patients and aging rats may affect the function of the NMJs (Brischigliaro et al., ). However, other researchers have demonstrated that there is no direct relationship between mitochondrial morphology and NMJ function. For example, one Drosophila melanogaster study has shown that mitochondrial fragments with basic normal biological capacity could be produced in the nervous system, and the flies could survive in the presence of a small number of mitochondria; (Trevisan et al., ) this finding suggests that these mitochondrial fragments are functional, and a small number of mitochondria with bioenergetic activity can maintain normal neural function. Taken together, the aforementioned evidence suggests a close relationship between mitochondria and the NMJs (Lee & Peng, ; Rikhy et al., ; Wilson et al., ). However, whether they unilaterally or collectively contribute to sarcopenia remains unknown.
Despite numerous studies highlighting the significant roles of the NMJs and mitochondria in sarcopenia, only two interventions have been currently reported to effectively manage NMJs and mitochondrial disruption in sarcopenia: exercise and calorie restriction (CR) (Jang et al., ; Shen et al., ). Exercise improves mitochondrial function and NMJ health (Kim et al., ; Lee et al., ). CR reduces proton leakage and reactive oxygen species (ROS) production in skeletal muscle mitochondria. In addition, CR enhances the expression of genes involved in ROS scavenging and alters the fatty acid composition of mitochondrial membranes, thereby reducing lipid oxidation and proton leakage (Drew et al., ; Short et al., ). Moreover, CR can directly affect NMJs; for example, it increases the number of sarcoplasmic ducts, leading to a greater number of postsynaptic sites that exhibit young structures (Jang et al., ). Another promising strategy involves the administration of ketone bodies or the activation of ketogenesis (Goossens et al., ; Yakupova et al., ). This approach is gaining interest because a ketogenic diet or in vitro ketogenic supplementation with ketone bodies can increase mitochondrial activity in young animals and improve mitochondrial mass and function in older animals (Cioni et al., ). However, the potential positive effect of a ketogenic diet on sarcopenia remains to be explored (Figure 2).
Exercise, a ketogenic diet, and a calorie‐restricted diet may prevent sarcopenia to some extent. CR, caloric restriction; EXER, exercise; KD, ketogenic diet.

MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTION IS NOT DIRECTLY RELATED TO NMJ IMPAIRMENT
Although mitochondria are generally believed to be closely related to the function of the NMJs, some studies have presented opposite conclusions. For example, the improvement of redox‐dependent sarcopenia by mitochondrial peroxiredoxin‐3 overexpression did not correspondingly alleviate NMJ damage (Ahn et al., ), possibly because other sources of ROS (i.e., nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase or cytosolic phospholipase A2) located in the sarcolemma and/or associated with binding lipid hydroperoxides were involved in NMJ damage (Pharaoh et al., ). Additionally, another study suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress might directly affect myosin interaction and force generation but do not significantly affect the stability of the NMJs (Carnio et al., ). This finding indicates no direct relationship between mitochondrial dysfunction and NMJ instability.

MITOCHONDRIAL DYSFUNCTION PRECEDES CHANGES IN THE NMJS

Role of mitochondria in the NMJs
Mitochondria are closely related to NMJ function (Lee & Peng, ; Rikhy et al., ; Wilson et al., ). While only approximately 50% of active synapses in the central nervous system of adult rodents contain mitochondria, NMJs are notably enriched in tightly packed mitochondrial networks (Altman et al., ; Misgeld & Schwarz, ). Mitochondria are present both pre‐ and post‐synaptically at NMJs (Osborne, ). Following pathological changes in the mitochondria, the production of ATP and acetylcholine and the regulation of calcium and ROS are disturbed, thus affecting NMJ transmission (Batt et al., ; Wu, Zhao, et al., ), These findings indicate that mitochondria play a unique role in maintaining NMJ function and stability.

Effect of mitochondrial changes on the NMJs
Mitochondria affect the NMJs through a variety of pathways (Table 1). Patients with sarcopenia resulting from mitochondrial myopathy have decreased synaptic vesicles at the presynaptic side, abnormal mitochondria aggregation at both the presynaptic and postsynaptic sides, and decreased NMJs (Lu et al., ), indicating the presence of pathological changes at the NMJs in sarcopenia. For example, multiple or single deletions of mtDNA can lead to alterations in myelin sheaths and crystal‐like inclusions in Schwann cells at NMJs (Pareyson et al., ). However, it is still controversial whether pathological changes of the NMJs precede or follow muscular changes (Lepore et al., ). Animal studies have suggested that mitochondrial alterations might precede pathological changes in muscles and NMJs in neuromuscular diseases. For example, a study of transgenic mice overexpressing fused in sarcoma (FUS), a marker of pathologies in FUS‐related ALS and frontotemporal dementia, showed that mitochondrial defects preceded NMJ instability (So et al., ). Similarly, mice with the p.Ser59Leu variant in the mitochondrial protein CHCHD10, which were used to model mitochondrial myopathy with unstable mtDNA, showed mitochondrial changes in skeletal muscles before NMJ instability, motor neuron degeneration, and high fragmentation of the motor endplate (Genin et al., ). This finding supports the view that the pathological changes of mitochondria precede NMJ alterations, affecting both the structure and function of the NMJs (Dobrowolny et al., ; Pollari et al., ).
Effects of mitochondrial changes on neuromuscular function.
Types of sarcopenia	Mitochondria	NMJ	Document	 	Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia	Mitochondrial destruction	A loss of synaptic vesicles and synaptophysin protein	So et al. 	 	Motor Neuron Disease	Structural instability of inner mitochondrial membrane and OXPHOS deficiency	NMJ highly fragmented	Genin et al. 	 	Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis	The local synthesis of nuclear encoded mitochondrial protein is inhibited	NMJ disruption	Altman et al. 	 	Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis	Mitochondrial uncoupling exacerbated	NMJ regeneration and functional recovery were profoundly delayed	Dupuis et al. 	 	Parkinson's Disease	Increased mitochondrial fragmentation	Abnormal behavior and structural changes of NMJ	Zhu et al. 	 		Mitochondrial protein S‐nitrosation	Protects against ischemia reperfusion‐induced denervation at NMJ	Wilson et al. 	 	Primary Myopenia	The number and speed of mitochondrial NADH decrease increase	NMJ deterioration or loss of mass	Su et al. 	 	Myasthenia Gravis, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis	Mitochondrial CHCHD10 protein mutation	Motion defect, abnormal neuromuscular conduction and NMJ structural damage	Xiao et al. 	 	Congenital Myasthenic Syndrome	Mutation of mitochondrial citrate carrier SLC25A1	Impaired Neuromuscular Transmission	Chaouch et al. 	 		Mitochondrial drp1 mutation	Mobilization damage of the reserve pool container at the NMJ	Verstreken et al. 	 	Chronic Intermittent Hypoxia	Mitochondrial swelling and SOCS3 upregulation	NMJ deterioration	Bannow et al.
Along with affecting energy supply, mitochondrial dysfunction increases the production of free radicals and ROS, triggering a vicious cycle of damage to macromolecules and organelles (Alizadeh Pahlavani et al., ; Martin et al., ). Mitochondrial dysfunction and increased ROS production in aged muscle have been identified as two key factors contributing to NMJ deterioration and primary sarcopenia. A study directly examining the effect of chronic oxidative stress on skeletal muscle in vivo found that aged mice lacking the antioxidant enzyme copper‐zinc superoxide dismutase exhibited a significant increase in mitochondrial numbers near the NMJs. However, mitochondrial function was significantly impaired, with broken AChRs and impaired NMJ function. Interestingly, the study also found that mitochondrial function within the muscle decreased during aging, as well as in response to altered neuronal redox status prior to NMJ deterioration or loss of muscle mass and force (Zorov et al., ). These findings suggest that mitochondrial defects might play a role in the development of sarcopenia, independent of denervation. Moreover, in patients with ICU‐AW, inflammation, hyperglycemia, and free radicals exacerbate mitochondrial damage, leading to impaired oxygen utilization in mitochondria and thereby affecting NMJ function (Friedrich et al., ). Additionally, scavenging peroxides produced by mitochondria can effectively prevent mitochondrial dysfunction and subsequent NMJ destruction associated with muscle atrophy due to denervation. This finding supports mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide as an important effector in NMJ changes associated with sarcopenia (Xu et al., ). These previous studies collectively indicate that mitochondria play a crucial role in maintaining the structural and functional integrity of the NMJs, and pathological changes in mitochondrial function or structure are directly linked to the corresponding functional damage of the NMJs.

NMJ ABNORMALITIES AFFECT MITOCHONDRIAL FUNCTION
The normal structure and function of the NMJs play important roles in mitochondrial function (Table 2) (Sirago et al., ). Mitochondria are transported from the main biosynthetic sites in the cell body along the cytoskeleton, traveling down the axon to the synaptic terminal (Barnhart, ; González & Couve, ). Changes in the structure of the NMJs can affect the location and number of mitochondria reaching the synapses, thereby affecting NMJ function and aggravating sarcopenia. In healthy adult animals, local protein synthesis occurs in the axons and synapses of NMJs (Hafner et al., ), playing an important role in the structural and functional integrity of mitochondria. However, it is unclear how the local protein synthesis in axons maintains the mitochondrial structure and function. Moreover, nuclear‐encoded mitochondrial messenger RNAs (mRNAs) have been identified in the axon at the NMJs (Maciel et al., ), and they are translated near the mitochondria within the axon (Cioni et al., ). Notably, these nuclear‐encoded mitochondrial genes are the most abundant mRNAs in the axonal transcriptome of human motor neuron (Maciel et al., ). However, the exact mechanism by which these nuclear‐encoded mitochondrial mRNAs are transported to the synapses, as well as the process of their translation at these sites, need to be further investigated.
Effect of NMJ on mitochondria.
NMJ	Mitochondria	Document	 	Changes of axonal endoplasmic reticulum in NMJ	Affect the local supply of mitochondria	González and Couve ; Barnhart 	 	Axis protein synthesis disorder	Promoting mitochondrial damage	Hafner et al. 	 	Axon‐enriched nuclei in NMJ encode mitochondrial mRNA	Maintain mitochondrial structure and function	Maciel et al. ; Cioni et al.
A study showed that accumulation of mislocalized TAR‐DNA‐binding protein (TDP)‐43 at the NMJs, a phenomenon observed in the motor neurons of approximately 95% of ALS patients, impaired local translation of nuclear‐encoded mitochondrial proteins and inhibited local protein synthesis in distal axons and NMJs, thereby leading to decreases in nuclear‐encoded mitochondrial protein levels in axons and synapses. Interestingly, the clearance of axonal TDP‐43 increases the level of nuclear‐encoded mitochondrial proteins in axons and synapses (Altman et al., ). These findings indicate that the normal structure and function of the NMJs are partly responsible for maintaining healthy mitochondria, while dysfunction of the NMJs can adversely affect structural and functional integrity of mitochondria in sarcopenia.

CONCLUSIONS
Mitochondria and the NMJs have a close and complex relationship, with damage to one often impacting the other. Most current evidence supports the idea that mitochondrial dysfunction usually precedes NMJ instability in both age‐related sarcopenia and disease‐associated sarcopenia. However, few studies have suggested that NMJ impairment might affect mitochondrial function or that their relationship is not directly causal. The reasons behind the discrepancy are still unclear and warrant further investigation (Figure 3). At present, regular exercise (Carol & Hodgson, ; Collao et al., ; Jacob et al., ) a ketogenic diet (Goossens et al., ; Yakupova et al., ), and a calorie‐restricted diet (Faulks et al., ; Jang et al., ) have shown promise in preventing or mitigating NMJs and mitochondrial damage in sarcopenia (Deschenes et al., ; Lee et al., ; Stockinger et al., ). In conclusion, understanding the interplay between mitochondria and NMJs could provide valuable insights into the development of treatments or preventive strategies for sarcopenia.
Sarcopenia. The interaction between mitochondria and the neuromuscular junction may be an important pathogenesis of sarcopenia. ACh, ROS, acetylcholine; reactive oxygen species; ATP, adenosine 5′‐triphosphate; MPTP, mitochondrial permeability transition pore; MPT, mitochondrial phosphate transporter; NMJs, neuromuscular junction.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
YM, LX, JS, XM, SS, and PX performed the literature search, wrote the first draft of the manuscript, and which was critically reviewed by PX. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

FUNDING INFORMATION
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation (Grant Nos. 82060359 and 82360382) of China; Guizhou Province Social Development Project: Qiankehe [2021] General 088; Key Project of Guizhou Natural Science Foundation: Qiankehe Fundamentals ZK [2022] Key 049; Guizhou Province Excellent Youth Science and Technology Talent Project: Qiankehe Platform Talent [2021] No. 5648; Zunyi Excellent Youth Science and Technology Talent Project: Zunyou Qingke (2020) No. 2; Zunshi Kehe H8 Zi (2020) No. 144; Yuan Ke Zi (2020) No. 13; Zunyi Medical University College Student Innovation and Entrepreneurship Training Program (No. ZYDC202202048).

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

ETHICS STATEMENT
Not applicable.

REFERENCES
Scavenging mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide by peroxiredoxin 3 overexpression attenuates contractile dysfunction and muscle atrophy in a murine model of accelerated sarcopenia[J]
Mitochondrial oxidative stress impairs contractile function but paradoxically increases muscle mass via fibre branching[J]
Sarcopenia: Describing rather than defining a condition[J]
Small junction, big problems: Neuromuscular junction pathology in mouse models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)[J]
Exercise and mitochondrial mechanisms in patients with sarcopenia[J]
In vitro compartmental system underlines the contribution of mitochondrial immobility to the ATP supply in the NMJs[J]
Axonal TDP‐43 condensates drive neuromuscular junction disruption through inhibition of local synthesis of nuclear encoded mitochondrial proteins[J]
Mitochondrial mechanisms of neuromuscular junction degeneration with aging[J]
Muscle 4EBP1 activation modifies the structure and function of the neuromuscular junction in mice[J]
Mitochondrial dynamics — Mitochondrial fission and fusion in human diseases[J]
Effect of chronic intermittent hypoxia (CIH) on neuromuscular junctions and mitochondria in slow‐ and fast‐twitch skeletal muscles of mice‐the role of iNOS[J]
Skeletal muscle mTORC1 regulates neuromuscular junction stability[J]
Mechanics of mitochondrial motility in neurons[J]
Mechanism of ICU‐acquired weakness: Skeletal muscle loss in critical illness[J]
Sarcopenia: A time for action. An SCWD position paper[J]
Mitochondrial neurodegeneration: Lessons from Drosophila melanogaster models[J]
Chaperone co‐inducer BGP‐15 mitigates early contractile dysfunction of the soleus muscle in a rat ICU model[J]
Autophagy impairment in muscle induces neuromuscular junction degeneration and precocious aging[J]
Early active mobilization during mechanical ventilation in the ICU[J]
Mutations in the mitochondrial citrate carrier SLC25A1 are associated with impaired neuromuscular transmission[J]
Mitochondrial fusion is required for mtDNA stability in skeletal muscle and tolerance of mtDNA mutations[J]
Asian working Group for Sarcopenia: 2019 consensus update on sarcopenia diagnosis and treatment[J]
Late endosomes act as mRNA translation platforms and sustain mitochondria in axons[J]
Resistance and endurance exercise training improves muscle mass and the inflammatory/fibrotic transcriptome in a rhabdomyosarcoma model[J]
Identity, developmental restriction and reactivity of extralaminar cells capping mammalian neuromuscular junctions[J]
Age changes in neuromuscular junction morphology and acetylcholine receptor distribution on rat skeletal muscle fibres[J]
Sarcopenia[J]
International clinical practice guidelines for sarcopenia (ICFSR): Screening, diagnosis and management[J]
Adaptive remodeling of the neuromuscular junction with aging[J]
Remodeling of the neuromuscular junction precedes sarcopenia related alterations in myofibers[J]
Functions and dysfunctions of mitochondrial dynamics[J]
Age‐related alterations at neuromuscular junction: Role of oxidative stress and epigenetic modifications[J]
Muscle expression of SOD1(G93A) triggers the dismantlement of neuromuscular junction via PKC‐theta[J]
Effects of aging and caloric restriction on mitochondrial energy production in gastrocnemius muscle and heart[J]
Muscle mitochondrial uncoupling dismantles neuromuscular junction and triggers distal degeneration of motor neurons[J]
Calorie restriction in mice: Effects on body composition, daily activity, metabolic rate, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species production, and membrane fatty acid composition[J]
Mitochondrial dysfunction in intensive care unit‐acquired weakness and critical illness myopathy: A narrative review[J]
Cachexia: A systemic consequence of progressive, unresolved disease[J]
The sick and the weak: Neuropathies/myopathies in the critically ill[J]
Mitochondria, motor neurons and aging[J]
Human neuromuscular junction on a Chip: Impact of amniotic fluid stem cell extracellular vesicles on muscle atrophy and NMJs integrity[J]
Mitochondrial defect in muscle precedes neuromuscular junction degeneration and motor neuron death in CHCHD10S59L/+ mouse[J]
The axonal endoplasmic reticulum and protein trafficking: Cellular bootlegging south of the soma[J]
The neuromuscular junction: Aging at the crossroad between nerves and muscle[J]
Adipose tissue protects against sepsis‐induced muscle weakness in mice: From lipolysis to ketones[J]
Synaptic dysfunction and plasticity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis[J]
Sarcopenia: What is the origin of this aging‐induced disorder?[J]
Local protein synthesis is a ubiquitous feature of neuronal pre‐ and postsynaptic compartments[J]
Accumulation of mitochondrial DNA deletion mutations in aged muscle fibers: Evidence for a causal role in muscle fiber loss[J]
The neuromuscular junction: Roles in aging and neuromuscular disease[J]
Leisure‐time physical activity and sarcopenia among older adults from low‐ and middle‐income countries[J]
Dietary restriction attenuates age‐associated muscle atrophy by lowering oxidative stress in mice even in complete absence of CuZnSOD[J]
Increased superoxide in vivo accelerates age‐associated muscle atrophy through mitochondrial dysfunction and neuromuscular junction degeneration[J]
The link between mitochondrial dysfunction and sarcopenia: An update focusing on the role of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 4[J]
Autophagic response to exercise training in skeletal muscle with age[J]
Age‐related change in peripheral nerve conduction: Compound muscle action potential duration and dispersion[J]
Causes of neuromuscular weakness in the intensive care unit: A study of ninety‐two patients[J]
Mitochondrial clustering at the vertebrate neuromuscular junction during presynaptic differentiation[J]
The function of mitochondria in presynaptic development at the neuromuscular junction[J]
Autophagy as a therapeutic target to enhance aged muscle regeneration[J]
Neuromuscular junction as an entity of nerve‐muscle communication[J]
Neuromuscular junction formation, aging, and disorders[J]
Neurogenic muscle biopsy findings are common in mitochondrial myopathy[J]
Mitochondria at the synapse[J]
The human motor neuron axonal transcriptome is enriched for transcripts related to mitochondrial function and microtubule‐based axonal transport[J]
Potential effects of melatonin and micronutrients on mitochondrial dysfunction during a cytokine storm typical of oxidative/inflammatory diseases[J]
The metabolic stability of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor at the neuromuscular junction[J]
Autophagy is required to maintain muscle mass[J]
Mitostasis in neurons: Maintaining mitochondria in an extended cellular architecture[J]
Skeletal muscle index at intensive care unit admission is a predictor of intensive care unit‐acquired weakness in patients with sepsis[J]
Neuromuscular junction instability and altered intracellular calcium handling as early determinants of force loss during unloading in humans[J]
A neuromuscular perspective of sarcopenia pathogenesis: Deciphering the signaling pathways involved[J]
Japan Society of Hepatology guidelines for sarcopenia in liver disease (1st edition): Recommendation from the working group for creation of sarcopenia assessment criteria [J]
Mitochondrial mutations can alter neuromuscular transmission in congenital myasthenic syndrome and mitochondrial disease[J]
Secreted signaling molecules at the neuromuscular junction in physiology and pathology[J]
The fine structure of neuromuscular junctions in the segmental muscles of the blowfly larva[J]
Sarcopenia: A contemporary health problem among older adult populations[J]
Peripheral neuropathy in mitochondrial disorders[J]
Targeting cPLA2 derived lipid hydroperoxides as a potential intervention for sarcopenia[J]
The role of oxidative stress in degeneration of the neuromuscular junction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis[J]
Neuromuscular junction aging: A role for biomarkers and exercise[J]
Muscle strength/intensive care unit acquired weakness in COVID‐19 and non‐COVID‐19 patients[J]
Mitochondrial network remodeling: An important feature of myogenesis and skeletal muscle regeneration[J]
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), cancer, autoimmunity and metabolic disorders: An unsolved tantalizing challenge[J]
Mutations in dynamin‐related protein result in gross changes in mitochondrial morphology and affect synaptic vesicle recycling at the drosophila neuromuscular junction[J]
The sympathetic nervous system regulates skeletal muscle motor innervation and acetylcholine receptor stability[J]
The connection between the dynamic remodeling of the mitochondrial network and the regulation of muscle mass[J]
Factors affecting denervation‐like changes at the neuromuscular junction during aging[J]
The ageing neuromuscular system and sarcopenia: A mitochondrial perspective[J]
Development of the vertebrate neuromuscular junction[J]
Timing of early mobilization to optimize outcomes in mechanically ventilated ICU patients[J]
Prevalence and risk factors of sarcopenia among adults living in nursing homes[J]
Exercise for sarcopenia in older people: A systematic review and network meta‐analysis[J]
The lack of CuZnSOD leads to impaired neurotransmitter release, neuromuscular junction destabilization and reduced muscle strength in mice[J]
Decline in skeletal muscle mitochondrial function with aging in humans[J]
Loss of neuromuscular junction integrity and muscle atrophy in skeletal muscle disuse[J]
Acetylcholine receptor binding properties at the rat neuromuscular junction during aging[J]
Decreased sprouting and degeneration of nerve terminals of active muscles in aged rats[J]
Mitochondrial abnormalities and disruption of the neuromuscular junction precede the clinical phenotype and motor neuron loss in hFUSWT transgenic mice[J]
Denervation drives mitochondrial dysfunction in skeletal muscle of octogenarians[J]
The multifaceted contributions of mitochondria to cellular metabolism[J]
Evidence for inefficient contraction and abnormal mitochondrial activity in sarcopenia using magnetic resonance spectroscopy[J]
Caloric restriction mimetics slow aging of neuromuscular synapses and muscle fibers[J]
Deletion of neuronal CuZnSOD accelerates age‐associated muscle mitochondria and calcium handling dysfunction that is independent of denervation and precedes sarcopenia[J]
Manipulation of mitochondria dynamics reveals separate roles for form and function in mitochondria distribution[J]
Attenuation of age‐related changes in mouse neuromuscular synapses by caloric restriction and exercise[J]
Paediatric myasthenia gravis: Prognostic factors for drug free remission[J]
Synaptic mitochondria are critical for mobilization of reserve pool vesicles at drosophila neuromuscular junctions[J]
Synaptic mitochondria in synaptic transmission and organization of vesicle pools in health and disease[J]
A mitochondrial bioenergetic etiology of disease[J]
Aging delays the regeneration process following sciatic nerve injury in rats[J]
Recent sarcopenia definitions—Prevalence, agreement and mortality associations among men: Findings from population‐based cohorts[J]
Mitochondrial fusion and fission in cell life and death[J]
Impact of ICU‐acquired weakness on post‐ICU physical functioning: A follow‐up study[J]
Mitochondrial protein S‐nitrosation protects against ischemia reperfusion‐induced denervation at neuromuscular junction in skeletal muscle[J]
Acetylcholine reduces palmitate‐induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis by promoting lipid droplet lipolysis and perilipin 5‐mediated lipid droplet‐mitochondria interaction[J]
High glucose induces Drp1‐mediated mitochondrial fission via the Orai1 calcium channel to participate in diabetic cardiomyocyte hypertrophy[J]
Loss of mitochondrial protein CHCHD10 in skeletal muscle causes neuromuscular junction impairment[J]
Muscle mitochondrial catalase expression prevents neuromuscular junction disruption, atrophy, and weakness in a mouse model of accelerated sarcopenia[J]
Disuse‐associated loss of the protease LONP1 in muscle impairs mitochondrial function and causes reduced skeletal muscle mass and strength[J]
Effects of ketogenic diet on muscle metabolism in health and disease[J]
Knockdown of Hsc70‐5/mortalin induces loss of synaptic mitochondria in a drosophila Parkinson's disease model[J]
Reactive oxygen species (ROS)‐induced ROS release: A new phenomenon accompanying induction of the mitochondrial permeability transition in cardiac myocytes[J]
Post‐synaptic specialization of the neuromuscular junction: Junctional folds formation, function, and disorders[J]