Cardiac Computed Tomography Angiography in the Evaluation of Coronary Artery Disease: An Interventional Perspective
Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) has become the gold standard for noninvasive anatomic assessment of the coronary arteries. With high positive predictive value and even higher negative predictive value, CCTA allows for rapid determination of the presence or absence of coronary plaque and triage of patients’ need for further invasive evaluation and treatment. From an interventional cardiologist’s perspective, CCTA (more so than stress testing) is helpful in determining the need for invasive therapy. In conjunction with functional assessments, the anatomic evaluation from CCTA mirrors the anatomical assessment of a coronary angiogram more than any other noninvasive assessment. This allows for catheter selection, percutaneous coronary intervention preplanning, as well as additional decision making before the patient has entered the catheterization laboratory. This manuscript explores some of the more recent developments in noninvasive coronary angiography and discusses the use and utility of CCTA from an interventional cardiologist’s perspective.

Cardiac computed tomography angiography is a better triage tool for the catheterization laboratory in stable patients with chest pain
More than 1,000,000 invasive coronary angiograms occur in the US annually. Although this has been a standard means to evaluate a patient’s coronary anatomy, there is an inherent risk (typically quoted approximately 0.1%) including death, stroke, and vascular complications. The percentage of cardiac catheterizations performed for chest pain which results in no revascularization can be up to 40%.
Compared to invasive coronary angiography (ICA), cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) represents a noninvasive alternative to evaluate coronary anatomy. It has been available to cardiologists and their patients for the better part of 2 decades and has become a guideline-directed alternative to ICA for the evaluation of patients with chest pain.
The diagnostic accuracy for noninvasive functional (stress) testing is good, with most sensitivities and specificities in the 70% to 80% range. In the most recent chest pain guidelines, CCTA is shown to be more accurate in delineating the presence of coronary disease, with higher positive and negative predictive values in the triage of patients than noninvasive testing.
Low-to-moderate risk chest pain patients derive less benefit from invasive testing and therapies but derive significant benefit from identification of coronary artery disease (CAD) as it leads to higher utilization of medications that reduce cardiac events. Additionally, those patients who undergo CCTA prior to ICA are less likely to have nonobstructive CAD on diagnostic coronary angiography.

Higher acuity patients with chest pain may be better served by ICA than CCTA
Chest pain rule out in the emergency department: A patient with multiple risk factors for coronary disease and multiple visits to the emergency department for acute chest pain. The patient presented with a negative electrocardiogram and cardiac enzymes, with a self-reported history significant for myocardial infarction. Cardiac computed tomography angiography demonstrated normal coronary arteries, no pericardial effusion, no pulmonary emboli, or aortic dissection. Other than “minimal” aortic plaque, this study allowed safe discharge, as it did not suggest a cardiac or life-threatening etiology of the symptoms. LAD, left anterior descending (coronary artery); LCx, left circumflex (coronary artery); OM, obtuse marginal (coronary artery); RCA, right coronary artery.
Chest pain is the second most common reason for visits to the emergency department (ED), and accounts for more than 7 million visits annually. Use of CCTA for the evaluation of chest pain in emergency room patients is increasing as well, with escalating use of this modality to triage patients and aid in early discharge. Early papers regarding the use of CCTA in performing “triple rule outs” for coronary disease, aortic dissection, and pulmonary embolus, were tempered with realistic concerns related to image quality, and use in the disposition of these higher-risk patients. Appropriate use criteria have suggested CCTA is reasonable to be used for patients in low-to-intermediate risk groups, or in clinically stable patients with markers for non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, but clearly recommend invasive evaluation for higher-risk non–ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction and ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (Figure 1).
Patient selection can aid in obtaining better CCTA image quality, which is important when the goal is to “rule out” coronary disease. In an ED population, it can be harder to select for ideal heart rate, body mass index, and ability to comply with breath holds, which impact CCTA image quality. Additionally, due to the obligate contrast use, potential downstream complications such as contrast-associated nephropathy may impact the decision to utilize CCTA.
Although in some studies, CCTA may facilitate more direct discharges from the ED, studies have shown no change in downstream cardiac events, at the cost of more downstream testing and higher radiation exposure for patients. In patients with low-risk chest pain in the ED, as defined by a low HEART Score and exclusion of acute coronary syndrome (ACS), there is little clinical benefit in the use of CCTA as a triage tool. When admitted with true ACS, CCTA as a part of the up-front evaluation does not reduce the incidence of death or subsequent myocardial infarction and tends to increase the length of hospitalization.
In higher-risk patients (eg, with active chest pain or ACS) up-front CCTA can delay definitive evaluation with ICA. With its extremely high specificity, CCTA is most helpful in allowing deferral of ICA in chest pain patients when the study shows completely normal coronaries or non–flow-limiting coronary disease. In hospitalized patients with chest pain, if coronary plaque is found, invasive evaluation is often the next step. Up-front CCTA with its obligatory need for contrast material may require additional time to allow contrast to “wash out,” and typically will result in extended hospitalization. In general, low-to-moderate risk patients without ACS who present to the ED can be triaged clinically and neither stress testing nor CCTA (as a gatekeeper for catheterization) is clinically helpful in preventing future MI.

Inpatient chest pain evaluation with CCTA
Similarly, in patients who have been admitted to the hospital for chest pain, there is good diagnostic accuracy and association between patients with plaque seen on CCTA and worse cardiac outcomes. However, there is scarce data on the broader use of CCTA in the acute evaluation of chest pain patients, particularly in those with increased cardiac troponin concentrations or evidence of myocardial injury. Although able to accurately determine the presence and severity of coronary disease, and obviate the need for invasive testing, CCTA: (1) may add to the delay of obtaining a definitive diagnosis, (2) may cause delay of ICA due to the need to reduce a patient’s exposure to contrast, and (3) may not be able to exclude significant coronary plaque due to body habitus or high heart rate. In studies looking at “emergency” CCTA, its use did not result in the reduction of length of stay or cost.

CCTA to reduce the need for “high-risk” ICA
Preoperative CCTAfor a patient with endocarditis: The left anterior descending (LAD), left circumflex (LCx) and right coronary artery (RCA) are all free of disease. Aortic valve endocarditic lesions (arrows–bottom panels) are noted on the aortic valve. This patient went on to have valvular surgery, without the need for preoperative invasive coronary angiography.
Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) in a patient with prior transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR): This patient received TAVR 4 years prior, now presenting with unstable angina. Cath at the time of TAVR placement showed mild disease. CCTA now indicates an anterior takeoff of the right coronary artery (RCA) (A–arrow) as evidenced by the “12 o’clock” orientation of the RCA ostium at the level of the sinus of Valsalva. Curved reformatted image showing lesion length and coronary sizing of a high-grade stenosis (B–arrow) in the proximal RCA. CCTA allowed the determination of stenosis, lesion length, and takeoff of the coronary ostia. Diagnostic invasive coronary angiography of the RCA, using an Amplatzer catheter, shows a high-grade stenosis (C–arrow) which was stented using a 2.5 × 28 mm drug-eluting stent (D–arrow), optimized to 3.0 mm.
There are situations where ICA is felt to be necessary but may be associated with a high procedural risk. Surgery for infectious endocarditis (particularly involving the aortic valve) and prior to surgery for aortic dissection are situations in which obtaining angiographic information can be associated with embolic events. CCTA can be used as an alternative to evaluate for coronary disease, and at the same time gain information about the aortic root (Figure 2). Invasive catheterization in patients with mechanical valves is of higher risk due to bleeding or the need to stop anticoagulation prior to the procedure. In such cases, CCTA may be a safer choice than either performing an invasive evaluation while on anticoagulation or stopping anticoagulation temporarily. Additionally, CCTA gives information (similar to cinefluoroscopic modality) related to valve function, similar to or even superior to fluoroscopy at the time of ICA. Likewise, in patients with transcatheter aortic valve replacement, CCTA can both determine the need for further invasive evaluation, as well as guide the choice of catheters prior to ICA (Figure 3).
Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) in a chest pain patient with a history of spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD): CCTA is used to follow the patient with prior coronary stents placed after acute infarct due to SCAD. Three-dimensional coronary reconstruction (A) and curved reformat evaluation (B) show no new or residual coronary dissection, and absence of coronary atherosclerosis. Evaluation of the stents themselves shows patency of 3 overlapping stents (C and D). LAD, left anterior descending (coronary artery).
Patients with prior ICA and intervention for spontaneous coronary artery dissection may be at high risk for ICA. CCTA as a subsequent test for recurrent chest pain allows for visualization of arteries to check for healing, new dissection, and even patency of previously placed stents (Figure 4).
Preoperative coronary evaluation for noncoronary surgery: Cardiac computed tomography angiography used for surgical preoperative evaluation of a patient with a left atrial myxoma. Curved reformatted images of the coronaries show minimal plaque in the proximal left anterior descending (A–double arrows). Normal right coronary artery (B) and left circumflex coronary artery (C). The mass is seen in the left atrium as a large flow void (D–arrowhead) and using 3D “navigator” view (E–arrowhead) which shows the relationship of the mass to the pulmonary arteries. The excised 2 × 2 cm myxoma is shown post removal (F). Reprinted with permission. LAD, left anterior descending (coronary artery); LCCA, left coronary circumflex artery; RCA, right coronary artery.
Preoperative coronary angiography for noncoronary cardiac surgery (such as valve surgery) or transcatheter aortic valve replacement is still recommended by guidelines but may no longer be necessary. In situations where the pretest probability is low-to-moderate, it is reasonable (and in some cases such as in preoperative evaluation for aortic valve surgery, preferable) to get information related to both the coronary anatomy as well as the ascending aorta with CCTA. Similarly, there are data suggesting that this type of noninvasive coronary imaging is useful in the preoperative assessment for other types of noncoronary, cardiac surgery (Figure 5).
Post coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) evaluation of graft patency: Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) of a patient post transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) and CABG × 4. Patency of grafts (LIMA to LAD, SVG to Dx, SVG to OM, SVG to RCA) are all identified. CCTA allows the additional benefit of evaluating the bioprosthetic valve for thrombosis, which was ruled out on this exam. Dx, diagonal branch (coronary artery); LAD, left anterior descending (coronary artery); LIMA, left internal mammary artery; OM, obtuse marginal (coronary artery); RCA, right coronary artery; SVG, saphenous vein graft.
High risk for invasive coronary angiography (ICA) post coronary artery bypass graft (CABG). Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) to evaluate for graft patency in a patient with known (severe) native coronary artery disease and left ventricular thrombus (A–arrow). CCTA, rather than ICA, was done preferentially to evaluate the patient’s grafts without having to instrument the heart or hold oral anticoagulation, reducing the risk for embolic stroke. Patency of all grafts is noted, including a LIMA to the LAD, SVG to the Dx branch, and SVG to the RCA (B). Dx, diagonal branch (coronary artery); LAD, left anterior descending (coronary artery); LIMA, left internal mammary artery; RCA, right coronary artery; SVG, saphenous vein graft.
Postaortic dissection and coronary artery bypass graft (CABG): Cardiac computed tomography angiography of a patient with prior surgery for ascending aortic dissection, which includedCABG, the details of which were not known. CCTA demonstrates the replacement of the ascending aortic arch and reimplantation of the great vessels (A) with a modified “Cabrol” procedure including the posterior location of the bypass conduit to the left system (B–arrow). Patency of the conduit to the LAD and LCx is noted (C, D). It is noted that engagement of the coronaries during invasive coronary angiography may have been difficult, even if the ostia locations had been known. LAD, left anterior descending (coronary artery); LCx, left circumflex (coronary artery).
Post bypass surgery, in patients with chest pain, most of the information that is needed is related to the patency of grafts. From a technical standpoint, CCTA for determining graft patency is excellent and can guide the need for further (ie, invasive) testing or continued medical management (Figures 6 and 7). When invasive evaluation is needed, particularly when an operative note is not available, precatheterization CCTA may save radiation, contrast, and time in allowing the operator to know where grafts are located as well as patency (Figure 8).

Information for the interventionalist at the time of catheterization
Arteria lusoria: Cardiac computed tomography angiography of a patient demonstrating aberrant right subclavian artery (so-called “arteria lusoria”) which can be challenging to navigate during a coronary angiogram performed through the right radial artery approach. Aberrant origin of this most-distal great vessel seen in axial (A–arrow), 3D (B–arrow), coronary (C–arrow) and saggital (D–arrow) views.
In addition to the ability of CCTA to aid in the determination of the need for catheterization, there is information obtained that can assist the interventional cardiologist before invasive testing. A large portion of coronary angiography access is now through the transradial approach. Although safer from a complication standpoint, there are specific anatomic subsets such as subclavian tortuosity or arteria lusoria which make this approach more difficult. These anatomic variants can be discovered prior to entering the catheterization lab using CCTA (Figure 9).
Left main disease: Patient with chest pain–left main disease seen on cardiac computed tomography angiography (A–arrow), invasive angiogram (B–arrow), and confirmed by intravascular ultrasound (C-red dots indicating lumen, green dots indicating media of artery).
Determination of the presence of high-risk subsets of coronary disease (left main and multivessel coronary disease) can be identified prior to ICA, which can alter the method in which coronaries are engaged. Diagnostic and guide catheter choices can be made, and there can be preplanning for the need for hemodynamic support if the patient decompensates (Figure 10).
Ostia orientation and location. Cardiac computed tomography angiography demonstrating an anterior takeoff of the right coronary artery shown on 3D reconstruction (A–arrow) without significant coronary disease in the body of the artery (B–arrow). Axial images (C–arrow) show the anterior origin and takeoff of the proximal portion of the artery. The origin is approximately 10 mm above the sinus of Valsalva (D).
Choosing appropriate guiding catheters: Cardiac computed tomography angiography of a 52-year-old man with chest pain. The ostium of the right coronary artery (RCA) is at “12 o’clock” in the axial images of the aortic root (A) suggesting a very anterior takeoff. This is also confirmed with 3D reconstruction (B). Curved reformat images suggest a high-grade stenosis (C) of the proximal RCA. Engagement of the artery is performed using an Amplatzer Left 0.75 guide, providing support for wiring (D) and ultimately percutaneous coronary intervention of this stenosis. As the origin of the RCA was from the right coronary cusp, it was not truly “anomalous,” but its location increases the difficulty in engaging using standard catheters.
Knowing the location and orientation of the coronary ostia can facilitate invasive catheterization, as can knowing whether the arteries are a normal variant or truly anomalous (Figure 11). The axial images through the sinus of Valsalva and the ascending aorta can clearly show the location and orientation of the coronary ostia. In normal coronary anatomy, the right coronary artery (RCA) is typically located around “11 o’clock,” whereas the left main coronary ostium is usually located around “4 o’clock.” The RCA is typically felt to be more anterior at the “12 o’clock” location, whereas the posterior left main ostium is around “6 o’clock.” Noting that an RCA ostium is anterior would suggest the use of a different type of catheter, such as an Amplatzer-type catheter, which facilitates engagement of the coronary artery and improves support during percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) (Figure 12). A very posterior takeoff left main requires additional counter-clockwise torque (particularly from the right radial approach) to effectively engage.
Coronary anomaly with high-risk anatomy in a patient with chest pain. Single coronary (R-IIB subtype) showing an anterior takeoff of the coronary from the right coronary cusp in 3D (A) and axial (B–arrow) imaging. The interarterial portion of the coronary is free of disease but has a significant caliber change as it passes between the pulmonary artery (PA) and the sinus of Valsalva (C–arrow). The right coronary artery is likewise free of disease (D–arrow). No further invasive imaging is needed to determine the course of this anomalous coronary.
Coronary anomalies (when discovered during an invasive heart catheterization) represent a scenario where a CCTA performed after the invasive procedure may be helpful in fully determining the true course and potential danger of a coronary anomaly. Determining whether the left or right coronary arteries course between the aorta and pulmonary artery can assist diagnostic efforts and aid in surgical planning for correction (Figure 13).

Preplanning for PCI
Pre-percutaneous coronary intervention stent planning. Cardiac computed tomography angiography showing high-grade stenosis in the proximal left anterior descending (coronary artery) (A–arrow), with measurement of the stenosis approximately 13 mm (B). Angiographic evaluation of the coronary arteries confirmed location and severity (C–arrow). A 3.5 × 15 mm drug-eluting stent (optimized to 4.0 mm) was placed successfully (D–arrow).
Once significant CAD is found, there is additional information that CCTA can provide the interventional cardiologist when planning PCI. The presence of significant side branches at the location of coronary stenosis can alter stent length or type, whereas the presence and severity of plaque at a bifurcation can aid in the prediction of successful bifurcation stenting. The use of CCTA to evaluate coronary distributions with regard to myocardial mass may be useful for both assessing the benefit of revascularization as well as potential negative outcomes should branch vessel occlusion occur. Tortuosity and angulation of the arteries themselves can alter the timing of a case or the need for hemodynamic support. Lesion length and artery diameter can be measured prior to the invasive procedure, which can alter planned stent length and diameter (Figure 14). The composition of plaque and the presence of severe coronary calcification can change planning with regard to the need for plaque modification prior to stent placement. With an increasing array of vessel preparation options including atherectomy, high-pressure balloons, intravascular lithotripsy, and drug-coated balloons, CCTA planning can increase efficiency and proper strategy to optimize PCI.
Chronic total occlusion (CTO). Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) showing CTO of the proximal LAD (A, B–arrow). The length of the CTO, presence of side branches, and degree of calcification of the occlusion could be evaluated prior to invasive catheterization and assisted in preprocedural planning. Invasive catheterization demonstrated the CTO with an antegrade injection of the left coronary system (C–arrow) and retrograde filling through collaterals from the RCA (D–arrow). Note: In an occluded artery, it is not possible to determine by CCTA whether the distal filling of the artery is from antegrade or retrograde flow. LAD, left anterior descending (coronary artery); RCA, right coronary artery.
Recent data suggest that CCTA may aid in facilitating PCI in chronic total occlusions (Figure 15). Understanding the course of the vessel can aid in both antegrade and retrograde approaches as well as understanding crossing strategies after carefully studying the characteristics of the proximal and distal atherosclerotic caps.

Use of functional assessment with fractional flow reserve computed tomography in the context of the COURAGE and ISCHEMIA trials
Invasive functional assessment of coronary stenosis is the standard of care in stenoses that are intermediate in severity, and there is good data supporting the benefit of intervening in those subsets that demonstrate functional flow limitation. Fractional flow reserve computed tomography (FFrCT) utilizes mathematical algorithms to estimate coronary blood flow and thereby evaluate the functional significance of coronary stenosis. There are data demonstrating that in patients with nonsignificant stenoses diagnosed by FFrCT, deferring invasive evaluation has no negative sequelae given the high negative predictive value of this test. However, these studies are in the setting of stable ischemic coronary disease, and it has been noted that the additional use of this modality tends to have a lower positive predictive value, can add significantly to the expense, and there is a known mismatch in higher severity stenoses when compared with ICA.
Functional testing using fractional flow reserve computed tomography (FFrCT)–false positive. Cardiac computed tomography angiography demonstrating plaque in the proximal LAD (A–arrow) with FFrCT suggesting significant flow reduction past the stenosis (B). Invasive angiogram shows less-impressive visual estimation of stenosis (C–arrow) with invasive physiologic evaluation (D) suggesting nonsignificant flow reduction. LAD, left anterior descending (coronary artery).
In a higher acuity population, the use of FFrCT has been shown to have potential issues with both false negative and false positive results, and may not be as applicable in this population. In the era of the COURAGE and ISCHEMIA trials, it has become clear that even in moderate subsets of ischemic coronary disease, deferring invasive evaluation is safe, and so additional functional assessment may be of less value. Functional assessment of coronary flow, as an adjunct to anatomic evaluation using CCTA is becoming more robust, and multiple studies are being done expanding the use in the evaluation of patients for coronary disease. That being said, the accuracy is not 100%, and there are still situations in which the clinical scenario and the CT results are discordant with angiographic findings. It is up to the interventional cardiologist to use those additional invasive tools to fully evaluate those patients in the catheterization laboratory (Figure 16).
Additionally, the pattern of coronary disease, and whether stenoses are focal or diffuse, can be determined angiographically by CT as well as functionally by FFrCT. These patterns of coronary disease, focal or diffuse, can impact both procedural as well as clinical outcomes, and so are pertinent pieces of information to know prior to PCI. Patients with nonobstructive, diffuse CAD found on CCTA might still be considered for further evaluation with PET or invasive coronary testing to ascertain coronary flow reserve, microvascular function, and vasospasm.

Future directions for CCTA: Artificial intelligence and CCTA for coronary artery bypass graft
Future directions for CCTA will focus on increasing the accuracy of the diagnosis of coronary disease severity and predicting future events. The characterization of “vulnerable plaque” by CCTA is now being looked at to predict (and in some cases prevent) future cardiac events with PCI.
There is the potential for obviating the need for confirmative ICA in patients discovered to have surgical coronary disease by CCTA. Studies, such as FastTrack coronary artery bypass graft (CABG), are underway evaluating the outcomes of CCTA-directed surgical bypass compared to ICA-guided referral, without the need for invasive diagnostics prior to CABG.
Artificial intelligence (AI) is being leveraged to support CCTA readers and improve accuracy in the evaluation of coronary stenoses. AI may also become helpful in determining the potential for successful PCI related to calcium burden, the complexity of anatomy, as well as the myocardial volume subtended by a particular coronary distribution. Future directions of the use of AI may include the ability to highlight areas of concern in the coronary tree, and “pre-plan” coronary interventions using a combination of anatomic and functional imaging.
Ultra-high resolution CT, utilizing photon counting, will likely be the next major improvement in coronary imaging. This technology allows for higher spatial resolution, lower noise, less radiation, and improved ability to identify plaque characteristics. It also improves upon current CT technology with regard to imaging of arteries with previously placed stents. Integration of imaging modalities in a catheterization laboratory setting holds the potential to give on-demand, real-time analysis to the interventionalist at the time of ICA. Fusion of noninvasive, functional as well as anatomic imaging can potentially be available as another tool to complement angiography, intravascular ultrasound, and optical coherence tomography.

Conclusion
Cardiac computed tomography angiography is an excellent tool for the evaluation of patients with low-to-moderate risk, stable ischemic cardiac disease. It allows for decisions to be made as to whether a patient may benefit from further invasive evaluation or therapy, and at the same time can definitively show who would benefit from lipid-lowering and antiplatelet therapy. It can obviate the need for coronary angiography in some patients who need cardiac surgery, can help with PCI planning, and is the gold standard for the evaluation of coronary anomalies. In patients with active chest pain, CCTA does not add significant additional benefit and may delay needed invasive testing, add to cost, and delay discharge. There is a need for further research to study the benefits of CCTA as a counterpart to, and in conjunction with ICA, as it may facilitate interventional cardiologists’ workflow and invasive coronary procedures (Central Illustration).
Cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) is useful to an interventional cardiologist in many situations, assisting in the evaluation of patients prior to their invasive cardiac procedure.

References
Safety and risk of major complications with diagnostic cardiac catheterization
Low diagnostic yield of elective coronary angiography
Non-invasive coronary angiography using multislice computed tomography
Stress testing and non-invasive coronary angiography in patients with suspected coronary artery disease: time for a new paradigm
2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines
Use of coronary computed tomographic angiography to guide management of patients with coronary disease
Outcomes of anatomical versus functional testing for coronary artery disease
National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2021 Emergency Department Summary Tables
Sixty-four-slice computed tomographic coronary angiography: will the “triple rule out” change chest pain evaluation in the ED?
2015 ACR/ACC/AHA/AATS/ACEP/ASNC/NASCI/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR/SCPC/SNMMI/STR/STS Appropriate Utilization of Cardiovascular Imaging in Emergency Department Patients with chest pain: a joint document of the American College of Radiology Appropriateness Criteria Committee and the American College of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force
Evaluation of image quality for high heart rates for coronary computed tomographic angiography with advancement in CT technology: the CONVERGE registry
Patient characteristics as predictors of image quality and diagnostic accuracy of MDCT compared with conventional coronary angiography for detecting coronary artery stenoses: CORE-64 multicenter international trial
Coronary CT angiography versus standard evaluation in acute chest pain
A randomized controlled trial of multi-slice coronary computed tomography for evaluation of acute chest pain
CT coronary angiography: new risks for low-risk chest pain
Early computed tomography coronary angiography in adults presenting with suspected acute coronary syndrome: the RAPID-CTCA RCT
Cardiovascular testing and clinical outcomes in emergency department patients with chest pain
Volumetric evaluation of coronary plaque in patients presenting with acute myocardial infarction or stable angina pectoris-a multislice computerized tomography study
Prognostic implications of nonobstructive coronary plaques in patients with non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: a multidetector computed tomography study
Troponin in acute chest pain to risk stratify and guide effective use of computed tomography coronary angiography (TARGET-CTCA): a randomised controlled trial
Prospective RandOmised Trial of Emergency Cardiac Computerised Tomography (PROTECCT)
Utility and safety of coronary angiography in patients with acute infective endocarditis who required surgery
Utility of coronary computed tomography angiography in acute coronary syndrome associated with infectious endocarditis
Complementary role of cardiac computed tomography angiography in the diagnosis of prosthetic aortic valve endocarditis and septic coronary embolism – a case report
Middle-aged man with unstable angina and an inaccessible right coronary artery
Computed tomography vs. cinefluoroscopy for the assessment of mechanical prosthetic valve leaflet motion
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: a review of pathogenesis, presentations, treatment, and outcomes
Spontaneous coronary artery dissection in a 22-year-old man on lisdexamfetamine
2021 ESC/EACTS Guidelines for the management of valvular heart disease
Effectiveness of pre-TAVR CTA as a screening tool for significant CAD before TAVR
Preoperative exclusion of significant coronary artery disease by 64-slice CT coronary angiography in a patient with a left atrial myxoma
Preoperative visualization of an atrial septal defect by 64-slice cardiac computed tomography
Preoperative visualization of a muscular ventricular septal defect by 64-slice cardiac computed tomography
Computed tomography cardiac angiography before invasive coronary angiography in patients with previous bypass surgery: the BYPASS-CTCA trial
Aberrant right subclavian artery (arteria lusoria) diagnosed during transradial coronary catheterization
Frequency of plaque dislodgement and embolization in transradial vs transfemoral approaches for left-sided cardiac catheterization: clinically silent vs clinically apparent embolism
Critical left main coronary artery stenosis diagnosed by computed tomographic coronary angiography
Role of coronary computed tomography angiography to optimise percutaneous coronary intervention outcomes
Benign or malignant anomaly? Very high takeoff of the left main coronary artery above the left coronary sinus
Use of multislice computed tomographic coronary angiography for the diagnosis of anomalous coronary arteries
Coronary artery anomalies in 126,595 patients undergoing coronary arteriography
Prediction of side branch occlusions in percutaneous coronary interventions by coronary computed tomography: the CT bifurcation score as a novel tool for predicting intraprocedural side branch occlusion
Cardiac computed tomography-derived myocardial mass at risk using the Voronoi-based segmentation algorithm: a histological validation study
Cardiac computed tomography-derived coronary artery volume to myocardial mass
Quantification of calcium burden by coronary CT angiography compared to optical coherence tomography
Preprocedural coronary computed tomography angiography in chronic total occlusion percutaneous coronary intervention: insights from the PROGRESS-CTO registry
Coronary computed tomographic prediction rule for time-efficient guidewire crossing through chronic total occlusion: insights from the CT-RECTOR multicenter registry (Computed Tomography Registry of Chronic Total Occlusion revascularization)
2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines
Coronary CT angiographic and flow reserve-guided management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease
The use and efficacy of FFR-CT: real-world multicenter audit of clinical data with cost analysis
Coronary lesion characteristics with mismatch between fractional flow reserve derived from CT and invasive catheterization in clinical practice
Diagnostic accuracy of computed tomography-derived fractional flow reserve: a systematic review
Non-invasive fractional flow reserve derived from coronary computed tomography angiography in patients with acute chest pain: subgroup analysis of the ROMICAT II trial
The feasibility, findings and future of CT-FFR in the emergency ward
Functional imaging after the “ischemia” trial
Procedural outcomes after percutaneous coronary interventions in focal and diffuse coronary artery disease
Differential improvement in angina and health-related quality of life after PCI in focal and diffuse coronary artery disease
Clinical outcomes based on coronary computed tomography-derived fractional flow reserve and plaque characterization
Safety and feasibility evaluation of planning and execution of surgical revascularisation solely based on coronary CTA and FFR(CT) in patients with complex coronary artery disease: study protocol of the FASTTRACK CABG study
Real-world approach to comprehensive artificial intelligence-aided CT evaluation of coronary artery disease in 530 patients: a retrospective study
Coronary CT angiography in the cath lab: leveraging artificial intelligence to plan and guide percutaneous coronary intervention
Clinical validation of a virtual planner for coronary interventions based on coronary CT angiography
Dual-source photon-counting computed tomography-part I: Clinical overview of cardiac CT and coronary CT angiography applications
Comprehensive imaging of coronary stent using ultra-high resolution spectral photon counting CT: A multimodality validation
Implementing coronary computed tomography angiography in the catheterization laboratory