Step‐by‐Step Approach to Phrenic Nerve Displacement
ABSTRACT
Phrenic nerve injury, though rare, can be a serious complication of catheter ablation leading to significant morbidity. The close proximity of the phrenic nerve to the site of origin of arrhythmias may also impact the success of catheter ablation. When the phrenic nerve is near the optimal site of ablation, several techniques have been proposed to create separation between the nerve and the epicardium, including the introduction of fluid, gas, and balloons. In this article, we present a step‐by‐step approach to phrenic nerve displacement to facilitate ablation, including a review of phrenic nerve anatomy, localization techniques, procedural strategies, and necessary equipment.

Introduction
Phrenic nerve injury, though rare, can be a serious complication of catheter ablation. Injury of the phrenic nerve has been documented in endocardial ablations of atrial arrhythmias and accessory pathways, as well as epicardial ablations of ventricular arrhythmias. Symptoms vary with some patients remaining asymptomatic while others can experience severe respiratory failure. Partial recovery of the phrenic nerve function may occur, but the injury can persist, leading to significant morbidity.
The close proximity of the phrenic nerve to the site of origin of arrhythmias may also impact the success of catheter ablation. Limited ablation due to the location of the phrenic nerve has been reported in up to one in five patients undergoing epicardial ablation for nonischemic cardiomyopathy related ventricular tachycardia. When the phrenic nerve is near the optimal site of ablation, several techniques have been proposed to create separation between the nerve and the epicardium, including the introduction of fluid, gas, and balloons. In this article, we present a step‐by‐step approach to phrenic nerve displacement to facilitate ablation, including a review of phrenic nerve anatomy, localization techniques, procedural strategies, and necessary equipment.

Phrenic Nerve Anatomy
Understanding the anatomical course of the phrenic nerves is paramount to avoiding injury during catheter ablation. Both phrenic nerves arise from the C4 cervical root, descending anterior to the subclavian artery before traveling posterior to the clavicles to enter the thoracic cavity. They continue their descent between the pericardium and parietal pleura, running anterior to pulmonary hila, and ultimately reaching the diaphragm (Figure 1).
Cadaver dissection demonstrating phrenic nerve anatomy with intact pericardium. (A) Right phrenic nerve from right lateral direction. (B) Left phrenic nerve from left lateral direction. Reproduced from Mori and Shivkumar. Copyright Cardiotext Publishing.
In relation to the heart, the right phrenic nerve courses along the right anterolateral surface of the superior vena cava (SVC), then curves posteriorly as it approaches the superior cavoatrial junction (Figure 2). It continues along the right atrium (RA), posterolateral to the sinus veranum (the smooth posterior wall of the RA), and passes close to the junction of the RA and the anterior aspect of the right superior pulmonary vein. In a study of cadaver dissections, 32% of specimens had the right phrenic nerve less than 2 mm from the anterior wall of the right superior pulmonary vein. The nerve then proceeds to the inferolateral border of the entrance of the inferior vena cava (IVC) into the RA before reaching the diaphragm. It typically does not course over the right ventricle.
Cadaver dissection of right and left phrenic nerves (yellow and red arrows, respectively). (A) Intact fibrous pericardial sac. (B) Partial removal of fibrous pericardium and lungs. Ao = aorta, LV = left ventricle, RA = right atrium, RV = right ventricle. Reproduced from Sánchez‐Quintana et al.. Copyright John Wiley and Sons.
After the left phrenic nerve enters the thoracic cavity, it courses near the left subclavian vein. Once reaching the heart, the left phrenic nerve is consistently located near the tip of the left atrial appendage (LAA), crossing it in 95% of patients with phrenic nerves seen with computed tomography (CT). From there, the nerve follows an oblique path over the left ventricle toward the diaphragm, though its trajectory is highly variable. In 65% of phrenic nerves evaluated by CT scan, the left phrenic nerve follows along the basal half of the left ventricle, with the remaining 35% showing a more apical course. Cadaveric dissection revealed that in 79% of specimens, the nerve passes over the obtuse cardiac margin and the first obtuse marginal artery. In the remaining 21% of specimens, however, it crosses over the left main coronary artery or the left anterior descending artery and great cardiac vein.
Familiarity with phrenic nerve anatomy is key to recognizing when its proximity during an ablation warrants concern and to prompting its identification in patients. Specifically, the right phrenic nerve should be carefully delineated during endocardial ablation at key sites, including the SVC, the posterolateral RA, the anterior right pulmonary veins, and the inferolateral junction of the IVC and RA. The left phrenic nerve, on the other hand, should be localized when performing endocardial ablation near the LAA, ablation of left sided accessory pathways, and epicardial ablation of left ventricular tachycardias.

Localizing Phrenic Nerves
Once it is determined that the ablation site may be near a phrenic nerve, the next step is to accurately locate it. Various imaging techniques have been explored for this purpose. While CT imaging can provide insights into phrenic nerve anatomy, it does not consistently identify the nerve in all patients (Figures 3 and 4). One study found that in patients undergoing a VT ablation, CT successfully localized the left phrenic nerve in 74% of cases and the right phrenic nerve in 47% of cases. The variability in patients' fat distribution may limit the effectiveness of CT for precise localization. Even when the phrenic nerve is identifiable, challenges remain, including the potential for imprecision when integrating the imaging data into the mapping system and the risk of respiratory displacement during the procedure.
CT of the left phrenic nerve transversing the left lateral ventricle. Blue arrow demonstrating the left phrenic nerve.
Delineation of the right phrenic nerve course using CT scan (white arrow). (A) Axial slide at the level of the right superior pulmonary vein. (B) Coronal slice. SVC = superior vena cava. Reproduced from Squara et al.. Copyright CC BY 4.0.
Intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) can be useful for real‐time visualization of the phrenic nerves during an ablation procedure (Figure 5). A recent study assessed the feasibility of localizing the right phrenic nerve using ICE during atrial fibrillation ablation, successfully visualizing the nerve in 92% of patients. While our own experience of locating the right phrenic nerve is similar, reliably localizing the left phrenic nerve with ICE has been challenging, and its effectiveness is often limited by the operator's experience.
Right phrenic nerve (white arrows) identified with ICE from the RA (A and B). Reproduced from Liu et al.. Copyright CC BY‐NC 4.0.
Pacing to capture the phrenic nerves remains the gold standard for real‐time localization of their course. This method involves pacing and monitoring for diaphragmatic stimulation, with identified sites subsequently incorporated into the electroanatomic map (Figures 6 and 7). Our experience highlights significant variability in the number of phrenic nerve capture points, underscoring the diverse ways in which the phrenic nerve interfaces with the heart.
Phrenic nerve capture sites displayed over anatomical left ventricular maps. (A) Yellow dots notes denote phrenic capture. (B) White dots denote phrenic capture.
Anatomic map with phrenic nerve capture sites denoted with black dots. (A) RAO view of the RA and LA. (B) RAO view of the LA.
Evidence exists to guide safe ablation near the phrenic nerve. A key factor is the distance from the phrenic nerve capture site to the intended ablation site. We recommend a 10 mm distance cut‐off to ensure safety. This is based on a study demonstrating that radiofrequency lesions on beating hearts at moderate to very high power result in maximal lesion depth of 6.7 ± 0.5 mm and a maximal lesion diameter of 12.0 ± 0.6 mm, corresponding to a lesion radius of approximately 6 mm. Our prior research demonstrated that noncapture at 50 mA and 2 ms is highly specific at 97.6% for predicting a phrenic nerve distance greater than 10 mm using CT as the gold standard. Recognizing that most institutions do not have this pacing output available, it is important to note specificity for distances > 10 mm was 77.5% at > 20 mA and 91.6% at > 30 mA. Given the variability in pacing outputs, we recommend utilizing your institution's high‐output and pulse width pacing to locate the phrenic nerve accurately and ensuring ablation occurs at least 10 mm away from the capture site.
We recommend pacing the phrenic nerve during ablation lesions in close proximity to phrenic capture to ensure continuous diaphragmatic capture. If capture is lost or diminished, ablation should be stopped immediately. To accomplish this, a separate pacing catheter is placed at a distance from the ablation site, capturing the phrenic nerve. The right phrenic nerve can be easily captured from pacing within the SVC. We have previously published a case involving pacing from the left subclavian vein to capture the left phrenic nerve (Video 1). While we typically monitor diaphragmatic capture during ablation with manual palpation, it may also be done with CMAP or viewing M‐mode of the diaphragm on ICE.
Pacing from the left subclavian vein with diaphragmatic stimulation.

Phrenic Nerve Displacement
In cases where ablation cannot be safely performed due to phrenic nerve proximity, displacement techniques can be pursued. After the course of the phrenic nerve has been identified, the next step is to move the nerve away from the site of ablation. For the right phrenic nerve, one approach involves right phrenic nerve displacement with endocardial catheters. This case report described a simple technique for ablating a focal atrial tachycardia near the right phrenic nerve. For this method, a second steerable sheath and a deflectable diagnostic catheter were placed to apply pressure to the interatrial septum in the right atrium, effectively shifting the right phrenic nerve away from the optimal ablation site.
For the right and left phrenic nerves, another approach involves displacing the nerve from the epicardial surface. Three main techniques have been proposed for this purpose: the introduction of gas, fluid, and/or balloons. The approach generally involves applying one of these methods to create separation, followed by pacing at the site of interest to assess whether the phrenic nerve is still being captured.

Epicardial Access
Epicardial access is required for this technique. We have previously outlined our approach to epicardial access. For endocardial ablations, a single epicardial access point is typically sufficient. In the case of epicardial ablation, the single access used for ablation can also be used to introduce gas and/or fluid. However, when using balloons, a separate epicardial access is required. This can be obtained through an additional pericardial puncture or by double‐wiring the existing access. To facilitate navigation within the pericardial space, we recommend short deflectable sheaths (Agilis EPI steerable introducer; Abbott Medical, North Plymouth, MN) as this greatly facilitates placing balloons in the desired locations. Most balloon catheters are too short to pass through standard cardiac electrophysiology sheaths, therefore a short sheath is recommended.

Fluid Insertion
We decide independently whether to introduce gas or liquid into the pericardial space. While the literature supports using either or both, in the absence of adhesions gas tends to localize over the anterior surface of the heart and may be more useful for separation from the right phrenic nerve. Myocardial density is higher than saline, and therefore liquid may still preferentially localize over the superior cardiac surface in a supine patient (RV). But as the density is closer than gas, it is likely easier to move the heart away from the posterior parietal pericardium where the left phrenic nerve is located. The options for gas include air and CO2. The options for liquid include saline, half‐normal saline, and D5W. Interestingly, we have previously used D5W or half‐normal saline as this may reduce conductivity and promote current shunting toward the myocardial surface. A 20 mL syringe is used for the injection, with each substance introduced in 20 mL increments (Videos 2a and 2b). Arterial pressure, fluoroscopy, and vital signs are closely monitored throughout the procedure. After each increment, high‐output pacing is repeated at the desired ablation site to assess phrenic nerve capture. We continue slowly instilling gas or fluid until either phrenic nerve capture is lost, or the patient becomes hemodynamically unstable. Based on our experience, a total of 50–150 mL of air and/or fluid is often required to be effective. This is done while monitoring effect and hemodyamics with support of preload to minimize the risk of tamponade.
Insertion of air into the epicardium in RAO (A) and LAO (B) views during an atrial fibrillation ablation case.
Insertion of air into the epicardium in RAO (A) and LAO (B) views during an atrial fibrillation ablation case.

Balloons
If we are unable to displace the phrenic nerve sufficiently with fluid and gas, we proceed with inserting a balloon. A separate epicardial access with a short deflectable sheath is required for phrenic nerve displacement using a balloon during epicardial ablation. Two types of balloons are commonly used: a vascular balloon (PTS sizing catheter balloon 20 × 3 mm; Braun Medical Inc., Bethlehem, PA, USA) or an esophageal balloon (Hercules 3 Stage esophageal balloon 18–20 × 5 mm; Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN). Our experience has shown successful outcomes with both balloon types. They have similar shapes, and there is no data favoring one over the other.
The deflated balloon is advanced through the sheath into the pericardial space and positioned at the site of interest—either opposite the endocardial site (Videos 3a and 3b) or directly at the epicardial site (Videos 4, 5a, 5b, 6). The balloon is then partially inflated with a diluted contrast medium (half contrast and half saline) with the goal of displacing the phrenic nerve away from the epicardium. High‐output pacing is repeated to assess phrenic nerve capture. If capture persists, the balloon location is adjusted or it is inflated further, and high‐output pacing is performed again. Adjustments can be made to fine‐tune the positioning and balloon inflation until the desired placement is achieved. We recommend partially deflating the balloon before repositioning it. Once phrenic nerve capture is no longer observed at the intended ablation site, we proceed with the ablation.
Inflation of balloon in the epicardium in RAO (A) and LAO (B) during an atrial fibrillation ablation case.
Inflation of balloon in the epicardium in RAO (A) and LAO (B) during an atrial fibrillation ablation case.
Inflation of balloon in the epicardium in RAO (A) and LAO (B) during an epicardial ventricular tachycardia ablation case.
Inflation of balloon in the epicardium in RAO (A) and LAO (B) during an epicardial ventricular tachycardia ablation case.
Inflation of balloon in the epicardium in RAO (A) and LAO (B) during an epicardial ventricular tachycardia ablation case.
ICE image during balloon inflation in the epicardium.
It is important to note that the location of the ablation catheter and balloon may be unstable on a beating heart. If either slip out of place during ablation, the phrenic may still be injured. Therefore, it is important to monitor the duration of ablation. We prefer to monitor the relative location of balloon and catheter using the electroanatomical map, ICE, and fluoroscopy as needed. In addition, we recommend pacing the phrenic from above continuously during ablation so that ablation can be promptly terminated if there is a change in diaphragmatic capture.

Next Steps
Despite employing these techniques, separating the phrenic nerve from the ablation site can still present challenges. In some areas it may be difficult or impossible to separate the ablation catheter a sufficient distance from the phrenic nerve. This is more likely a limitation near the right phrenic nerve as the myocardium is fixed to the thorax around the great vessels, diminishing the degree of displacement possible. In such situations, alternative approaches may be considered. One option is to use a cryoablation catheter which can offer an increased time before irreversible phrenic nerve injury is caused by ablation. In cases requiring more direct intervention, surgical epicardial access via thoracotomy can be considered (Video 7). This allows for direct visualization of the ablation site and manual displacement of the phrenic nerve before ablation. Additionally, the emergence of pulse field ablation presents a promising option for endocardial ablation, potentially minimizing the risk of phrenic nerve injury.
Epicardial ventricular tachycardia ablation via a left thoracotomy. The phrenic nerve was previously on top of the site of ablation, and has been displaced out of view under surgical retractors in this image.

Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

References
Phrenic Nerve Injury After Atrial Fibrillation Catheter Ablation
Left Phrenic Nerve Paresis Complicating Catheter Radiofrequency Ablation for Wolff‐Parkinson‐White Syndrome
Epicardial Ablation for Ventricular Tachycardia: A European Multicenter Study
Epicardial Ablation of Ventricular Tachycardia: An Institutional Experience of Safety and Efficacy
Phrenic Nerve Injury After Catheter Ablation: Should We Worry About This Complication?
Characterization of the Phrenic Nerve Course Within the Epicardial Substrate of Patients With Nonischemic Cardiomyopathy and Ventricular Tachycardia
Phrenic Nerve Limitation During Epicardial Catheter Ablation of Ventricular Tachycardia
Epicardial Phrenic Nerve Displacement During Catheter Ablation of Atrial and Ventricular Arrhythmias: Procedural Experience and Outcomes
Prevention of Phrenic Nerve Injury During Epicardial Ablation: Comparison of Methods for Separating the Phrenic Nerve From the Epicardial Surface
Phrenic Nerve Displacement by Intrapericardial Balloon Inflation During Epicardial Ablation of Ventricular Tachycardia: Four Case Reports
How Close Are the Phrenic Nerves to Cardiac Structures? Implications for Cardiac Interventionalists
Detection of Phrenic Nerves and Their Relation to Cardiac Anatomy Using 64‐Slice Multidetector Computed Tomography
Role of High‐Resolution Image Integration to Visualize Left Phrenic Nerve and Coronary Arteries During Epicardial Ventricular Tachycardia Ablation
Value of High‐Output Pace‐Mapping of the Right Phrenic Nerve for Enabling Safe Radiofrequency Ablation of Atrial Fibrillation: Insights From Three‐Dimensional Computed Tomography Segmentation
Visualization and Mapping of the Right Phrenic Nerve by Intracardiac Echocardiography During Atrial Fibrillation Ablation
Comparison of In Vivo Tissue Temperature Profile and Lesion Geometry for Radiofrequency Ablation With High Power‐Short Duration and Moderate Power‐Moderate Duration: Effects of Thermal Latency and Contact Force on Lesion Formation
Left Phrenic Nerve Pacing From the Left Subclavian Vein: Novel Method to Monitor for Left Phrenic Nerve Injury During Catheter Ablation
Diaphragmatic Electromyography During Cryoballoon Ablation: A Novel Concept in the Prevention of Phrenic Nerve Palsy
Use of Intracardiac Echocardiography for Early Detection of Phrenic Nerve Injury During Cryoballoon Pulmonary Vein Isolation
Interatrial Septal Pressure: A Novel Technique to Facilitate Safe Ablation of Periphrenic Right Atrial Tachycardias
Practical Guide to Ablation for Epicardial Ventricular Tachycardia: When to Get Access, How to Deal With Anticoagulation and How to Prevent Complications