Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Regulation to Alleviate Sickle Cell Disease Severity: A Promising Therapeutic Approach
Abstract
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a genetic disorder that affects millions of individuals worldwide. Chronic anemia, hemolysis and vasculopathy are the most common symptoms that arise from hemoglobin (Hb) polymerization, which is the primary event of SCD. The above process can lead to erythrocyte sickling. Therapeutic options for SCD remain limited, and novel therapies are still being evaluated for their effectiveness in particular populations. Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P), a significant bioactive sphingolipid, acts as a potent signal mediator, modulating several cellular functions. The potential role of erythrocyte-S1P in enhancing SCD severity has been previously reported by multiple studies. Therefore, the present review article aimed to summarize the effects of S1P on the progression of SCD and provide strategies to modulate this process. More specifically, it focused on erythrocyte-S1P as a potential target for reducing the complications associated with SCD, thus paving the way for the development of novel therapeutic strategies for SCD.

Introduction

Sickle cell disease (SCD)
Sickle cell disease, one of the most prevalent autosomal recessive disorders, affects millions of individuals worldwide. It has been reported that ∼20–25 million individuals suffer from SCD in the world. Each year, >312,000 neonates are born with SCD, with 64-75% of cases occurring in sub-Saharan Africa, where 50–90% of disease-related deaths occur in childhood. The molecular and cellular basis of SCD has been previously identified. Therefore, it is characterized by the altered production of adult hemoglobin (HbA) with an abnormal beta-globin chain called sickle hemoglobin (HbS). The primary function of Hb is to transport oxygen (O2) from the lungs to the tissues through cooperative binding and release. Under hypoxia, HbS is polymerized through the interactions between the two mutated deoxy-HbS molecules. The above polymerization leads to the formation of a helical structure, which facilitates red blood cell (RBC) sickling, eventually resulting in impaired blood rheology and vaso-occlusion (VOC). These symptoms, in turn, can contribute to the development of various complications, including painful VOC crises, ischemia, hemolytic anemia and acute chest syndrome. Currently, the approved drugs Voxelotor, Endari (L-Glutamine), Crizanlizumab and Hydroxyurea are considered as the most common treatment strategies for SCD. Although these drugs can reduce the severity of SCD and its complications, they each have specific limitations. For example, hydroxyurea may cause myelosuppression and teratogenicity, while Endari and Crizanlizumab show only a modest effectiveness in reducing the frequency of VOCs. Therefore, the current therapeutic approaches for SCD either fail to target the underlying disease pathology or cannot be effective for all patients. Therefore, novel therapeutic options that can fully ameliorate SCD manifestations are urgently needed.

Sphingosine-1-phospate (S1P) function and metabolism
S1P, a bioactive lipid, is a key sphin-golipid signaling molecule that regulates a wide range of biological processes. It exerts its effects either by activating cell surface S1P receptors or by interacting with intracellular regulatory proteins such as, histone deacetylases, protein kinase C delta, β-site amyloid precursor protein cleaving enzyme-1, TNF receptor-associated factor 2, Prohibitin 2, etc. and modulates intracellular functions by inducing signaling cascades as a second messenger. Therefore, maintaining S1P metabolism is essential for a normal and healthy system. In terms of metabolomics, the availability of ceramide, an upstream metabolite, and that of active S1P-synthesizing and -degrading enzymes can determine the intracellular S1P levels. Ceramide, the central hub of sphingolipid metabolism, is generated through both de novo and salvage pathways, which in turn are dependent on several other metabolites and enzymes. The ceramide-S1P rheostat serves a key role in determining the fate of a cell, since ceramide induces cell death, while S1P promotes cell survival.
S1P production commences with the ceramidase-mediated hydrolysis of ceramide to sphingosine and fatty acids. The intermediate sphingosine is then phosphorylated by two sphingosine kinases (SPHKs), namely SPHK1 and SPHK2. Therefore, ceramide availability and its active metabolizing enzymes are considered as the primary regulators of S1P production. Additionally, the generation of S1P can be also regulated by S1P-phosphatase (SGPP1), that dephosphorylates S1P back to sphingosine, and S1P-lyase (SGPL1), which irreversibly degrades S1P. The above findings indicate that the homeostasis of S1P is a multifactorial phenomenon.
Intracellular S1P can trigger several cellular signaling cascades in response to various stimuli. Previous studies suggest that S1P could directly modulate intracellular functions via inducing several signaling cascades as a second messenger or via acting as a ligand for five S1P specific receptors (S1PR1-S1PR5) after secretion into the extracellular environment. As a ligand, S1P binds and activates the above five specific cell surface receptors to activate different signaling pathways involved in several developmental and disease-related processes.

S1P in the circulatory system
Over the past few decades, several studies have suggested that intracellularly generated S1P can be exported to the circulatory system, where it acts in a paracrine or autocrine manner to regulate a wide spectrum of cellular effects, including cell proliferation, differentiation, survival and migration. Therefore, it plays a key role in the development of several diseases, including cancer, myocardial infarction, autoimmunity, osteoporosis and atherosclerosis. Emerging evidence has also suggested that circulatory S1P levels are significantly associated with the onset of numerous conditions, such as cardiovascular diseases, hypertension, stroke, kidney diseases, tumors, diabetes, multiple sclerosis and SCDs, thus supporting its potential as a biomarker for these conditions.
Under regular physiological conditions, the highest concentrations of S1P in the body are detected in blood, and more particularly in plasma, where its levels are much higher compared with those required for S1P mediated receptor activation. Types of cells that produce S1P in blood include RBCs, endothelial cells, platelets, mast cells and macrophages. Among these, RBCs have been identified as the primary source of circulating S1P, since they are characterized by high SPHK activities and lack of S1P catabolizing enzymes, S1P-lyase and S1P phosphohydrolase. Since erythrocytes lack the enzymes required for S1P synthesis from ceramide, they import sphingosine, the precursor of S1P, from the extracellular environment, where it is phosphorylated to S1P due to elevated SPHK activity. In addition, erythrocytes can import S1P from the surrounding microenvironment. Therefore, erythrocytes are well acclimatized to maintain high S1P concentrations in blood. The significant effect of erythrocyte-S1P (Ery-S1P) has been well documented in previous studies. A study demonstrated that anti S1P antibody-captured S1P was completely replaced by erythrocyte-derived S1P within 24 h. This was again supported by the finding that anemic patients not only suffered from a lower hematocrit, but also from lower plasma S1P-levels compared with healthy volunteers. Taken together, these findings indicated that S1P levels in plasma could be well-buffered by erythrocytes, thus serving a key role in maintaining plasma S1P concentrations (Figure 1). Several studies have suggested that Ery-S1P plays a major role in several conditions, such as Alzheimer’s disease, chronic kidney disease, vascular development and SCD.
Pathways involved in the generation and accumulation of Ery-S1P under normal physiological conditions. Sphingolipid metabolism occurs in intracellular matrix in which ceramide plays a central role from which sphingosine and then S1P is generated and released to the extracellular matrix and circulatory system. Sphingosine and S1P is also generated in extracellular matrix from ceramide and secreted to the circulatory system. Sphingosine is imported to erythrocytes from the surrounding environment and get phosphorylated to S1P by the enzyme sphingosine kinase 1 (SPHK1). Intact S1P is also imported directly to the erythrocyte from the surroundings. (SMase: sphingomyelinase; SMS: sphingomyelin synthase; SPT: serine palmitoyl transferase; CK: ceramide kinase; C1PP: ceramide 1 phosphate phosphatase; GCS: glucosyl/galactosyl ceramide synthase; GCase: glucocerebrosidase; CDase: ceramidase; CerS: ceramide synthase; SPHK1: sphingosine kinase 1; SPHK2: sphingosine kinase 2; SPPase: S1P phosphatase).

Hypoxia induces Ery-S1P production
Erythrocytes, the primary cell type responsible for O2 delivery, quickly respond to hypoxia, which is characterized by the inadequate supply of O2 to the whole body or a region of the body, via increasing their O2 delivery ability. A previous study suggested that the enhanced erythrocyte organic phosphate content could be involved in the increased availability of O2 to the tissues. Hypoxia can be considered as a critical player in SCD, since patients commonly experience O2 deficiency due to the reduced number of erythrocytes. During hypoxia, ATP is released from the cell and is converted to adenosine, thus extracellular adenosine level is increased, eventually enhancing signaling through A2B adenosine receptor (ADORA2B). Similarly, adenosine concentration is significantly increased in SCD, contributing to disease pathology via activating adenosine receptors on RBCs. This finding was further verified following treatment of SCD mice with PEG-ADA (polyethylene glycol–modified adenosine deaminase), a drug used to reduce adenosine levels. Therefore, mice treatment with PEG-ADA attenuated the production of adenosine and 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (2,3-BPG), an erythroid specific metabolite that promotes the release of O2 from Hb, ultimately decreasing sickling compared with the control group. Furthermore, treatment with an analog of adenosine, 5’-N-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine (NECA), enhanced 2,3-BPG generation in normal cultured mouse and human erythrocytes. In 2016, Sun et al. suggested that Ery-S1P could be a significant hypoxia-responsive biolipid. The study demonstrated that Ery-S1P levels increased significantly in response to hypoxia induced by high-altitude, due to the up-regulation of erythrocyte-SPHK1 (Ery-SPHK1). This increase was accompanied by elevated erythrocyte 2,3 BPG levels and an increased P50 value the partial O2 pressure required to reach 50% Hb-O2 saturation. Using SPHK1 knock-out mice and reciprocal bone marrow transplantation experiments, the study further indicated that the enhanced Ery-SPHK1-mediated S1P production was necessary for the hypoxia-induced elevation of 2,3-BPG levels and subsequent enhancement of erythrocyte O2-releasing capacity. Additionally, 2,3 BPG could be potentially released through glycolysis, facilitated by glycolytic enzymes, such as GAPDH, which are released when S1P interacts with deoxy Hb and becomes anchored to the membrane. Overall, the aforementioned findings indicated that hypoxia-induced adenosine could regulate the function of erythrocyte 2,3-BPG, which could be further associated with increased Ery-S1P production mediated by enhanced Ery-SPHK1 enzyme activity (Figure 2).
Hypoxia generated by high altitude induces the mechanism to supersede the condition to bring back to normoxia by delivering O2, generated through S1P-pathway, to peripheral tissue. Hypoxia induces the increased activation of Ery-SPHK1 and hence increased production of Ery-S1P. Generated S1P interact with deoxy-Hb and activate 2,3-BPG produced through glycolysis pathway and enhance the release of O2. (SPHK1 – sphingosine kinase 1; S1P – sphingosine 1 phosphate; 2,3-BPG - 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate).

Erythrocyte Sickling: Association between adenosine and 2,3-BPG through Ery-SPHK1 activation
The molecular basis of sickling—the fundamental pathogenic process in SCD—remains poorly under stood. The genetic basis of sickling in patients with SCD has been well established. A mutation in the β-globin chain forms a hydrophobic patch in HbS, promoting its polymerization. The resulting long polymers distort RBCs into a sickled shape. In response to hypoxia, multiple factors within erythrocytes are altered, contributing to the pathogenesis of SCD. Therefore, prior identifying an association between adenosine and Ery-SPHK1 in SCD, studies primarily focused on the molecular mechanisms underlying adenosine and 2,3-BPG-mediated erythrocyte sickling. In nor mal erythrocytes, adenosine could enhance 2,3-BPG production, thus promoting O2 release and preventing acute ischemic tissue injury. By contrast, elevated adenosine and 2,3-BPG levels in transgenic SCD mice could serve a key role in the sickling process. Treatment with PEG-ADA restored the hypoxia-induced elevated adenosine levels, thus decreasing sickling and attenuating hemolysis. This finding suggests that elevated adenosine levels may promote erythrocyte sickling and hemolysis, particularly during acute sickle crises triggered by hypoxia. Another study demonstrated that adenosine could induce SPHK1 activity in erythrocytes via the activation of ADORA2B-mediated signaling pathways in both SCD and normal human and mouse erythrocytes. These studies established an association between hypoxia-induced adenosine and Ery-SPHK1 enzyme and hence with Ery-S1P, thus high lighting the role of S1P in the molecular mechanisms underlying erythrocyte sickling in SCD.

The loop: Hypoxia - Ery-S1P 2,3-BPG - RBC sickling
In patients with SCD, hypoxia, one of the most common symptoms of the disease, does not manifest until several months after birth due to the presence of fetal Hb (HbF). It then begins when HbF is replaced by HbS. HbS polymerization, which leads to the distortion of erythrocytes and low O2 levels. A study revealed that there was a delay period in the polymerization kinetics of deoxygenated HbS prior the formation of fibers. In turn, this delay allowed the majority of cells to escape the microvasculature, making HbS disease survivable. Therefore, extending this period could reduce the probability of erythrocyte sickling in the microcirculation, thus ultimately attenuating the adhesion of blood cells to the vascular endothelium. The mechanism underlying SCD severity could be associated with the formation of a loop. The genetic background of a patient with SCD predisposes RBC sickling mediated by deoxy-HbS polymerization. In turn, sickling promotes hypoxia, which can sequentially activate Ery-SPHK1 through adenosine, thus enhancing Ery-S1P levels. The induction of 2,3-BPG via Ery S1P-mediated signaling cascade facilitates the release of O2 from HbS. The accumulation of deoxy-HbS in RBCs further promotes polymerization, thus perpetuating sickling (Figure 3). In this loop, Ery-S1P and other members play a critical role in enhancing 2,3-BPG levels and promoting sickling. Therefore, modulating Ery-S1P production and accumulation in patients with SCD could reduce 2,3-BPG-mediated deoxygenation, thus mitigating sickling and its associated comorbidities.
Formation of a loop: Figure represents the mechanism behind the induction of disease severity in SCD patients. The metabolite sphingosine, Ery-S1P and the enzyme Ery-SPHK1 play a major role in this loop. (HbF - hemoglobin F ; HbS hemoglobin S; ADORA2B A2B adenosine receptor; PKA – protein kinase A; SPHK1 – sphingosine kinase 1; S1P – sphingosine 1 phosphate; 2,3-BPG - 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate).

Modulating the production and accumulation Ery-S1P
As discussed above, erythrocytes in normal physiology exhibit high SPHK1 activity, high S1P concentration and lack of S1P degrading enzymes. Therefore, they act as the major reservoir of plasma S1P. By contrast, the levels of S1P are generally very low in peripheral tissues compared with blood. The S1P concentration gradient between the circulation and peripheral tissues plays a significant role in various physiological processes, including lymphocyte trafficking, vascular integrity, bone homeostasis, neovascularization, and antigen presentation. In a previous study, the significant role of SPHK1, but not that of SPHK2, in synthesizing circulating S1P was also highlighted using a mice model. In the last decade, S1P and its synthesizing enzyme, SPHK1, have gained increasing attention due to their novel role in SCD. In 2014, Zhang et al reported that S1P was upregulated in humans and mice with SCD via the enhanced activity of Ery-SPHK1, but independently of S1P-receptor activation. The above study suggested that S1P generation through the increased activity of Ery-SPHK1 in patients with SCD could be involved in erythrocyte sickling and pro mote disease progression. SPHK1 activity was further increased in response to hypoxia. However, SPHK1 inhibition notably decreased Ery-S1P levels in erythrocytes, eventually attenuating erythrocyte sickling. Addition ally, only high S1P concentrations, but not low ones, could accelerate deoxy-HbS aggregation in a receptor in dependent manner. The above studies highlighted the inevitable role of S1P in erythrocyte sickling in SCD during hypoxia. However, the particular factors involved in the selective increase in Ery-SPHK1 activity and Ery S1P production in SCD erythrocytes remain unknown. A recent study conducted in clinical trials showed an altered sphingolipid metabolism in the RBCs of SCD patients compared to healthy controls. Similarly, Similarly, a strong correlation of upregulated levels of circulating S1P was reported in a metabolomic correlation analysis performed using Berkeley SCD mice and SCD patients. In an ongoing study, we have identified a significant association of increased SPHK1 activity and S1P levels in the erythrocytes with SCD (data not published). Further studies on the molecular mechanism by which this elevated S1P enhance the severity of SCD are required in this area. Therefore, intervention in one of the following phases could modulate the elevation of Ery-S1P in individuals with SCD, thus assisting to reverse S1P-induced erythrocyte sickling and its com plications during hypoxia. These key phases include: i. Release of free sphingosine to the circulatory system; ii. uptake of sphingosine by erythrocytes; iii. increased activity of erythrocyte Ery-SPHK1; and iv. accumulation of Ery-S1P. Via modulating one or combination of these phases, could possibly reduce S1P concentrations in erythrocytes and alleviate its subsequent pathological effects in SCD.

Diminishing the release of free sphingosine in the circulatory system
Sphingosine, the substrate for SPHK in the production of S1P, exists in two forms which are ubiquitously expressed throughout the body, namely dihydrosphingosine or sphinganine (d18:0) and sphingosine (d18:1). Dihydrosphingosine is involved in the de novo synthesis of ceramide mediated by serine palmitoyl transferase. Sphingosine is generated and released through two pathways. Primarily, ceramidase hydrolyzes ceramides to produce sphingosine, which is then released from the cells. Secondly, in several cell types, S1P dephosphorylation can lead to the production of sphingosine species. A study reported that in the plasma of healthy individuals, sphingosine concentration ranged between 25-50 nM. Among the different isoforms of ceramidases, including neutral-, alkaline and acid-ceramidase, only alkaline-ceramidase-2 has been identified as a key enzyme providing sphingosine for S1P synthesis in whole blood, plasma, erythrocytes and platelets. However, whether alkaline-ceramidase-2 can hydrolyze ceramides in hematopoietic cells to facilitate the release of sphingosine to the circulatory system or whether secreted ceramidase from hematopoietic cells can hydrolyze circulating ceramides to provide sphingosines for erythrocytes and platelets, the major source of S1P in the blood, remains elusive. In addition, it has been reported that sphingolipid-metabolizing enzymes, such as sphingomyelinases (SMase), which convert sphingomyelin to ceramide, and ceramidases, not only act in intracellular organelles, but also in the extracellular spaces, thus contributing to the release of sphingosine in the circulatory system. However, the particular source of plasma sphingosines remains unknown.
Previous studies also demonstrated that inhibition of serine palmitoyl transferase, the rate-limiting enzyme of de novo ceramide synthesis, using its potent inhibitor myriocin, could markedly reduce the plasma levels of major sphingolipids, including sphingomyelin, ceramide and S1P, and increase plasma phosphatidylcholine levels. This finding indicated that de novo ceramide synthesis could be a major source of sphingosine production and release into the circulatory system, thus acting as a substrate for Ery-SPHK1 for the production of Ery-S1P. Platelets serve a significant role in the release of circulatory sphingosine. Additionally, sphingosine can be also released into plasma through the degradation of membrane-bound sphingomyelin to ceramide. This process is catalyzed by membrane-bound acid SMase and neutral ceramidase. Targeting key enzymes involved in sphingosine production through specific inhibitors could be a promising strategy to reduce the availability of sphingosine into plasma. Further studies are needed in this area to elucidate the exact source of plasma sphingosine, so that the availability of sphingosine for the production of Ery-S1P can be mitigated. In turn, this could reduce the production and accumulation of S1P in erythrocytes, thus improving the hypoxia-induced S1P-mediated erythrocyte sickling in patients with SCD.

Inhibiting the uptake of sphingosine by erythrocytes
In various cell types, it has been reported that sphingosine and sphingosine-like molecules enter cells via plasma membrane-derived intracellular endosomes, while the conversion of sphingosine to S1P through SPHK1 is essential for vesicle clearance. It has also been suggested that sphingosine, due to its highly am phipathic nature, can enter cells via diffusion through the plasma membrane. Using Ter119, a specific erythrocyte plasma membrane marker, a study revealed that the uptake of sphingosine by erythrocytes was not endocytosis, but through an influx mechanism during its phosphorylation by SPHK1. Exogenously added circulatory sphingosine could be efficiently absorbed by erythrocytes, readily converted to S1P by Ery-SPHK1, ultimately being released to the circulatory system through a major facilitator superfamily domain containing protein 2a (Mfsd2a)-depended pathway. Taken together, the above findings suggested that erythrocytes could require both active intracellular SPHK1 enzyme and its product S1P for sphingosine uptake from the circulatory system. Therefore, deregulating Ery-SPHK1 activity could be a possible strategy to minimize sphingosine uptake by erythrocytes.

Inhibiting Ery-SPHK1 activity
SPHK1 activity can be intervened at three levels, namely reducing circulating adenosine levels, inhibiting the activation of adenosine receptor ADORA2B using a receptor antagonist, and directly blocking SPHK1 enzyme activity using the corresponding inhibitors. Therefore, previous studies showed that excess plasma adenosine levels could induce SPHK1 activity in erythrocytes via activating ADORA2B adenosine receptor. In addition, another study demonstrated that erythrocyte treatment with ethylcarboxamidoadenosine (NECA), a potent nonmetabolizable adenosine analog, notably enhanced 2,3-BPG production. Conversely, reducing circulating adenosine levels using PEG-ADA led to a significant decrease in the percentage of sickled RBCs and reticulocytes in SCD transgenic mice. Similarly, RBC treatment with the ADORA2B antagonist, PSB1115, could also increase the half-life of RBCs via mitigating the production of 2,3-BPG and the percentage of sickled cells in transgenic SCD mice, thus supporting the role of ADORA2B receptor in activating SPHK1. The specificity of only ADORA2B receptor, and not of the other adenosine receptors (ADORA1, ADORA2A and ADORA3), in inducing 2,3-BPG production was also verified following human RBC treatment with NECA, 2,3-BPG stimulating agent. The results showed that only ADORA2B-specific inhibitors, such as MRS1754 and BAY 60-6583, could promote the production of 2,3-BPG. Furthermore, a previous study showed that INCB106385 and TT702, two orally bioavailable drugs that are used as an adenosine receptor antagonists, could effectively bind to ADORA2B and inhibit its downstream signaling cascades in tumor models. Similarly, 5PSB-603 and PSB111, two other ADORA2B-specific antagonist, could also inhibit ADORA2B-mediated signaling cascade. More specifically, 5PSB-603 showed anti-inflammatory effects and reduced ROS levels, while PSB111 could alleviate SCD related complications, such as priapism, in transgenic mice. Another study identified ISAM-R56A, an antagonist for ADORA2B, can be a potent inhibitor for ADORA2B-mediated signaling. Therefore, the effects of the aforementioned antagonists on inhibiting ADORA2B indicated that they could serve as a viable strategy to treat patients with SCD via inhibiting the adenosine-induced SPHK1 activation. The clinical relevance of using inhibitors of adenosine receptors approved by FDA as a therapeutic approach for various human diseases have been reviewed and discussed recently. Lack of receptor selectivity and therapeutic molecule delivery into the target tissue are evaluated as the major limitations of these drugs.
SK1-I, a sphingosine analog, and PF543 can specifically inhibit the activity of SPHK1, but not that of SPHK2. The treatment of cultured erythrocytes isolated from SCD transgenic mice with the above two inhibitors inhibited SPHK1 activity and hypoxia induced erythrocyte sickling in a dose-dependent manner. Among them, PF543, a more efficient inhibitor, significantly reduced SPHK1 activity, the percentage of sickled cells, and S1P-induced hemolysis and inflamma tion, while it increased the survival rates of transgenic SCD mice. Furthermore, the inhibition of SPHK1 by the PF543 inhibitor could also significantly reduce the uptake of sphingosine by RBCs. PF543 is the most potent selective SPHK1 inhibitor to date with a maximum inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 2.0 nM with a T0.5 of 1.2 h pharmacokinetics in blood samples. A recent study demonstrated that three other compounds, namely ZINC06823429, ZINC95421501 and ZINC9542107, could more efficiently inhibit SPHK1 activity compared with PF543. This study also showed that ZINC06823429 could tightly bind to the catalytic site of SPHK1 to maintain its stability. Inhibitors of SPHK1 are used as a therapeutic approach for various clinical trials, especially for various tumors, and some of them finished its phase 3 clinical trials for its efficacy and safety. These findings suggested that inhibiting SPHK1 using the aforementioned inhibitors could be also considered as a potent treatment strategy for patients with SCD.

Reducing the concentration of Ery-S1P
Facilitating the release of S1P from erythrocytes into the circulatory system could serve as a potential approach to reduce the levels of accumulated Ery-S1P and mitigate its consecutive effects. Plasma S1P is transported bound to HDLs, LDLs, VLDLs and albumin. Among these, HDL and albumin remain as major transporters and they induces endogenous triggers of S1P release from erythrocytes. It has been identified that HDL prevents S1P degradation by ecto-phosphatase, the degradative enzymes that rapidly clear circulating S1P and release sphingosine for the synthesis of intracellular S1P by SPHK1. It has also been identified that hepatic sinusoidal endothelial cells also has primary role in degradation of plasma S1P. The transporter protein Mfsd2b, which is highly expressed in erythrocytes and platelets, is involved in delivering approximately half of the plasma S1P pool. Experimental evidence from Mfsd2b knock-out mice, which exhibited high plasma sphingosine levels due to reduced RBC sphingosine uptake, and low plasma S1P levels due to decreased Ery-S1P release into plasma, verified the necessity of Mfsd2b protein for Ery-S1P transport into plasma. Additionally, other studies showed that a proton gradient, dependent on D95 and T175 residues, was necessary for the Mfsd2b-mediated release and transport of Ery-S1P. Identifying factors that could trigger this Mfsd2b-mediated pathway could be a viable approach to increase the release of Ery-S1P into circulation.
Due to their short half-life, circulating S1Ps are rapidly degraded by lipid phosphate phosphohydrolase 1 (LPP1), a S1P degradative ecto-enzyme. LPP1 is the only enzyme that can degrade circulating S1P, since it is commonly located on the extracellular space of endothelial cells of the human pulmonary circulation. Therefore, the released S1P in the circulatory system can be degraded by endothelial LPP1. Inducing the activity of LPP1 using specific inducers could be considered as an effective strategy to reduce plasma S1P levels, thus facilitating the release of Ery-S1P to maintain the optimal plasma S1P levels. Similarly, another study demonstrated that spinster homolog 2 (SPNS2), another reputed S1P transporter in endothelial cells to the lymph and blood, could serve as plasma S1P pool. Therefore, inhibiting the SPNS2-mediated release of S1P into circulation using SPNS2-specific inhibitors could decrease S1P plasma levels, which could, in turn, promote Ery-S1P release via Mfsd2 pathways to restore the optimal levels. A recent functional analyses study identified that Spns2 exports S1P via a facilitated diffusion method which could be attenuated by locking Spns2 in the inward-facing state using 16d, a SPNS2 inhibitor. Intervening the above regulatory mechanisms could promote the reduction of Ery-S1P levels and mitigate its adverse effects. The four key phases where the abovementioned modulations could be applied to lower Ery-S1P levels are illustrated in Figure 4.
The figure showing four phases where modulations can be applied to reduce the production of Ery-S1P.

Limitations and challenges of current research on Ery-S1P in SCD
Despite significant advancements in understanding the roles of S1P in inflammation, vascular biology and immune modulation, the particular mechanisms underlying the effects of Ery S1P on SCD remain obscure. Currently, there is a lack of clinical trials establishing a direct association between altered Ery-S1P levels and SCD severity. Furthermore, the inconsistency in the measurement of Ery-S1P and other S1P-related biomarkers in the blood due to the lack of standardized protocols limits their potential as reliable biomarkers for disease diagnosis and progression. Additionally, complete remodeling of the complex mechanisms of human diseases, such as SCD, in animal models remains challenging due to species differences in S1P metabolism. As mentioned previously, deregulated sphingosine uptake and its phosphorylation by SPHK1 in erythrocyte occurs through an influx mechanism. Finding a possible strategy to minimize this influx mechanism is also a challenge as it is triggered by the concentrations of both substrate and product of SPHK1 enzyme. Similarly, some of the inhibitors of SPHK1 show severe toxic effects due its poor selectivity and multiple off-target including other protein kinases. Hence, finding specific inhibitors for erythrocyte SPHK1 is another greater challenge. In addition, S1P modulators have been associated with some safety concerns, such as cardiovascular risks, which poses a significant challenge in SCD treatment, since patients with SCD are already at high risk of developing VOC and ischemia. While the roles of Ery-S1P in SCD are currently being investigated, significant challenges remain to fully understand its underlying mechanisms and translating these insights into effective clinical interventions. Currently, S1P-based drug development and its applications in various disease conditions are being investigated in clinical trials. However, to date, no clinical trials have reported the use of S1P or Ery S1P-based drugs for the treatment of SCD.
In conclusion, S1P could play a crucial role in augmenting HbS-induced hypoxia in patients with SCD via synergizing secondary hypoxic metabolic pathways to promote erythrocyte sickling. Developing effective strategies to reprogram metabolic pathways and nullify Ery-S1P generation could help reduce erythrocyte sickling and disease progression in patients with SCD, thus paving the way for innovative therapeutic developments in this field.
Disclosure Authors have no conflict of interests, and the work was not supported or funded by any drug company.

References
Starting to understand the natural history of sickle cell disease in African countries
Global epidemiology of sickle haemoglobin in neonates: a contemporary geostatistical model-based map and population estimates
Advances in the diagnosis and treatment of sickle cell disease
Pathophysiology and recent therapeutic insights of sickle cell disease
Crystal structure of carbonmonoxy sickle hemoglobin in R-state conformation
Sickle Cell Anemia
Metabolic Reprogramming in Sickle Cell Diseases: Pathophysiology and Drug Discovery Opportunities
The Role of miRNAs as Therapeutic Tools in Sickle Cell Disease
Sphingosine-1-Phosphate (S1P) and S1P Signaling Pathway Modulators, from Current Insights to Future Perspectives
The role of sphingosine 1-phosphate in autophagy and related disorders
BACE1 activity is modulated by cell-associated sphingosine-1-phosphate
Sphingosine 1-phosphate signaling and its role in disease
Lack of sphingosine 1-phosphate-degrading enzymes in erythrocytes
Sphingolipid breakdown products: anti-proliferative and tumor-suppressor lipids
A Rheostat of Ceramide and Sphingosine-1-Phosphate as a Determinant of Oxidative Stress-Mediated Kidney Injury
Regulation of stem cell pluripotency and neural differentiation by lysophospholipids
Tumor necrosis factor-α enhances microvascular tone and reduces blood flow in the cochlea via enhanced sphingosine 1-phosphate signaling
T-bet-dependent S1P5 expression in NK cells promotes egress from lymph nodes and bone marrow
Sphingosine 1-phosphate receptor modulators in multiple sclerosis treatment: A practical review
Sphingosine-1-phosphate lyase deficiency produces a pro-inflammatory response while impairing neutrophil trafficking
The role of sphingosine 1-phosphate metabolism in brain health and disease
Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Metabolism and Signaling in Kidney Diseases
Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Signaling in Cardiovascular Diseases
Targeting Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Signaling in Breast Cancer
Elevated sphingosine-1-phosphate promotes sickling and sicklecell disease progression
Quantitative measurement of sphingosine 1-phosphate by radioreceptor binding assay
Redistribution of sphingosine 1-phosphate by sphingosine kinase 2 contributes to lymphopenia
Erythrocytes serve as a reservoir for cellular and extracellular sphingosine 1-phosphate
Vascular endothelium as a contributor of plasma sphingosine 1-phosphate
Mechanisms of sphingosine and sphingosine 1-phosphate generation in human platelets
Expression of SphK1 impairs degranulation and motility of RBL-2H3 mast cells by desensitizing S1P receptors
Haka AS, at al. Sphingosine kinases are not required for inflammatory responses in macrophages
Metabolism and functional effects of sphingolipids in blood cells
Sphingosine but not sphingosine-1-phosphate stimulates suicidal erythrocyte death
Local inactivation of sphingosine 1-phosphate in lymph nodes induces lymphopenia
Plasma levels of sphingosine 1-phosphate are strongly correlated with haematocrit, but variably restored by red blood cell transfusions
Sphingosine 1-phosphate Decreases Erythrocyte Dysfunction Induced by β-Amyloid
Erythrocyte Metabolic Reprogramming by Sphingo sine 1-Phosphate in Chronic Kidney Disease and Therapies
Erythrocyte-derived sphin gosine 1-phosphate is essential for vascular development
Effect of altitude on oxygen binding by hemoglobin and on organic phosphate levels
Endogenous adenosine produced during hypoxia attenuates neutrophil accumulation: coordination by extracellular nucleotide metabolism
New insights into sickle cell disease: a disease of hypoxia
Detrimental effects of adenosine signaling in sickle cell disease
Sphingosine-1-phosphate promotes erythrocyte glycolysis and oxygen release for adaptation to high-altitude hypoxia
Adenosine Is A Common Factor Regulating Erythrocyte 2,3-Bisphosphate Induction In Normal Individuals At High Altitude and In Patients With Sickle Cell Disease
Pathophysiology and therapy for haemoglobinopathies. Part I: sickle cell disease
Adenosine signaling in normal and sickle ery throcytes and beyond
Elevated adenosine signaling via adenosine A2B receptor induces normal and sickle erythrocyte sphingosine kinase 1 activity
Delay time of hemoglobin S polymerization prevents most cells from sickling in vivo
Kinetics and mechanism of deoxyhemoglobin S gelation: a new approach to understanding sickle cell disease
The delay time in sickle cell disease after 40 years: A paradigm assessed
Hemoglobin S gelation and sickle cell disease
Editorial: Delay time of gelation: a possible determinant of clinical severity in sickle cell disease
Sphingosine 1-phosphate in blood: function, metabolism, and fate
Mice deficient in sphingosine kinase 1 are rendered lymphopenic by FTY720
Sphingosine 1-phosphate: Lipid signaling in pathology and therapy
Sphingosine 1-Phosphate Induces Erythrocytes Sickling in Sickle Cell Disease By Promoting Hemoglobin S Aggregation
Patients with sickle cell disease presented dys-regulated plasma Rb/K ratio and Gamma-glutamyl cycle in red blood cells
Metabolic correlates to critical speed in murine models of sickle cell disease
De novo sphingolipid biosynthesis: a necessary, but dangerous, pathway
Ceramidases, roles in sphingolipid metabolism and in health and disease
An overview of sphingolipid metabolism: from synthesis to breakdown
Dobrzyn´ A, Baranowski M. Concentrations of sphingosine and sphinganine in plasma of patients with type 2 diabetes
Alkaline ceramidase 2 is essential for the homeostasis of plasma sphingoid bases and their phosphates
Mfsd2b is essential for the sphingosine-1-phosphate export in erythrocytes and platelets
Ceramide/sphingosine/sphingosine 1-phosphate metabolism on the cell surface and in the extracellular space
Effect of myriocin on plasma sphingolipid metabolism and atherosclerosis in apoE-deficient mice
Erythrocytes efficiently utilize exogenous sphingosines for S1P synthesis and export via Mfsd2b
Mechanisms of sphingosine and sphingosine 1-phosphate generation in human platelets
Sphingomyelinase activity in human platelets
Human vascular endothelial cells are a rich and regulatable source of secretory sphingomyelinase. Implications for early atherogenesis and ceramide-mediated cell signaling
Sphingosine and Sphingosine Kinase 1 Involvement in Endocytic Membrane Trafficking
Erythrocyte-derived sphingosine 1-phosphate is essential for vascular development
Validation of an anti-sphingosine-1-phosphate antibody as a potential therapeutic in reducing growth, invasion, and angiogenesis in multiple tumor lineages
Erythrocyte adaptive metabolic reprogramming under physiological and pathological hypoxia
Abstract LB157: Discovery and characteri zation of INCB106385: a novel A2A/A2B adenosine receptor antagonist, as a cancer immunotherapy
National Cancer Institute: A2A/A2B adenosine receptor antagonist INCB106385
Adenosine A2B receptor antagonist TT-702
PSB 603 a known selective adenosine A2B receptor antagonist - has anti-inflammatory activity in mice
Excess adenosine A2B receptor signaling contributes to priapism through HIF-1α mediated reduction of PDE5 gene expression
A2B adenosine receptor antagonists rescue lymphocyte activity in adenosine-producing patient-derived cancer models
Drugs targeting adenosine signaling path ways: A current view
Therapeutic potential of the sphingosine kinase 1 inhibitor, PF-543
Identifying novel sphingosine kinase 1 inhibitors as therapeutics against breast cancer
Sphingosine kinase inhibitors: A patent review
Sources, metabolism, and regulation of circulating sphingosine-1-phosphate
Involvement of Band3 in the effiux of sphingosine 1-phosphate from erythrocytes
Characterization of the ATP-dependent sphingosine 1-phosphate transporter in rat erythrocytes
Yamaguchi A, Nishi T. MFSD2B is a sphingosine 1-phosphate transporter in erythroid cells
Sphingosine 1-phosphate-related metabolism in the blood vessel
Lipid phosphate phosphohydrolase-1 degrades exogenous glycerolipid and sphingolipid phosphate esters
Intracellular generation of sphingosine 1-phosphate in human lung endothelial cells: role of lipid phosphate phosphatase-1 and sphingosine kinase 1
Mfsd2b and Spns2 are essential for maintenance of blood vessels during development and in anaphylactic shock
Discovery of Potent, Orally Bioavailable Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Transporter (Spns2) Inhibitors
2-Aminobenzoxazole Derivatives as Potent Inhibitors of the Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Transporter Spinster Homolog 2 (Spns2)
Structural and functional insights into Spns2-mediated transport of sphingosine-1-phosphate
Targeting the Sphingosine Kinase/Sphingosine-1-Phosphate Signaling Axis in Drug Discovery for Cancer Therapy
Icanbelimod (CBP-307), a next-generation Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor modulator, in healthy men: pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, safety, and tolerability in a randomized trial in Australia
Targeting sphingosine 1-phosphate and sphingosine kinases in pancreatic cancer: mechanisms and therapeutic potential