Neurocognitive evaluation in patients with intracranial Meningiomas: A systematic review
Introduction
Meningiomas remain the most frequently occurring intracranial, extra-axial, space-occupying lesions. Aspects such as neurocognitive function and quality of life become more and more crucial. Several meningioma patients present with evidence of neurocognitive impairment, behavioral disorders, or even psychiatric symptoms.
Research question
This review synthesizes the current literature on neurocognitive evaluation in intracranial meningioma patients, focusing on the range of cognitive domains affected (Q1), the assessment tools utilized (Q2), and the relationship between tumor characteristics and cognitive outcomes (Q3).
Materials and methods
A PRISMA-compliant systematic review was performed. We searched PubMed, Scopus, and Dimensions, to identify relevant studies published to date. Additionally, we examined the reference lists of the selected studies. The most recent literature search was conducted on January 31, 2025.
Results
We included 30 studies. The neurocognitive domains examined encompass a range of functions, such as executive functioning, memory, attention, perceptual speed, visuospatial abilities, verbal fluency, cognitive flexibility, and cognitive function. The most frequently used tests as demonstrated in current literature are WAIS, RAVLT, WMS, TMT, Stroop test and CNS Vital signs. Tumor size, increased age, peritumoral edema and skull base meningiomas were all associated with worse performance in various cognitive domains.
Discussion and conclusion
Our analysis reveals that meningiomas can significantly impact cognitive function, affecting various domains such as memory, executive function, attention, and language. Most of these domains seem to improve postoperatively. A common battery test for neurocognitive evaluation in all meningioma patients would provide us with more comparable and reliable results.
Highlights
Meningioma patients present with evidence of neurocognitive impairment.
Most of the cognitive domains seem to improve postoperatively.
Even after surgery, cognition remains impaired compared to healthy controls.
Several factors are associated with worse cognitive function.

Abbreviations
AVLT
Auditory Verbal Learning Test
BPRS
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale
CFQ
Cognitive Failures Questionnaire
CNS
Central Nervous System
CNS VS
Central Nervous System Vital Signs
CFT
Complex Figure Test
COWAT
Controlled Oral Word Association Test
CST
Concept Shifting Test
CTT
Color Trial Test-I
CVLT
California Verbal Learning Test
DART
Dutch Adult Reading Test
DFR
Delay Free Recall
DSST
Digit Symbol Substitution Test
DVT
Digit Vigilance Test
EORTC
European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
HADS
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
HVLTR
Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-Revised
LDST
Letter–Digit Substitution Test
MMSE
Mini Mental State Examination
MTCF
Modified Taylor Complex Figure Test
NBV
N-back verbal test
NPI
Neuropsychiatric Inventory
NPF
Neuropsychological Functioning
RAVLT
Rey's Auditory Verbal Learning
RBMT
Rivermead Behavioral Memory Test Extended Version
RCFT
Rey Complex Figure Test
ROCF
Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test
RWT
Regensburger Verbal Fluency Test
SCWT
Stroop Color-Word Test
SF-36
Short-Form Health Survey
Tdcs
transcranial Direct Current Stimulation
TMS
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
TMT
Trail Making Test
TPS
Transcranial Pulse Stimulation
VLMT
Verbal Learning and Memory Test
VmPFC
ventromedial Prefrontal Cortex
WAIS
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
WCST
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test
WMS
Weschler Memory Scale
WMT
Working Memory Task

Introduction
Meningiomas remain the most frequently occurring intracranial, extra-axial, space-occupying lesions, representing one-third of all diagnosed primary Central Nervous System (CNS) tumors, and originating from the meningothelial cells of the arachnoid. The 2021 World Health Organization classification of central nervous system tumors provides a thorough framework for understanding meningiomas' histopathological subtypes and molecular characteristics, which is crucial for guiding treatment strategies and predicting patient outcomes. Meningiomas are in their majority benign tumors, but they can cause a variety of neurological symptoms due to their location and size, leading to compression of the adjacent brain structures. While in some cases patients may be asymptomatic, in other cases symptoms can range from headaches and visual disturbances to seizures, neurological deficits, and neurocognitive and behavioral disorders, depending on the tumor's location..
As a result of current therapeutical advances, meningioma patients have constantly improved and prolonged survival rates,. Therefore, aspects such as neurocognitive function and quality of life become more and more crucial. Several meningioma patients present with evidence of neurocognitive impairment, behavioral disorders, or even psychiatric symptoms, which are associated to the mass effect caused by the meningioma, and/or to the associated peritumoral edema,,. The precise incidence of such symptomatology is difficult to be established, due to the variability in tumor location, size, growth rate, and heterogeneity of assessment methods used across published studies. In addition, there are substantial controversies regarding the underlying pathogenetic mechanism,,.
This review synthesizes the current literature on neurocognitive evaluation in intracranial meningioma patients, focusing on the range of cognitive domains affected (Q1), the assessment tools utilized (Q2), and the relationship between tumor characteristics and cognitive outcomes (Q3). By examining the available evidence, we may provide a comprehensive understanding of the neurocognitive impact of meningiomas and identify areas for future research and clinical practice improvements.

Material and methods

Information sources
This systematic review followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, ensuring a rigorous and comprehensive synthesis of existing knowledge. We thoroughly searched electronic databases, including PubMed, Scopus, and Dimensions, to identify relevant studies published to date. Additionally, we examined the reference lists of the selected studies. The most recent literature search was conducted on January 31, 2025.

Search strategy
Our systematic search strategy based on the PICO criteria.
Table 1
Frame	Keywords	Search	Inclusion criteria	Exclusion Criteria	Sources	 	Patients	# 1. “meningioma”	#1 AND #2 AND #3	“RCTs” OR “observational studies” OR “case series” OR “propensity-score matched studies” about neurocognitive evaluation in meningioma patientsPublished in peer-reviewed journalsCase reports or case series with more than five patientsEnglish languageAdults	Studies not reporting on neurocognition in meningioma patientsStudies on pediatric populationStudies solely reporting on other types of CNS tumors (e.g., gliomas)Case reports or case series with less than five patientsNon-EnglishIrrelevant title or abstractIrrelevant full textStudy design other than RCTs/observational studies/case series, including editorials, reviews (included systematic reviews), letters to the Editor, meta-analyses, experimental non-human studies	Databases (PubMed, Scopus, Dimensions)Reference list of the retrieved records	 	Intervention	#2. “neuropsychological” OR “neurocognitive” OR “cognitive”#3. “evaluation” OR “test” OR “score” OR “scale”	 	Comparator	Healthy controls	 	Outcome	“Affected cognitive domains”, “assessment tools utilized”, “tumor characteristic and cognitive outcome”	 	Study design	“original studies” OR “observational studies” OR “case series” OR “propensity-score matched studies” OR “RCTs”	 	Time	Search period:1968 to January 2025
PICO, patients/intervention/comparator/outcome; KPS, Karnofsky Performance Status.
The search strategy incorporated a combination of keywords and controlled vocabulary terms, such as "meningioma," "cognition," "neuropsychological assessment," "cognitive impairment," and "executive function." The search terms were adapted for each database to account for variations in indexing practices. The search was limited to articles published in English. There were no temporal limitations regarding the date of publication to provide a comprehensive view of the subject (Table 1).

Eligibility criteria
The study selection criteria were meticulously defined to include original research articles, clinical trials, and observational studies, that evaluated cognitive function in adult patients diagnosed with meningiomas. Studies that used standardized neuropsychological tests or cognitive screening instruments to assess cognitive performance were included. Studies were excluded if they focused on pediatric populations or non-human subjects or did not provide original data on cognitive outcomes. Grey literature, such as conference abstracts and unpublished reports, was excluded to mitigate potential publication bias.

Study selection
Two independent reviewers screened the titles and abstracts of all identified articles to determine their eligibility for inclusion. For potentially relevant studies, full-text articles were obtained and assessed against the inclusion criteria. Disagreements between reviewers were resolved through discussion and consensus or, if necessary, this was addressed by a third reviewer. The complete records and cited references of the selected publications were exported and downloaded.

Data extraction
Two reviewers independently extracted data using a standardized form. The information included the study design, sample size, patient demographics, tumor characteristics (location, size, grade), treatment modalities, neuropsychological tests administered, and cognitive outcomes.

Quality assessment
The quality assessment was performed based on the type of study. Randomized control trials (RCTs) were assessed as high-quality studies. Observational cohorts were considered of moderate quality and case series of low-quality.

Evidence synthesis
The findings from the included studies were synthesized qualitatively, providing a narrative overview of the cognitive domains affected in patients with meningiomas, the assessment methods used, and the relationship between tumor characteristics and neurocognitive outcomes.

Results

Literature search
Our current study’s flowchart depicting that out of total of 1147 articles, 31 fulfilled our eligibility criteria and formed the basis of our systematic review.
Fig. 1
The review initially identified 1147 records through database searching, and 6 additional records through citation searching. After removing duplicates and screening for relevance, 480 records were assessed for eligibility. Finally, 30 studies met our inclusion criteria and were included in the review. The results are depicted in Fig. 1.

Eligible studies
Baseline characteristics in terms of PICO, adopted neurocognitive test battery, and study findings.
Table 2
Author (Year)	Research PICOT	Study population	Adopted Neurocognitive Battery of Tests	Findings	 	Αbel et al. (2015) 	P: Patients who underwent resection of meningiomas.I: Lesions involving the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC)C: Lesions that did not involve the vmPFC.O: Cognitive and behavioral effects of meningioma lesions	70 patients	WAIS verbalWAIS similaritiesWAIS digit spanWAIS arithmeticWAIS block designWAIS codingBVRT correctBVRT errorsAVLT trialAVLT 30′ delayCFT copyCFT recallBNTCOWAFacial Recognition TestTMT ATMT BPegboard dominantPegboard nondominantWCST categoriesWCST perseverative errors BPI	Lesions of the vmPFC are associated with specific deficits in adaptive function and value-based decision making.No differences in other cognitive domains.	 		P: Patients with frontal, frontally-involved, and non-frontal meningiomas.I: Examination of the role of frontal meningioma localizationC: Axis-wise and lobe-based approach to meningioma localizationO: Executive functioning impairments	353 patients	CNS VS batteryCOWATWAIS Digit Span task	The study did not find a specific relation between a frontal meningioma location and executive functioning impairments.	 		P: Patients with supratentorial meningiomaI: Surgery.C: Pre-operative and post-operative cognitive functions.O: Cognitive deficits	57 patients	DSSCTT-1 (DVTCOWATANT57Visual N-back testRAVLTRAVLT-IRRAVLT-DRCFTCFT-IRCFT-DR	Meningiomas caused cognitive deficits in 73.7 % of patients. Frontal and temporal meningiomas, tumor volume >35 cc, peritumoral edema >40 cc and increased ICP were all associated with poor cognitive function. Post-operatively, the cognitive deficits improved significantly in the frontal and temporal groups.	 		P: Individuals with incidentally-identified meningioma.I: Description of neurocognitive function.C: Mayo Clinic Study of Aging (MCSA) participants.O: Neurocognitive function	48 patients	TMTWAIS-RBoston naming testCategory fluencyWMS-RAuditory verbal learning test	Study described neurocognitive function in patients with incidentally-discovered meningioma. Incidentally- identified meningioma group had no difference on cognitive tests compared to the control group.	 	Constantin et al. (2021) 	P: Patients with olfactory groove meningiomasI: SurgeryC: Pre- and post-surgery neuropsychological outcomesO: Neuropsychological outcomes	17 patients	Not specified	The study presents neuropsychological outcomes after surgery for olfactory groove meningiomas. Despite a worsening in almost all cognitive domains immediately post-operatively, long-term patients show neurocognitive improvement	 		P: Patients with meningiomas originating in the anterior skull base.I: Influence of meningiomas and their surgical resection on mentalizing.C: Healthy volunteer.O: Impairment of mentalizing	61 patients	Facial expression recognition test and picture arrangement test of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, third edition	Mentalizing was impaired by meningiomas arising from the anterior skull base, but it can improve after surgical resection of the tumors.	 	Dicristofori et al. (2018) 	P: Elderly patients with intracranial meningioma.I: Surgery.C: N/AO: Neuropsychological functioning (NPF)	41 patients	Dedicated battery of tests:Token TestNaming of objectsCorsi spanAVLTAttentional Matrices TestStroop TestDigit Span Backward Phonemic fluencyWeigl TestRaven Colored Progressive MatricesROCFMTCF	Surgery determined an improvement of NPF over time in elderly patients	 		P: Patients with WHO grade I meningiomaI: Surgical resection with or without adjuvant radiotherapyC: N/AO: Extent and nature of neurocognitive deficits	89 patients	Letter–Digit Modalities TestRAVLTWorking Memory TestDigit SpanCategory Verbal Fluency TestStroop Color Word TestConcept Shifting Test	The study documents the extent and nature of neurocognitive deficits in patients with World Health Organization (WHO) grade I meningioma after treatment. Compared with healthy controls, patients with meningioma showed significant impairments in executive functioning, verbal memory, information processing capacity), psycho motor speed, and working memory	 	Fisher et al. (2022) 	P: Skull base meningioma (SBM) patientsI: Surgical resection or radiotherapy based on MR presumptive meningioma diagnosisC: 1) informal caregivers of SBM patients, 2) convexity meningioma patients.O: Long-term health-related quality of life and neurocognitive functioning	89 patients	AVLT,Concept Shifting Test,Memory Comparison Task, Categorical Verbal Fluency Test,Digit Symbol Substitution Test,Stroop Color and Word Test.SF-36EORTC QLQ-BN20 questionnaires	In the long term, patients with SBM did not significantly differ from controls or convexity meningioma patients on generic HRQOL assessment. Anterior/middle SBM patients had significantly and clinically relevantly better HRQOL in SF-36 and EORTC QLQ-BN20 scores than posterior SBM patients.	 		P: Patients with giant olfactory groove meningiomasI: bifrontal microsurgical approachC: Pre- and post-operative investigationsO: ophthalmological, personality and cognitive disturbances	36 patients	MMSEMBPRSNPIPhonemic Verbal Fluency TestPreferred hand test for assessment of handednessVerbal Memory Test.	Cognitive changes and visual deficits will improve in patients with giant olfactory groove meningiomas after a bifrontal approach, without additional neurological deficits.	 	Guaraccino et al. (2019) 	P: Patients with meningioma localized in sensorimotor areas.I: Investigation of cognitive alterationsC: N/AO: Pre-operative cognitive alterations	46 patients	Raven Matrices 17Objects and Verbs namingIdeomotor apraxiaToken TestDigit span forward and backward,TMT A-BVerbal FluencyDigit Agnosia Raven Matrices 17Clock TestApple TestCorsi forward and backward Digit Symbol Substitution Test Letter Cancellation,Star Cancellation,Barrage,Line BisectionBalloon TestSensorimotor testVisuo-spatial imagery test	Meningioma can lead to pre-operative cognitive alterations even if localized in sensorimotor areas.	 		P: Patients with frontal WHO grade I meningioma undergoing resectionI: Surgical resectionC: Matched controlsO: Neurocognitive function	12 patients	DSST,TMT A and B,Stroop color-word test,Corsi block-tapping test, digitDST,VLMT,RWT,WAIS,HADS	Patients with frontal meningiomas show preoperative and postoperative deficits in perceptual speed, executive function, short-term memory, and verbal fluency. The risk for cognitive deterioration due to surgical resection is low. Executive function and short-term memory appear to recover within the first two months after surgery.	 		P: Patients over 60 years old with meningioma.I: Assessment of cognitive function.C: Investigation of factors affecting pre-operative cognitive decline.O: Pre-operative cognitive impairment	46 patients	Boston Naming TestRCFTSeoul Verbal Learning Test Delayed recall for verbal memoryColor readingStroop Test	Tumor size and age were associated with executive dysfunction.	 	Liouta et al. (2016) 	P: Patients with skull base and convexity meningiomasI: Examination of neurocognitive functionC: Comparison with healthy controlsO: Pre- and post-operative neurocognitive functions	54 patients	Standardized testing assessing executive, memory, and motor functions:WAIS-IIIDigit Span subtestTMT A and BCOWATRBMT	All patients performed significantly worse in most neurocognitive domains than controls. The skull base group showed more disturbances in memory than the convexity group. Surgery led to improvement in some neurocognitive domains.	 		P: Meningioma patientsI: Investigation of incidence and severity of cognitive dysfunctionC: Pre- and post-surgery comparisonO: Cognitive dysfunction	68 patients	CNS Vital Signs	Pre- and post-operatively, meningioma patients demonstrated significantly lower scores in all cognitive domains. Large proportion of patients show post- operative improvement.	 	Pranckeviciene (2018) 	P: Meningioma patientsI: Study of preoperative verbal memory problemsC: Evaluation of clinical prognostic valueO: Preoperative verbal memory problems	93 patients	HVLT-R	Cumulative verbal learning impairment was associated with greater risk for poor functional outcome post-operatively	 	Rinjen et al. (2020) 	P: Meningioma patients undergoing surgeryI: Examination of individual changes in cognitive performance.C: N/AO: Cognitive outcomes pre- and postoperatively	261 patients	CNS Vital Signs	Patients showed impaired cognitive performance before and after surgery, and although performance improved on the group level, cognitive scores remained significantly lower than in the normative sample up to 12 months post-operatively	 	Schouwenaars et al. (2023) 	P: Meningioma patientsI: Evaluation of the effect of surgery on cognitive brain activityC: Combining neuropsychological with functional imaging measurementsO: Cognitive brain activity before and after surgery	23 patients	CNS Vital Signs	Neuropsychological assessment showed impaired cognitive functioning before as well as 3 months after surgery, with no significant changes at neuropsychological tests.	 		P: Meningioma survivorsI: Investigation of long-term changes in neurocognitive performance and psychological symptomsC: Analysis of associations with radiation dose to brain regionsO: Long-term neurocognitive and psychological outcomes	17 patients	WAISDigit SpanWAIS Digit Span BackwardWAIS ArithmeticWAIS CodingWAIS Symbol SearchTMT A AND BWCSTTest of phonemic fluencyCVLT-IIDFRRCFT	Meningioma survivors experience neurocognitive deficits and psychological symptoms many years after diagnosis and treatment.	 	Tucha et al. (2001) 	P: Elderly patients with intracranial meningiomaI: Examination of cognitive functioning before and after surgeryC: Comparison with healthy subjectsO: Effects of surgery on cognitive functioning	33 patients	Standardized test procedures including examination of memory, attention, visuo-constructive abilities and executive functions:WMS-RDigit Span Forward Digit Span BackwardLogical Memory ILogical Memory IIWMS-RVisual MemorySpan ForwardVisual Memory Span BackwardVisual Reproduction IVisual Reproduction IIAlertnessDivided Attention TaskReaction ChangeTMT A-BFive-Point TestComplex Figure	No significant deterioration of cognitive functioning was found following surgery.	 		P: Patients with intracranial meningioma and an indication for surgeryI: Assessment of neurocognitive function, quality of life and depression before and after surgeryC: N/AO: Influence of surgical treatment on neurocognitive functioning and quality of life	13 patients	Test battery including investigation of selective and divided attention, verbal and figural memory, executive functioning, and word fluency:Determination testWMS-IVNBVWAIS IVSelf-report questionnaires to assess depressive symptoms, QoL, and disease coping	Surgical treatment of meningiomas improves neurocognitive functioning and quality of life.	 	Van der	P: Patients operated on for cerebral meningioma between 2007 and 2009I: N/AC: N/AO: Long-term cognitive complaints, symptoms of depression and anxiety	194 patients	CFQ,HADS	40 % of patients experienced cognitive and/or emotional problems.	 		P: Meningioma patientsI: N/AC: ControlsO: Subjective cognitive functioning	254 patients	CFQ,CNS Vital Signs,HADS	Patients reported significantly better subjective cognitive functioning compared to controls before and 3 months after surgery, but not at 12 months post-surgery.	 	Van Nieuwenhuizen D. et al. (2007) 	P: WHO grade I meningioma patientsI: RadiotherapyC: Surgery aloneO: Neurocognitive functioning and health-related quality of life	18 patients	DARTLine Bisection TestAVLTWMTSCWTCategoric Word FluencyCSTSF36,EORTC-BCM20	No significant differences were found in neurocognitive functioning between WHO grade I meningioma patients that underwent surgery only, and patients that received additional radiotherapy; however, even patients who were only treated surgically had significantly lower neurocognitive functioning than healthy controls.	 	Van Nieuwenhuizen D. et al. (2019) 	P: WHO grade I meningioma patientsI: N/AC: Healthy controlsO: Postoperative cognitive functioning and health-related quality of life	21 patients	Cognitive test battery:DARTLine Bisection TestAVLWMTSCWCategoric Word FluencyCSTLDSTSF-36	Patients had lower verbal memory capacity compared to healthy controls. Postoperative functioning was lower in patients with preoperative cerebral edema than in those without.	 	Van Nieuwenhuizen D., Douw L. et al. (2018) 	P: Postoperative WHO gradeI meningioma patientsC: Healthy matched controlsO: Cognitive functioning and functional brain networks	21 patients	Standardized test battery:DARTLine Bisection TestAVLTWMTSCWTCategoric Word FluencyCSTLDSTMagnetoencephalography	Meningioma patients had lower working memory capacity compared to healthy controls. Lower working memory performance was associated with lower connectivity within the default mode network.	 		P: Radiologically suspected WHO grade I meningioma patientsI: N/AC: Healthy controlsO: Neurocognitive functioning and health-related quality of life (HRQOL)	21 patients	Standardized test battery:Verbal Fluency TaskCSTLetter-Digit Modalities TestSCWTSRAVLTWMTMOSSF-36 questionnaire	Compared to healthy controls, meningioma patients had lower psychomotor speed, and working memory capacity and furthermore attained lower levels of self-perceived general health and vitality.	 	Waagemans M. L. et al. (2011) 	P: Patients with low-grade meningiomasI: N/AC: N/AO: Health-related quality of life (HRQOL)	89 patients	Category Verbal Fluency Test,CSTLetter-Digit Modalities TestRAVLTSCWT,WMT,SF-36	Patients with meningiomas had significant impairment in 4 of 6 cognitive domains, most pronounced in the domain of executive functioning	 	Zamanipour et al. (2020) 	P: Intracranial meningioma patientsI: Surgery and radiotherapyC: ControlsO: Long-term disease burden	190 patients	AVLTCSTMemory Comparison Test,Categoric Word Fluency Test,Digit-Symbol Substitution Test,SCWTSF-36,HADS	Patients reported more limitations due to physical and emotional functioning compared with controls.	 		P: Patients with skull base meningiomasI: N/AC: N/AO: Neuropsychological deficits	58 patients	QoL assessment,Depression and anxiety scales,VLMT,CSTAttention and concentration tests,Figural memory tests,Visual-motor speed testsVLMT,WAIS,WMS-RTMT-B	23 % of patients showed transient neurological deficits, and 12 % showed permanent new neurological deficits.Long-term verbal memory, working memory, and executive functioning were slightly affected within the first months following surgery but were stable or improved in the majority of patients at long-term follow-up
Thirty studies fulfilled our eligibility criteria and were used in our systematic review. Table 2 shows baseline characteristics in terms of PICO, the neurocognitive battery test used in each study, and the main findings. All studies were published between 2001 and 2024, while 22 of them were published after 2015.

The range of cognitive domains affected (Q1)
The neurocognitive domains examined in the literature review encompass a range of functions, with executive function being a frequently investigated area, which is often affected in meningioma patients,,,,,,. Studies also explored memory, including short-term and verbal memory, attention, perceptual speed, visuospatial abilities, verbal fluency, cognitive flexibility, and cognitive function in general,. Some studies focused on the impact of meningiomas and their treatment on broader cognitive outcomes, such as neuropsychological functioning (NPF), cognitive deficits, and cognitive dysfunction. It has to be emphasized, that these terms are used interchangeably between various studies, without being able to interpret if the authors of these studies have evaluated different domains. The reviewed studies provided no clear definition of these terms, so any interpretation would be inaccurate. Additionally, a few studies investigated the effects of meningiomas on more specific cognitive processes, such as mentalizing, and the cognitive changes associated with specific tumor locations.

Tools utilized in cognitive assessment in patients with meningioma (Q2)
Several tests are commonly employed in studying neurocognitive functions in the context of meningioma research, as suggested in Table 2. Standardized neuropsychological assessments are frequently utilized, indicating a comprehensive approach to evaluating cognitive domains. The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) comprises multiple subtests that assess specific cognitive domains such as working memory and processing speed and mentalizing,,,. Tests such as the Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST), Trail Making Test (TMT),,,,,, and Stroop test,,, focusing on executive functions are also prevalent, although specific tests are not always detailed, suggesting a variety of tools may be used for these higher-order cognitive processes. Memory assessment often employs tools such as the verbal learning and memory test (VLMT),, the Hopkins Verbal Learning Test-Revised (HVLT-R), the Rey's Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT),,,, and the Weschler memory scale (WMS),,,, or standardized memory function tests, while attention and concentration are evaluated through tests designed for these cognitive domains. Tests like DSST, TMT,,,,,, and Stroop test,,, have been employed for examining perceptual speed, processing, and executive function. More specifically, TMT, one of the most frequently test used, is comprised of part A, that assesses mainly processing speed and visual attention and part B, that assesses mainly cognitive flexibility. Boston naming test, and Controlled Oral Word Association Test (COWAT), are used to assess linguistic skills and verbal fluency, while the Rey complex figure test and recognition trial have been utilized for measuring visuospatial ability and memory,. Questionnaires such as the Cognitive Failures Questionnaire (CFQ),, and the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS),, capture subjective cognitive complaints and emotional states, which can influence cognitive performance. Additionally, some studies utilize computerized batteries like CNS Vital Signs for a more automated assessment of various cognitive domains,,,,.

Relationship between tumor characteristics and cognitive outcomes (Q3)
The relationship between tumor characteristics and cognitive outcomes is multifaceted. Tumor location significantly influences the type of cognitive deficits observed; for instance, lesions involving the ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) are linked to deficits in adaptive function and value-based decision-making, while anterior skull base meningiomas can impair mentalizing. Constantin et al. reported on their study with olfactory-groove meningioma patients, that almost all cognitive domains including memory, attention, language, inhibition, updating and cognitive flexibility were impaired preoperatively. Dijkstra et al. and Liouta et al. showed that patients with skull base meningiomas performed worse in most neurocognitive domains, compared to patients with convexity meningiomas,. Hendrix et al. demonstrated in their series, that their patients with frontal lobe meningiomas presented lower scores in perceptual speed, executive function, short term memory, and verbal fluency compared to their matched healthy controls. Furthermore, their performance in the administered tests remained low in the early postoperative period in all domains.. Contrarywise, their scores remained lower regarding the perceptual speed, while their executive function and short-memory tests showed no difference compared to the healthy-controls at the two-month follow-up. However, a clear relationship is not always established by all previously published series,,,. Specifically, Beele et al. found no specific association between frontal meningioma location and executive functioning impairments, while Fisher et al., noticed that in their long-term follow-up study, skull-base meningioma patients, had no significant differences in cognition, compared to convexity meningioma patients or healthy controls. On the other hand, Boomakanti et al. demonstrated that frontal and temporal meningiomas demonstrated the highest frequency of cognitive impairment. Additionally, tumor size,,,,, and patient's age,, are associated with altered preoperative cognition, notably executive dysfunction, while the presence of preoperative peri-tumoral edema correlates with lower preoperative and postoperative cognitive functioning,. Boomakanti et al. postulate that frontal location, tumor volume higher than 35 cm3, peritumoral edema higher than 45 cm3, and increased intracranial pressure are all associated with poor cognitive performance. Similarly, van Nieuwenhuizen et al. described in their study a strong correlation of tumor volume and preoperative edema with poor cognitive functioning postoperatively. On the contrary, and reported no association between tumor volume and neurocognitive status. Rinjen et al. assessed the predictors of late cognitive function. Better preoperative performance, younger age, male sex, and higher educational level predicted better late cognitive performance. Surgical intervention usually enhances cognitive function,, as demonstrated in patients with giant olfactory groove meningiomas, where cognitive changes and visual deficits were also improved postoperatively,,,. Nevertheless, surgery carries risks, with some patients experiencing transient or permanent neurological deficits following resection. Overall, tumor characteristics such as meningioma location, size, patient's age, better preoperative performance, and preoperative edema are essential in determining the nature and extent of cognitive deficits in these patients.

Quality appraisal
Eighteen of the studies included in the systematic review are observational cohorts and are thus considered of moderate quality. The rest of the 12 studies are case series and are thus considered to be of low quality.

Discussion

Overview of our findings
Meningiomas are usually benign tumors and the use of newer treatment modalities offers meningioma patients significantly improved survival rates and less neurological deficits,. Therefore, accurate evaluation of neurocognition plays a more and more crucial role. This systematic review offers a comprehensive synthesis of the existing literature on neurocognitive evaluation in patients with meningiomas. Our analysis reveals that meningiomas can significantly impact cognitive function, affecting various domains such as memory, executive function, attention, and language,,. Specifically, most of the studies demonstrated several neurocognitive domains affected in meningioma patients compared to a healthy control group preoperatively,,. The variability in cognitive outcomes can be attributed to differences in tumor location, size, growth rate, and treatment modalities. Interestingly, few studies manifest that, even though patients may show deterioration in multiple cognitive domains immediately postoperatively, in long-term they demonstrate significant improvement,,,,,,,,,. However, their cognitive function is still affected compared to health controls,. This improvement is demonstrated mainly at one-year follow up,,. Hendrix et al., demonstrated that even though some domains, such as executive function and short-term memory, may show improvement at two-months follow-up, others require up to one year. It is of paramount importance to know the exact time evolution of cognitive improvement, not only for medical but also for social and medico-legal reasons. This may provide valuable information ragerding the return of these patient to the productive process. Numerous tests are described in current literature, that are used to assess neurocognition. This abundance and heterogeneity though, makes it impossible to have comparable results among patients with neurocognitive deficits. Indeed, a previously published systematic review has identified the perplex situation regarding neurocognitive outcome in meningioma patients.. The necessity for adopting a widely accepted preoperative neurocognitive evaluation battery and the development of a consensus regarding the optimal time for postoperative evaluation of these patients has been adequately outlined in the literature and such a project is under way. The most frequently used tests and test batteries as demonstrated in current literature, are WAIS, RAVLT, WMS, TMT, Stroop test and CNS Vital signs,,,,,,,,,. Several factors were associated with worse cognitive function. Tumor size, increased age, peritumoral edema and skull base meningiomas were all associated with worse cognitive function,,,,,,. Dijkstra et al., showed in their series that skull base meningiomas are associated with worse cognitive outcome, compared to convexity meningiomas. Similarly, Kang et al. linked tumor size and increased age to worse executive function. Such predictors may be remarkably useful, while informing the patients for postoperative outcome. Quality of life is of these patients is also often evaluated, using questionnaires such as HADS. Multiple studies show that quality of life is affected especially postoperatively,,,,,,,. In several cases meningioma patients undergo radiation. Undoubtedly, the radiation – induced cognitive impairment is established in the pertinent literature. Even though there are several theories regarding the pathogenesis in cognitive decline post-radiation the exact mechanism remains unknown. In their study, Sekely et al., showed that high radiation doses to the parietal-occipital zone and the cerebellum may be associated with slower visuomotor processing speed. Similarly, Najafabadi et al., demonstrated that postoperative radiation is associated with worse verbal memory, attention, and executive functioning. All these radiation-induced changes need to be taken into consideration for deciding the optimal timing and proper dosology for adjuvant radiation in cases of atypical meningiomas. Furthermore, the role of the administered anti-seizure prophylactic medications in these patients and their long term neurocognitive effect, remains unclear.

Research barriers
Studying neurocognitive disorders in patients with meningiomas faces several barriers. Among these are the infrequent assessment of neurocognitive functions in patients with meningiomas during standard care, the utilization of varied neuropsychological tests, and the inadequate consideration of confounding variables. There is also a lack of standardized assessment protocols, heterogeneity in patient populations, and methodological limitations in existing studies. The absence of consistent neuropsychological testing batteries complicates comparisons across studies and hinders the development of a comprehensive understanding of the cognitive profiles linked to meningiomas. The presence of confounding variables, such as pre-existing conditions, medication usage, and psychosocial factors further complicates the interpretation of results, and restricts the ability to draw definitive conclusions about the direct impact of meningiomas on cognitive function. Substantial variation in the design and response criteria of meningioma trials makes comparing these trials extremely difficult.

Applicability of our findings
Despite these limitations, our findings underscore the importance of incorporating routine neurocognitive evaluations into the clinical management of meningioma patients. Baseline assessments can help establish a patient's pre-treatment cognitive status, facilitating the early detection of cognitive changes and allowing for timely interventions and better patient information. Longitudinal monitoring can track cognitive trajectories and assess the impact of treatment on cognitive outcomes. The accurate outlining of the problem is of paramount importance, however offering practical solutions would be of even greater importance. There are currently several neurocognitive rehabilitation choices ranging from dance to transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) and transcranial pulse stimulation (TPS). Even more interestingly, thanks to all the current technological advances, there are numerous apps, easily accessible to the patients, that could be really beneficial in neurocognitive rehabilitation, such as Lumosity (Lumos Labs, Inc, San Francisco, CA, USA), CogniFit (San Francisco, CA, USA), Elevate (Elevate Labs LLC, San Francisco, CA, USA), and Brain HQ (Posit Science, Inc, San Francisco, CA, USA).

Limitations
Several limitations should be considered when interpreting the findings of our current review. First, the heterogeneity of study designs and assessment methods across the included studies limited the ability to perform a quantitative meta-analysis. Second, the lack of standardized neuropsychological protocols, specific and accurate terminology and normative data specific to meningioma patients makes comparing cognitive performance across studies quite challenging. Third, the presence of publication bias, when studies with positive findings are more likely to be published, cannot be ruled out. Fourth, there is lack of a thorough quality assessment of the included studies. This could be addressed in a future systematic review and metanalysis of more homogeneous data. Finally, the number of articles included was limited to those written in English.

Conclusion
Neurocognitive examination becomes more and more crucial in evaluation of meningioma patients, since most of them demonstrate cognitive dysfunction both pre- and postoperatively. A common battery test for neurocognitive evaluation in all meningioma patients would provide us with more comparable and reliable results.

Funding
This study did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
The cognitive and behavioral effects of meningioma lesions involving the ventromedial prefrontal cortex
Quality of life reporting in the management of posterior fossa tumours: a systematic review
Acquired personality disturbances after meningioma resection are strongly associated with impaired quality of life
Preoperative executive functioning impairments in patients with a meningioma: does a frontal location matter?
Pre-operative and post-operative cognitive deficits in patients with supratentorial meningiomas
Neurocognition in individuals with incidentally-identified meningioma
Neuropsychological outcomes after surgery for olfactory groove meningiomas
Surgery in elderly patients with intracranial meningioma: neuropsychological functioning during a long term follow-up
Advances in neurocognitive rehabilitation research from 1992 to 2017: the Ascension of neural plasticity
Mentalizing can be impaired in patients with meningiomas originating in the anterior skull base
Prevalence and correlates of fatigue in patients with meningioma before and after surgery
Late neurocognitive sequelae in patients with WHO grade I meningioma
The application of cognitive remediation therapy in the treatment of mental disorders
Long-term health-related quality of life and neurocognitive functioning after treatment in skull base meningioma patients
Transcranial pulse stimulation in the treatment of mild neurocognitive disorders
The unseen impact – a deep dive into neurocognitive impairment among patients with intracranial meningiomas: a comprehensive systematic review of the literature
Surgical and functional outcome of olfactory groove meningiomas: lessons from the past experience and strategy development
Giant olfactory groove meningioma: ophthalmological and cognitive outcome after bifrontal microsurgical approach
Development of anxiety and depression in patients with benign intracranial meningiomas: a prospective long-term study
EANO guideline on the diagnosis and management of meningiomas
Meningiomas and cognitive impairment after treatment: a systematic and narrative review
Meningiomas and cognitive impairment after treatment: a systematic and narrative review
Molecular pathways: radiation-induced cognitive impairment
Meningioma can lead to pre-operative cognitive alterations Even if localized in sensorimotor areas: a multimodal MRI-Neuropsychological study in a series of 46 patients
The cognitive neuroscience and neurocognitive rehabilitation of dance
Neurocognitive function surrounding the resection of frontal WHO grade I meningiomas: a prospective matched-control study
Neurocognitive considerations in the treatment of meningioma with radiation therapy: applications for quantitative neuroimaging and precision radiation medicine
Incidental intracranial meningiomas: a systematic review and meta-analysis of prognostic factors and outcomes
Predictors of pre-operative cognitive impairment in meningioma patients over 60 years old
Adjuvant radiotherapy for atypical and malignant meningiomas: a systematic review
Effects of surgery on cognitive functioning of elderly patients with intracranial meningioma
Long-term postoperative health-related quality of life in patients with subfrontal meningiomas
The application of technology to improve cognition in older adults: a review and suggestions for future directions
Effects of intracranial meningioma location, size, and surgery on neurocognitive functions: a 3-year prospective study
Subjective cognitive functioning in patients with a meningioma: its course and association with objective cognitive functioning and psychological symptoms
The 2021 WHO classification of tumors of the central nervous system: a summary
Mechanisms of radiotherapy-associated cognitive disability in patients with brain tumours
Cognitive improvement in meningioma patients after surgery: clinical relevance of computerized testing
Cognitive functioning in meningioma patients: a systematic review
Development of ‘Core Outcome Sets’ for meningioma in clinical studies (the COSMIC project): protocol for two systematic literature reviews, eDelphi surveys and online consensus meetings
Long-term disease burden and survivorship issues after surgery and radiotherapy of intracranial meningioma patients
Life after surgical resection of a meningioma: a prospective cross-sectional study evaluating health-related quality of life
Differential effect of surgery and radiotherapy on neurocognitive functioning and health-related quality of life in WHO grade I meningioma patients
Neurocognitive functioning and health-related quality of life in patients with radiologically suspected meningiomas
Cognitive functioning and functional brain networks in postoperative WHO grade I meningioma patients
The association between preoperative edema and postoperative cognitive functioning and health-related quality of life in WHO grade I meningioma patients
Preoperative verbal memory problems and their clinical prognostic value in meningioma patients: a prospective study
Advances in meningioma genetics: novel therapeutic opportunities
Cognitive outcomes in meningioma patients undergoing surgery: individual changes over time and predictors of late cognitive functioning
Health-related quality of life outcomes in meningioma patients based upon tumor location and treatment modality: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Cognitive brain activity before and after surgery in meningioma patients
Long-term neurocognitive and psychological outcomes in meningioma survivors: individual changes over time and radiation dosimetry
Surgical treatment of meningiomas improves neurocognitive functioning and quality of life – a prospective single-center study
Meta-analysis of adjuvant radiotherapy for intracranial atypical and malignant meningiomas
Cognitive and emotional problems in patients after cerebral meningioma surgery
Long-term impact of cognitive deficits and epilepsy on quality of life in patients with low-grade meningiomas
International consortium on meningiomas consensus review on scientific advances and treatment paradigms for clinicians, researchers, and patients
Presenting symptoms and prognostic factors for symptomatic outcomes following resection of meningioma
Prospective analysis of neuropsychological deficits following resection of benign skull base meningiomas
This article is part of a special issue entitled: Brain Tumor Surgery published in Brain and Spine.