Re‐Evaluation of Fixed Dosing Versus Body Size‐Based Dosing Approaches for Large Molecule Therapeutics in Adults
Wang et al.1 (2009) and Zhang et al.2 (2011) recommended a fixed dosing approach for large molecule therapeutics for first‐in‐human (FIH) trials, based on the finding that the majority of α values (body size effect on clearance) were < 0.5 across 12 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and 18 therapeutic proteins (TPs) and peptides, and fixed dosing provides advantages such as convenience, reduced medical errors, and cost‐effectiveness. They also recommended that the approved dosing approach should be determined by α and the therapeutic window. This review aims to re‐evaluate these recommendations using a larger dataset (N = 143) of diverse molecules. Results showed 62% (78/126) of non‐ADC drugs were approved with fixed dosing, and 58% (28/48) of non‐ADC drugs approved with body size‐based dosing had an α < 0.7 where fixed dosing would be appropriate. Therefore, only the remaining 16% (20/126) of non‐ADC drugs required body size‐based dosing. In addition, the FIH dosing approach had significant implications on the approved dosing approach with 68% (90/133) of drugs using the same dosing approach in FIH and approval. Lastly, of non‐ADC drugs evaluated, 56% (71/126) demonstrated a relationship between α and the approved dosing approach. When α did not explain the approved dosing approach, lack of clinically meaningful differences in exposure (49%, 27/55) was the most common justification. These findings confirm Wang et al.’s and Zhang et al.’s previous conclusions, continuing to support their recommendations. Based on these insights, a decision tree is proposed for selecting the appropriate dosing approach at each stage of drug development.
It is generally assumed that drug administration based on patient body size as either body weight (BW) or body surface area (BSA) reduces inter‐individual variability (IIV) in pharmacokinetics (PK) and/or pharmacodynamics (PD), thereby optimizing therapeutic outcomes. However, previous analyses have shown that this is not necessarily the case for the majority of the therapeutic proteins (TPs) evaluated. In the publications by Wang et al. and Zhang et al, the relationship between body size and exposure was evaluated in 12 approved monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) and 18 other TPs and peptides, and simulations were performed to compare body size‐based dosing against fixed dosing approaches. The results of the analyses showed that fixed dosing performed better in 7 of 12 mAbs and 12 of 18 other TPs and peptides. The key parameter determining the performance of the dosing approach is the exponent (α), reflecting the magnitude of the body size effect on clearance (CL), as described by a power model shown in Eq. 1.
A body size‐based dosing approach adjusts for various body size metrics such as body weight (BW), body surface area (BSA), ideal body weight (IBW), adjusted IBW (AIBW), lean body weight (LBM), etc. The dosing approach aims to reduce IIV in exposure, that is, the area under the concentration‐time curve (AUC). Figure  1  illustrates the relationship of the difference in AUC between subjects with extreme body size and those with typical body size for different dosing approaches as a function of α using BW as an example. When α = 0, fixed dosing is preferred because subjects with extreme body size have the same AUC as a typical subject (%AUC difference = 0), while when α = 1, body size‐based dosing is preferred for the same reason. As body size‐based dosing assumes a 1:1 correlation between body size and CL, that is, α = 1, it overcorrects the exposure difference as illustrated by red lines which increasingly deviate from 0% as α decreases. Similarly, fixed dosing, which assumes no relationship between body size and CL, leads to underexposure in subjects with high body size (solid blue line) and overexposure in subjects with low body size (dashed blue line) as α increases. The preferred dosing approach would achieve a lower % AUC difference. Body size‐based dosing works better when α is > 0.5, while fixed dosing works better when α is < 0.5, as shown in Figure  1 . The two dosing approaches perform similarly when α is 0.5. When α is 0.7, the difference between fixed dosing and body size‐based dosing for subjects with extreme body size ranged from 16 to 23%. Since such differences are unlikely to be clinically relevant for the majority of the drugs excluding those with a narrow therapeutic window, fixed dosing is considered an acceptable approach given its other advantages when α is < 0.7.
The percent difference in AUC for subjects at low body weight (50 kg, dashed lines) and high body weight (130 kg, solid lines) relative to a reference subject (80 kg) is shown as a function of α for both fixed (blue) and body size‐based dosing (red), assuming the power model in Eq. 1.
Moreover, since the majority of TPs did not show an α > 0.5, Wang et al, and Zhang et al. recommend the use of fixed dosing in first‐in‐human (FIH) trials, given the advantages of convenience, reduced risk of dosing errors, and cost‐effectiveness. These recommendations hold especially when data to adequately estimate α are not yet available. Once sufficient clinical data are obtained, the dosing approach for Phase 3 trials and approved dosing approach can be determined based on the magnitude of body size effect on CL along with other covariates, as well as the therapeutic window.
It has been over a decade since the publication of these findings. This paper aims to re‐examine the landscape of dosing approaches using a larger and more diverse dataset of FDA‐approved mAbs, fusion proteins (FPs), bispecific antibodies (bsAbs), antibody drug conjugates (ADCs), peptides, and oligonucleotides. This work will evaluate: (i) α across molecule types, (ii) approved dosing approaches, (iii) the relationship between α and approved dosing approach, (iv) the comparison of dosing approach in the FIH trial and at approval, and (v) changes in FIH and approved dosing approaches over time. Our objective is to provide updated recommendations on the use of body size‐based versus fixed dosing for FIH trials, Phase 2/3 trials, and approval.

DATA COLLECTION
FDA‐approved drugs prior to September 2024 were reviewed and compiled from publicly available sources. Monoclonal antibodies, bispecific antibodies, fusion proteins, and ADCs were identified by searching for drug names that contained “mab,” “cept,” or “fusp” in the FDA Purple Book. For peptides and oligonucleotides which lack consistent nomenclature, literature review papers were referenced. Specifically, FDA TIDES Harvest 2020–2023 reports provided a list of FDA‐approved peptides and oligonucleotides between 2016–2023 and 1998–2023, respectively, while a review of therapeutic peptides provided a list of peptides approved globally prior to 2016 (2000–2020). Once the list of drug names was compiled, biosimilars, duplicates between sources, combination drug products, non‐systemic routes of administration (e.g., intravitreal, intraocular), and radiopharmaceuticals were excluded.
Using the refined list of drugs, data of interest were extracted from the original FDA review available in the Drugs@FDA database. Key information included dosing approaches employed in FIH trials, FIH start date, approved dosing approach, approval date, details of population pharmacokinetic (PopPK) models (model structure for body size covariates, body size metric used, and α values), and justification of approved dosing approach when α did not explain the dosing approach. Entries were excluded if the covariate analysis on body size was not available or not conducted (e.g., No pharmacometrics review available, not approved in the United States by the FDA, etc.), a PopPK model based only on adult subjects (≥ 18 years old) was not available, or linear clearance was not included as a parameter in the PopPK model. ClinicalTrials.gov was used to collect FIH dosing approaches and/or start dates if they were unavailable in the FDA review.
For drugs with body size covariate models differing from a standard power model (Eq. 1), the covariate model was converted into a power model to estimate α. Body weights were simulated using a power‐transformed normal distribution based on its superior approximation compared to a log‐normal distribution, as shown below:
These simulated body weights were used to calculate individual clearances, which were subsequently refitted to a power model using a log‐transformed linear regression.

FINAL DATASET
A total of 203 unique drug names were initially identified from the FDA Purple Book using the specified search terms. An additional 75 drug names were identified through FDA TIDES Harvest 2020–2023 reports and a review of therapeutic peptides. Twelve (12) mAbs from Wang et al., and 10 drugs (8 peptides and 2 fusion proteins) from Zhang et al. were also included. One hundred (100) drugs were excluded, including biosimilars (N = 54) and duplicates between data sources (N = 14). An additional 65 drugs were excluded following further evaluation of the original FDA review, primarily because a PopPK model based only on adult subjects was not available (N = 29) or PopPK models were not performed or reported (N = 35).
A total of 143 drugs were included in the final dataset based on specific data collection criteria, including 79 monoclonal antibodies, 9 fusion proteins, 9 bispecific antibodies, 12 ADCs, 6 oligonucleotides, and 28 peptides. An overview of the data collection process and the included drugs is shown in Figure  2 .
Flow diagram of included FDA‐approved drugs. NA, not available; NP, not performed.

EXPONENT ON CLEARANCE (α) FOR BODY SIZE EFFECT
Body size was identified as a statistically significant covariate for clearance in 78% (112/143) of PopPK models. A power model (Eq. 1) was used in 85% (95/112) of cases to characterize the body size effect on CL, while 5% (6/112) of drugs used a linear model. The remaining 10% (11/112) of PopPK models did not report the body size covariate model structure and were assumed to use a power model because this was the most common model structure and had α values in the appropriate range for a power model (0.19–0.88).
BW was the most frequently used body size metric, applied in 93% (104/112) of models. Alternative metrics included BSA in 4 models, lean body weight (LBW) in 2 models (Inotersen and Pasireotide), body mass index (BMI) in 1 model (Dupilumab), and adjusted ideal body weight (AIBW) in 1 model (Mirvetuximab Soravtansine).
The overall distribution of α values, as well as distributions stratified by molecule type, is illustrated in Figure  3 . When body size is not a statistically significant covariate on CL, α values were treated as 0. Across all drugs in the dataset, 36% (51/143) and 57% (82/143) of models reported α values < 0.5 and 0.7, respectively. Across mAbs, comprising the majority of the dataset (55%, 79/143), 29% (23/79), and 58% (46/79) of models reported α values < 0.5 and 0.7, respectively. For peptides, body size was not a significant covariate in 54% (15/28) of models, which was substantially higher than any other molecule type. Definitive trends could not be drawn for bispecific antibodies, fusion proteins, ADCs, and oligonucleotides due to the limited sample size within these categories.
Histogram of α values for FDA‐approved drugs stratified by molecule type. The red vertical dashed line shows an α = 0.5 and α = 0.7. Non‐significant body size covariates are visualized as α = 0. Non‐BW body size metrics were used for 6% (8/143) of drugs visualized.

APPROVED DOSING APPROACHES FOR NON‐ADCs
Approved dosing approaches are summarized for all non‐ADC drugs (N = 131) and by modality as illustrated in Figure  4 . Five (5) drugs were excluded because they are not FDA‐approved but had an available α value from Wang et al. or Zhang et al. Dosing approaches included fixed dosing (mg), weight‐based dosing (mg/kg), AIBW‐based dosing (mg/kg AIBW), dosing based on body weight cutoffs (mg per BW range; for example, X mg for < 70 kg and Y mg for ≥ 70 kg), and BSA‐based dosing (mg/m2). Antibody drug conjugates (ADCs), which frequently require body size‐based dosing due to their narrow therapeutic indices, are discussed in greater detail in the subsequent section.
Approved dosing approaches by molecule type.
Fixed dosing was the most common dosing approach which was used for 62% (78/126) of non‐ADC drugs. This approach predominated across mAbs, bsAbs, peptides, and oligonucleotides, and ranged from 55 to 77%. While only two fusion proteins used fixed dosing, the number of fusion proteins available for evaluation is too small (N = 8) to draw any conclusions for this category.
BW‐based dosing was the next most common approach, which was used for 30% (38/126) of non‐ADC drugs. The prevalence of BW‐based dosing varied across molecule type, ranging from 15 to 33% among mAbs, bsAbs, oligonucleotides, and peptides. Alternative dosing approaches included body weight range‐based approaches (6%, 7/126) and body surface area‐based approaches (2%, 3/126).

APPROVED DOSING APPROACHES FOR ADCs
ADCs require special consideration due to their unique mechanism of action and narrow therapeutic index related to the cytotoxic effects of chemotherapeutic agents. Notably, all 12 ADCs received approval with body size‐based dosing approaches, despite a wide range of α values.
Dosing approach distribution revealed that 75% (9/12) of ADCs utilized BW as the primary body size metric, with 2 ADCs utilizing BSA‐based dosing (gemtuzumab ozogamicin and inotuzumab ozogamicin) and 1 ADC utilizing AIBW. Mirvetuximab soravtansine, approved in 2022, represented the sole therapeutic employing AIBW‐based dosing. The Elahere dosing approach demonstrated particularly noteworthy PK characteristics. Its scaling exponent (α) based on AIBW approximated 1.07, suggesting an optimal methodology for minimizing IIV and mitigating potential dosing discrepancies in subjects with extreme AIBW.

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN EXPONENT ON CL (α) AND APPROVED DOSING APPROACH WITH DOSE JUSTIFICATIONS FOR APPROVED DOSING APPROACHES UNEXPLAINED BY α FOR NON‐ADCS
The number of drugs with their α value range and approved dosing approach for non‐ADC drugs is summarized in Table  1 . Of the drugs evaluated, 56% (71/126) demonstrated a relationship between α and approved dosing approach. A relationship was demonstrated if α < 0.5 and fixed dosing was used, 0.5 ≤ α ≤ 0.7 and either fixed dosing or body size‐based dosing was used, or α > 0.7 and body size‐based dosing was used.
Dosing matrix for non‐ADC molecules (N = 126). Green‐shaded cells represent dosing approaches consistent with recommendations by Wang et al. Red‐shaded cells represent deviations from these recommendations and were further evaluated based on dosing approach justification in the FDA review.
α < 0.5	0.5 < α < 0.7	α > 0.7	Overall	 	Body size‐based dosing	15% (19/126)	7% (9/126)	16% (20/126)	38% (48/126)	 	Fixed dosing	19% (24/126)	14% (18/126)	29% (36/126)	62% (78/126)	 	% Fixed Dosing	56% (24/43)	67% (18/27)	64% (36/56)
Bold values indicate the overall findings.
Among the 36 drugs where fixed dosing was used despite α > 0.7, the most frequent justification was a lack of clinically meaningful differences in efficacy and/or safety based on exposure‐response analyses (75%, 27/36). Alternative justifications for fixed dosing included individualized dose titration based on patient outcomes for GLP‐1 agonists (Exenatide, Liraglutide, Semaglutide, and Tirzepatide). For these drugs, body size‐based dosing is not needed because the dose will already be individualized based on how the patient responds. Two notable exceptions emerged where regulatory reviewers challenged the proposed dosing approach. For Secukinumab and Tralokinumab, reviewers recommended either considering body weight range‐based dosing or issuing post‐marketing commitments (PMCs) to evaluate dosing approaches for subjects with higher body weights. There were three drugs where the review was not available, or the dose justification was not provided.
Conversely, for 19 drugs, body size‐based dosing was implemented despite α < 0.5. Most commonly, 47% (9/19) of drugs showed an α between 0.3 and 0.5, where there is often no clinically meaningful difference in exposure between fixed and body size‐based dosing; however, body size‐based dosing was selected because it was often the only dosing approach used in development and its efficacy and safety were supported by data from late clinical trials while fixed dosing would have been a better dosing approach. In three cases (Aflibercept, Mogamulizumab, and Carfilzomib), the FDA reviewers acknowledged the suboptimal dosing approach but accepted its use because it was the only dosing approach used in development. Blinatumomab used a BW range‐based dosing approach with the weight cutoff at 45 kg, effectively applying a fixed dose for adult patients. For Motixafortide, the submitted PopPK model indicated that body weight influenced exposure through bioavailability rather than clearance. The reviewer found the rationale physiologically implausible, and a weight‐based dosing approach may have been better modeled as an effect on CL. Lastly, Patisiran (α = −0.175) utilized a body weight‐based dose up to 100 kg, beyond which a fixed dose was implemented to avoid overdosing in overweight subjects. In this case, a fixed dose across all body weights might achieve more consistent exposures. There were four drugs where the review was not available, or the dose justification was not provided.

COMPARISON OF DOSING APPROACH IN THE FIRST‐IN‐HUMAN TRIAL AND AT APPROVAL
Figure  5  highlights the dynamic nature of dosing approach evolution from early clinical development to regulatory approval. Across the dataset where FIH and approved dosing approach were available, the initial dosing approach demonstrated significant implications for subsequent regulatory approval, with over two‐thirds (68%, 90/133) of drugs using the same dosing approach in FIH at approval. Specifically, in drugs initiated with weight‐based dosing, 54% (45/83) were ultimately approved using a weight‐based dosing approach. Of the drugs that used a BSA‐based dosing approach in the FIH trial, 67% (4/6) were approved with BSA‐based dosing. Of the remaining drugs, Blinatumomab (α was not significant) was approved based on a body weight cutoff at 45 kg (effectively a fixed dose for adult patients), and etanercept (α = 0.75) was approved with fixed dosing. On the other hand, 93% (41/44) drugs administered as fixed dosing in the FIH trial also ultimately received approval with a fixed dosing approach. Of the drugs that switched to body size‐based dosing, amivantamab (α = 0.75) was approved based on body weight cutoffs, and obiltoxoximab (α = 0.677) and trastuzumab (α was not significant) were approved with body weight‐based dosing. Etanercept’s dosing justification was not provided and trastuzumab’s review was not available.
Sankey diagram of FIH dosing approaches (left), approved dosing approaches (middle), and α values (right).

FIRST‐IN‐HUMAN AND APPROVED DOSING APPROACHES OVER TIME
FIH start year and approval year by dosing approach are shown in Figure  6 . The FIH start date was unavailable for 26% (27/143) of drugs, while the FIH dosing approach was unavailable for 6% (8/143) drugs. In FIH trials, the percentage of drugs using fixed dosing increased over time; however, BW‐based dosing was still the most common for each quartile. For approved dosing approaches, it was less clear if there was an increase in fixed dosing over time; however, the majority of drugs used fixed dosing for each quartile after 2013.
FIH and approved dosing approaches by year. The dark blue line is the percentage of drugs using a fixed dosing approach quartiled by year. Vertical dashed lines represent the quartile boundaries.

DISCUSSION
To our knowledge, this study represents the first systematic review of body size‐based dosing approaches for multiple approved molecule types, expanding upon earlier work to evaluate the impact of body size‐based vs. fixed dosing approaches. It analyzed a broad range of modalities, including monoclonal antibodies, fusion proteins, bispecific antibodies, ADCs, peptides, and oligonucleotides. This study incorporates the covariate effect (α) of body size on CL from PopPK models, as well as evaluating the sponsor’s dose justification to provide insight into the selection of dosing approaches.
This study highlights several critical findings. The α value, a measure of the magnitude of body size effect, is the primary metric to decide a body size‐based dosing approach. Our analysis has shown that out of all drugs analyzed, 57% (82/143) have α < 0.7. This suggests that fixed dosing is appropriate for the majority of drugs. Over the past decade, fixed dosing has been widely adopted in approvals, reinforcing its safety, efficacy, and practicality. In fact, 62% (78/126) of non‐ADC drugs were approved with a fixed dosing approach. Among the non‐ADC drugs approved with body size‐based dosing, 58% (28/48) had α < 0.7 where fixed dosing would have been appropriate. This means that only 16% (20/126) of non‐ADC drugs required body size‐based dosing. Given that less than half of non‐ADC drugs had an α > 0.7 and fixed dosing was the most common approved dosing approach, the results of this review are aligned with the previous findings by Wang et al. and Zhang et al. . Therefore, we continue to recommend fixed dosing for FIH studies when the effect of body size on clearance (CL) is unknown because of its advantages mentioned previously.
Starting early development with fixed dosing also increases the likelihood of selecting it as the approved dose. Our analysis shows that the FIH dosing approach had significant implications for subsequent regulatory approval. As illustrated in the Sankey plot (Figure  5 ), among the drugs that employed body size‐based dosing in FIH trials, 63% (56/89) were also ultimately approved using body size‐based dosing. Notably, 41% (23/56) and 61% (34/56) of these drugs had α values < 0.5 and 0.7, respectively. The primary reason for selecting body size‐based dosing in these cases was that it was the only dosing regimen studied in the development program. In contrast, for the drugs that started their FIH trial with fixed dosing, only 7% (3/44) were approved with a body size‐based dosing despite 50% (22/44) of drugs having α > 0.7. The availability of safety data following fixed dosing helps address safety concerns for patients with extreme body sizes. It provides a basis for approval, even if fixed dosing results in relatively higher IIV compared to body size‐based dosing; fixed dosing may be preferred if it is well tolerated given its other advantages.
We have also evaluated the change in dosing approaches in FIH trials since 1993. The results show that while the use of fixed dosing has increased in certain years, body size‐based dosing remains the predominant approach, accounting for 67% (90/135) of FIH trials studied. To assist in the selection of the appropriate dosing approach at different stages of drug development, we propose a decision tree (Figure  7 ).
Decision tree for selecting a body size‐based dosing approach. *For a compound with α 0.5–0.7 and an extremely narrow therapeutic index where a 20% difference will impact efficacy and/or safety, body size‐based dosing should be considered.
For FIH trials, fixed dosing is recommended as the starting dosing approach. Once sufficient PK data become available, the effect of body size on clearance (CL) should be evaluated. If α < 0.5, fixed dosing is recommended as it results in lower IIV compared to body size‐based dosing. In the range of 0.5 ≤ α ≤ 0.7, although body size may outperform fixed dosing in reducing IIV, this difference is unlikely to be clinically significant. Therefore, fixed dosing is recommended, unless the safety data suggest otherwise (e.g., for drugs with a very narrow therapeutic window). If α > 0.7, body size‐based dosing is recommended, particularly if exposure differences at extreme body sizes are clinically meaningful, though fixed dosing may still be used when the therapeutic window is wide.
Body size‐based dosing remains essential for certain subtypes, particularly ADCs. The potent cytotoxic payload can elicit substantial toxicity and is particularly sensitive to small changes in exposure, which can lead to pronounced differences in safety and efficacy. Body size‐based dosing can help mitigate this variability by aiming to normalize exposure across individuals of varying body size when α > 0.5. For ADCs that had a α < 0.5, fixed dosing could have provided a more consistent exposure compared to body size‐based dosing. To better dose ADCs, other dosing approaches have been explored. Recently, Elahere was approved with AIBW‐based dosing (2022) as it offers a better correction of the exposure difference across subjects with scaling exponent (α) closer to 1 (α = 1.07 for AIBW). Further evaluation of different ADC body size dosing approaches is warranted to optimize patient outcomes.
Although the scope of this review covered a wide range of modalities with more than a decade’s worth of approvals, this study still had limitations. Namely, non‐linear clearance was not considered, which is common for TPs exhibiting target‐mediated drug disposition. The calculation of AUC difference using α may not be exact when non‐linear clearance is present but will be close when the contribution of non‐linear clearance is low, which is the case for many drugs to achieve target saturation. Additionally, the small sample size for certain modalities (e.g., fusion proteins, bispecific antibodies) limits the ability to draw definitive conclusions for these subcategories. Although not discussed in detail, contributions from other covariates to IIV should also be considered, as discussed previously in Wang et al. and Zhang et al. Future research should expand the scope of analysis to include body size covariate contributions to overall IIV and its impact on dosing strategy, as discussed in Wang et al.
In conclusion, this study confirms the finding by Wang et al. and Zhang et al. and continues to support their recommendations. For non‐ADC drugs, fixed dosing is recommended for FIH trials. The dosing approach for subsequent trials and approved dose should be based on the impact of body size effect on PK and therapeutic window.

FUNDING
No funding was received for this work.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors declared no competing interests for this work.
Fixed dosing versus body size‐based dosing of monoclonal antibodies in adult clinical trials
Fixed dosing versus body size‐based dosing of therapeutic peptides and proteins in adults
2020 FDA TIDES (peptides and oligonucleotides) harvest
2021 FDA TIDES (peptides and oligonucleotides) harvest
2022 FDA TIDES (peptides and oligonucleotides) harvest
2023 FDA TIDES (peptides and oligonucleotides) harvest
Therapeutic peptides: current applications and future directions
Drugs@FDA: FDA‐Approved Drugs
ClinicalTrials.gov [Internet]
Body weight and the shape of the natural distribution of weight, in very large samples of German, Austrian and Norwegian conscripts