A scoping review approach for synthesizing and mapping research in anesthesia and pain medicine
A scoping review (ScR) is a widely used method of evidence synthesis for identifying and mapping the available evidence on a specific topic, field, concept, or issue. This article presents the guidelines for conducting a ScR using a systematic and rigorous methodology. The steps for conducting a ScR, illustrated with examples from anesthesia and pain medicine research, are as follows: (1) building a review team, (2) formulating broad research questions, (3) developing and registering a ScR protocol, (4) identifying relevant studies through a systematic search, (5) extracting data using predefined templates, (6) analyzing and presenting the evidence, (7) consulting with stakeholders and/or experts, and (8) reporting the results transparently. ScRs are valuable methods of evidence synthesis, enabling researchers in anesthesia and pain medicine to map and explore the breadth of existing evidence.

INTRODUCTION
Scoping reviews (ScRs) are an increasingly common type of literature review aimed at identifying and mapping the range of evidence available on a given topic, field, concept, or issue, regardless of the type of evidence (i.e., primary research, reviews, or non-empirical evidence) within or across contexts. ScR is exploratory and flexible, focusing on broad review questions regarding complex or heterogeneous topics across diverse sources of evidence, in contrast to the more focused questions on comparative effectiveness of interventions addressed in systematic reviews. Notably, risk-of-bias assessment is considered optional in ScRs, as their purpose is to map the available evidence rather than to provide a synthesized and clinically meaningful answer to a review question. Key features of a ScR do not include pooled estimates from quantitative synthesis, such as meta-analyses, to inform decision-making in clinical practice and policy.
Nevertheless, ScR has recently been recognized as a valuable approach to evidence synthesis for the following reasons: (1) identifying existing evidence and research gaps in a field through a systematic and transparent process; (2) clarifying concepts, definitions, characteristics, or factors related to a particular topic for research planning, conduct, or implementation; (3) contributing to clinical practice guideline development by identifying and understanding existing guidelines that could be adopted, adapted, or developed; and (4) providing a foundation for systematic reviews or understanding the existing evidence on a topic. Additionally, ScR has considerable potential to guide research priorities by identifying key issues, advancing research by synthesizing existing evidence, justifying new studies to address knowledge gaps, and monitoring emerging evidence in rapidly evolving fields. Table 1 summarizes the key differences between systematic and ScRs to aid researchers in determining when to select a ScR.
This article aims to explain the main steps, methodological characteristics, and limitations for researchers intending to conduct a ScR, based on the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) ScR guidance, with relevant examples from published anesthesia and pain medicine research. Two primary examples are presented: one identifying various pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic interventions for pediatric postoperative nausea and vomiting (PONV), and the other investigating regional and neuraxial anesthesia techniques for spinal surgery.

HOW TO SYNTHESIZE AND MAP THE AVAILABLE RESEARCH EVIDENCE AND EXAMPLES OF PUBLISHED ANESTHESIA AND PAIN MEDICAL RESEARCH
Fig. 1 illustrates the overall JBI-based ScR process. Each step of the ScR process is explained in detail using two representative ScRs.

Building a review team
To ensure methodological rigor and transparency, a ScR should be conducted by an appropriate review team rather than by a single researcher. Similar to a systematic review team, a ScR team should include content experts who contribute to understanding the breadth and depth of the topic, methodological experts experienced in conducting ScRs, and information science experts to develop a comprehensive search strategy (Table 2).

Creating broad research questions
During the development of review questions, the review team faced the challenge of formulating questions due to their broad nature and purpose. An iterative process is necessary to determine the appropriate scope, refine the review questions, align them with the review objectives, and clarify the relevant population, concept, and context using insights from existing literature.
The “PCC” framework, comprising population (P), concept (C), and context (C), is recommended as a guide to formulate clear and relevant review questions and eligibility criteria for a ScR. If ScR focuses on the details of the research designs used in a specific area of research, it may not require specification of the target participants. However, the concept or focus explored by the ScR should be explicitly articulated to delineate the scope and breadth of a review. This concept may be related to interventions or phenomena of interest, as well as specific outcomes relevant to the ScR, which are typically described in greater detail in a standard systematic review.
The scope of a ScR varies depending on the research question. The context should be explicitly specified and may include geographical or cultural factors, discipline, study setting, study design, or an open context, depending on the review question.
A ScR may have broad review questions with specific sub-questions to map available evidence in a given field, ensuring that the evidence is systematically included, analyzed, and presented. Therefore, a clear review question grounded in the PCC framework guides the development of the eligibility criteria, facilitates the design of the literature search, and helps reviewers decide which sources to include in the ScR. In the two ScR examples, the review questions and objectives were structured using the PCC framework. Context was the study design in the ScR by Pankiv et al., whereas Ní Eochagáin et al. adopted an open context (Table 3).

Developing and registering ScR review protocol
Similar to the systematic review protocol, the ScR protocol provides a plan for conducting a ScR and is essential for minimizing reporting bias. Usually, the ScR protocol should include a definition aligned with objective/s and question/s, development of inclusion and exclusion criteria aligned with the objective/s and question/s, and a description of the planned approach to evidence search, selection, extraction, analysis, and presentation of review findings. However, ScRs are both iterative and flexible. While any deviations from the protocol should be transparently reported, adjustments to the questions, inclusion/exclusion criteria, and searches may be made during the review.
After developing a protocol, review teams register it in an online database of review protocols, such as the Open Science Framework; however, PROSPERO does not currently allow ScR registration. There are a range of medical and healthcare journals including Systematic Reviews, BMC Medical Research Methodology, PLOS One, BMJ Open, the Journal of Advanced Nursing and so on. Registering the ScR protocol enhances transparency in conducting and reporting ScR and helps reduce the unintended duplication of reviews. A description of the registration of the review protocol should be provided in the Methods section of the peer-reviewed publication. In two examples of ScRs, Gawel et al. registered their review protocol publicly in the Open Science Framework, whereas Pankiv et al. provided a review protocol as supplementary material in their published article (Table 4). To reduce research duplication, publishing a review protocol in a peer-reviewed journal or registering it in a publicly accessible database at an early stage of the review process is recommended.

Identifying relevant studies through systematic search
An optimal ScR search strategy should be designed to identify both published and unpublished sources of evidence. Hence, ScR can include any type of evidence source, such as primary research studies (quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods), systematic reviews and meta-analyses, letters, guidelines, websites, blogs, regulatory documents, reports, and patent records. However, reviewers may decide to restrict the inclusion of certain sources if they consider only particular types as relevant and provide appropriate information to answer the review questions. Any limitations of the search strategy are explicitly reported and justified. If the ScR sought to identify the existing literature reporting ultrasound-guided nerve blocks performed by emergency physicians, only quantitative studies might be considered in developing the search strategy because qualitative research was unlikely to contain relevant information to answer the review questions.
Similar to a systematic review, the search strategy should be comprehensive, typically encompassing electronic databases, reference list scanning, and manual searches. The search for relevant evidence may involve multiple electronic databases, such as MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane Library, CINAHL, and PsycINFO. Reviewers should search the gray literature, including Scopus, Web of Science, Google Scholar, and websites of major institutions, on the topic of interest if the review questions focus on emerging topics with limited published evidence. The engagement of a librarian or consultation with experienced methodologists is recommended to develop a search strategy, including keywords, Medical Subject Headings, and text words, and to adapt the search strategy according to database interface features. In two examples of ScRs, review teams reported comprehensive searches across multiple databases: electronic databases to retrieve peer-reviewed journal articles and the Web of Science, Google Scholar, and Scopus to search for gray literature. Pankiv et al. searched trial registries to identify ongoing clinical trials (Table 5).
Similar to the study selection of a systematic review, the relevant study selection process was performed by independent reviewers based on the eligibility criteria, beginning with the screening of titles and abstracts, followed by a full-text review. Any discrepancies in the study selection were resolved through team discussion or consultation with a third author. Notably, in ScR, the study selection process can incorporate post hoc or revised inclusion and exclusion criteria through new familiarity with the subject matter gained by reading the studies. Therefore, reviewers are required to clearly and transparently report post hoc modifications to the review protocol in the corresponding ScR to reduce bias and facilitate the replication of review findings.

Data extraction using pre-defined templates
Data extraction in ScR is a reflective process, whereby reviewers iteratively extract information relevant to the objective of the review and align it with questions from individual studies. Moreover, the data extraction form may be refined through collaboration within the review team during the pilot data extraction stage using samples of studies included in the review.
Although the data to be extracted should be relevant to the PCC of the review questions, typical charting data include author, publication year, country, study design, study population, sample size, methodologies, outcome measures, study findings, and future directions. More specific categories of data extraction should be adjusted and clarified to ensure the mapping and understanding of a given review question. If the prespecified extraction template is changed between the protocol stage and the scope of the ScR, this change should be documented in the full ScR. In accordance with methodological guidance, two exemplar reviews reported that independent reviewers conducted data extraction either by refining the data extraction tool following pilot testing or by achieving a group consensus on a data collection template (Table 6).

Analyzing and presenting the available evidence
As mentioned in Table 1, there are two key differences between a ScR and a systematic review. First, ScR does not assess the risk of bias of included studies, as critical appraisal is optional in the conduct guidance. Second, ScR does not generate summary findings from individual studies using meta-analysis or qualitative thematic synthesis using meta-aggregation and meta-ethnography, because its aim is to provide an overview and map the existing body of evidence.
Although there are no defined rules for presenting results, reviewers can use diverse formats, including tabular summaries outlining the PCC, methodological characteristics, and other pertinent findings. In general, a numerical analysis of the extent and characteristics of the studies is presented in tables and charts. Additionally, data visualization, such as bubble charts, histograms, and tree diagrams accompanied by a narrative summary, is recommended to enhance a range of stakeholder understandings aligned with review questions and objectives. If an ScR focuses on qualitative research, the extracted data may be textual and descriptive, enabling descriptive content analysis through predefined coding and thematic categories. Reviewers can use software such as Microsoft Excel, PowerPoint slides, Flourish Studio (accessed from https://flourish.studio/), and evidence gap maps (accessed from https://www.3ieimpact.org/evidence-hub/evidence-gap-maps) for data visualization. In line with methodological guidance, two exemplar reviews reported review findings aligned with the review questions using tables and figures based on basic descriptive analyses to map and chart the available evidence (Table 7).

Consulting with stakeholders and/or experts
According to JBI guidance, consultation with stakeholders, information scientists, and experts, including practitioners, patients, and consumers, is recommended across ScR stages, from topic prioritization and review protocol development to the review and dissemination of findings. This process involved informing external stakeholders of the ScR findings and seeking insights to ensure the validity of the results. However, stakeholder consultations may sometimes be omitted in ScRs, owing to time and resource restrictions. Nonetheless, stakeholder and/or expert engagement in the ScR process may contribute to the successful completion of a significant ScR and affect the main findings and recommendations. Both examples of ScR did not report the involvement of stakeholders for consultation. Unfortunately, none of the ScR examples reported stakeholder consultations.

Reporting the results transparently
To improve transparency in reporting ScRs, reviewers should follow the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR) guidelines. This reporting guideline, consisting of a 20-item checklist, outlines the components of a ScR and specifies the essential elements for transparent reporting (Table 8). The PRISMA-ScR is currently under update (https://osf.io/489ck).

CONCLUSION
A ScR is a specific type of evidence synthesis that can provide a map or snapshot of the existing body of evidence, offer information to inform priority setting in the research agenda, and suggest implications for future research based on knowledge gaps identified from the review results. However, researchers should acknowledge that ScRs do not formally assess the risk of bias in included studies; therefore, the quality of evidence derived from review findings cannot be assured. Without assessing risk of bias, the strength of recommendations and the certainty of evidence required to inform clinical decisions cannot be determined. Instead, a ScR enables reviewers to map the scope and extent of existing evidence relevant to the review question. Particularly, a ScR is useful for identifying and emphasizing research gaps when the topic or concept of interest is complex, heterogeneous, or emerging. Authors planning to undertake ScRs should adhere to JBI methodological guidance and report transparently using the PRISMA-ScR checklist to ensure high-quality reviews.
FUNDING
None.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
During the preparation of this paper, the author used ChatGPT (OpenAI) to enhance language clarity. The manuscript was reviewed and edited by the author, who takes full responsibility for its content.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this article and its supplementary information files.

REFERENCES
What are scoping reviews? Providing a formal definition of scoping reviews as a type of evidence synthesis
Guidance for conducting systematic scoping reviews
Systematic review or scoping review? Guidance for authors when choosing between a systematic or scoping review approach
Undertaking a scoping review: a practical guide for nursing and midwifery students, clinicians, researchers, and academics
"How-to": scoping review?
A scoping review describes methods used to identify, prioritize and display gaps in health research
Scoping reviews and their role in identifying research priorities
Scoping reviews (2020). JBI Manual for Evidence Synthesis [Internet]
Prophylaxis for pediatric postoperative nausea and vomiting: a scoping review of clinical trials
Regional and neuraxial anaesthesia techniques for spinal surgery: a scoping review
Scoping studies: advancing the methodology
An introduction to scoping reviews
Large scoping reviews: managing volume and potential chaos in a pool of evidence sources
From Arksey and O'Malley and beyond: customizations to enhance a team-based, mixed approach to scoping review methodology
Updated methodological guidance for the conduct of scoping reviews
Updated methodological guidance for the conduct of scoping reviews
Development of a scoping review protocol. JBI Manual for Evidence Synthesis [Internet]
Scoping reviews: reinforcing and advancing the methodology and application
Emergency physician-performed ultrasound-guided nerve blocks: a scoping review of the published literature
Practical guide to undertaking scoping reviews for pharmacy clinicians, researchers and policymakers
Steps for conducting a scoping review
The scoping review: a flexible, inclusive, and iterative approach to knowledge synthesis
What is scoping review?
Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework
Data visualisation in scoping reviews and evidence maps on health topics: a cross-sectional analysis
Mapping reviews, scoping reviews, and evidence and gap maps (EGMs): the same but different- the "Big Picture" review family
The scoping review approach to synthesize nursing research evidence
Prisma extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation
Progress notes: methods for research evidence synthesis: the scoping review approach
Conducting high quality scoping reviews-challenges and solutions
Scoping review process based on Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) methodological guidance.
Essential Methodology Differences between Scoping Review and Systematic Review
Scoping review	Systematic review	 	Purpose of evidence synthesis			 		To map the literature and provide an overview of evidence, concepts, or studies in a particular field	To inform the feasibility, appropriateness, effectiveness, or meaning of an intervention, prognosis of a condition, diagnostic accuracy of a test, and experiences of a phenomenon	 	To identify and analyze knowledge gaps	To use the results of the evidence synthesis as the basis for the development of a clinical guideline	 	To clarify key concepts/definitions in the literature		 	To examine how research is conducted on a certain topic or field		 	To identify key characteristics or factors related to a concept		 	To identify existing guidelines that could be adopted, adapted, or developed		 	Critical appraisal/risk of bias assessment	Optional	Mandatory	 	Analysis	Basic descriptive analysis	Meta-analysis, structured synthesis qualitative thematic synthesis	 		Descriptive qualitative techniques		 	Impact	To inform future research priorities and policy	To support evidence-informed policy and practice, strengthen decision-making, contribute to guideline development, and direct future research
Adapted from the articles of Pollock et al. (J Adv Nurs 2021; 77: 2102-13) and Pollock et al. (J Clin Epidemiol 2024; 176: 111572).
Example: Building a Review Team
Exemplars: Building a review team	 	Pankiv et al., 2023 	Although explicitly described in the paper, the authors were composed of content experts and a librarian-scientist based on the authors’ affiliation.	 	Ní Eochagáin et al., 2022 	A multidisciplinary research team, comprising experts in knowledge synthesis methodology, information science, and anaesthesia for spinal surgery. All review members had prior experience in conducting scoping or systematic reviews.
Example: Creating Broad Research Questions
Exemplars: PCC framework	 	Pankiv et al., 2023 	To assess the body of evidence around prophylactic strategies, both pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic, targeting pediatric PONV.	 	• P: Pediatric patients undergoing general anesthesia	 	• C: Pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic forms of PONV prophylax	 	• C: Randomized clinical trials	 	1. “What are the existing pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic prophylaxes for pediatric PONV (including different doses of pharmacologic prophylaxes)?”	 	2. “What type of surgery is most investigated for pediatric PONV?”	 	3. “What measurement tools are used to assess PONV?”	 	4. “What other outcomes are measured in addition to PONV?”	 	5. “In reporting trial results, is pain properly measured and addressed?”	 	6. “For pharmacologic PONV prophylactic strategies, are dose-dependent antiemetic effects studied? If so, is there an optimal dose and/or dose above which patients experience side effects?”	 	Ní Eochagáin et al., 2022 	To map the available evidence regarding the use of regional and neuraxial anesthesia techniques for adult patients undergoing spinal surgery.	 	• P: Adult patients undergoing spinal surgery	 	• C: Use of regional and neuraxial anesthesia techniques	 	• C: Open context	 	1. “How are neuraxial anaesthesia techniques being used for patients undergoing spinal surgery?”	 	2. “How are peripheral regional anaesthesia techniques being used for patients undergoing spinal surgery?”	 	3. “What patient outcomes are measured in studies of patients undergoing spinal surgery?”
PCC: population, concept and context, PONV: postoperative nausea and vomiting.
Example: Developing and Registering a Review Protocol
Exemplars: Developing and registering a review protocol	 	Pankiv et al., 2023 	“The protocol can be accessed in the Electronic Supplementary Material (ESM) eAppendix 1.”	 	Gawel et al., 2025 	“This study was registered with Open Science Framework on September 19, 2024.”
Example: Searching for the Available Evidence
Exemplars: Searching for the available evidence	 	Pankiv et al., 2023 	“We searched the following databases from their inception: MEDLINE, MEDLINE ePubs Ahead of Print and In- Process, Embase Classic Embase, the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, and Cochrane CENTRAL (all via the Ovid platform); Scopus (Elsevier), the Web of Science Core Collection (Clarivate Analytics); and trial registries: ClinicalTrials.gov (National Institutes of Health), the World Health Organization International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, and the International Standard Randomized Controlled Trial Number Registry.”	 	Ní Eochagáin et al., 2022 	“We performed a search of ﬁve databases (MEDLINE, Embase, EBSCO, Scopus, and Web of Science) on February 28, 2021. We limited our search to articles published since January 1980 to provide an overview of past and current spinal surgery and anaesthesia techniques. Next, we performed a Google Scholar search for the ﬁrst 500 results using the same terms and dates. Finally, reference lists from included studies were also searched to identify any additional relevant publications.”
Example: Data Extraction Using Pre-Defined Templates
Exemplars: Extracting the evidence	 	Pankiv et al., 2023 	“A data collection worksheet was created using DistillerSRTM (Evidence Partners Inc., Ottawa, ON, Canada), designed to answer the six research questions mentioned above. Following group consensus, eligible trials in full were uploaded to this platform. Two independent reviewers (E. P. and E. A.) inputted data into the worksheet following thorough article review, with a third reviewer (K. A.) clarifying any uncertainty in extracting data as required.”	 	Ní Eochagáin et al., 2022 	“ANE and BNS designed the data extraction tool by inde- pendently reviewing ﬁve articles and then comparing results. The extraction tool was modiﬁed based on the pilot and then used to extract data from the remaining full texts of articles.”
Example: Summarizing and Presenting the Evidence
Exemplars: Summarizing and presenting the evidence	 	Pankiv et al., 2023 	“For demographic data, we qualitatively synthesized our ﬁndings on an aggregate level. Means and standard deviations were used to describe normally distributed continuous variables, while categorical variables were expressed as counts and proportions.”	 	Tables present the main pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic interventions, doses of the main pharmacologic interventions, the type of surgery most frequently investigated for pediatric postoperative nausea and vomiting, and secondary outcomes assessed in addition to postoperative nausea and vomiting, using numerical analysis.	 	Fig. 2 shows that the size of the circle over each country indicates the proportion of the 188 trials included in this scoping review.	 	Fig. 3 shows temporal trends in pharmacologic prophylactic interventions using a bubble chart.	 	Ní Eochagáin et al., 2022 	According to the specific review question, the tables provided an overview of neuraxial techniques and regional anesthesia techniques for spinal surgery. Tables included study details, type of anesthesia, surgical procedure, study designs, number of patients, primary outcomes, and the study’s conclusion.
Summary of PRISMA-ScR Checklist
Section	No. of items	Explanation of checklist item	 	Title	1	• Report a scoping review as a publication type	 	Abstract	1	• Provide a structured summary	 	Introduction	2	• Describe the rationale for the review in the context of what is already known	 	• Provide an explicit statement of the review questions and objectives	 	Methods	9	• Indicate whether a review protocol exists	 	• Specify characteristics of the sources of evidence used as eligibility criteria with justification	 	• Describe all information sources in the search, with the date of the most recent search	 	• Present the full electronic search strategy for at least 1 database	 	• State the process for selecting sources of evidence	 	• Describe the methods and list of data extraction from the included sources of evidence	 	• If conducted critical appraisal was conducted, provide a rationale for conducting a critical appraisal of included sources of evidence; describe the methods used and how this information was used in any data synthesis	 	• Synthesis of results	 	Results	5	• Selection of sources of evidence	 	• Characteristics of sources of evidence	 	• If a critical appraisal is conducted, present data on the critical appraisal of included sources of evidence	 	• Results of individual sources of evidence	 	• Present synthesis of results	 	Discussion	3	• Summarize the main results, link to the review questions and objectives	 	• Discuss the limitations of the scoping review process	 	• Provide a general interpretation of the results with respect to the review questions and objectives, with potential implications	 	Funding	1	• Describe sources of funding for the included sources of evidence, as well as sources of funding for the scoping review
PRISMA-ScR: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews.