The influence of direct anterior approach and postero‐lateral approach on wound complications after total hip arthroplasty: A meta‐analysis
Abstract
To date, we have reviewed the synthesis literature critically through four databases: PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library and Web of Science. Eight relevant studies were examined after compliance with the criteria for inclusion and exclusion, as well as documentation quality evaluation. This report covered all randomised, controlled studies of total hip arthroplasty (THA) comparing the direct anterior approach (DAA) with the postero‐lateral approach (PLA). The main result was surgical site infection rate. The secondary results were duration of the operation, length of the incision and VAS score after surgery. The results of the meta‐analyses of wound infections in the present trial did not show any statistically significant difference in DAA versus PLA (between DAA and PLA) (OR = 1.42, 95%CI: 0.5 to 4.04, p = 0.51). Compared with PLA, DAA had shorter surgical incision (WMD = −3.2, 95%CI: −4.00 to −2.41; p < 0.001) and longer operative times(WMD = 14. 67, 95%CI: 9.24 to 20.09; p < 0.001). Postoperative VAS scores were markedly lower in DAA compared with PLA within 6 weeks of surgery (p < 0.05), with low heterogeneities(I 2 = 0). We found that DAA did not differ significantly from PLA in terms of the risk of wound infection for THA and that the surgical incisions was shorter and less postoperative pain after surgery, even though DAA surgery takes longer.

INTRODUCTION
THA, as a standard surgery, has been widely applied to treat terminal stage diseases like osteonecrosis of the femoral head, hip osteoarthritis and femoral neck fractures. It has been demonstrated that hip operation can relieve the pain in the injured hip, enhance the function of the hip and improve the quality of life. However, about 7% to 15% of patients also report feeling unsatisfied after operation. Postoperative pain occurs in THA patients, which can make functional recovery and early mobility more challenging after surgery. Related articles report the cause of pain may be related to failure of internal fixation devices, instability, or trauma from surgery resulting in soft tissue damage. Selecting the best operative route may decrease this risk thereby increasing THA results.
A number of operative methods may be employed for THA, including the anterior approaches, lateral approach, anterolateral(Hardinger) and direct lateral approach, and postero‐lateral approaches. However, there is no evidence to suggest which access is the best in controlling postoperative complications. The two most commonly used THA surgery approaches are DAA and PLA. The PLA is one of the main methods of THA surgery. The DAA is regarded as a true minimal invasive technique since it causes minimal muscular wound and is carried out by means of a tiny slit between the hip and the muscle, and its use has been shown to be advantageous in the patient's early postoperative recovery, with the ability to provide effective relief of postoperative pain and early symptomatic improvement in patients relative to THA with the posterior‐lateral approach.
Yue et al. showed that while DAA might allow for shorter hospitalization time and quicker healing at an early stage, there is not enough evidence to determine which of the two approaches is preferable for THA. Other studies have shown that DAA is more likely to cause postoperative complications than PLA, especially neuropathic paralysis of the thigh lateral skin nerve. Several meta‐analyses have been published comparing the two procedures, but their results are not convincing enough. Most of the articles did not focus on analyzing the differences in postoperative complications, especially wound infection.
Accordingly, we conducted a meta‐analyses with strict inclusion criteria and incorporated the latest randomised, controlled studies to compare DDA versus PLA with respect to wound complications in THA, operative time, incision length and VAS score.

METHODS

Selection strategy
We were based on the PICOS opinion identification method and established classification criteria.
patients undergoing THA;
these studies were prospective studies, randomised trials, or retrospective studies;
this study included a comparison of DAA and PLA;
a study containing complications after THA.
The inclusion criteria for this study are given below:
non‐randomised controlled trials;
research beyond THA;
full article not accessible;
research in abstracts, conferences, case reports, reviews and duplicates and letters to the editor.
Exclusion criteria used in this study:

Search strategy
Through a comprehensive and systemic review of all studies conducted at PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library and Web Science, it was conducted with keywords extracted from medical subject headings for the time period from database creation to July 2023, and we imported all relevant documents into EndNote for processing according to the finding methods in Table 1. A critical review was conducted to ensure that all relevant study results were relevant and accurate throughout the trial.
Search strategy.
No.	Query	 	#1	total hip replacement [Title/Abstract] OR total hip arthroplasty [Title/Abstract] OR THA [Title/Abstract] OR THR [Title/Abstract]	 	#2	direct anterior [Title/Abstract] OR DAA [Title/Abstract]	 	#3	posterolateral [Title/Abstract] OR posterior [Title/Abstract] OR PLA [Title/Abstract] OR PA [Title/Abstract]	 	#4	infection [All Files] OR dehiscence [All Files] OR wound complication* [All Files] OR haemorrhage [All Files] OR haematoma [All Files]	 	#5	#1 AND #2 AND #3 AND #4

Data extraction process
For this experimental data screening, we got information from the paper's main author, country, date of publication, size of the sample size and type of study. We independently screened all selected papers by inclusion and exclusion criteria. If a dispute arose during the screening process, a third independent reviewer was requested to address this dispute.

Quality assessment
The Cochrane Risk Bias Assessment Tool was applied to assess the risk of bias in both articles by two authors. The disputes resulting from the evaluation were settled by discussing with a senior researcher. In this study, we evaluated the results using 7 dimensions: Sampling Bias, Selection Bias, Performance Bias, Detection Bias, Attrition Bias, Reporting Bias and Other Bias. Determine whether there is a low, high, or uncertain risk of bias in all 3 dimensions.

Data analysis
The research is done under Review Manager 5.3. We first write all the data into Excel, then divide it into discrete and sequential variables. Continuous variables (operative time, incision length and VAS score at postoperative follow‐ups) were expressed as the mean difference (WMD) from the 95% confidence intervals of CI. In the absence of statistical heterogeneity (I 2 < 50%), a fixed effect model is applied, and in the presence of heterogeneous data (I 2 > 50%), a random effect model is applied.

Assessment of reporting bias
To assess the statistical bias of the sample, we use funnel plots to demonstrate the logarithmic relationship.

RESULTS

Study selection
We ended up with 8 randomised controlled trials out of 239 articles that were included in this study after screening, and these studies corresponded to articles published between 2014 and 2023 (Figure 1). The results of the trials are shown in Table 2. There were 615 patients at baseline, of whom 303 received DDA and 312 received PLA. The overall sample size ranged from 40–130.
Flow chart of the study.
Distribution characteristics of the selected studies used for meta‐analysis.
Study	Country	Year	DAA	PLA	Male/female DAA:PA	 	Cao	China	2020	65	65	27/38:28/37	 	Cheng	Australia	2017	35	38	15/20:18/20	 	Jin	China	2023	50	50	26/24:21/29	 	Nambiar	Australia	2021	23	29	11/12:13/16	 	Rykov	Netherlands	2017	23	23	8/15:11/12	 	Taunton	America	2014	27	27	12/15:13/14	 	Yang	China	2021	20	20	15/5:15/5	 	Zhao	China	2017	60	60	24/36:26/34

Risk of bias
The meta‐analysis was all high‐quality randomised, controlled studies. There was no significant confounding bias, and the risk of selection and outcome measure bias was low in all studies. Detailed risk of bias is shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Risk of bias diagram.
Summary of risk of bias.

Clinical outcomes

Wound infection
A total of 355 patients were included in the THA study to compare DAA and PLA wound infection. No significant difference between DAA and PLA was observed (OR = 1.42, 95%CI: 0.50to 4.04; p = 0.51, I 2 = 0%, Figure 4).
Forest plot of the effect of direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach on wound complications after total hip arthroplasty.

Duration of surgery
A total of 509 patients were enrolled in six trials to compare DAA versus PLA operations in THA. DAA needs much more operational time (14.67 min, 95%CI: 9.24 to 20.09; p < 0.001, Figure 5). Statistical heterogeneity existed between the six studies (I 2 = 90%).
Forest plot of the effect of direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach on duration of surgery after total hip arthroplasty.

Incision length
In five trials, 463 patients were enrolled to compare the DAA versus the PLA for the THA. The DAA has significantly improved incision length, with heterogeneity from study to study (MD = −3.20 cm, 95%CI: −4.00 to −2.41; p < 0.001, I 2 = 95%, Figure 6).
Forest plot of the effect of direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach on Incision length after total hip arthroplasty.

VAS score (1 day after surgery)
In three clinical trials, 260 subjects were enrolled to compare the postoperative 1‐day VAS scores of DAA versus PLA after surgery for THA. VAS is more significantly lower in DAA (MD = −0.62, 95%CI: −0.87 to −0.38; p < 0.001, I 2 = 0%, Figure 7).
Forest plot of the effect of direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach on VAS score (1 day after surgery) after total hip arthroplasty.

VAS score (3 days after surgery)
In 3 clinical trials, 260 subjects were enrolled in studies to compare the VAS scores for DAA and PLA after surgery for THA27, 30, 31. The VAS score was lower in DAA group 3 days post operation compared with PLA (MD = ‐0.68, 95%CI: −0.82to −0.54; p < 0.001, I 2 = 0%, Figure 8).
Forest plot of the effect of direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach on VAS score (3 day after surgery) after total hip arthroplasty.

VAS score (1 week after surgery)
In three trials involving 270 patients, DAA versus PLA VAS scores one week after surgery were compared with those in PLA. The results of DAA score were much low (WMD = ‐0.76, 95%CI: −0.94to −0.58; p < 0.001, I 2 = 36%, Figure 9).
Forest plot of the effect of direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach on VAS score (1 week after surgery) after total hip arthroplasty.

VAS score (6 weeks after surgery)
Two studies were carried out in 170 patients to compare DAA and PLA VAS scores for 6 weeks in THA. VAS score was more significant lower in DAA (WMD = −0.39, 95%CI: −0.61 to −0.16; p < 0.001, I 2 = 0%, Figure 10).
Forest plot of the effect of direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach on VAS score (6 week after surgery) after total hip arthroplasty.

VAS score (3 months after surgery)
In three studies, 270 patients were involved in comparison of DAA and PLA VAS scores in THA at 3 months post operation. No statistical significance was found in PLA and DAA (MD = −0.10,95%CI: −0.23 to 0.03; p = 0.13, I 2 = 0%, Figure 11).
Forest plot of the effect of direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach on VAS score (3 months after surgery) after total hip arthroplasty.
Most randomised controlled studies were found to be more scientifically rigorous in methodology and free from bias in selection. After going through the analysis of the qualitative funnel plots, the studies were likewise not found to be biased. This is illustrated in Figures 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
Funnel plot of results for wound complications on direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach after total hip arthroplasty.
Funnel plot of results for Duration of surgery on direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach after total hip arthroplasty.
Funnel plot of results for Incision length on direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach after total hip arthroplasty.
Funnel plot of results for VAS score (1 day after surgery) on direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach after total hip arthroplasty.
Funnel plot of results for VAS score (3 day after surgery) on direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach after total hip arthroplasty.
Funnel plot of results for VAS score (1 week after surgery) on direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach after total hip arthroplasty.
Funnel plot of results for VAS score (6 week after surgery) on direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach after total hip arthroplasty.
Funnel plot of results for VAS score (3 months after surgery) on direct anterior approach compared with postero‐lateral approach after total hip arthroplasty.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we systematically reviewed and performed meta‐analyses of 615 participants from 8 randomised, controlled studies, to determine whether DAA versus PLA were different for THA with respect to wound complications. In comparing clinical results, there were no statistical differences in DAA versus PLA for wound infection and we observed that DAA had significantly smaller incision length and significantly more heterogeneous between trials (p = 0.01). Our analysis found that the VAS score in the DAA group was significantly lower than that in the PLA group within 6 weeks after surgery (p < 0.05). There were no statistical differences in DAA versus PLA for VAS scores at 3 months after surgery. However, the operative time was significantly increased in the DAA compared with the PLA, with an average of 14.67 min (p < 0.001).
This is a meta‐analysis of RCTs that directly synthesises a comparison of DAA versus PLA for THA Wound Complications. Our study only included randomised controlled trials and systematically searched for higher quality randomised controlled research trials related to wound complications, systematically comparing wound infections and postoperative recovery, Provision of Level I Evidence for Evidence‐Based Medicine. In THA, there has been increasing interest in minimizing muscular damage and minor surgical procedures. The best operative approach to THA, however, is still a matter of debate. A number of articles have shown an advantage in DAA compared with PLA in the initial phase (3–6 months), but there was no difference in function after one year. One study found a significant reduction in the use of anaesthetic drugs and a significant reduction in pain at 6 weeks in the DAA group. Better recovery was achieved with DAA in THA. This is consistent with our study, VAS scores were significantly lower with DAA compared with PLA at 6 weeks, Takahito et al. DAA and PLA have been shown to have beneficial effects on functional performance, quality of life and survival at the end of the 5‐year follow up period. Similarly, there was no statistical difference between DAA and PLA in VAS scores after 3 months in this trial. What is interesting is that DAA patients have far more time to operate compared with PLA, though they have a shorter cut and fewer muscular injuries. This is related to the limitations of minimally invasive surgery, including limited exposure and difficulty in recognizing anatomical landmarks intraoperatively. Likewise, a lot of cohort studies have shown that the length of the operation is linked to an increased incidence of complications following complete hip replacement.
There are several drawbacks to this research. Firstly, the absence of multi‐centre randomised, large‐sample and randomised trials can produce inaccurate results. Secondly, there is little information about the incidence of trauma, and we have included no more in‐depth analysis of injury complications, so a more comprehensive, randomised, controlled trial is needed. Last but not least, we have insufficient data for subpopulations like age, gender, ethnic origin and ethnic origin, which means that more research is required to exclude the possibility of confounders.

CONCLUSION
In total hip arthroplasty, DAA required a longer operative time, had a significantly shorter surgical incision and had a significantly lower VAS score within 6 weeks postoperatively compared with PLA. There was no significant difference between the two groups in terms of wound infection. Further studies are needed regarding the advantages of the DAA approach.

FUNDING INFORMATION
This research was funded by the Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region's Key R&D Program for Foreign Scientific and Technological Cooperation Projects, grant number: 2022BFH02010.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data available on request from the authors.

REFERENCES
The operation of the century: total hip replacement
A comparison of hospital length of stay and short‐term morbidity between the anterior and the posterior approaches to total hip arthroplasty
Predicting dissatisfaction after total hip arthroplasty: a study of 850 patients
Total joint arthroplasties: current concepts of patient outcomes after surgery
Rapid rehabilitation and recovery with minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty
Over 25 years survival after Charnley's total hip arthroplasty
Prospective randomized study of two surgical approaches for total hip arthroplasty
Soft‐tissue changes in hip abductor muscles and tendons after total hip replacement: comparison between the direct anterior and the transgluteal approaches
Reduced postoperative pain in total hip arthroplasty after minimal‐invasive anterior approach
Standard Transgluteal versus minimal invasive anterior approach in hip arthroplasty: a prospective, consecutive cohort study
Abductor function after total hip replacement. An electromyographic and clinical review
Dislocation after total hip arthroplasty: a randomized clinical trial of a posterior approach and a modified lateral approach
Prospective randomized study of direct anterior vs postero‐lateral approach for total hip arthroplasty
A prospective randomized clinical trial in Total hip arthroplasty‐comparing early results between the direct anterior approach and the posterior approach
A prospective randomized trial of mini‐incision posterior and two‐incision total hip arthroplasty
A scoping review comparing two common surgical approaches to the hip for hemiarthroplasty
Relationship between functional anatomy of the hip and surgical approaches in Total hip arthroplasty
Orthopaedic practice in total hip arthroplasty and total knee arthroplasty: results from the global Orthopaedic registry (GLORY)
Prospective evaluation of the posterior tissue envelope and anterior capsule after anterior total hip arthroplasty
Muscle damage during MIS total hip arthroplasty: Smith‐Petersen versus posterior approach
A mini‐anterior approach to the hip for total joint replacement: optimising results: improving hip joint replacement outcomes
Comparison of direct anterior and lateral approaches in Total hip arthroplasty: a systematic review and meta‐analysis (PRISMA)
Minimally invasive total hip arthroplasty with anterior incision
Direct anterior approach versus posterolateral approach for total hip arthroplasty in the lateral decubitus position
Direct anterior total hip arthroplasty yields more rapid voluntary cessation of all walking aids: a prospective, randomized clinical trial
Posterolateral vs direct anterior approach in Total hip arthroplasty (POLADA trial): a randomized controlled trial to assess differences in serum markers
Comparison of early functional recovery after Total hip arthroplasty using a direct anterior or posterolateral approach: a randomized controlled trial
Natural outcome of hemoglobin and functional recovery after the direct anterior versus the posterolateral approach for total hip arthroplasty: a randomized study
No difference in functional, radiographic, and survivorship outcomes between direct anterior or posterior approach THA: 5‐year results of a randomized trial
Patient‐reported results of simultaneous direct anterior approach and posterolateral approach total hip arthroplasties performed in the same patients
Comparison of postoperative outcomes between bikini‐incision via direct anterior approach and posterolateral approach in simultaneous bilateral total hip arthroplasty: a randomized controlled trial
Evidence‐based medicine III: level of evidence
A clinical comparative study of the direct anterior with mini‐posterior approach: two consecutive series
John Charnley award: randomized clinical trial of direct anterior and Miniposterior approach THA: which provides better functional recovery?
Early outcome comparison between the direct anterior approach and the mini‐incision posterior approach for primary total hip arthroplasty: 150 consecutive cases
Comparison of direct anterior approach and posterior approach total hip arthroplasty: more than 5‐year follow‐up
Operative time affects short‐term complications in Total joint arthroplasty
Impact of operative time on adverse events following primary total joint arthroplasty
Morbidity and mortality in the thirty‐day period following total hip arthroplasty: risk factors and incidence
Thirty‐day postoperative complications and mortality following total knee arthroplasty: incidence and risk factors among a national sample of 15,321 patients