Assessing dissociation: A systematic review and evaluation of existing measures
Objective
This review aimed to assess the psychometric properties and methodological quality of existing dissociation measures.
Methods
MEDLINE, Embase, and PsycINFO were searched in May 2023 using comprehensive search terms for ‘dissociation’ combined with terms for ‘measurement’ and ‘psychometric properties’. The review was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42023423485) and followed PRISMA and COSMIN guidelines. We assessed content validity, structural validity, cross-cultural validity, and different indices of reliability comprising 1) reliability (test-retest, inter-rater, intra-rater), 2) internal consistency, and 3) measurement error.
Results
Of 7570 studies, 170 were eligible, revealing 44 measures of dissociation (86% trait dissociation, 14% state dissociation) and their 14 adapted versions. None of the measures met all COSMIN criteria for good psychometric properties and high methodological quality. Overall, methodological quality was rated as follows: ‘doubtful’ for content validity, ‘adequate’ for measurement error and cross-cultural validity, and ‘very good’ for structural validity and internal consistency. Most included studies did not assess the reliability of investigated measures.
Conclusion
The Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES), adolescent DES, Peritraumatic Dissociative Experiences Questionnaire, Somatoform Dissociation Questionnaire-20, and Cambridge Depersonalisation Scale demonstrated strong evidence for measuring general, child/adolescent, trauma-related (state) or somatoform dissociation, and depersonalisation, respectively. Future research should refine or develop dissociation measures following COSMIN guidelines to ensure robust methodology and psychometric properties.
Highlights
We reviewed the properties and quality of existing dissociation measures.
44 measures and 14 adapted versions were found, most assessing trait dissociation.
Only one measure for adolescent dissociation (A-DES) met all COSMIN psychometric and quality criteria.
The Dissociative Experiences Scale is the strongest measure of trait dissociation.
Further validation and development of dissociation measures is warranted.

Introduction
Dissociation is broadly defined as a state of disruption or discontinuity in the integration of consciousness, memory, identity, emotion, perception, body representation, motor control and behaviour. This can refer to ‘state dissociation’, as in transient experiences of detachment, identity disturbance or amnesia, but can also encompass the tendency to experience, or vulnerability to develop, such dissociative states, referred to as ‘trait dissociation’. A core feature of dissociative psychopathology is elevated trait dissociation, which is found in dissociative identity disorder, depersonalisation-derealisation disorder, and dissociative amnesia, for example. A range of measures have been developed to assess one's degree of, or tendency to experience, dissociation, irrespective of its specific definition.
Dissociation, particularly dissociative disorders characterised by the experience of pronounced dissociative symptomatology, imposes a significant financial burden on society and the diagnosis and specialised treatment of such conditions can result in reduced service utilisation and associated cost over time. The prevalence of dissociative disorders has varied widely, ranging from less than 1%–11.4%, depending on the population, assessment methods, and specific dissociative disorder diagnoses. Dissociation is linked to various psychiatric conditions, especially those related to trauma, which is its significant risk factor. Additionally, dissociation can also serve as a coping mechanism against such unbearable and overwhelming experiences. Furthermore, the presence or heightened severity of dissociation can serve as a prognostic indicator in specific psychiatric disorders including borderline personality disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and functional neurological disorder. In addition, dissociation is increasingly recognised as an important feature of a range of psychiatric symptoms, such as hallucinations and psychosis. Therefore, appropriate measures for assessing dissociation are beneficial for clinicians and researchers in terms of evaluating dissociation and following treatment outcomes.
Despite the significance of, and clinical need for, robust dissociation measurement, a comprehensive and systematic review of existing measures has not been conducted recently. Neither the methodological quality, nor the psychometric properties, of such measures has been thoroughly examined. This leaves clinicians and researchers at a standstill regarding the value and rigour of different measures, and which are most well-suited to specific populations and/or dissociative symptoms. Thus, our review aims to address this gap by evaluating the methodological quality and psychometric properties, along with the relative strengths and weaknesses, of existing measures designed to assess state and trait dissociation.

Method

Search strategy
This review was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42023423485). Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines were followed, and methodological quality and psychometric properties were assessed using the COnsensus-based Standards for the selection of health Measurement INstruments (COSMIN) criteria. A narrative synthesis was conducted to summarise the findings.
In May 2023, three databases (MEDLINE, Embase, and PsycINFO) were systematically searched using comprehensive search terms for dissociation, measurement and psychometric properties (Supplementary Table 1). The search terms were combined using the “AND” operator across all three domains. The searches were performed in the abstract, title, and keywords fields. References and relevant reviews were also searched manually to identify additional sources.

Eligibility
Studies evaluating the psychometric properties of measures specifically designed to assess dissociation, published in peer-reviewed journals or books, were included. We included only measures that quantify the severity of either state or trait dissociation and can be used regardless of any experimental manipulation. There were no restrictions on publication date. Exclusion criteria were: 1) clinical interviews, 2) not published in English, 3) insufficient data or unpublished sources (e.g., doctoral theses, poster presentations), and 4) reviews and meta-analyses.

Study selection and data extraction
SW conducted the deduplication of search results. Two reviewers (SW and XH) independently screened titles and abstracts. Full-text assessment and data extraction (e.g., number of items, response method, response option, scoring range, and representative items) were carried out by SW. Any disagreements during the screening or uncertainties during data extraction were resolved through consultation with senior authors (LSMM or SP).

Quality appraisal and the COSMIN checklist
COSMIN definitions of relevant measurement properties.
Table 1
Properties	Explanation	 	Content validity	Does the measure include items relevant to the construct of interest and covering the full scope of the outcome? Evidence should be presented of an assessment concerning item relevance and scope during the development of each measure.	 	Structural validity	The items within a scale should be related to each other and can be tested by either exploratory factor analysis (EFA; explain at least 50% of all variances) or confirmatory factor analysis (CFA; factors matched the defined criteria), and Item Response Theory (IRT) with Rasch analysis.	 	Internal consistency	The items within a scale should tap into the same basic underlying construct and correlate with the overall score in case of the exclusion of that specific item. It can be tested using the value of Kuder-Richardson Formula 20 (KR-20) or Cronbach's alpha ≥0.70, for each subscale.	 	Reliability	The results remain the same or similar across the appropriate interval (test-retest) or in the rating completed by two equal groups (split-half), measured by the Intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) ≥ 0.70. It also refers to the stability of participants during their measure rating.
Two independent raters (SW and XH) completed the methodological quality assessment and psychometric properties evaluation. Cohen's kappa was 0.9, indicating a strong inter-rater reliability. The COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist was used to assess methodological quality and risk of bias of the included studies (Table 1). Each domain was rated as ‘very good’, ‘adequate’, ‘doubtful’, or ‘inadequate’ for all items within that domain. The overall rating for the methodological quality of each domain was determined based on the lowest rating among its items. Content validity was rated once as its result is applicable with other studies using identical constructs. Meanwhile, other domains (e.g., structural validity, internal consistency, cross-cultural validity, reliability, and measurement error) were assessed for methodological quality in all included studies.
The reported psychometric properties were evaluated and scored as sufficient (+), insufficient (−) or indeterminate (?) based on the criteria for good measurement properties. In addition to evaluating structural validity, internal consistency, and reliability, the assessment also encompassed cross-cultural validity in relevant studies. Specific validity types such as divergent, convergent, and concurrent validity were not included in the COSMIN framework. It is noteworthy that the COSMIN defines ‘reliability’ with a broader concept, comprised of 1) reliability (test-retest, inter-rater or intra-rater), 2) internal consistency, and 3) measurement error. As a result, ‘internal consistency’ was rated separately from reliability.

Levels of evidence
Levels of evidence.
Table 2
Level of evidence	Definition	 	Strong (+++ or ---)	There are several studies of good methodological quality assessing the measure. The symbol ‘+++’ indicates sufficient evidence of good measurement properties, while ‘---’ denotes insufficient evidence.	 	Moderate (++ or --)	There are several studies of fair methodological quality or in one study of good methodological quality. The symbol ‘++’ indicates sufficient evidence of good measurement properties, while ‘--’ denotes insufficient evidence.	 	Limited (+ or -)	There is only one study of fair methodological quality with sufficient evidence of good measurement properties (+) or insufficient (−).	 	Conflicting (±)	The findings are conflicting.	 	Unknown (?)	There are only studies of poor methodological quality.
All measures were graded for their level of evidence, considering the consistency of scores for both psychometric properties and methodological quality ratings (Table 2). Methodological quality ratings were coded with ‘+’ or ‘-‘ signs, denoting good or poor properties, respectively. Levels of evidence were categorised as ‘strong’ (+++ or ---), ‘moderate’ (++ or --), ‘limited’ (+ or -), ‘conflicting’ (±), or ‘unknown’ (?).

Results
PRISMA flow diagram.
Fig. 1
One hundred and seventy studies were eligible for inclusion (Fig. 1). In total, 44 measures of dissociation were identified, and all original articles were included except the Fewtrell Depersonalisation Scale (FWS) because of its unavailability. The Tellegen Absorption Scale (TAS) was also excluded because it was not conceptualised originally as a measure of dissociation. Although ‘absorption’ can be a marker of dissociative pathology, its definition in the case of the TAS is different to measures of dissociation (i.e., the DES), with the two scales examining different constructs. The Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES) had the highest number of translated and validated studies (n = 52). All measures used self-rated methods except for five measures that were observer-rated or caregiver-rated: the original Peritraumatic Experiences Questionnaire, the Depersonalisation Severity Scale (DSS), the Child Dissociation Checklist (CDC), the Child/Adolescent Dissociation Checklist (CADC), and the Clinician-Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS), with the last two also capable of being utilised as self-rated measures. Most measures assessed trait dissociation (38; 86%) whereas only six measures (14%) were designed to assess state dissociation. An overview of included measures can be found in Supplementary Table 2.
The majority of studies were conducted in the United States (40.0%) and were available in English. In addition to studies that examined general dissociation (n = 102; 60.0%), we identified studies evaluating measures of child and adolescent dissociation (n = 25; 14.7%), depersonalisation (n = 15; 8.8%), somatoform dissociation (n = 12; 7.1%), and dissociation in PTSD (n = 11; 6.5%). Five studies were classified as miscellaneous (2.9%), either focusing on other specific aspects of dissociation (n = 4) or incorporating dissociation assessment within non-dissociative questionnaires (n = 1). Supplementary Table 3 shows the study characteristics and demographic profiles of participants in all included studies.

Methodological quality and psychometric properties
The methodological quality of all included studies was assessed using the COSMIN checklist. Content validity was rated for 46 articles. Most studies were rated as having doubtful quality (n = 34; 73.9%) and one, eight, and three measures met criteria for inadequate, adequate, and very good methodological quality, respectively.
Structural validity, internal consistency, reliability, and measurement error were assessed in all studies. Approximately half of the studies (n = 76; 44.7%) showed very good structural validity. Internal consistency was frequently reported (n = 133; 78.2%), and the methodological assessment yielded very good results in this domain for most studies (n = 121; 71.2%). In contrast, many studies were indetermined for evidence of good measurement (n = 69; 40.6%). Further, more than half of the studies did not assess reliability (n = 105; 61.8%), resulting in a high proportion of inadequate methodological quality ratings in this domain (n = 98; 57.6%). Adequate grading was most prevalent for the measurement error domain (n = 124; 72.9%).
Cross-cultural validity was assessed in studies with different contexts such as translated versions or countries of study locations (n = 70). Among the assessed studies, methodological quality of cross-cultural validation was rated as adequate (n = 39; 55.7%), very good (n = 19; 27.1%), or doubtful (n = 12; 17.1%). All assessment results are described in Supplementary Table 4.

Levels of evidence
Level of evidence of included measures of dissociation (k = 30)
ADI – Acute Dissociation Inventory; A-DES – Adolescent Dissociative Experiences Scale; ARAS – Attentional Resource Allocation Scale; CADC – Child/Adolescent Dissociation Checklist; CADSS – Clinician-administered Dissociative States Scale; CAD-P – Cognitive Appraisal of Dissociation in Psychosis; CDC – Child Dissociative Checklist; CDPS – Childhood Dissociative Predictor Scale; CDS – Cambridge Depersonalisation Scale; CEFSA – Černis Felt Sense of Anomaly; CPAS – Children's Perceptual Alteration Scale; DAS – Dissociative Ability Scale; DCI – Detachment and Compartmentalisation Inventory; DDI – Depersonalisation-Derealisation Inventory; DDS – Dixon's Depersonalisation Scale; DEMO – Dissociative Experiences Measure, Oxford; DES – Dissociative Experiences Scale; DES-T – Dissociative Experiences Scale-Taxon; DESC – Dissociative Experiences Scale-Comparisons; DESVQ – Dissociative Experiences Scale-Verbal Quantifier; FDS1 – Fragebogen zu Dissoziativen Symptomen; CES – Curious Experiences Survey; DIS-Q – Dissociative Questionnaire; DSS1 – Dissociative Symptoms Scale; DSS-B – Brief Dissociative Symptoms Scale; DSS2 – Depersonalisation Severity Scale; DSS/DTS – Dissoziations-Spannungs-Skala/Dissociative Tension Scale; FDS2 – Fewtrell Depersonalisation Scale; GDS – General Dissociation Scale; JBS – Jacobs and Bovasso's Depersonalisation Scale; MDI – Multiscale Dissociation Inventory; MID – Multidimensional Inventory of Dissociation; MSDQ – Medical Somatic Dissociation Questionnaire; NCDI – North Carolina Dissociation Index; PAS – Perceptual Alteration Scale; PDEQ – Peritraumatic Dissociative Experiences Questionnaire; RPDEQ – RAND Peritraumatic Dissociative Experiences Questionnaire; PDS – Phillips Dissociation Scale; PDS-B – Brief Pathological Dissociation Scale; PSDS – Dissociative Subtype of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Scale; QED – Questionnaire of Experiences of Dissociation; SCL/HSCL – Symptom Checklist/Hopkins Symptom Checklist augmented with dissociation questionnaires; SDI – Somatoform Dissociation Index; SDQ – Somatoform Dissociation Questionnaire; SDS – Subclinical Dissociation Scale; SFQ – Strange-Face Questionnaire; SFQ-R – Strange-Face Questionnaire-revise; SODAS – Scale of Dissociative Activities; SR-DDIS – Self-report Dissociative Disorders Interview Schedule; SSD – State Scale of Dissociation; VOD-Q – Van Obsessional Dissociation Questionnaire; WES – Wessex Dissociation Scale.
Fig. 2
Levels of evidence for all measures are shown in Fig. 2. There were 30 measures, and their adaptations, that were assessed by one study for each. Positive results were more common among internal consistency and reliability domains, compared to content validity and structural validity.
The DES was the most evaluated measure and received very strong positive ratings for its internal consistency and reliability. The DES was initially developed as a 28-item self-rated questionnaire with three subscales: 1) amnestic fragmentation of identity, 2) absorption and imaginative involvement, and 3) depersonalisation and derealisation, established through factor analyses. Certain studies categorised this measure into four factors, adding an additional ‘miscellaneous’ subscale. Conversely, another subscale, the DES-Taxon (DES-T), was derived from the DES by selecting eight items signifying severe dissociative psychopathology, enabling the identification of pathological dissociation, specifically dissociative identity disorder. Validation studies of the DES encompassed a diverse range of populations, including rape victims, offenders, non-clinical populations, as well as individuals with psychiatric disorders such as eating disorders, schizophrenia, and substance use disorder. The DES has also served as a model for dissociation measurement in other populations, including children and adolescents.
Alongside general dissociation measures, the adolescent DES (A-DES; n = 16), Peritraumatic Dissociative Experiences Questionnaire (PDEQ; n = 8), Somatoform Dissociation Questionnaire-20 (SDQ-20; n = 8), and Cambridge Depersonalisation Scale (CDS; n = 10) exhibited the most satisfactory levels of evidence for measures of child and adolescent dissociation, trauma-related state dissociation, somatoform dissociation, and depersonalisation, respectively. Several studies examined the psychometric properties of more than one measure, resulting in a cumulative evaluation count exceeding the cumulative number of included studies (164), as indicated in Fig. 2.

Discussion

Overview of assessment of methodological quality and psychometric properties
The aim of this review was to offer comprehensive insights into the methodological quality and psychometric properties of existing measures of dissociation. In all, 44 original measures and 12 adapted versions were identified. However, none of the included measures exhibited psychometric properties and methodological quality that fully aligned with the COSMIN standards. A significant factor in this determination was content validity, for which the majority of measures received an ‘inadequate’ rating.
To achieve a ‘very good’ rating for content validity, as per COSMIN guidelines, a complex methodological approach is necessitated, involving soliciting feedback from both patients and professionals to assess the measure's relevance and comprehensiveness. This omission of stakeholder involvement has been evident in evaluations of various health outcome measures adhering to similar criteria. It is important that the development of future dissociation measures, and or the refinement of existing measures, prioritises input from both professionals and patients to encompass the most comprehensive and relevant constructs, which can subsequently be incorporated as items within the measure.
According to COSMIN guidelines, structural validity evaluation requires confirmatory or exploratory factor analyses. By contrast, numerous studies employed other forms of validity (i.e., convergent, divergent, and concurrent validity), which were not categorised under structural validity. Consequently, this led to lower methodological quality ratings and hindered the attainment of good standards for measurement properties.
For most measures, evidence for good internal consistency was considered ‘indeterminate’. According to the COSMIN, to receive a favourable rating, Cronbach's alpha coefficients for each subscale must meet the set value of ≥0.70. Accordingly, studies reporting only overall Cronbach's alpha coefficients could not be ranked higher than ‘indeterminate’ unless the measure's unidimensionality was adequately established. Researchers are therefore encouraged to thoroughly examine their analyses and effectively present their findings to attain higher levels of grading for reported psychometric properties.
Among the measures under review, reliability consistently garnered the most favourable assessment. The use of either split-half or test-retest reliability warrants at least adequate methodological quality. In the context of test-retest reliability, suitable intervals were identified in most measures, with the exception of certain measures on child and adolescent dissociation, where the time span ranged from five months to one year.

Measurement profiles
The item count within the examined measures varied from four to 218. Opting for fewer items may enhance respondent acceptability, but it could potentially constrain the scope of certain property evaluations. This trend aligns with the levels of evidence outlined in our review. Future high-quality studies on measures of dissociation with low numbers of items are necessary to help draw more definitive conclusions. Five measures included in this review contained fewer than eight items, and none of the seven studies assessing these measures reached a satisfactory level of evidence.
A variety of response options were observed across included studies. The predominant approach was employing a Likert-scale with scores ranging from three to 100. Earlier generations of measures utilised different response formats, such as true or false, or marking a line from 0% to 100% in the original version of the DES. However, the DES was subsequently modified into a 0–100 rating scale, making it suitable for use by both patients as raters and clinicians as interpreters.
Based on our findings, the DES was the most widely translated measure (14 languages) and was validated in diverse global contexts. However, similar to other measures, the DES is susceptible to response and experimenter biases. Notably, none of the studies included in this review were conducted in African countries, where dissociation might exhibit distinct prevalence and conceptualisation. Our eligibility criteria limited inclusion to articles published in English, hence studies involving measures in non-English languages within African countries were excluded, leading to the omission of those measures. For instance, we excluded one study from Tunisia which was published in French, which we acknowledge as a limitation in terms of language inclusivity.
Among the various measures assessing general dissociation, child and adolescent dissociation, trauma-related/state dissociation, somatoform dissociation, and depersonalisation/derealisation, the most robust levels of evidence were found for the DES, A-DES, PDEQ, SDQ-20, and CDS, respectively. Each of these measures received the highest ratings in terms of methodological quality and mostly demonstrated moderate to strong evidence of good results, as described in Fig. 2. However, despite the preferrable psychometric properties of the PDEQ for participants with PTSD, this measure has not yet been validated or utilised in populations with PTSD and disturbances in self-organisation, more precise diagnoses of PTSD, or complex PTSD.
Thirty-eight measures (86%) were developed to evaluate trait dissociation using retrospective approaches, either with or without limited timeframes. Six measures (14%) were specifically designed to assess state dissociation; four measures (i.e., Acute Dissociation Inventory; ADI, Clinician-Administered Dissociative States Scale; CADSS, State Scale of Dissociation; SSD, and Strange-Face Questionnaire; SFQ) evaluated the level of state dissociation, whereas the other two assessed the severity of particular symptoms during a dissociative state, including ‘Felt Sense of Anomaly’ (ČEFSA) and ‘Cognitive Appraisal’. All state measures are self-rated, except for the Clinician-administered Dissociative States Scale, which can be either self-rated and/or observer-rated. This measure was adapted into a shorter 6-item version for monitoring dissociative effects during ketamine infusion.
Interestingly, the SFQ appears particularly unique in its approach to assessing state dissociation during face-to-face interpersonal interactions and face-to-face interactions with oneself during mirror staring. Unlike other measures of dissociation that tend to focus on more generalised dissociative experiences or retrospective accounts of dissociation, the SFQ was designed to specifically target transient dissociative experiences in these direct, personal contexts. In contrast, the ADI was originally developed for laboratory settings. Participants underwent three dissociation induction exercises (a dot-staring task, an audio/photic stimulation task, and a stimulus deprivation task using a mask and headset without audio and visual input). The ADI assesses the immediate severity of dissociative symptoms with questions such as “How much of the past 10 min do you feel you can recall?”.

Strengths and limitations
This is the first systematic review to assess the quality of measures of dissociation, yielding a substantial number of included studies and a wide range of measures, providing a comprehensive overview of their psychometric properties. New measurement studies, such as the ČEFSA, are included. Although a strength of this review is the utilisation of the COSMIN checklist, which has been well-developed and widely used, several included studies were conducted prior to the guideline's establishment, leading to potential misalignment in quality appraisal. Additionally, studies receiving negative or unknown ratings may have obtained a better rating if they had reported the requisite values for the COSMIN assessment. Therefore, while COSMIN offers valuable insights, it may not comprehensively reflect actual methodological quality or good standards of measurement properties for all included studies, but rather the reporting approach. Certain psychometric properties, such as criterion validity or structural validity, may be evaluated in only a few studies, leading to a lower level of evidence for these domains despite a high number of validation studies. The application of specific dimensions of the COSMIN criteria were tailored for this review. Additionally, the COSMIN, originally developed for patient-rated measures, might not fully capture the considerations for observer- or caregiver-rated measures and its assessment relies on the judgement of raters. Consequently, caution should be exercised when applying the COSMIN to such measures.
We included only measures specifically designed to assess dissociation. Therefore, measures evaluating psychiatric syndromes encompassing dissociation, such as several borderline personality severity measures, and the Stanford Acute Stress Disorder Questionnaire, were excluded. Despite trauma-related dissociative symptoms being assessed, this measure differs from the PDEQ and other included measures, which are specifically designed to assess peri-traumatic dissociative symptoms.
Additionally, we did not include diagnostic interviews in this review. While such measures can provide severity gradings, the continuous measures derived from these interviews are not as comprehensive in terms of scoring range as those computed with the psychometric measures considered here. Furthermore, these interviews require an experienced rater for proper administration and can be time-consuming, with some taking over 1.5 h to complete. Including them would have also shifted the focus of the review towards diagnostic assessments, which was not our original intention.
This review underscores the ongoing need for continued development and refinement of dissociation measures. Considering that the overall methodological quality did not completely meet the COSMIN standard, particularly content validity, future research on psychometric properties should place a special emphasis on addressing this concern. Attention should also be paid to other properties and methodological considerations, while also ensuring adherence to the guidelines outlined by COSMIN.

Conclusions
This review included 44 different measures of dissociation across 164 studies evaluating their psychometric properties. The methodological quality assessment based on COSMIN guidelines revealed varying levels across studies: content validity was rated as ‘doubtful’, measurement error and cross-cultural validity were ‘adequate’, structural validity and internal consistency were ‘very good’, and reliability was ‘not assessed’. The DES, A-DES, PDEQ, SDQ-20, and CDS demonstrated the highest levels of evidence for measures of general dissociation, child and adolescent dissociation, trauma-related/state dissociation, somatoform dissociation, and depersonalisation, respectively. However, the availability of measures tailored to specific cultural contexts, such as African countries, was limited. Additionally, COSMIN itself may not be entirely objective and is dependent on the subjective judgement of raters. Future measures of dissociation, designed in accordance with COSMIN guidelines, should be developed with the aim of enhancing methodological quality and psychometric properties.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Sorawit Wainipitapong: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. L.S. Merritt Millman: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology. Xi Huang: Formal analysis, Data curation. Lillian Wieder: Writing – review & editing, Methodology. Devin B. Terhune: Writing – review & editing, Methodology. Susannah Pick: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Conceptualization.

Funding details
SP and LSMM have been funded by an  Career Development Award to SP (2021–2026 ). SW has been granted by the Thai Red Cross Society.

Declaration of competing interest
None.

References
Development and validation of a measure of adolescent dissociation: the adolescent dissociative experiences scale
Development, reliability, and validity of a dissociation scale
Trauma-related dissociation and the autonomic nervous system: a systematic literature review of psychophysiological correlates of dissociative experiencing in PTSD patients
Psychological processes mediating the association between developmental trauma and specific psychotic symptoms in adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Dissociative experiences are associated with obsessive-compulsive symptoms in a non-clinical sample: a latent profile analysis
Measurement of dissociative states with the clinician-administered dissociative states scale (CADSS)
The Detachment and Compartmentalization Inventory (DCI): an assessment tool for two potentially distinct forms of dissociation
Dissociation and its biological and clinical associations in functional neurological disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis
Dissociation and hallucinations in dyads engaged through interpersonal gazing
Psychometric properties of the Stanford Acute Stress Reaction Questionnaire (SASRQ): a valid and reliable measure of acute stress
A new perspective and assessment measure for common dissociative experiences: “Felt Sense of Anomaly.”
Using online methods to develop and examine the Hong Kong Chinese translation of the dissociative experiences scale
The psychometric properties of the adolescent dissociative experiences scale (a-des) in a sample of Portuguese at-risk adolescents
Validation of a French version of the dissociative experiences scale in a rape-victim population
The multidimensional inventory of dissociation (MID): a comprehensive measure of pathological dissociation
Racial and ethnic differences in dissociation: an examination of the dissociative experiences scale in a nonclinical population
Convergent validity of the new form of the DES
Validation of the extended version of the Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES) in patients diagnosed with substance use disorders
Dissociative experiences on ice—Peritraumatic and trait dissociation during the cold pressor test
Assessing dissociative symptoms in eating disordered patients: construct validation of two self-report measures
Dissociative symptoms in complex posttraumatic stress disorder: a systematic review
Patient-reported outcome measures for adults and adolescents with patellofemoral pain: a systematic review of content validity and Feasibility using the COSMIN methodology
Confirmatory factor analyses of the Dissociative Experiences Scale in schizophrenia: results from two psychiatric samples in South Korea
The prevalence of Dissociative Disorders and dissociative experiences in college populations: a meta-analysis of 98 studies
Development and validation of the brief pathological dissociation scale PDS(B): Initial psychometrics
A proposed severity classification of borderline symptoms using the borderline symptom list (BSL-23)
Dissociation, trauma, and borderline personality disorder
Dissociation in borderline personality disorder: Recent experimental, Neurobiological studies, and Implications for future research and treatment
Psychometric validation of the state scale of dissociation (SSD)
The economic burden of dissociative disorders: a qualitative systematic review of empirical studies
Factorial structure and psychometric properties of the French adaptation of the Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES) in non-clinical participants
Dissociation in the laboratory: a comparison of strategies
Accuracy of the PHQ-2 alone and in combination with the PHQ-9 for screening to detect major depression: systematic review and meta-analysis
The relationship between dissociation and symptoms of psychosis: a meta-analysis
Peritraumatic dissociation and posttraumatic stress in male Vietnam theater veterans
A comparison of two time intervals for test-retest reliability of health status instruments
Zār spirit possession in Iran and african countries: group distress, Culture-bound syndrome or cultural concept of Distress?
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement
COSMIN risk of bias checklist for systematic reviews of patient-reported outcome measures
Non-pathological and pathological dissociation at adolescence: evaluation and comparison on tunisian population
The development of the somatoform dissociation questionnaire (SDQ-5) as a screening instrument for dissociative disorders
The development and psychometric characteristics of the Somatoform Dissociation Questionnaire (SDQ-20)
Psychometric characteristics of the somatoform dissociation questionnaire: a replication study
Somatoform dissociation among Swedish adolescents and young adults: the psychometric properties of the Swedish versions of the SDQ-20 and SDQ-5
Reliability and validity of the dissociative experiences scale among south Korean patients with schizophrenia
Content validity of patient-reported outcome measures of satisfaction with primary care for musculoskeletal Complaints: a systematic review
Reliability and validity of the borderline evaluation of severity over time (best): a self-rated scale to measure severity and Change in Persons with borderline personality disorder
Initial development and validation of the Phillips dissociation scale (PDS) of the MMPI
The relationship between dissociation and voices: a systematic literature review and meta-analysis
COSMIN guideline for systematic reviews of patient-reported outcome measures
Development, reliability, and validity of a child dissociation scale
A checklist for screening dissociative disorders in children and adolescents
Dissociative experiences in children with Abuse Histories: a replication in Puerto Rico
Measurement of dissociation
A simplified 6-Item clinician administered dissociative symptom scale (CADSS-6) for monitoring dissociative effects of sub-anesthetic ketamine infusions
Factor structure and correlates of the Dissociative Experiences Scale in a large offender sample
The Cambridge Depersonalization Scale: a new instrument for the measurement of depersonalization
Alexithymia, absorption, and cognitive failures in depersonalization disorder: a comparison to posttraumatic stress disorder and healthy volunteers
Development of a depersonalization severity scale
Dissociative absorption: an empirically unique, clinically relevant, dissociative factor
Psychometric evaluation of the dissociative experiences scale-Taxon (DES-T)
Development and psychometric characteristics of the DSS-4 as a short instrument to assess dissociative experience during neuropsychological experiments
Openness to absorbing and self-altering experiences (“absorption”), a trait related to hypnotic susceptibility
Hallucinations and the meaning and structure of absorption
COSMIN methodology for evaluating the content validity of patient-reported outcome measures: a Delphi study
Validating dissociative experience scale (DES) in a Greek sample
The measurement of dissociation in normal and clinical populations: meta-analytic validation of the Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES)
Types of dissociation and dissociative types: a taxometric analysis of dissociative experiences
The prevalence of depersonalization-derealization disorder: a systematic review

Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2024.11.040.