Monogenic causes of cerebral small vessel disease- models for vascular cognitive impairment and dementia?
Purpose of review
Recent advancements in molecular biomarkers and therapeutic options for Alzheimer's disease have brought into focus the need for greater progress in the second most common cause of dementia, vascular cognitive impairment and dementia (VCID). We examine how the study of monogenic causes of VCID has contributed to the understanding of its pathophysiology and potential biomarker and treatment research.
Recent findings
It is widely accepted that conditions which disrupt the cerebral small vessels contribute to vascular pathologies including stroke and cerebral microbleeds, ultimately leading to vascular cognitive impairment and dementia. Among these conditions are a range of monogenic small vessel diseases (SVDs) such as CADASIL, CARASIL, Fabry disease and COL4A-related disorders.
Summary
This review indicates the importance of furthering research into monogenic SVDs in order to gain insight into the pathomechanisms of VCID more broadly. Monogenic conditions are easier to model than sporadic VCID and can serve as a guide for identifying biomarkers for diagnosis, monitoring and intervention outcomes.

INTRODUCTION
Vascular cognitive impairment dementia (VCID) is a general term for a condition involving cognitive impairment primarily associated with cerebrovascular disease. This encompasses vascular dementia (VaD), the second most common cause of dementia after Alzheimer's disease, as well as vascular mild cognitive impairment (vMCI) below the recognized diagnostic threshold of dementia. VCID commonly co-occurs with Alzheimer's disease and other neuropathologies; however, there is increasing evidence to suggest that ‘pure’ VCID is not rare, being recently reported at 21% in a large clinico-pathological study. VCID can arise from any disruption to the cerebral vessel system. While the diagnosis of VCID does not require occurrence of stroke, poststroke cognitive impairment is relatively common. The diagnosis is further strengthened by evidence of temporal or causal relationship between the cerebrovascular disease, typically cerebral small vessel disease (cSVD) and cognitive decline.
Importantly, though cSVD is the main pathological contributor to vascular dementia and commonly co-occurs with other dementia subtypes, it does not always result in cognitive decline. Meta-analyses have indicated consistently that cSVD increases incident dementia risk, but this does not suggest that all individuals with a cSVD diagnosis will get dementia. This diagnostic indeterminacy is somewhat clarified by considering genetics. Largely, genetic risk of VCID has been deduced from studies of stroke and cerebrovascular disease. A recent genome-wide association study of all-cause dementia and VaD suggested genetic overlap between dementia types, with further genetic correlations for VaD with hypertension, diabetes and neuron maintenance [▪▪].
no caption available
The most robust evidence for genetic risk of VCID is derived from a range of monogenic conditions affecting the cerebral small vessels. Figure 1 highlights some monogenic causes of cSVD and their common features. These conditions are rare and so reliable studies are limited. Even so, the association between cSVD and cognitive impairment is so compelling that it can be argued that these conditions can be used as models for VCID. These models provide an avenue for identifying and validating biomarkers, investigating pathomechanisms and risk management, and determining therapeutic targets for VCID. There is no specific treatment for VCID, with prevention focused on modifiable risk factors and management focused on symptom-targeted intervention and risk reduction. Increasing understanding of the pathomechanisms of VCID, using monogenic cSVDs, can provide avenues for targeted intervention of VCID.
Monogenic causes of cerebral small vessel disease (cSVD) leading to vascular cognitive impairment and dementia (VCID), their common symptoms and associated genes. Icon adapted from BioRender. CADASIL, cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; CARASAL, cathepsin-A related arteriopathy with strokes and leukoencephalopathy; CARASIL, cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy; COL4A1/A2, collagen type IV alpha 1 and 2; CTSA, cathepsin A; GLA, galactosidase alpha; HTRA1, high temperature requirement serine peptidase A1; RVCL-S, retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukoencephalopathy and systemic manifestations; TIA, transient ischaemic attack.

Monogenic conditions of cerebral small vessel disease
CADASIL (cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy): Among the relatively rare monogenic forms of cSVD, CADASIL is the most common, with recent reports suggesting that as many as one in 450 in the general population of predominantly European ancestry carries the associated genetic mutation. This cSVD is caused by pathogenic variants in the NOTCH3 gene, of which there are over 200 described variants, predominantly missense in nature and found in a heterozygous state. CADASIL typically causes symptom onset in midlife, including recurrent strokes, complex migraine with aura, mood disturbance and cognitive decline. There is no specific treatment for CADASIL, and management is focused on reducing symptoms and risks. CADASIL research has become more widespread in recent years which has led to greater understanding of the heterogeneity of the disease and complexity of the mutations, with progressive stages of CADASIL proposed. Harmonization of CADASIL is a priority of the field. To further this effort, an instrument was recently designed to capture subjective cognitive and wellbeing outcomes, to aid in CADASIL research, clinical settings and in other cSVDs with further validation. Typically, CADASIL is monitored by regular observation of neuroimaging (usually MRI) features such as enlarged perivascular spaces, white matter hyperintensities, cerebral microbleeds, lacunes and infarcts. Recently, a tool was developed to assist in easy observation of these key features and for comparison across data collected using different scanners/parameters [▪▪].
Though cognition is often noted in clinical settings and case reports of CADASIL, comprehensive cognitive assessment results are limited. Some degree of cognitive decline is suggested to arise in midlife and occur in approximately 40–60% of individuals with symptomatic CADASIL, with prevalence increasing at advanced stages of disease. Worse cognitive performance is associated with neurological features including enlarged perivascular spaces, lacunar infarcts and stroke.The cognitive profile trajectory in CADASIL usually first presents with slowed processing, with executive function impairment extending to attention and concentration, and worsening over the disease course. Late-stage CADASIL is indicated by advanced widespread cognitive decline, including memory impairment, and loss of functional independence due to motor function loss, loss of speech and incontinence.
While cellular and animal models do not provide a direct representation of human disease, their results can be extrapolated as proxies for human studies to inform mechanisms. CADASIL has been genetically modelled using both transgenic and knock-in mutant mice, with varying degrees of clinical and pathophysiological penetrance [▪▪]. Cerebrovascular neuroradiological features and pathological hallmarks of CADASIL have been successfully detected in many CADASIL mutant mice models, revealing key mechanisms in CADASIL and cSVD more broadly. The clinical phenotype, however, has been less widely expressed. Notch3Arg170Cys mice demonstrated motor deficits and reduced exploratory behaviour], transgenic TgNOTCH3R169C mice indicated poor performance in re-learning and perseverance [], and recently spatial memory in TgNOTCH3R169C mice was improved using cerebrolysin (neuropeptide drug) intervention [. These results are promising but suggest a need for improved genetic animal models of CADASIL with greater focus on behavioural and cognitive outcomes.
CARASIL: While the autosomal dominant CADASIL presents almost entirely with neurological features, CARASIL is an autosomal recessive condition linked to high temperature requirement serine peptidase A1 (HTRA1) mutations, and presents additionally with systemic alterations including alopecia and spinal osteoarthritis. Like in patients with CADASIL, CARASIL is associated with recurrent ischemic strokes and early onset cognitive impairment and dementia. CARASIL is mostly confined to Asian populations but there have been some reports in other regions. Modelling of CARASIL using the transgenic HtrA1L364P mouse found typical patterns of hair loss and cognitive difficulties such as poor learning, memory and spatial ability. This model also demonstrated the upregulation of TGF-beta and venular abnormalities including thickened vessel walls, suggesting possible pathogenesis pathways and avenues for intervention.
Mutations in the HTRA1 gene have also been shown to cause autosomal dominantly inherited cSVD. These reports are very limited but suggest clinical presentation is milder than CARASIL, including delayed but still early onset cognitive impairment, alopecia and back pain, and altered neuroradiology. Interestingly, HTRA1 and NOTCH3 variants have been shown to be relatively prevalent in the general population, and have been linked to increased risk of ischemic stroke and dementia [▪▪,].
COL4A1-COL4A2 related disorders is caused by mutations in collagen genes (e.g. COL4A1) and affect multiple organ systems, with cSVD being a major feature. Symptoms arise at different life stages including during foetal cortical development. Modelling COL4A1 mutation using mice demonstrated alteration to vascular smooth muscle cells associated with the involvement of TGF-β signalling. Pontine autosomal dominant microangiopathy with leukoencephalopathy (PADMAL), is a cSVD caused by a COL4A1 mutation which presents with recurrent ischemic stroke. Motor and cognitive function has been suggested to decline in a stepwise progressive trajectory, particularly in attention, processing speed, executive function and verbal episodic memory.
Retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukoencephalopathy and systemic manifestations (RVCL-S) is an autosomal dominantly inherited TREX1 mutation which presents predominantly as progressive blindness due to vascular retinopathy, and both focal and widespread neurological disruption, arising in midlife. RVCL-S has multiple systemic indications including Raynaud's disorder, and renal and hepatic disruption, as well as reduced lifespan. Cognitive decline in RVCL-S is slow and progressive, affecting up to 75% of individuals across the disease course. Impairment is noted across multiple domains including working memory, executive function and processing speed, as well as psychiatric disturbance and mood change. Neurofilament light chain (Nfl) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) have been proposed as biomarkers for VCID [▪▪]. Both markers were shown to be elevated in the serum of individuals with symptomatic RVCL-S and were associated with poorer cognitive function.
CARASAL (cathepsin-A related arteriopathy with strokes and leukoencephalopathy) has only been recognized in the last 10 years and has been reported in <20 individuals, mostly of European ancestry. Caused by a CTSA (cathepsin) gene mutation, CARASAL is a cSVD with common symptoms of transient ischemic attacks, stroke, hypertension, migraine, and cognitive decline. While CARASAL can be considered a monogenic form of VCID, a limited number of reports suggest that cognitive decline has a slow and late trajectory.
Fabry disease is an inherited X-linked lysosomal storage disorder, caused by an alpha galactosidase (GLA) variant. Fabry disease has multiorgan involvement including cerebrovascular events which are heterogenous but typically include ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attacks, and less frequently haemorrhages and microbleeds. Cognitive functioning in Fabry disease is not consistently reported, with some studies reporting relatively preserved cognition, particularly in female patients. When present, cognitive impairment is more prominent in executive function including reduced processing speed, attention, language generation and problem solving. Fabry disease also often causes mood disturbance such as anxiety and depression.
Familial (or Hereditary) cerebral amyloid angiopathy (FCAA) is a cSVD caused by autosomal dominant mutation in the amyloid precursor protein (APP), which causes accumulation of amyloid-beta in blood vessels. There are subtypes of FCAA with heterogenous presentations, but FCAA commonly results in cerebral haemorrhage and stroke. FCAA is associated with both Alzheimer's disease and VaD so while it is considered a monogenic cause of VCID, other conditions are considered to be more suitable models.

What have these conditions revealed about the pathomechanisms of vascular cognitive impairment and dementia?
Given the frequency of cognitive impairment in monogenic cSVDs, these conditions have enabled insights into the pathophysiological processes involved in cSVD and VCID. The combination of human imaging and fluid biomarker studies, animal models, cellular and molecular techniques and bioinformatic modelling have revealed potential mechanistic pathways for the development of VCID.
Reduced cerebral blood flow has emerged as a driver of hypoperfusion resulting in damage to the white matter regions commonly observed in cSVD and VCID. Cross-sectionally reduced blood flow has been associated with increased white matter hyperintensity burden and poorer cognitive performance, but longitudinal associations have been less consistent.
A recent study in VCID looked at regional cerebral blood flow in relation to performance in specific cognitive domains. The study, from the Heart–Brain Connection consortium indicated that widespread reduction in cerebral blood flow was related to global cognitive decline, most strongly in executive function- attention and psychomotor speed. Individuals with greater reduction in baseline temporal and frontal cerebral blood flow performed worse in memory related cognitive tasks.
Regionally reduced cerebral blood flow has been shown to be a contributing factor to pathological severity in CADASIL. Widespread cerebrovascular alterations including decreased cerebral blood flow and impacts on vascular reactivity, were evidenced by models of human brain tissue and NOTCH3 knockout mice [▪▪]. This reduction in cerebral blood flow was similarly shown in the white matter of TgNotch3R169C mice and in the cortex of HTRA1 knockout mice.
Reduced cerebrovascular reactivity is another proposed mechanism for cerebrovascular damage. Cerebrovascular reactivity is a measure of the change in cerebral blood flow in relation to vasodilatory stimuli, thereby indicating the ability of the vasculature to regulate changes in blood flow. Impairment in this regulation may result in periods of hypoperfusion. Cross-sectionally, reduced cerebrovascular reactivity was associated with neuroradiological markers of cSVD, including greater white matter hyperintensity volume, more lacunes, more microbleeds, more atrophy, enlarged perivascular spaces, it was also associated with a trend towards poorer cognitive performance. Further, regions of decreased cerebrovascular reactivity were associated with progression from normal white matter to white matter hyperintensity over a 1-year follow up period in older adults.
In CADASIL, cerebrovascular reactivity was associated with increased lacune number but not other neuroradiological markers. However, there were no significant associations between cerebrovascular reactivity and depressive symptoms, delayed processing speed or disability. In a CADASIL longitudinal study, baseline reduced cerebrovascular reactivity was associated with an increase in white matter hyperintensities but no association with lacunes or microbleeds, at 7 year follow-up. A different study in CADASIL found that cerebrovascular reactivity and cerebral blood flow were significantly reduced in the thalamus of individuals that had experienced a stroke but this was not co-located to the thalamic region, and this result did not translate to other brain regions. In RVCL-S, cerebrovascular reactivity was decreased in both the grey and white matter as compared with controls, particularly in older patients.
Disruption of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) is another proposed pathomechanism in cSVD. Some breakdown of the BBB is normal with ageing, but decreased BBB integrity has also been associated with cSVD and dementia. Plasma markers of BBB integrity including cyclophilin A, and matrix metalloproteinase have been proposed as biomarkers for VCID, and have been suggested to differentiate between dementia subtypes, to varying extents.
A co-culture model of mural and endothelial cells using human induced pluripotent stem cells from individuals with COL4A1/A2-related mutations was created to show BBB disruption in the extracellular matrix. Matrix metalloproteinase was elevated in this model and inhibiting this protein's activity was shown to have therapeutic properties. In a CADASIL transgenic mouse model, BBB leakage was only associated with a subset of white matter lesions that occurred in the presence of lacunes and enlarged perivascular spaces.

CONCLUSION
Cerebrovascular disease contributes to the development of dementia in general but is the primary pathological cause of VCID, the second most common dementia. Investigating monogenic forms of cSVD such as CADASIL, CARASIL, COL4A1/2-related disorders and others, has provided critical insights into the pathophysiological mechanisms underpinning VCID. Although rare, these disorders are easily modelled using animal models, cell lines as well as human cohorts and can facilitate the identification of potential biomarkers and therapeutic targets for the more common sporadic forms of VCID.

Acknowledgements
None.

Financial support and sponsorship
D.G.S. is supported by a National Health and Medical Research Council grant for the Vascular Contributions to Dementia Centre of Research Excellence. PSS is supported by an NHMRC Investigator Grant.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READING
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:
▪ of special interest
▪▪ of outstanding interest

REFERENCES
Frequency and underlying pathology of pure vascular cognitive impairment
Cognitive impairment after ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association
Clinical significance of magnetic resonance imaging markers of vascular brain injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Cerebral small vessel disease and the risk of dementia: a systematic review and meta-analysis of population-based evidence
Cerebral small vessel disease and risk of incident stroke, dementia and depression, and all-cause mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Stroke genetics informs drug discovery and risk prediction across ancestries
NOTCH3 variants are more common than expected in the general population and associated with stroke and vascular dementia: an analysis of 200 000 participants
Most common NOTCH3 mutations causing CADASIL or CADASIL-like cerebral small vessel disease: a systematic review
Effect of NOTCH3 EGFr group, sex, and cardiovascular risk factors on CADASIL clinical and neuroimaging outcomes
Novel grading system for CADASIL severity: a multicenter cross-sectional study
CADA-PRO: a patient questionnaire measuring key cognitive, motor, emotional, and behavioral outcomes in CADASIL
The CADA-MRIT
Prevalence and predictors of vascular cognitive impairment in patients with CADASIL
Enlarged perivascular spaces are associated with white matter injury, cognition and inflammation in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
Trajectory pattern of cognitive decline in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
Cognition, mood and behavior in CADASIL
Progress to clarify how NOTCH3 mutations lead to CADASIL, a hereditary cerebral small vessel disease
Protein aggregates containing wild-type and mutant NOTCH3 are major drivers of arterial pathology in CADASIL
CADASIL from bench to bedside: disease models and novel therapeutic approaches
Notch3 Arg170Cys knock-in mice display pathologic and clinical features of the neurovascular disorder cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
Notch3-dependent effects on adult neurogenesis and hippocampus-dependent learning in a modified transgenic model of CADASIL
Treatment with cerebrolysin prolongs lifespan in a mouse model of cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
HTRA1-related cerebral small-vessel disease causes cerebral microbleeds on the brainstem surface
Characteristic features and progression of abnormalities on MRI for CARASIL
Two novel HTRA1 mutations in a European CARASIL patient
HtrA1L364P leads to cognitive dysfunction and vascular destruction through TGF-β/Smad signaling pathway in CARASIL model mice
Clinical features and pathogenicity assessment in patients with HTRA1-autosomal dominant disease
Identified novel heterozygous HTRA1 pathogenic variants in Chinese patients with HTRA1-associated dominant cerebral small vessel disease
Genetically proxied HTRA1 protease activity and circulating levels independently predict risk of ischemic stroke and coronary artery disease
Cysteine-altering NOTCH3 variants are a risk factor for stroke in the elderly population
Association of vascular risk factors and genetic factors with penetrance of variants causing monogenic stroke
Main features of COL4A1-COL4A2 related cerebral microangiopathies
Elevated TGFβ signaling contributes to cerebral small vessel disease in mouse models of Gould syndrome
Pontine autosomal dominant microangiopathy with leukoencephalopathy: Col4A1 gene variants in the original family and sporadic stroke
Disruption of a miR-29 binding site leading to COL4A1 upregulation causes pontine autosomal dominant microangiopathy with leukoencephalopathy
Retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukoencephalopathy and systemic manifestations (RVCL-S): an update on basic science and clinical perspectives
Systemic features of retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukoencephalopathy and systemic manifestations: a monogenic small vessel disease
Retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukoencephalopathy and systemic manifestations
Molecular biomarkers for vascular cognitive impairment and dementia
NFL and GFAP in (pre)symptomatic RVCL-S carriers: a monogenic cerebral small vessel disease
A rare cause of monogenic cerebral small vessel disease and stroke: Cathepsin A-related arteriopathy with strokes and leukoencephalopathy (CARASAL)
Cathepsin A–related arteriopathy with strokes and leukoencephalopathy (CARASAL)
Cognitive aspects of MELAS and CARASAL
Cerebrovascular involvement in fabry disease
Cognitive and psychological functioning in Fabry disease
Monogenic cerebral small-vessel diseases: diagnosis and therapy. Consensus recommendations of the European Academy of Neurology
Cognitive impairments and subjective cognitive complaints in Fabry disease: a nationwide study and review of the literature
Neuropsychiatric symptoms and their association with sex, age, and enzyme replacement therapy in Fabry disease: a systematic review
Main features of hereditary cerebral amyloid angiopathies: a systematic review
Cerebral blood flow in small vessel disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Associations between white matter hyperintensity burden, cerebral blood flow and transit time in small vessel disease: an updated meta-analysis
Longitudinal changes in cerebral blood flow and their relation with cognitive decline in patients with dementia: current knowledge and future directions
Longitudinal relationship between cerebral small-vessel disease and cerebral blood flow: the second manifestations of arterial disease-magnetic resonance study
A longitudinal characterization of perfusion in the aging brain and associations with cognition and neural structure
Lower cerebral blood flow predicts cognitive decline in patients with vascular cognitive impairment
CADASIL affects multiple aspects of cerebral small vessel function on 7T-MRI
Effects of different regional cerebral blood flow on white matter hyperintensity in CADASIL patients
Age-related loss of Notch3 underlies brain vascular contractility deficiencies, glymphatic dysfunction, and neurodegeneration in mice
Cerebrovascular dysfunction and microcirculation rarefaction precede white matter lesions in a mouse genetic model of cerebral ischemic small vessel disease
Candesartan prevents arteriopathy progression in cerebral autosomal recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy model
Cerebrovascular reactivity in patients with small vessel disease: a cross-sectional study
Development of white matter hyperintensity is preceded by reduced cerebrovascular reactivity
Vasoreactivity in CADASIL: comparison to structural MRI and neuropsychology
Cerebrovascular reactivity is a main determinant of white matter hyperintensity progression in CADASIL
Association between cerebrovasoreactivity and stroke in cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
Cerebrovascular reactivity in retinal vasculopathy with cerebral leukoencephalopathy and systemic manifestations
Quantifying blood-brain barrier leakage in small vessel disease: review and consensus recommendations
Fluid biomarkers of the neurovascular unit in cerebrovascular disease and vascular cognitive disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Inflammatory biomarkers aid in diagnosis of dementia
Contribution of blood-brain barrier-related blood-borne factors for Alzheimer's disease vs. vascular dementia diagnosis: a pilot study
A novel human iPSC model of COL4A1/A2 small vessel disease unveils a key pathogenic role of matrix metalloproteinases
Blood brain barrier leakage is not a consistent feature of white matter lesions in CADASIL