Changes in the gut microbiome and colic in horses: Are they causes or consequences?
The gut microbiome is a compound for millions of microorganisms that coexist in an organized way and contribute to the fermentation of different types of indigestible fibers by the small intestine. Some techniques, such as the massive sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene, have made it possible to obtain information about the abundance and functionality of the microorganisms that compose the equine gut microbiome and the interaction with their environment. Recent studies have identified the change in the composition of the intestinal microbiome during and after a colic episode, although is not clear if it is a cause or a consequence. The objective of this review was to elucidate whether there is a direct relationship between the changes that occur in the gut microbiome and colic in the equine. A systematized search in Embase, Web of Science, and PubMed was realized. Although there is good evidence that horses with colic have a change in their gut microbiome, it is not fully understood whether these changes are causes or effects. It is necessary to delve into this topic, considering studying larger population sizes. In addition, it would be of great value to previously know the normal intestinal microbiome of a group of healthy horses, which in the future could develop an episode of colic, to compare the before and after in the same individual.

Introduction
In equine veterinary medicine, colic is the general term to refer to visceral abdominal pain and acute abdominal disease. This pain is considered a symptom that may be reflecting various disorders of different magnitudes and severity at the digestive level, such as a simple obstruction, strangulating obstruction, or severe inflammatory processes, among others. Despite the treatments and surgical interventions to address these episodes, there is a high morbidity and mortality associated with economic losses for the owners. Therefore, identifying and understanding the variables that act as predisposing or determining factors have been key to suggesting management practices that reduce the prevalence of colic. In a 2019 report, these risk factors were evaluated and classified into three large areas: horse-related factors, management-related factors, and environment-related factors. It was concluded that the most common risk factors are related to diet, either due to changes in the concentrate or hay consumed by the animal and/or due to a decrease in water intake.
The equine gut microbiome is a complex and diverse ecosystem composed primarily of bacteria, which cohabit with viruses, archaea, and fungi. As in other mammals, the intestinal microbiome of horses generates a complex and symbiotic environment, which in addition to its role in the digestion of food, fulfills metabolic functions of protection against pathogens and stimulation of the immune system, directly or indirectly affecting different physiological processes of the host.
Modifications in the composition of the microbiome, known as dysbiosis, have been related to diets high in concentrate, poor quality forage, confinement, stress, fasting, and age, among other causes. Interestingly, in recent years, some authors have associated alterations in the gut microbiome of horses with colic, since changes in the abundance of certain bacterial groups that have an important role in maintaining a healthy gastrointestinal tract have been observed. The objective of this review was to elucidate whether there is a direct relationship between the changes that occur in the intestinal microbiome and colic in equines.

Gut microbiome
The equine gastrointestinal tract is made up of a complex consortium of microorganisms called the microbiome, which plays an important role in both health and disease. It is estimated that there are about 1015 microorganisms that compose it, with about 160 described species.
The equine gut microbiome colonization process begins at birth, where the neonates acquire the first microorganisms occurring through the birth canal, for the direct contact with the mother and later for the contact with the environment. In humans and horses, it has been shown that the assembly and establishment of the gut microbiome are essential for proper growth and development. The first colonizers are facultative anaerobic bacteria, such as Enterobacteriales, Enterococcus, and Streptococcus; these bacteria will consume the oxygen present in the intestinal lumen, creating an anaerobic environment that will allow the growth of strict anaerobes, such as Bacteroides and Clostridium.
The equine gut microbiome is totally different in the first months of life from that existing or established in adulthood, which related to the intake of colostrum, milk, coprophagia, and/or the incorporation of fiber in the diet. In a study conducted in foals and their mothers, a marked stabilization of the gut microbiome was observed around day 50 postpartum, which was associated with the gradual introduction of the adult diet well before weaning. The early microbiome was characterized by bacteria previously identified in the milk and birth canal, while from day 50 there was a significant increase in certain anaerobic species capable of fermenting fiber. Apparently, the diversity of species decreases with age, determined by a study concluding that horses between 19 and 28 years have lower bacterial richness compared to younger horses. support the idea that the aging process in the horse generates a reduction in microbial diversity. Another study conducted on fecal samples found that the group made up of old horses had a higher relative abundance of the Proteobacteria phylum compared to the control group.
The use of culture-independent identification methods, such as the massive sequencing of 16S ribosomal RNA gene, allowed obtaining information about the abundance and functionality of the microorganisms that compose the equine gut microbiome and the interaction with their environment. Most of these studies have been carried out from stool samples, being representative of the microbiome present in the large intestine, mainly in the caecum. In healthy adult horses, the microbial profiles that have been found are mostly represented by bacteria from the phyla Firmicutes (44%) and Bacteroidetes (38%), followed by Spirochaetes (2.5%), Fibrobacter (2.0%), Proteobacteria (0.8%), and Tenericutes (0.5%). On the contrary, other studies indicate that the most abundant phylum in healthy horses is Bacteroidetes, followed by Firmicutes, Verrucomicrobia, and methanogenic archeas. However, some studies have concluded that bacteria belonging to the phylum Firmicutes outnumber Bacteroidetes in a ratio of 4:1, in contrast to current data reporting that this ratio is 1: 1. Indeed, these differences may be influenced by factors such as geographic location, race, diet, intestinal segment, methodological differences in the DNA extraction technique, and even the sequencing platform used (Table 1).
Additionally, some reports indicate that the microbiome is diverse and multifunctional throughout the gastrointestinal tract, which is related to the physiology of each segment. In general, the richness and diversity are much greater in the large intestine than in the stomach and small intestine. At the edge level, the Proteobacteria is dominant in the ileum, while Firmicutes and Bacteroides are abundant in the large intestine.
One of the main activities of the gut microbiome is to contribute to the fermentation of various types of indigestible fibers by the small intestine. Horses, as nonruminant herbivores, depend largely on the colon and the caecum to carry out fermentation processes where fibrolytic bacteria, mainly anaerobic, are capable of depolymerizing pectin, starch, cellulose, and hemicellulose to their respective monosaccharides through the Embden Meyerhoff pathway. This activity results in the release of short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), such as butyrate, propionate, and acetate. Butyrate has been shown to affect the growth and differentiation of colonocytes and has a positive role in reducing inflammation at the intestinal level. In addition, it has a direct impact on the development and activity of the immune system, considering that the intestinal epithelium represents a stable barrier between the lymphoid tissue and the microbiome itself. It is important to understand that microbial interactions are key to shaping the composition of the gut microbiome, where competition for nutrients is commonly observed. These interactions are dependent on the chemical nature of dietary compounds and could influence health, according to the different SCFA profiles that each individual manifests. The diet is the main factor that contributes to gut microbiome modification in horses.
Relative abundance of the main intestinal bacterial phyla reported for healthy equines (HE) and intestinal disease equines (IDE).
Study group	HE	IDE	N° of equines evaluated (HE/IDE)	Reference	 	Donkeys	Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes	Uninformed	5/ 0		 	Sport horses	Spirochaetes, Tenericutes, Firmicutes	Uninformed	185/ 0		 	Sport horses without or with diarrhea	Bacteoidetes, Verrucomicrobia, Firmicutes	Bacteroidetes, Proteobacterias, Firmicutes	45/ 5		 	Thoroughbred horses without or with colic	Bacteoidetes Firmicutes	FirmicutesBacteroidetes	24/ 28		 	Horses managed at pasture	Bacteoidetes, Firmicutes, Spirochaetes	Uninformed	7/ 0		 	Sport horses without or with colic	Bacteoidetes Firmicutes, Fibrobacteres	FirmicutesBacteroidetes, Fibrobacteres	5/ 9		 	Horses without or with colic	Bacteoidetes Firmicutes, Fibrobacteres	FirmicutesBacteroidetes, Fibrobacteres	30/ 17		 	Horses with colic	Uninformed	Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Spirochaetes	0/ 17	Stewart et al., 2020	 	Horses without or with colic	FirmicutesBacteroidetes, Proteobacteria	Bacteoidetes Firmicutes, Proteobacteria	6/ 10

Alterations of gut microbiome
In human and animal patients, it has been observed that losses of microbiome homeostasis, or dysbiosis, are associated with some diseases, which are explained by the imbalance and loss of some bacterial species. An example of this is inflammatory bowel disease, which contains Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis, in addition to metabolic syndrome and irritable bowel disease and chronic relapsing Clostridium difficile infection. One of the strongest links between irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and intestinal microbiome was indicated in a study where fecal matter was transplanted from human subjects with IBS to healthy mice, observing that the mice showed changes associated with the disease, such as impaired intestinal motility, increased permeability of the intestine, and visceral hypersensitivity.
Currently, there is little research evaluating the relationship between the intestinal microbiome and colic in horses; one of them was carried out by, where they analyzed fecal samples obtained from thoroughbred horses during the colic episode, and compared them with those obtained 30 and 90 days later; they reported an increase in the relative abundance of Clostridium phytofermentans and Bacteroides sp. in all samples obtained during colic, compared to samples collected at 30 and 90 days after the episode. Other studies mention that colicky horses have a significantly higher percentage of Clostridioides difficile compared to healthy horses. In this regard, relate the administration of antimicrobials in hospitalized horses with diarrhea caused by C. difficile, where a clear increase in this species has been observed. Undoubtedly, among all the external factors that generate changes in the gut microbiome, the administration of antibiotics could have the most serious consequences since it favors the rapid proliferation of pathogenic bacteria. In equine clinical practice, the oral administration of antibiotics can induce dysbiosis, which often results in diarrhea and colitis. Indirectly, the administration of the fecal transplantation from a healthy donor horse to a patient with diarrhea has made it possible to generate a causal relationship between the composition of the microbiome and disease situation that has been reported in human patients.
It has been shown that the diversity of species decreases in horses with colic, showing significant differences in 46 of 304 identified operational taxonomic units. Likewise, they point out that the relative abundance of bacteria such as Prevotella, Clostridia, and Lachnospiraceae is reduced while Christenellaceae, Streptococcus, and Sphaerochaeta increase in horses with colic compared to elective cases. The decrease in the relative abundance of members of the family Lachnospiraceae producers of butyrate bacteria has been previously mentioned. Interestingly, found an association between Firmicutes: Proteobacteria ratio and the appearance of colic with an odds ratio of 0.95, indicating that the higher this proportion, the lower the probability of developing a colic episode, information you can use to predict and prevent these types of events. However, other study could not find this relationship and found an overgrowth of lactic acid-producing bacteria, such as Lachnospiraceae and Lactobacillaceae, and a decrease of methanogenic bacteria. found in postpartum mare that developed colic a higher relative abundance in Proteobacteria 1–76 days (mean 17.5) before the onset of the colic episode (Table 1). However, neither significant differences in community membership, structure, diversity, or evenness were found. Likewise, several studies carried out in humans support the idea of considering the Proteobacteria phylum as a marker of the alteration of the intestinal microbiome, and an increase in the relative abundance of this group of microorganisms associated with various gastrointestinal diseases has been observed.
Epidemiological studies have established an increased risk of colic associated with sudden changes in diet, which result from an alteration of fermentation patterns and a metabolic disorder within 4–6 days after a dietary change. Some authors explain that when horses are exposed to the sudden incorporation of high levels of soluble carbohydrates in the diet, the normal enzymatic degradation in the small intestine is overloaded and large amounts of starch pass to the large intestine, where the microbial fermentation occurs. As a result of this fermentation, an accumulation of lactic acid and gas occurs by bacteria such as Lactobacillus and Streptococcus, causing a rapid drop in the pH of the hindgut and consequently a loss in fibrolytic bacteria. Using culture-independent techniques, it was possible to confirm a lower abundance of the Lachnospiraceae, Ruminococcaceae and Fibrobacter families. It is also known that grass-fed horses have a higher relative abundance of bacteria belonging to the Clostridiaceae, Eubacterium, and Spirochataceae families in the hindgut. On the other hand, those fed grain show a decrease in the relative abundance of Fibrobacter. In addition, pregnant mares are at greater risk to have colic because of changes in their feeding management during the peripartum period that produce significant alterations in the pH of the colon, which can cause variations in the hindgut microbiota, leading to a significant increase in the phylum Proteobacteria.

Conclusion
Different factors can alter the composition of the intestinal microbiome in equines, modifying the relative abundance of the main bacterial phyla. The bacterial community composition in horses with colic is different from healthy horses, characterized by a less diverse population and changes in the relative abundance of some phyla and bacteria species.
In healthy animals, a predominance of the phyla Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes has been identified, while in horses with colic these phyla decrease and Proteobacteria increases. However, more studies are required to establish a causal relationship between these alterations and the presentation of colic in horses.

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

Authors’ contributions
Felipe Lara: conception of the study, wrote the first draft of the manuscript, and critically revised the manuscript. Rodrigo Castro: wrote the first draft of the manuscript and critically revised the manuscript. Pamela Thomson: conception and design of the study, wrote the first draft of the manuscript, critically revised the manuscript, and funding acquisition.

References
Decoding molecular interactions in microbial communities
The composition and metabolism of faecal microbiota is specifically modulated by different dietary polysaccharides and mucin: an isothermal microcalorimetry study
Equine duodenitis-proximal jejunitis: a review
The gastrointestinal microbiome: a review
Antimicrobial-associated diarrhoea in three equine referral practices
Interactions between substrate, fermentation end-products, buffering systems and gas production upon fermentation of different carbohydrates by mixed rumen microorganisms in vitro
Strong stability and host specific bacterial community in faeces of ponies
Colic prevention to avoid colic Surgery: a surgeon´s perspective
Indicators of ‘critical’ outcomes in 941 horses seen ‘out-of-hours’ for colic
Role of the intestinal microbiota in resistance to colonization by Clostridium difficile
European consensus conference on faecal microbiota transplantation in clinical practice
The intestinal microbiota
Starch Digestion by Gut Bacteria: Crowdsourcing for Carbs
Landscapes and bacterial signatures of mucosa-associated intestinal microbiota in Chilean and Spanish patients with inflammatory bowel disease
Clostridium butyricum, a butyrate-producing probiotic, inhibits intestinal tumor development through modulating Wnt signaling and gut microbiota
Prebiotic potential of pectin and pectic oligosaccharides to promote anti-inflammatory commensal bacteria in the human colon
Emergence of Clostridium difficile toxinotype III, PCR-ribotype 027-associated disease, France, 2006
Evaluation of the colic in horses: decision for referral
Comparison of the fecal microbiota of healthy horses and horses with colitis by High throughput sequencing of the v3-v5 region of the 16S rRNA gene
The equine intestinal microbiome
Understanding the intestinal microbiome in health and disease
The hypersensitivity to colonic distension of IBS patients can be transferred to rats through their fecal microbiota
Risk factors for acute abdominal pain (colic) in the adult horse: a scoping review of risk factors, and a systematic review of the effect of management-related changes
Bacterial diversity within the equine large intestine as revealed by molecular analysis of cloned 16S rRNA genes
Design and evaluation of groupspecific oligonucleotide probes for quantitative analysis of intestinal ecosystems: their application to assessment of equine colonic microflora
Alterations in microbiota and fermentation products in equine large intestine in response to dietary variation and intestinal disease
Changes of the hindgut microbiota due to high–starch diet can associate with behavioral stress response in horses
Dietary-induced modulation of the hindgut microbiota is related to behavioral responses during stressful events in horses
Clostridium difficile infection in horses: a review
Identification of a core Bacterial community within the large intestine of the horse
Characterisation of the faecal bacterial community in adult and elderly horses fed a high fibre, high oil or high starch diet using 454 pyrosequencing
A microbiological map of the Healthy equine gastrointestinal tract
High nutrient availability reduces the diversity and stability of the equine caecal microbiota
Efect of starch source (corn, oats or wheat) and concentration on fermentation by equine faecal microbiota in vitro
Microbiota intestinal en la salud y la enfermedad
Intestinal microbiota in Healthy adults: Temporal analysis reveals individual and common core and relation to intestinal symptoms
The role of the gut microbiota in metabolic health
The Bacterial Community of the horse gastrointestinal tract and its relation to fermentative acidosis, laminitis, colic, and stomach ulcers
The impact of diet on the hindgut microbiome
Insights into the Role of Human Gut Microbiota in Clostridioides difficile Infection
Clinical findings, diagnoses, and outcomes of horses presented for colic to a referral hospital in Atlantic Canada (2000–2015)
The gut microbiome of horses: current research on equine enteral microbiota and future perspectives
Alterations in the fecal microbiome of Healthy horses in response to antibiotic treatment
Development of the equine gut microbiota
Microbial diversity within the digestive tract contents of Dezhou donkeys
The gut microbiota, bacterial metabolites, and colorectal cancer
Priming for welfare: gut microbiota is associated with equitation conditions and behavior in horse athletes
Colic: Diagnosis, surgical decision, preoperative management, and surgical Approaches to the abdomen
A key genetic factor for fucosyllactose utilization affects infant gut microbiota development
The fecal microbiota of healthy donor horses and geriatric recipients undergoing fecal microbial transplantation for the treatment of diarrhea
Assessment of clinical and microbiota responses to fecal microbial transplantation in adult horses with diarrhea
Prebiotics Mediate Microbial Interactions in a Consortium of the Infant Gut Microbiome
A farm – based prospective study of equine colic incidence and associated risk factors
Changes in equine hindgut bacterial populations during oligofructose-induced laminitis
Microbial events in the hindgut during carbohydrate - induced equine laminitis
The equine gastrointestinal microbiome: Impacts of age and obesity
The infant microbiome development: mom matters
Gut microbiota in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease
Postoperative Clostridium difficile infection with PCR ribotype 078 strain identified at necropsy in five Thoroughbred racehorses
Mortality, clinical findings, predisposing factors and treatment of Clostridioides difficile colitis in Japanese thoroughbred racehorses
Fecal microbiota transplant, its usefulness beyond Clostridioides difficile in gastrointestinal diseases
Comparison of the fecal microbiota of horses with intestinal disease and their healthy counterparts
Long-term survival of equine surgical colic cases. Part 1: Patterns of mortality and morbidity
An ecological network of polysaccharide utilization among human intestinal symbionts
The composition of the gut microbiota throughout life, with an emphasis on early life
Variation in faecal microbiota in a group of horses managed at pasture over a 12-month period
A longitudinal study of the faecal microbiome and metabolome of periparturient mares
Management and horse-level risk factors for recurrent colic in the UK general equine practice population
Prevalence of Clostridium difficile and Clostridium perfringens in Swiss horses with and without gastrointestinal disease and microbiota composition in relation to Clostridium difficile shedding
Molecular insights into dietary induced colic in the horse
Pyrosequencing of 16S rRNA genes in fecal samples reveals high diversity of hindgut microflora in horses and potential links to chronic laminitis
Characterization of the fecal microbiota of healthy horses
Differences in the equine fecal microbiota between horses presenting to a tertiary referral hospital for colic compared to an elective surgical procedure
Global metabolic interaction network of the human gut microbiota for context-specific communityscale analysis
The microbiome in early life: implications for health outcomes
Colic in the British military working horse population: a retrospective analysis
Roles of short-chain fatty acids receptors, GPR41 and GPR43 on colonic functions
The microbiome and innate immunity
Antibiotic-induced alterations of the gut microbiota alter secondary bile acid production and allow for Clostridium difficile spore germination and outgrowth in the large intestine
Anti - inflammatory effect of microbial consortia during the utilization of dietary polysaccharides
Gastrointestinal microbiome, what is behind faecal microbiota transplantation?
Prospective study of equine colic incidence and mortality
Duodenal Infusion of donor feces for recurrent Clostridium difficile
Assessment of equine fecal microbial profiles during and after a colic episode using pyrosequencing
Role of the gut microbiota in equine health and disease
Effects of Feeding management on the equine cecal microbiota
Prognostic value of measuring heart rate variability at the time of hospital admission in horses with colic
Influence of short-term dietary starch inclusion on the equine cecal microbiome
Changes in the faecal microbiota of mares precede the development of post-partum colic
Changes in faecal bacteria associated with concentrate and forage-only diets fed to horses in training
Equine colic: clinical epidemiology and associated risk factors in and around Debre Zeit
New frontiers in genetics, Gut Microbiota, and immunity: a Rosetta stone for the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease
Butyrate suppresses colonic inflammation through HDAC1-dependent Fas upregulation and Fas-mediated apoptosis of T cells