Emergence of Chandipura viral encephalitis in India: a strategic approach to combat a fatal viral epidemic
Vector-borne viral encephalitis is currently a significant public health concern worldwide. Factors such as climate change, urbanization, rapid land development, globalization of trade, increased intercontinental travel, and ecological disruptions are contributing to the emergence of many viral diseases. Chandipura virus encephalitis (CHPVE) is one of the prominent emerging viral diseases, quickly becoming a serious health threat. CHPVE is an acute, febrile viral illness with a high-case fatality rate. The disease was first identified in 1965 in Chandipura, Nagpur district of Maharashtra, during an outbreak of mosquito-borne diseases such as Dengue and Chikungunya. Initially, the outbreak was confined to Maharashtra, but it later spread to neighbouring states like Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, and Chhattisgarh. Two decades after its initial case in Maharashtra, the disease has now been spread to other countries, including Nigeria, Senegal, West Africa, and Sri Lanka. As the name suggests, CHPVE is caused by the Chandipura virus (CHPV), belonging to the Vesiculovirus genus of the Rhabdoviridae family, responsible for the incidence of well-known neurotrophic disease, i.e., Rabies.

Introduction

HIGHLIGHTS
Chandipura virus encephalitis (CHPVE) is a re-emerging neurotropic viral disease with frequent outbreaks in India and expanding its geographical range to Africa and Sri Lanka.
CHPV is transmitted by sand flies (Phlebotomus papatasi), enters the host cells via clathrin-mediated endocytosis, which induces neuronal apoptosis and inflammation.
The CHPV detection methods used at present are time-consuming, and there is no approved antiviral treatment available.
Development of rapid diagnostics, effective antiviral therapy, and next-generation vaccines (DNA, viral vectored, mRNA-based) to prevent high mortality can enable timely outbreak containment.
Vector-borne viral encephalitis is currently a significant public health concern worldwide. Factors such as climate change, urbanization, rapid land development, globalization of trade, increased intercontinental travel, and ecological disruptions are contributing to the emergence of many viral diseases. Chandipura virus encephalitis (CHPVE) is one of the prominent re-emerging viral diseases, quickly becoming a serious health threat. CHPVE is an acute, febrile viral illness with a high case fatality rate. The disease was first identified in 1965 in Chandipura, Nagpur district of Maharashtra, during an outbreak of mosquito-borne diseases such as Dengue and Chikungunya. Initially, the outbreak was confined to Maharashtra, but it later spread to neighboring states like Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, and Chhattisgarh.
Two decades after its initial case in Maharashtra, the disease has now been spread to other countries, including Nigeria, Senegal, West Africa, and Sri Lanka. As the name suggests, CHPVE is caused by the Chandipura virus (CHPV), belonging to the Vesiculovirus genus of the Rhabdoviridae family, responsible for the incidence of well-known neurotrophic disease, i.e., Rabies. During the late 20th century, it was not studied and investigated thoroughly due to the sporadic incidences; however, CHPVE severely affected children below 15 years of age in Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat in 2003 and 2005, respectively. Herein, the case fatality rate was remarkedly higher to the tune of 56–t75%. Despite intensive containment measures, an outbreak occurred in Gujarat, India, between June and August 2024, with 245 reported cases and 82 deaths, yielding a case fatality rate of 33%. This outbreak was more severe than the previous outbreaks over the past two decades, underscoring the increased severity and public health significance of the 2024 episode. Subsequently, the focus of researchers, health professionals, and policymakers shifted towards the risk assessment, pathogenesis, transmission, preventive and containment measures, and virulence of the Chandipura virus. Global warming induced erratic rainfall and altered weather patterns being favorable for the sand flies and mosquitoes are mainly responsible for the emergence of vector borne diseases including CHPVE. Moreover, deforestation, encroachment of forests, increased proximity of forest areas, and climate change has resulted in transmission of disease to bordering regions.

Viral genome
The CHPV, a vesiculovirus is an enveloped, arthropod-borne, nonsegmented, single-stranded RNA virus. The genome of CHPV consists of negative-sense RNA of 10 kb in length which encodes for five polypeptides namely N (Nucleocapsid protein), M (Matrix protein), P (phosphoprotein), G (glycoprotein), and L (large protein) through five monocistronic mRNAs. The P protein plays a vital role in the virus’s life cycle, M protein is lethal in nature, whereas G protein spikes out and acts as an antigenic determinant. Studies during the last two decades have recognized polypeptide M as a deadly weapon in rhabdovirus that perhaps alone may induce cytopathic effects in virus-infected cells. These genes are arranged sequentially along the viral RNA, reflecting the canonical genomic organization of the Rhabdoviridae family. The P protein is essential cofactor for the viral polymerase. The M protein which plays a pivotal role in virus assembly and budding. The G protein responsible for viral attachment and entry into host cells. The L protein is an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase required for viral transcription and replication. This linear arrangement of genes (N–P–M–G–L) represents the typical genomic structure of the CHPV.
If considering the similarity in terms of protein and nucleic acid composition, CHPV is closely related to the prototype virus of the genus, Vesicular Stomatitis virus (VSV), and to the pathogenesis of Rabies virus. The role of the aforementioned proteins in pathogenesis has been speculated from the existing data on VSV.

Evolution and epidemiology of CHPV
CHPVE is predominantly reported from India, where multiple outbreaks have occurred across different states. Beyond India, sporadic cases have also been documented in Bhutan, Sri Lanka, and Nigeria. The virus was first isolated in 1965 at the Virus Research Laboratory (now the National Institute of Virology, Pune) during an investigation of acute febrile illness cases from Chandipura village in Maharashtra, India. Accordingly, the virus was named after its geographic location of discovery.
Retrospective serological analyses revealed evidence of CHPV circulation as early as 1955, nearly a decade prior to its first isolation. Subsequently, the virus was also isolated from Phlebotomus sand flies during a routine entomological survey conducted in Aurangabad. The second documented human case reported in an 11-year-old child from Raipur in 1983.
CHPVE remained relatively ignored until the major outbreak that happened in Andhra Pradesh in the year 2003, during which 329 cases and 183 deaths were reported, corresponding to a case fatality rate (CFR) of 55.6%. Soon after, another outbreak was reported in Gujarat in early 2004, resulting in 17 deaths among 23 cases (CFR 78.3%). In 2007, Maharashtra reported another episode with 39 laboratory-confirmed CHPV cases and a CFR of 43.6%. Recently, an outbreak was reported in Odisha in 2015.
CHPV has been consistently associated with outbreaks in central and western India, particularly in Maharashtra, Gujarat, and Andhra Pradesh, where it is considered endemic. The disease predominantly affects rural and tribal populations in areas with high sand fly density, the primary vector of the virus. Outbreaks occur more frequently during the monsoon season, which provides favorable environmental conditions for sand fly breeding and virus transmission.

Replication and assembly of the virus
The replication cycle of CHPV begins with the attachment of the viral G protein to specific receptors on the host cell surface. This interaction triggers endocytosis, leading to viral internalization within an endosome. Acidification of the endosome induces conformational changes in the glycoprotein, promoting fusion between the viral envelope and the endosomal membrane and subsequent release of the viral ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex into the cytoplasm.
Once in the cytoplasm, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (L protein), in association with the phosphoprotein (P), transcribes the negative-sense viral RNA genome into monocistronic mRNAs. These mRNAs are translated by host ribosomes to produce the five viral proteins. The newly synthesized nucleoprotein encapsidates the nascent viral RNA to form RNP complexes. Genome replication proceeds through the synthesis of a full-length positive-sense RNA intermediate, which serves as a template for generating new negative-sense genomes.
Assembly of progeny virions occurs at the inner surface of the host plasma membrane, where the matrix protein links the RNP complex with the glycoprotein spikes embedded in the host membrane. Mature virions bud from the cell membrane, acquiring their lipid envelope in the process. This budding, driven by interactions between the M protein and the host lipid bilayer, results in the release of infectious particles capable of spreading to adjacent cells and perpetuating the infection cycle.

Pathophysiology and transmission dynamics
The CHPV, being a neurotrophic virus affects brain and nervous system functioning resulting in nervous symptoms (Graphical abstract). Immature neurons and other biological factors are the primary reasons for the age-dependent susceptibility in CHPVE seen in different neurotropic viral diseases. The reticuloendothelial cell maturation, formation of the blood–brain barrier (BBB), modifications in receptor configuration, potentiation of interferon (IFN) production, the enhancement of immune responses, and the reduction of systemic stress responses are additional predisposing factors for age-dependent susceptibility. In this context, the virus led to the death of more than 50 children below 15 years of age during a recent outbreak of CHPVE in July 2024 in Sabarkantha district of Gujarat. Herein, the majority of the deaths occurred within 48 hours after the exhibition of high-grade fever.
The CHPV is primarily transmitted by the bite of sand flies (Phlebotomus papatasi being the most notable species). Besides, sand flies can transmit CHPV through venereal routes wherein, male sand flies have crucial role in sustaining CHPV activity in nature. The sand flies of the genus Sergentomyia, abundantly present in endemic areas, also have been found to harbor CHPV. No direct human-to-human transmission is reported till date; however, livestock such as pigs, cattle, sheep, and goats are found to carry antibodies against CHPV. Despite of several reports and many exploratory studies, the mechanisms of CHPV transmission remain poorly understood.
Being a vector-borne disease, pathogenesis of CHPV begins with the virus entering host via sandfly. Postentry, rapid viral replication occurs at the site of entry followed by systemic viremia. Due to neurotropic nature, CHPV efficiently breaches BBB leading to neuronal inflammation, degeneration, and apoptosis within the central nervous system. The broad host range of CHPV suggests that it may utilize multiple host receptors for cell entry. A critical aspect of its entry process involves interaction with host proteins associated with clathrin-mediated endocytosis (CME). Specifically, CHPV exploits AP2 adaptor proteins (AP2A1, AP2A2) and epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate 15 (Eps15), which are essential components of CME, thereby facilitating viral internalization and productive infection. After entering into the host bloodstream through insect bite, CHPV initially disseminates to peripheral organs before reaching peripheral nerve terminals, from which it undergoes retrograde transport to the central nervous system (CNS). An alternative route of entry involves through olfactory neurons. CHPV infection also triggers the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, and MCP-1, which contribute to increased BBB permeability, facilitating direct viral entry into the CNS. Within the CNS, CHPV induces neuronal death predominantly via the extrinsic apoptotic pathway. The virus activates Fas-associated death domain (FADD) signaling, leading to activation of caspase-8 and caspase-3 followed by PARP cleavage, which together execute apoptosis.
Additionally, oxidative stress plays a key role in CHPV-mediated neuronal apoptosis. The infection leads to mitochondrial dysfunction and reactive oxygen species generation, which activate p38 MAPK and further promote apoptosis via the FasL-FADD pathway. Furthermore, CHPV infection elicits neuroinflammatory responses, particularly in microglia, where infection upregulates chemokines like CXCL10 and CCL5, promoting infiltration of peripheral immune cells and exacerbating CNS inflammation. This is accompanied by disruption of tight-junction proteins such as occludin, claudin-1, and β-catenin, further compromising BBB integrity. Furthermore, progressive neuronal degeneration finally leads to encephalitis and neuronal disorders.
The extensive effect of CHPV on CNS results in systemic clinical manifestations namely, fever, vomiting, altered sensorium, seizures, and often progressing rapidly to death. The elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines and impaired innate immune defence aggravates disease severity and result in mortality.

Diagnosis of CHPVE
The diagnosis of CHPVE may be based on symptoms such as rapid onset of high-grade fever followed by, vomiting, diarrhoea, altered sensorium, convulsions, altered posture, altered vision, seizures, and meningeal irritation. However, the confirmatory diagnosis can be done by either conventional method by employing infant mice, embryonated eggs, and cell culture. The rapid onset of CHPVE and progression to death within 24-48 hours necessitated rapid diagnostic methods having high sensitivity and specificity, unlike the time taking reverse RT-qPCR and Immunofluorescent antibody technique (Graphical abstract). The incidence of high fever in the areas inhabiting sand flies and mosquitoes needs to be considered seriously to address the high case fatality rate (>50%) as observed during the recent outbreak (July 2024) in Sabarkantha, Aravalli, Mahisagar, Kheda, Mehsana, and Rajkot districts of Gujarat. Considering these facts, to conduct a detailed study of the CHPVE outbreak, a national joint outbreak response team was deployed in Gujrat. Due to the sheer similarity of CHPVE symptoms with other encephalitic diseases, dengue, and malaria, the disease poses a tough challenge to global researchers in its containment. Consequently, the correspondence is aimed at suggesting a strategic approach to combat CHPVE: a fatal viral epidemic. Currently, there is no rapid and robust diagnostic test available for the detection of CHPV, which poses a significant challenge for timely treatment and effective disease management. At present, CHPV detection relies on techniques such as conventional virus isolation, RT-PCR and ELISA. However, these methods are time-consuming, require advanced laboratory infrastructure, technical expertise and are unsuitable for point-of-care testing during outbreaks. Hence, there is pressing need to develop a rapid, sensitive, point-of-care diagnostic method for the detection of CHPV, which would facilitate early case identification, effective containment, and timely therapeutic interventions. In this context, a routine method with high sensitivity and specificity has been developed for targeting N gene (527 bp) with a detection limit of 10–100 plaque-forming units.

Treatment and prevention of CHPVE
There are no approved antiviral therapies available at present for the treatment of CHPVE infection, and clinical management remains chiefly supportive, focusing mainly on mitigation of symptoms. Several studies have investigated potential therapeutic strategies, including RNA interference (siRNA)-based approaches that target viral genes. Besides, antiviral drugs such as Ribavirin and Favipiravir, which have shown variable inhibitory effects against CHPV in experimental models. Nevertheless, vector control and antiviral drugs may also be effective for the prevention and treatment of CHPVE, respectively. In addition, mass awareness programs, good nutrition, and maintaining good hygiene will help in the reduction of CHPVE. Considering the rapid onset and high case fatality rate, mass vaccination in endemic areas may prove crucial in prevention of the CHPVE. In this context, few researchers have developed recombinant and inactivated vaccines for CHPVE which have shown promising results in mice. Surprisingly, no vaccine has yet been tested for efficacy or neutralizing antibodies in humans and no effective antiviral treatment has been reported. Given the high mortality rates in children, there is an urgent need to develop a safe, effective, and long-lasting vaccine targeting the virus. New generation vaccines, which can provide robust, and long-lasting immunity such as DNA vaccines, viral vector vaccines, or mRNA vaccines coding for immunogenic proteins like the G protein, should be developed. Furthermore, the efficacy and safety of these vaccines should be tested in humans to ensure their broader application.
Despite comprehensive analysis of CHPVE, this article has limitations. First, majority of the available literature available are historical and with observational data, limiting its ability to establish causation in disease transmission and outbreak patterns. Second, we have not discussed in detail the challenges of large-scale vaccine production, distribution, or efficacy in endemic regions. Additionally, lack of comprehensive epidemiological data, such geographic distribution and seasonal activity of vectors, affects the development of effective surveillance and control measures. Finally, the article does not address socioeconomic and infrastructural challenges involved in implementing preventive strategies at resource-limited settings, especially in endemic areas. This study follows the TITAN criteria, as cited in our manuscript.

Surveillance and control
Enhance the Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme (IDSP) for real-time CHPV monitoring, especially during the monsoon.
Strengthening Surveillance:
Effective surveillance and control strategies are essential to mitigate the public health impact of CHPV, particularly in endemic regions. The following strategies are generally recommended to strengthen preparedness, early detection, and response capacities:
2. Improving Diagnostics:
Establish sentinel sites with diagnostic capabilities in high-risk areas.
Train healthcare workers for early recognition, scientific management, and prompt reporting of CHPV cases.
3. Vector Control:
Develop and deploy rapid point-of-care tests in rural health centers.
Conduct insecticide spraying and promote use of insecticide-treated nets and repellents.
4. Public Awareness:
Improve sanitation and eliminate sand fly breeding sites through community participation.
Conduct awareness campaigns on transmission, symptoms, and prevention of the disease.
5. Research and Policy Integration:
Introduce school-based education programs for children in endemic areas.
Study vector ecology and climatic influences on outbreaks, that will enhance the understanding of transmission dynamics.
Promote vaccine and antiviral research, and genomic surveillance.
Adopt a One Health approach and ensure coordinated policies with sustained funding support.

Future directions and research gaps
Genomic and Molecular exploration studies:
Despite progress in understanding CHPV, significant gaps remain in epidemiology, pathogenesis, treatment, and prevention. Future research should focus on:
Comprehensive genomic surveillance to monitor viral evolution, recombination, and strain diversity.
Detailed studies on sand fly ecology, seasonal patterns, and vector competence under changing climatic conditions.
2. Transmission Dynamics:
Elucidation of molecular mechanisms of neurovirulence, host immune evasion, and viral persistence.
3. Diagnostics and Therapeutics:
Integrated vector management strategies combining environmental, chemical, and biological control measures.
Development of sensitive, rapid, and affordable point-of-care diagnostic assays suitable for field use.
4. Vaccine Development:
Screening of antiviral compounds targeting key viral proteins and host–virus interactions.
Exploration of novel vaccine platforms, including recombinant viral vectors and mRNA-based vaccines.
5. Epidemiological and One Health Studies:
Evaluation of cross-protection potential within the Rhabdoviridae family.
Investigating zoonotic reservoirs and integrating animal–human–environmental data through a One Health framework.
6. Global Health Integration:
Strengthening community-based surveillance and early warning systems.
Inclusion of CHPV in global arboviral surveillance networks.
Collaborative research and data sharing among endemic and nonendemic countries to enhance preparedness.

Conclusion
CHPV remains a neglected yet deadly pathogen with significant epidemic potential. The repeated outbreaks in India, coupled with its expanding geographical range, highlight the pressing need for integrated strategies beyond vector control and awareness campaigns. The absence of a rapid, point-of-care diagnostic test, and the lack of approved therapeutics severely influence timely intervention and effective disease management. While preliminary studies on repurposed antivirals, siRNA-based therapies, and vaccine candidates have shown promise, the failure to translate these findings into clinical trials underscores a critical research gap. Future efforts must prioritize the development of sensitive diagnostics, next-generation vaccines, and novel antivirals guided by a deeper understanding of CHPV pathogenesis and host–virus interactions. Bridging these gaps through collaborative research, sustained funding, and public health preparedness will be crucial in mitigating the impact of future CHPV outbreaks and preventing widespread morbidity and mortality.
Sponsorships or competing interests that may be relevant to content are disclosed at the end of this article.
Published online 26 November 2025

Ethical approval
Ethics approval was not required for this editorial.

Consent
“Informed consent was not required for this editorial.”

Source of funding
None.

Author contributions
G.N.A.: Writing – review & editing. N.K.C.: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. S.S.: Writing – review & editing. S.K.P.: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing. K.K.K: Writing & review. V.S.M.: Writing & review. A.K.: Writing & review. T.B.E.: Writing- review & editing.

Conflicts of interest disclosure
All authors declare that there exists no potential conflict of interest.

Guarantor
Talha Bin Emran.

Research registration unique identifying number (UIN)
Not applicable.

Provenance and peer review
Not commissioned, externally peer-reviewed.

Data availability statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

References
Re-emergence of Chandipura virus infection in India
The evolving landscape of Chandipura Virus: a comprehensive account of outbreaks to recent advances
Chandipura: a new arbovirus isolated in India from patients with febrile illness
Temporal trends in outbreaks of Chandipura viral infection in India: a systematic review
Changing clinical scenario in Chandipura virus infection
An outbreak of Chandipura virus encephalitis in the eastern districts of Gujarat state, India
Acute encephalitis syndrome due to Chandipura Virus India
Complete genome sequences of Chandipura and Isfahan vesiculoviruses
Rhabdoviruses and apoptosis
Analysis of the dark proteome of Chandipura virus reveals maximum propensity for intrinsic disorder in phosphoprotein
Cyclophilin A: a possible host modulator in Chandipura virus infection
Phlébotomes du Sénégal: inventaire de la faune de la région de Kédougou. Isolements d’arbovirus
Viruses other than arenaviruses from West African wild mammals: factors affecting transmission to man and domestic animals
Chandipura virus: an emerging human pathogen?
Isolation of Chandipura virus from sandflies in Aurangabad
Isolation of Chandipura virus from the blood in acute encephalopathy syndrome
A large outbreak of acute encephalitis with high fatality rate in children in Andhra Pradesh, India, in 2003, associated with Chandipura virus
Chandipura virus encephalitis outbreak among children in Nagpur division, Maharashtra, 2007
Chandipura virus infection causing encephalitis in a tribal population of Odisha in eastern India
Genetic characterization of the glycoprotein G of Chandipura viruses in India with emphasis on an outbreak of 2015
Re-emerging Chandipura vesiculovirus: a cause of concern for global health
Epidemiology and clinical characteristics of Chandipura virus
Childhood encephalitis hospitalizations associated with virus agents in medium-endemic states in India
Structure and expression of the glycoprotein gene of Chandipura virus
Role of cell surface vimentin in Chandipura virus replication in Neuro-2a cells
Chandipura virus: an emerging tropical pathogen
Chandipura virus forms cytoplasmic inclusion bodies through phase separation and proviral association of cellular protein kinase R and stress granule protein TIA-1
Biological and pathogenic blueprint of Chandipura Virus
Venereal transmission of Chandipura virus by Phlebotomus papatasi (Scopoli)
Incidence of neutralizing antibodies to Chandipura virus in domestic animals from Karimnagar and Warangal districts of Andhra Pradesh, India
Predicting the host protein interactors of Chandipura virus using a structural similarity-based approach
Neuropathogenesis by Chandipura virus: an acute encephalitis syndrome in India
Chandipura virus resurgence: insights from Indian outbreaks and the path forward
Chandipura virus induces neuronal death through Fas-mediated extrinsic apoptotic pathway
Nitrosporeusine analogue ameliorates Chandipura virus induced inflammatory response in CNS via NFκb inactivation in microglia
Chandipura virus resurgence in India: insights into diagnostic tools, antiviral development, and public health implications
Intracranial administration of P gene siRNA protects mice from lethal Chandipura virus encephalitis
Plasma ribavirin concentrations during treatment of recurrent hepatitis C with peginterferon α-2b and ribavirin combination after liver transplantation
Ribavirin inhibits Chandipura virus replication in Vero cells
Recombinant glycoprotein based vaccine for Chandipura virus infection
Development of an inactivated candidate vaccine against Chandipura virus (Rhabdoviridae: vesiculovirus)
Transparency in the reporting of artificial intelligence–the TITAN guideline
Chandipura virus Infection - Key Insights and Control Measures
Innovations in vector-borne disease control in India. InPublic health in developing countries-challenges and opportunities
Chandipura virus: a major cause of acute encephalitis in children in North Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, India
Recent advances in Phlebotomine sand fly research: a review based on studies presented at ISOPS XI
In vitro and in vivo testing of the antiviral effect of favipiravir (T705) against the neurotropic Chandipura virus