Evaluation of guidelines on antimicrobials use in food-producing animals: a systematic review
Background
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a global public health problem due to misuse/overuse of antimicrobials. The interplay between humans, animals, and the environment requires a One Health approach for effective AMR control. We focused this research on antimicrobial use in food-producing animals (bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and swine) to assess the compliance of Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries (members, partners, and candidates) with international guidelines: Codex Alimentarius: Code of Practice to Minimize and Contain Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance, and the Terrestrial Animal Health Code.
Methods
For this systematic review (PROSPERO CRD42024535461), between February 1 and June 30 of 2024, guidelines were searched on: governmental websites associated with health and veterinary sectors, veterinary organizations specified by the government or included in the country’s National Action Plan for AMR, and the global repository of available guidelines for responsible use of antimicrobials in animal health. Three researchers performed data extraction and AGREE II appraisal was conducted by two researchers.
Results
Of the 49 OECD countries, 37 presented guidelines (n = 82) for responsible antimicrobial use in the analyzed species, with bovine and swine being the most represented. The highest number of published guidelines was observed between 2017–2020. The number of clinical and non-clinical guidelines were 43 and 37, respectively, emphasizing the need for veterinarian-directed recommendations.
Conclusions
The AMR challenge, the interdependence of countries, and the trade of animal-derived products should encourage national initiatives to develop and implement guidelines for the judicious use of antimicrobials in animal production. Due to OECD countries’ disparities in terms of culture, internal policies, attitudes and perceptions about AMR, and financial resources, this process needs to be gradual and tailored for each case. Therefore, communication and collaboration between countries and stakeholders are essential.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s42522-025-00160-w.

Introduction
Antimicrobials are essential in human and animal health care, encompassing antibiotic, antifungal, antiparasitic, and antiviral drugs. Despite being a lifesaving breakthrough, the misuse and overuse of antimicrobials has led to antimicrobial resistance (AMR), placed in the top ten worldwide public health concerns by the World Health Organization (WHO). Resistant microorganisms can naturally arise in humans, animals, food, plants, and the environment, and this has also been reported during clinical treatments with antimicrobials. However, AMR development is aggravated by the excessive and inadequate use of antimicrobials in human medicine, veterinary, and agriculture practices.
In this context, a One Health approach is required to address AMR, being defined by WHO as “an integrated, unifying approach to balance and optimize the health of people, animals and ecosystems”. Antimicrobial stewardship initiatives have emerged to tackle AMR within the One Health framework and are implemented at multiple levels, including national, regional, community, and institutional settings. The development and effectiveness of these initiatives depend on national policies, regulatory authorities, human healthcare workers, veterinarians, farmers, industry actors, and the general public.
Among these efforts, national and international guidelines serve as critical starting points for countries to build internal structures and shape their antimicrobial use (AMU) governance. While these documents alone do not constitute a fully operational response to AMR, they offer an essential foundation by outlining key principles, minimum standards, and strategic direction. Establishing such guidance is particularly important for countries where institutional capacity, policy coherence, or awareness on AMR remains limited. Expanding antimicrobial stewardship frameworks on a global scale, especially in low-middle income countries (LMICs), requires not only human and financial resources, but also international guidance and frameworks. Cooperation, coordinated action, and strategic planning of international organizations enable the design and implementation of clinical guidelines to standardize procedures, to support clinical decisions of health professionals, and to promote more efficient and effective practices. In veterinary medicine, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), WHO, and the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) have published documents providing guidance for the responsible use of antimicrobials – the Codex Alimentarius: Code of Practice to Minimize and Contain Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance (FAO/WHO) and the Terrestrial Animal Health Code (WOAH).
These international veterinary guidelines gather updated literature, incorporating new discoveries and advances to improve healthcare quality and safety. Each country is responsible for adapting these international recommendations to its own legislation and epidemiological status, updating them as appropriate, and effectively disseminating the information across health professionals and/or stakeholders for a successful application.
To our knowledge, there is a lack of studies broadly analyzing the existence and agreement/disagreement of national guidelines with those established by FAO, WHO, and WOAH. To address this gap, our major goal was to assess guidelines of Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries for veterinary care in bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and swine. We also aimed to: (i) summarize key characteristics of guidelines; (ii) assess the quality of clinical and non-clinical guidelines; and (iii) analyze the compliance of clinical guidelines with international recommendations.

Materials and methods

Search strategy
We conducted a systematic review in accordance with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement, registered in the PROSPERO database (CRD42024535461). It focused on guidelines for the prescription of antimicrobials in food-producing animals (bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and swine). The search was limited to countries that are OECD members, accession candidates, and key partners (n = 49 countries; appendix pp 10-11), and it was performed between February 1 and June 30 of 2024.
The search strategy for identifying potential guidelines involved three key approaches: first, searching the websites of relevant government ministries responsible for medical and veterinary sectors. Second, a search was conducted in veterinary organizations indicated by the government or included in the National Action Plans (NAPs) of Antimicrobial Resistance published in the WHO Library of NAPs. Third, the global repository of available guidelines for responsible use of antimicrobials in animal health, created by the World Veterinary Association (WVA) in collaboration with the WOAH, was consulted. The search on the theme was performed in the respective countries’ original languages. The PICO question used as the basis of this work was: What guidelines have OECD countries adopted for antimicrobial stewardship in food-producing animals? This question is divided as follows: P (population): All stakeholders involved in developing, revising, and implementing guidelines for the responsible and prudent use of antimicrobials in food-producing animals; I (intervention): Prescription of antimicrobials in veterinary, specifically in food-producing animals; C (comparator): international recommendations on antimicrobial use, as established by WHO, WOAH, and FAO; O (outcome): existence/non-existence of guidelines, their specificities, and agreement/disagreement with international recommendations.

Eligibility criteria

Inclusion criteria
(i) Guidelines and stewardship documents with a focus on the use of antimicrobials in food-producing animals (bovine, swine, equine, ovine, and caprine) concerning OECD-related countries (members, partners, and candidates); (ii) Documents published on the websites of the government and the ministries/agencies responsible for regulating the veterinary sector and/or pharmaceutical sector concerning OECD-related countries; (iii) Documents published by government-indicated veterinary associations and/or organizations of OECD-related countries and/or included in the NAPs on antimicrobial resistance published on the WHO Library of NAPs.

Exclusion criteria
(i) Guidelines and stewardship documents addressing other medicines or medicines in general in food-producing animals; (ii) Guidelines and stewardship documents with a focus on the use of antimicrobials in other animals; (iii) Document specific to a procedure/treatment/active substance/disease; (iv) Documents published on websites other than by the official government and the ministries/agencies responsible for regulating the veterinary sector and/or pharmaceutical sector; (v) Documents published by veterinary associations and/or organizations that are not indicated by the governments and/or included in the NAPs; (vi) Documents that are not antimicrobial stewardship guidelines (e.g.: regulatory documents, reports, NAPs, scientific communication, notification/notice/advisory document, policies, guidance on food processing practices for farmers, articles).
A preliminary screening by title and aim was conducted, followed by a thorough evaluation of the full-text version to determine if the guidelines met the inclusion criteria. Three authors, RN, AM, and JOP, performed independent assessments, with a fourth researcher consulted in cases of disagreement. If multiple versions of a guideline were available, only the most recent was considered (retrieved guidelines were published between 2000 and 2024). All documents not meeting the eligibility criteria are listed in the appendix (pp 4-5), with the reasons for exclusion. Following the completion of the searches, countries without appropriate guidelines for responsible antimicrobial use in the species under investigation were also documented. After accessing and documenting the available guidelines, these were reviewed, either in their original language (English, Portuguese, and Spanish) or after being translated to English through an online translation engine (one author used Google Translate and the others used DeepL for comparison). The usefulness and suitability of both tools have been confirmed by several researchers.

Data analysis
Data extraction was performed independently by three researchers, RN, AM, and JOP, using a data collection template (Appendix 2, p 3). The following data was extracted from the documents: country, year of publication, title, author(s), target species, target audience, scope, focus (antimicrobials or antibiotics), and source (government or other). OECD status (member, candidate, and/or key partner) was also described. Pertinent details were also recorded: the existence or not of medically important antimicrobials (MIAs) classification in the guidelines, and the listing of their active ingredients.
The instrument Appraisal of Guidelines for Research & Evaluation (AGREE) II was used to assess the quality of retrieved documents. AGREE II is constituted by 23 appraisal criteria (items) divided into six domains, each of which “captures a distinctive aspect of guideline quality”: Domain 1, scope and purpose; Domain 2, stakeholder involvement; Domain 3, rigor of development; Domain 4, clarity of presentation; Domain 5, applicability; Domain 6, editorial independence. The items in each domain are assessed on a 7-point Likert scale (1- strongly disagree to 7- strongly agree). Final domain scores were calculated by combining individual item scores in a domain from a blind analysis of two appraisers and expressing them as a percentage of the maximum score for that domain.
Next, RN, AM, and JOP reviewed the clinical guidelines for agreement/disagreement with 10 listed recommendations from each international source – Codex Alimentarius: Code of Practice to Minimize and Contain Foodborne Antimicrobial Resistance, and the Terrestrial Animal Health Code, by FAO/WHO and WOAH.

Results

Search results
Flow diagram of guideline selection
The search in governmental and non-governmental sources of the 49 OECD countries resulted in the exclusion of six countries, for which no documents related to antimicrobial use in defined food-producing animals were found. The remaining 43 OECD countries yielded a total of 109 documents (Fig. 1). After full-text screening, 82 (75·23%) were eligible as guidelines, belonging to 37 countries (out of 43): 31 members, 1 key partner (South Africa), 3 candidates (Bulgaria, Romania, Thailand), and 2 candidates/key partners (Brazil and Indonesia). The complete list of guidelines is in the appendix (pp 6-8). Out of the 49 OECD countries, a total of 12 did not present antimicrobial stewardship guidelines for the animal species under evaluation (appendix p 9). Moreover, all OECD countries have developed NAPs (except Israel, which NAP is under development; appendix pp 10-11). The content analysis of NAPs was not performed since it was out of this work’s scope.

Main characteristics of retrieved guidelines
Main characteristics of the included guidelines on the prudent use of antimicrobials in food-producing animals
Country	Last Update	Target Audience	Target Species	Antimicrobial (AM)/Antibiotic (AB)	Organization	Ref	 	Australia	2020	Veterinarians	Sw	AM	Ngov		 	2024	Veterinarians	Ov	AM	Ngov		 	2024	Veterinarians	Bov	AM	Ngov		 	2024	Veterinarians	Bov	AM	Ngov		 	Austria	2024	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, Ov, Eq, other (rabbit, hamster, chinchillas, poultry, dogs, cats)	AB	Gov		 	Belgium	2021	Stakeholders	Bov	AB	Ngov		 	2021	Stakeholders	Sw	AB	Ngov		 	2021	Veterinarians	Eq	AB	Ngov		 	Brazila	2022	Stakeholders	Bov, Sw, other (poultry, fish)	AB	Gov		 	Bulgariab	2021	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AM	Gov		 	Canada	2008	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, other (poultry)	AM	Ngov		 	Colombia	2019	Stakeholders	Sw	AM	Ngov		 	2020	Livestock handlers	Bov	AB	Ngov		 	Costa Rica	2018	Livestock handlers	Bov	AM	Ngov		 	Denmark	2013	Stakeholders	Bov	AB	Ngov		 	2018	Veterinarians	Sw	AM	Gov		 	Estonia	2020	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, other (poultry, fish)	AB	Ngov		 	Finland	2018	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, Cap, Eq, other (poultry, fish, bees, dogs, cats, fur animals, deer)	AM	Gov		 	France	2009	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AB	Ngov		 	Germany	2015	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, Ov, Cap, Eq, other (poultry, fish, dogs, cats)	AM	Ngov		 	Greece	2020	n.a	Unspecified species	AM	Gov		 	Hungary	2020	Veterinarians	Unspecified species	AB	Gov		 	Indonesiaa	2017	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AM	Ngov	d	 	2021	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AB	Gov		 	Ireland	2018	Livestock handlers	Unspecified species	AB	Ngov		 	2019	Livestock handlers	Sw	AM	Ngov		 	2019	Livestock handlers	Bov	AM	Ngov		 	2020	Livestock handlers	Bov	AM	Ngov		 	2020	Livestock handlers	Ov	AM	Ngov		 	2022	Livestock handlers	Eq	AM	Gov		 	Italy	2018	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AB	Ngov		 	2018	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AB	Gov		 	2022	Stakeholders	Sw	AM	Ngov		 	2023	Stakeholders	Bov	AB	Gov		 	Japan	2000	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AB	Gov		 	2013	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AB	Gov		 	Korea (Republic of Korea)	2020	Veterinarians	Bov	AB	Gov		 	2020	Veterinarians	Sw	AB	Gov		 	2022	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, Eq, Ov, Cap, other (poultry, dogs, cats)	AB	Gov		 	Latvia	2018	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AM	Gov		 	Luxembourg	2022	Veterinarians	Unspecified species	AB	Gov		 	Mexico	2021	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AM	Gov		 	2023	Stakeholders	Sw	AM	Gov		 	Netherlands	2015	Veterinarians	Unspecified species	AM	Ngov		 	2019	Veterinarians	Sw	AB	Ngov		 	2019	Veterinarians	Cap	AB	Ngov		 	2019	Veterinarians	Bov	AB	Ngov		 	2019	Veterinarians	Ov	AB	Ngov		 	2021	Veterinarians	Eq	AB	Ngov		 	2023	Veterinarians	Bov	AB	Ngov		 	New Zealand	2018	Veterinarians	Bov	AB	Ngov		 	2018	Stakeholders	Bov, other (deer)	AM	Ngov		 	2018	Veterinarians	Eq	AB	Ngov		 	2020	Veterinarians	Sw	AM	Ngov		 	Norway	2022	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, Ov, Cap	AB	Ngov		 	Poland	2020	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, Eq, other (poultry, rabbit, dogs, cats, small rodents)	AM	Ngov		 	Portugal	2021	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AM	Gov		 	2023	Veterinarians	Bov	AM	Gov		 	Romaniab	2020	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AM	Gov		 	Slovenia	n.a	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AB	Gov		 	South Africac	2002	Veterinarians	Unspecified species	AM	Ngov		 	2016	Veterinarians	Sw	AM	Ngov		 	Spain	2017	Veterinarians	Bov	AB	Ngov		 	2017	Veterinarians	Eq	AB	Ngov		 	2017	Veterinarians	Sw	AB	Ngov		 	2021	Veterinarians	Bov	AM	Gov		 	2021	Veterinarians	Ov, Cap	AB	Ngov		 	Sweden	2013	Veterinarians	Eq	AB	Ngov		 	2017	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, Ov, Cap	AB	Ngov		 	2019	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw	AB	Ngov		 	Switzerland	2022	Veterinarians	Bov, Sw, Ov, Cap, other (New World camelids)	AB	Ngov		 	2022	Veterinarians	Unspecified species	AB	Ngov		 	Thailandb	2009	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AM	Gov		 	2017	Stakeholders	Unspecified species	AM	Ngov	d	 	United Kingdom (UK)	2014	Livestock handlers	Unspecified species	AB	Ngov		 	2018	Livestock handlers	Sw	AB	Ngov		 	2019	Veterinarians	Unspecified species	AM	Ngov		 	2019	Livestock handlers	Ov	AB	Ngov		 	2020	Livestock handlers	Bov, Ov	AB	Ngov		 	2022	Livestock handlers	Bov	AM	Ngov		 	2022	Livestock handlers	Bov	AM	Ngov		 	United States	2012	n.a	Unspecified species	AM	Gov		 	2020	Veterinarians	Unspecified species	AM	Gov
aOECD key partner and accession candidate
bOECD accession candidate
cOECD key partner
dThis guideline is the same for Indonesia and Thailand, being accounted for only one; Bov bovine, Cap caprine, Eq equine, Ov ovine, Sw swine; Unspecified species: guidelines referred to ‘livestock’, ‘farm animals’, ‘production animals’, and/or ‘industrial animals’; Other species: other livestock animals (different than the main 5 addressed) and pets, including poultry, dogs, cats, fish, rabbits, chinchillas, hamster, deer, fur animals, bees, small rodents, New World camelids; AM antimicrobials, AB antibiotics; Livestock handlers: owners, farmers, producers, animal keepers, breeders, and other staff; Stakeholders: veterinarians, livestock handlers, pharmaceutical industries, health managers, regulatory authorities, laboratories, etc.; Gov governmental organization; Ngov non-governmental organization; n.a. not available
Major characteristics of the 82 included guidelines and corresponding world map. A Target species, B Focus, C Target audience, D Type of organization that elaborated and published the guideline, and (E) World map of guidelines’ distribution and target audience. A Some guidelines would include, in the same document, the 5 main species: bovine, caprine, equine, ovine, and swine. In these cases, each species was accounted for individually within the same document; Other species: other livestock animals (different than the main 5 addressed) and pets, including poultry, dogs, cats, fish, rabbits, chinchillas, hamsters, deer, fur animals, bees, small rodents, and New World camelids; Livestock handlers: owners, farmers, producers, animal keepers, breeders, etc.; Stakeholders: veterinarians, livestock handlers, pharmaceutical industries, health managers, regulatory authorities, laboratories, etc.
Table 1 and Fig. 2 outline the main characteristics of the 82 guidelines. Of these, 39 (47·56%) were dedicated to the prudent use of antimicrobials, while 43 (52·44%) focused on the use of antibiotics. Of the 82 included guidelines, 25 (31·71%) were non-species specific. The remaining ones addressed the specific species, either individually or within the same document, resulting in a higher number of guidelines per species (n = 125; Table 1 and Fig. 2A): bovine (n = 32), caprine (n = 8), equine (n = 12), ovine (n = 12), and/or swine (n = 25) (Fig. 2A). A total of 13 guidelines would include in the same document these different species (Table 1). Other countries, in turn, provided separate guidelines for each species (Table 1), namely Australia, Belgium, Colombia, Costa Rica, Denmark, Ireland, Italy, Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Portugal, Spain, and the UK. Throughout 10 documents, other species were also mentioned (Table 1), namely poultry, fish, dogs, cats, rabbits, deer, bees, hamsters, chinchillas, fur animals, small rodents, and New World camelids. More than half of guidelines specifically addressed veterinarians (n = 43), while 37 were non-clinical, being directed towards stakeholders (n = 23) and livestock handlers (n = 14) (Fig. 2B). The stakeholders include veterinarians, farmers, livestock handlers, regulatory authorities, pharmaceutical industry, laboratories, distributors and sellers, pharmacists, veterinarian and producer associations, academia, and general public (Fig. 2B). The remaining two guidelines did not specify the target audience, i.e., veterinarians, livestock handlers, or stakeholders. In total, 28 guidelines were retrieved from governmental sources, while the other 54 were from non-governmental entities (Fig. 2C).
Number of guidelines published per year (A) and per year interval (B) based on OECD status. EU: European Union; n.a.: not available
As depicted in Fig. 3, most guidelines (n = 14, 17·07%) were published in 2020. From 2000 to 2016, 13 (15·85%) guidelines were found. Since 2017, the EU has published/updated 37 (45·12%), while other OECD countries have published/updated 31 (37·80%) guidelines. The publication year for the Slovenia guideline was not available (n.a.).

Medically important antimicrobials
Number of guidelines that provide or indicate a list of medically important antimicrobials (MIAs). Within the national lists, 29 were based on the indicated international categorization and 3 did not specify any reference list. The specific organizations that established national lists for 22 guidelines are: Australian Strategic and Technical Advisory Group on Antimicrobial Resistance (ASTAG), Belgium’s Centre of Expertise on Antimicrobial Consumption and Resistance in Animals (AMCRA), Canada’s Veterinary Drug Directorate’s (VDD), the Danish Veterinary and Food Administration, Japan’s Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF), Japan’s Food Safety Commission (FSC), the Netherlands Veterinary Antibiotic Policy Working Group (WVAB), the UK’s Pig Veterinary Society, and Veterinary Medicine Directorate (VMD); and the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA); WHO: World Health Organization; AMEG: Antimicrobial Advice Ad Hoc Expert Group; WOAH: World Organisation for Animal Health; MIAs: medically important antimicrobials
Considering the importance of antimicrobials used in both human and veterinary medicine – MIAs – the number of guidelines that have or have directed the reader to a list of these critical antimicrobials was also reported (Fig. 4). Most of the guidelines either referred to the internationally established MIAs lists, WHO, AMEG (Antimicrobial Advice Ad Hoc Expert Group), and/or WOAH (n = 30), or presented national-specific lists based on those (n = 29). In the latter, 22 guidelines of 8 countries identified organizations that defined the antimicrobial classification. A total of 3 guidelines also referenced MIAs, although not denoting any specific international classification. In turn, 20 guidelines did not mention MIAs.
Some differences were noted between country-specific and WHO’s lists, namely the classification as “low importance”, as opposed to the WHO’s CIA ranking . Also, some guidelines applied a higher importance to other antimicrobials, including the prohibition for use in food-producing animals or humans. Furthermore, additional antimicrobials beyond those provided by WHO have been considered as MIAs by several countries’ guidelines. Detailed information regarding the active ingredients and the differences between these lists and WHO’s classification of MIAs can be found in the appendix (pp 12-16).

Quality assessment of guidelines
AGREE II domain scores, in percentage, for guidelines targeting either veterinarians or other public. Other public refers to guidelines that are non-clinic and addressed to veterinarians and/or other stakeholders
The quality appraisal using AGREE II revealed differences in some domain scores, depending on the nature of the guideline: clinical and non-clinical (Fig. 5). In both types of guidelines, the highest-scoring quality domains included scope and purpose, ranging from 25·00 to 97·22% and from 16·67 to 86·11%, for clinical and non-clinical guidelines, respectively. The clarity of presentation ranged from 16·67 to 91·67% and from 25·00 to 83·33%, for veterinarian-only and other public guidelines, respectively. Scores for stakeholder involvement ranged from 5·56 to 88·89% and from 5·56 to 50·00%, for clinical and non-clinical guidelines. Veterinarian-only guidelines showed a higher score for rigor of development (3·13 to 83·33%) compared to guidelines for other public (3·13 to 25·00%) (Fig. 5). The quality domain applicability ranged from 0·00 to 22·92% and 0·00 to 45·83% for veterinary-specific and other public guidelines, respectively. This suggests inadequate reporting on strategies to improve guideline uptake and on the implications and resources needed for implementation. Lastly, editorial independence ranged from 0·00 to 50·00% in veterinary-only guidelines and from 0·00 to 33·33% for documents directed towards other public. From the analyzed guidelines, only 2 (2·44%) disclosed that the formulation of recommendations was void of undue bias due to competing interests. More detailed information regarding AGREE II analysis is in the appendix (pp 17-21).
Compliance of recommendations with Codex Alimentarius (FAO/WHO) and Terrestrial Animal Health Code (WOAH). Guidelines were categorized as compliant when the recommendation was aligned with the document and as non-compliant when they were not. When the information was not found in the analyzed document, the recommendation was classified as Not Available (NA). The bar on the right depicts the color scale, ranging from 0 to 100%. The percentage of non-compliant recommendations is also indicated. For each international document, 10 recommendations were assessed. Details on the addressed topics are in appendix (pp 20-21)
Among the 43 clinical guidelines, a median of 70% (range of 20-100%) and 80% (range of 10-100%) compliance with the Codex Alimentarius and the Terrestrial Code, respectively, was observed. The median of non-available information regarding the listed recommendations was 30% (range of 0-80%) and 20% (range of 0-90%) for the Codex Alimentarius and the Terrestrial Code, respectively. Non-compliance with the Codex Alimentarius on the use of MIAs as growth promoters was only observed for Korea (20%) and South Africa (10%) guidelines (Fig. 6).

Discussion
In this systematic review, we assessed the guidelines of 49 OECD-related countries on the prudent use of antimicrobials in food-producing animals. Our search retrieved 82 guidelines from official sources (and others identified by the government) from 37 countries, potentially hindering global efforts against AMR. Some countries only had guidelines directed towards producers and/or other stakeholders, despite veterinarians being primarily responsible for antimicrobial prescription and use, and in direct communication with farmers. Both clinical and non-clinical guidelines clearly defined the scope and purpose and displayed high clarity of presentation.
These guidance documents are part of the wider international antimicrobial stewardship framework, focusing on good husbandry practices and appropriate antimicrobial use as actions to reduce AMR emergence and spread. Results from antimicrobial stewardship initiatives are evident and measurable. For instance, antimicrobial sales for meat production halved in the last two decades across OECD countries and, if the trend continues, antimicrobial use in food-producing animals could drop by an additional 10% by 2035. In Europe, the Nordic countries register some of the lowest use of antimicrobials in animals and AMR prevalence, outcomes of strict regulatory frameworks, guidelines’ application, surveillance programs, and adequate education and training. In Canada, MIAs quantity (mg/kg biomass) sold for use in animals decreased by 3%. Antimicrobial stewardship relies on actively engagement of stakeholders, namely governmental agencies, provincial and territorial partners (Ministries of Agriculture and veterinary licensing bodies), veterinary medical associations, animal nutrition associations, drug manufacturers, as well as producer associations.
The One Health approach can only effectively mitigate AMR if strong collaborative efforts are in place. Therefore, each country should implement these guidelines according to their own regulatory framework, resources, and epidemiological status. Depending on these, some countries may require gradual adaptation and integration of guidelines. Nevertheless, countries have an increased understanding and awareness of AMR, showing commitment towards antimicrobial stewardship and helping each other. For instance, through the network “Nordic Vets Against AMR”, Finland, Norway, and Sweden aim to exchange knowledge and experiences to support other countries in effectively tackling AMR. Noteworthy, contrary to the mandatory nature of antimicrobial use legislation, guidelines are voluntary to apply. Therefore, the ongoing improvement in food-producing practices and the responsible antimicrobial use demonstrates countries’ commitment to tackle AMR. Nations’ efforts are further proven by the increased publication of veterinary medicine guidelines after 2016 as part of NAPs. These strategic plans were promoted by WHO’s Global Action Plan on AMR, issued in 2015. The European Commission’s 2015 adoption of EU Guidelines on Prudent Use of Antimicrobials in Animal Health may also explain this rise in guidelines publication. A peak in 2020 may be linked to Regulation (EU) 2019/6, effective in January 2019, and the farm-to-fork strategy presented in May 2020.
Moreover, commitment towards antimicrobial stewardship is demonstrated by guidelines that, besides addressing international recommendations, also included additional information and guidance, namely (i) euthanasia in specific cases (e.g.: uncertain prognosis, long-term disease, or if animal welfare cannot be ensured), (ii) decision-trees to instruct and guide on the choice of the most adequate antimicrobial, (iii) diagnostic protocols and a guide to interpret susceptibility test results, (iv) non-antibiotic alternatives for infection prevention in dry-period cows (e.g.: teat sealants), (v) lists of disinfectants for cleaning animal housing and equipment, including their effectiveness and advantages/disadvantages, (vi) the prescription is revoked and the treatment is terminated if the farmer does not address the deficiencies in husbandry conditions, (vii) promote the implementation of new commercially available technologies for more cost-effective, quicker, and more accurate diagnosis (e.g.: of bovine respiratory disease), and (viii) veterinarians are only allowed to prescribe and dispense under a valid veterinarian-client-patient-relationship (VCPR)
In antimicrobial stewardship, the first and foremost step in the process of reducing antimicrobial use is the establishment of effective disease prevention measures, as highlighted in The One Health Joint Plan of Action (2022-2026). Among these are the adoption of appropriate biosecurity actions, vaccination plans, and management strategies, including pest control, housing, and nutrition. Effective communication between the veterinarian and producer is key, as some producers may resist changes due to immediate financial burdens. From 2013 to 2022, the global reduction in antimicrobial sales (20·9 to 12·7%) has been correlated with increased use of vaccines and parasiticides (56·7 to 62·8%). Most guidelines (n = 71) included biosecurity and preventive actions.
The intensification of antimicrobial use in large-scale farming systems is expected due to the increasing food needs of the growing global population. In intensive animal production systems, the occurrence and spread of infectious diseases is exacerbated when biosecurity is inadequate. Therefore, antimicrobials are used routinely in these farming systems, sometimes at sub-therapeutic doses, not only to control sub-clinical infections and to maintain productivity, but also for prophylactic and metaphylactic purposes. In the EU, according to Regulation (EU) 2019/6, the use of all antimicrobials as productivity enhancers is prohibited and, in the case of metaphylaxis and prophylaxis, Article 107(3) states that antimicrobials are only allowed in specific conditions and when properly justified.
Since countries are becoming more interdependent and the OECD facilitates food trading, it is extremely important to outline and implement guidelines for the prudent use of antimicrobials in food-producing animals. Recent trade agreements prioritize AMR, food sustainability, and animal welfare, namely EU-Mexico (2018), UK-New Zealand (2022), Australia-UK (2023), EU-Chile (2023), and EU-New Zealand (2024). A strategic association between Mercosur (Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay) and the EU, if ratified, could increase EU beef imports from Mercosur from 23 to 52% by 2030 due to new tariff rate quotas. Reserves are held regarding its approval, including increased agricultural, environmental, and health damage due to the misuse of pesticides and antibiotics prohibited in EU by Mercosur countries. Despite Brazil and Argentina being key OECD partners or candidates, this negotiation highlights the difficulty in implementing standardized guidelines and the need for case-by-case analysis. Nevertheless, the EU and Mercosur have agreed to cooperate in ensuring animal welfare standards, food safety, and tackling AMR.
Relating to MIAs, a considerable number of guidelines (24·39%) did not contain a MIAs list, and among those that had antimicrobial categorization, some differed from WHO’s list due to local conditions, low dependence on these drugs and/or the country-specific importance of some pathogens (e.g.: epidemiological status, legislation, and available resources) or required updated versions. Of note, since the first installment of MIAs categorization by WHO in 2005, the document has been updated seven times, with the most recent version being from 2024. Therefore, guidelines dating from previous years may have considered the classification that was in effect at the time. It is important to mention that WHO’s list of MIAs specifies that “the term ‘antimicrobial’ refers to antibacterials” and that “lists focused on other antimicrobials, such as antifungals, will be developed in the future to complement this list”. Our results showed that more than half of the guidelines focused on antibacterial agents. However, caution is needed when interpreting this data. In some documents, the terms'antibacterial'and'antimicrobial'were used interchangeably without clear definition, suggesting confusion between the two. This raises concerns about the integrated approach to antimicrobial stewardship, particularly in recognizing the roles of all antimicrobial agents in the rise of AMR. It also emphasizes the need for clearer guidance and communication on AMR, which involves not only bacterial resistance, but also resistance in viruses, fungi, and protozoa.
Although not prohibited for use in animals, MIAs are strongly controlled in veterinary medicine in the EU under Regulation 2019/6. On 1 January 2006, the EU prohibited the use of all antibiotics for growth promotion and, in February 2023, the EU adopted the Regulation (EU) 2023/905, banning imports of animal-derived products from third countries exposed to antimicrobials as growth promoters. Some OECD countries still use non-MIAs for productivity purposes, namely Argentina, Australia, Brazil, India, Korea, South Africa, and the US. This occurs because farmers, in order to meet market demands and maintain their competitiveness, are required to increase production yields in a short period of time. Also, regulatory framework regarding the use of antimicrobials for this purpose is often lacking, allowing their widespread availability without prescription. In South Africa, antimicrobials are available over-the-counter, and some MIAs are permitted as feed additives. Korea phased out antibiotics in compound feed in 2011, but still allows farm-level mixing. On 13 January 2020, Brazil banned growth promoters with tylosin, lincomycin, and tiamulin, but allows their production for export. Nevertheless, OECD countries are progressively discouraging antimicrobials as yield enhancers. This is being accomplished by prohibiting antimicrobials as growth promoters, by banning MIAs for productivity, or though the withdrawal of drug-containing feed additives.
For the successful implementation of recommendations, investment in information technologies and online platforms is important to increase the awareness of professionals and stakeholders, and to provide fast and easy access to guidelines. Countries can use digital technologies to facilitate consultation and application of recommendations. EPRUMA, a multi-stakeholder platform active since 2005, includes several European organizations and promotes good-practice frameworks for veterinary medicines. In September 2023, the WOAH introduced ANIMUSE (ANImal antiMicrobial USE), a global interactive platform for reporting, accessing, and visualizing data on antimicrobial use in animals. This database presents global and regional data, helping countries assess the effectiveness of national measures and identify gaps. In Belgium, in 2012, the AMCRA (AntiMicrobial Consumption and Resistance in Animals) created species-specific vade-mecums, i.e. pocketbooks or guides, for the responsible antibacterial use, accessible via a website and a free app. The UK’s Responsible Use of Medicines in Agriculture (RUMA) Alliance, the Netherlands Veterinary Medicines Institute (SDa), and Spain’s Vet + i Foundation (Vetresponsable) have websites dedicated to antimicrobials use in livestock for veterinarians and/or producers. Australia’s AMR Vet Collective provides guidance on antimicrobial prescription, communication with farmers, and offers online courses. Canada’s Farmed Animal Antimicrobial Stewardship Initiative (FAAST) platform educates on antimicrobial use and collaborates with veterinarians, livestock owners, and stakeholders to prevent AMR dissemination.
However, not all online platforms ensure public accessibility. For example, Spain has an app for registered veterinarians, informing on recommended treatment by species and disease, antibiotic categorization, and the region’s epidemiological status. Moreover, the Canadian Veterinary Medical Association (CVMA) launched the Firstline app (https://firstline.org/cvma/), a mobile repository of updated clinical guidance on antimicrobial use. Access to this resource is restricted to licensed Canadian veterinarians.
In human medicine, these online tools, namely mobile apps, have also demonstrated high applicability for clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) dissemination, easy access, and implementation by clinicians. In addition, access to global CPGs is possible through the database Guidelines International Network, that encompasses a multitude of countries and languages, guidelines’ scope (disease, treatment/diagnosis, among others) and status (published, withdrawn, or planned), and endorsing organization.
In quality assessment using AGREE II, clinical and non-clinical guidelines scored high in domain 1 (aim, clinical question, and target population) and domain 4 (language, structure, and presentation), similar to other reports in veterinary and human medicine. Nevertheless, both were lacking in rigor of development (domain 3), applicability (domain 5), and editorial independence (domain 6). The rigor of development, focusing on the process of identifying and summarizing evidence for guidelines’ development, scored poorly, indicating that either this information was omitted or the authors did not resort to established approaches to ensure methodological rigor. Applicability also displayed a low score. This domain addresses aspects related to guidelines’ implementation and, if not adequately addressed, it may impair compliance. A low applicability suggests that the guideline may not be as useful for clinicians as intended, requiring a design that considers not only scientific evidence, but also the dissemination and implementation for real-life use by clinicians. The lowest scoring domain was editorial independence, which examines any conflicts of interest and the impact of funding entities. Appropriate declarations should be included in guidelines to ensure transparency. This domain’s scoring varies between animal and human health guidelines, being generally higher in the later. Stakeholder involvement had an intermediate score. This domain addresses if all the relevant individuals were included during the guidelines’ development and is highlighted as important in human and animal sectors. Similar to the present study, recommendations in human medicine also vary widely across guidelines due to differences in target population and geographic location, leading to varied AGREE II scores.
Overall, OECD and other countries worldwide are identifying gaps and working to promote the adequate use of antimicrobials in animals, either through regulatory frameworks, guiding documents, or both. As aforementioned, disparities between nations/regions in terms of culture, internal policies, attitudes and perceptions about ABR, and financial resources must be accounted for when assessing antimicrobial stewardship initiatives. Importantly, the existence of national guidelines does not ensure their implementation or impact. Indeed, some countries in South America, Southeast Asia, and Africa, despite not yet fully integrating antimicrobial stewardship within their regulatory framework, are showing commitment to improving their practices and collaborate, at national and international levels, against AMR. Nevertheless, these guidelines act as foundational pillars within a broader antimicrobial stewardship framework, providing countries with a structured reference to guide national efforts, align policies, and engage stakeholders.

Strengths and limitations
Major strengths of this systematic review were the exhaustive search of antimicrobial guidelines on governmental and non-governmental entities. This allowed a broader understanding of current initiatives against AMR, emphasizing the need to improve coordination between countries and to encourage the design, dissemination, and implementation of appropriate and updated guidelines. Despite this, some limitations should be noted: (i) This study was focused on guidelines referenced on governmental websites or organizations designated by these entities and retrievable by the authors, i.e., without restricted access to members and/or veterinarians. Therefore, we recognize the limitations of the search strategy and the fact that some guidelines may not have been included. Nevertheless, guidelines officially endorsed or published by the government have been included and discussed. The non-inclusion of some documents may impact the comprehensiveness and accuracy of reported findings and limit their interpretation, with an underestimating of countries’ antimicrobial stewardship efforts and risking overly optimistic or pessimistic views of current national scenarios. However, this systematic review can serve as a source of in-depth knowledge and critical analysis of OECD countries’ guidelines for the prudent use of antimicrobials in food-producing animals; (ii) Throughout the guidelines’ assessment, the terms ‘antimicrobials’ and ‘antibiotics’ were sometimes used interchangeably, without explanation. This hindered the clear definition of what the focus of said guidelines was; (iii) In the absence of a tool to assess the quality of veterinary practice guidelines, the AGREE II instrument, recommended for human clinical practice guidelines, was used. Other authors have also employed this appraisal tool in the veterinary context, denoting its adaptability. Although this instrument is valuable for comparing guidelines, all domains have equal weight and it has been considered subjective since there are no minimum domain scores set to define low- and high-quality. Users may introduce different cut-offs, resulting in disparate ratings for the same guideline. Moreover, there is no evidence correlating AGREE II domain scores with effective guideline implementation. Another limitation of this tool is that the content of guidelines is not thoroughly accounted for, including the existence of online platforms/tools that provide guidance on antimicrobial use. This relevant item is not considered by this appraisal instrument; thus, several guidelines may be undervalued. In human clinical practice, it is recommended that two appraisers assess the guidelines. In the present work, two appraisers, one a non-practicing veterinarian, performed this task. Nevertheless, a wider group of appraisers would be advantageous. Overall, the AGREE II scores showed the variability between guidelines, even within the same country, serving as a guiding foundation for which topics could benefit from improvement. It would be important to develop and validate a critical appraisal tool for veterinary medicine guidelines to ensure their quality, reliability, and applicability. Such tool could facilitate the integration of the latest research findings into veterinary practice and allow veterinarians to critically assess the validity and relevance of recommendations, leading to more informed clinical decisions.

Conclusion
Global awareness about AMR is increasing, and consumer habits are shifting, favoring healthier food options and pressuring the agriculture sector to reduce drug use in livestock. This systematic review indicates that OECD-related countries are actively addressing AMR in food-producing animals or have proposed future strategies and interventions. For successfully designing and implementing guidelines, it is important to consider the heterogeneity in socio-economic and production systems across these countries. Since AMR prevalence varies by geography and antimicrobial class, appropriate surveillance is crucial for more targeted interventions. Investment in information technologies for guidelines’ dissemination should also be a priority. Overall, this systematic review can help policymakers identify potential gaps in current approaches, and design tailored and more effective stewardship programs from a One Health perspective, addressing drivers of AMR and mitigating this global health crisis.

Supplementary Information
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Jacinta Oliveira Pinho and Ana Isabel Plácido contributed equally to this work.

Authors’ contributions
AIP, FR, and MTH conceived the systematic review and wrote the protocol. RN, AM, and JOP were responsible for the search, investigation, and data extraction. RN, AM, AIP, and JOP performed data interpretation and data analysis, synthesized the results. RN drafted the manuscript. RN and AM performed the AGREE II appraisals. AIP and JOP reviewed and edited the manuscript. PO, ACC, AF, FR, and MTH critically reviewed and edited the manuscript, and acquired the funding. FR and MTH supervised the project. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Funding
This work was supported by FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, I.P. through project UID 4501- Instituto de Biomedicina - Aveiro, project reference 2022.04568.PTDC and DOI identifier 10.54499/2022.04568.PTDC, project reference UIDB/04033 and DOI identifier 10.54499/UIDB/04033/2020, and project reference CEECINST/00093/2021/CP2815/CT0002 and DOI identifier 10.54499/CEECINST/00093/2021/CP2815/CT0002. The project’s funder had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or report writing. Collected data from documents will be made available upon request to the corresponding author. Full access to the protocol is available at PROSPERO CRD42024535461.

Data availability
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article and its supplementary information file (Appendix).

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Rushton J, Ferreira JP, Stärk K. Antimicrobial resistance: the use of antimicrobials in the livestock sector. OECD Food, Agriculture and Fisheries Papers. Paris: OECD Publishing; 2014.
WHO. 10 Global health issues to track in 2021. 2020. https://www.who.int/news-room/spotlight/10-global-health-issues-to-track-in-2021. Accessed 8 Apr 2024.
The drivers of antibiotic use and misuse: the development and investigation of a theory driven community measure
Understanding the mechanisms and drivers of antimicrobial resistance
WHO. Fact sheet - One Health. 2023. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/one-health. Accessed 9 Jul 2024.
Antimicrobial stewardship: a definition with a One Health perspective
Awareness and capacities of 103 countries to address antimicrobial resistance from 2017 to 2020
Revisiting antibiotic stewardship: veterinary contributions to combating antimicrobial resistance globally
Antibiotic resistance is the quintessential One Health issue
Panteli D, Legido-Quigley H, Reichebner C, Ollenschläger G, Schaefer C, Busse R. ClinicAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES AS A Quality strategy. In: Busse R, Klazinga N, Panteli D, Quentin W, editors. Improving healthcare quality in Europe: characteristics, effectiveness and implementation of different strategies. Copenhagen: European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies, Health Policy Series, No. 53; 2019. p. 233–64.
FAO/WHO. Codex alimentarius - code of practice to minimize and contain foodborne antimicrobial resistance (CXC 61–2005). 2021.
World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH). Chapter 6.10: Responsible and prudent use of antimicrobial agents in veterinary medicine. 2024. Available at: https://www.woah.org/en/what-we-do/standards/codes-and-manuals/terrestrial-code-online-access/?id=169&L=1&htmfile=chapitre_antibio_use.htm. Accessed 10 Jul 2024.
Clinical practice guidelines: the good, the bad, and the ugly
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Nogueira R, Plácido AI, Monteiro A, Pinho J, Oliveira P, Coelho AC, et al. Evaluation of guidelines on antimicrobials use in food-producing animals: a systematic review. PROSPERO 2024 CRD42024535461. Available from: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero/display_record.php?ID=CRD42024535461 Accessed.
Global repository of available guidelines for responsible use of antimicrobials in animal health. 2020. Available from: https://worldvet.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/021rev6_-_list_of_available_guidelines_on_amu_22sep2020.pdf. Accessed.
Overview and evaluation of existing guidelines for rational antimicrobial use in small-animal veterinary practice in Europe
No longer lost in translation: evidence that google translate works for comparative bag-of-words text applications
Is machine translation a reliable tool for reading German scientific databases and research articles?
Performance of machine translators in translating French medical research abstracts to English: a comparative study of DeepL, Google Translate, and CUBBITT
The AGREE Next Steps Consortium. Appraisal of guidelines for research & evaluation II - AGREE II. 2009. https://www.agreetrust.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/AGREE_II_Portuguese.pdf. Accessed 10 June 2024.
Guideline appraisal with AGREE II: systematic review of the current evidence on how users handle the 2 overall assessments
Antimicrobial resistance in food-producing animals: towards implementing a one health based national action plan in Israel
Antimicrobial prescribing guidelines for dairy cattle
Cusack P, Batterham T, Page SW, Browning GF, M. NJ. Antimicrobial prescribing guidelines for feedlot cattle. 2024. https://animalmedicinesaustralia.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/antimicrobial-prescribing-guidelines-feedlot-cattle-21-03-24.pdf. Accessed 16 June 2025.
Leitlinien für den sorgfältigen Umgang mit antibakteriell wirksamen Tierarzneimitteln [Guidelines for the careful handling of antibacterial veterinary medicinal products]. 2024. https://www.ooe-tgd.at/Mediendateien/AVN_20240228_AVN_2024_2_2.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Mesures pour un bon usage des antibiotiques lors d’un traitement de groupe chez les bovins [Measures for the correct use of antibiotics during group treatment of bovines]. 2021. https://amcra.be/swfiles/files/Advies-groepsbehandeling-bij-rundvee-_Goedgekeurd-RvB-22112021_FR.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Lentz CAM. Atualização sobre Uso Racional de Antimicrobianos e Boas Práticas de Produção [Update on the rational use of antimicrobials and good production practices]. 2022. https://www.gov.br/agricultura/pt-br/assuntos/insumos-agropecuarios/insumos-pecuarios/resistencia-aos-antimicrobianos/publicacoes/Apostila_AtualizaosobreUsoRacionaldeAntimicrobianoseBoasPrticasdeProduo.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
CVMA antimicrobial prudent use guidelines 2008 for beef cattle, dairy cattle, poultry and swine. 2008. https://worldvet.org/uploads/docs/cvma_antimicrobial_prudent_use_guidelines_2008_for_beef_dairy_poultry_swine.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Castañeda DCF, B. MJF, Godoy MPD. Guía de uso prudente de antibióticos en la producción de leche a partir del modelo de salud de hato [Guide to the prudent use of antibiotics in milk production from the herd health model]. 2020. https://editorial.agrosavia.co/index.php/publicaciones/catalog/view/101/87/856-1. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guía de uso responsable de medicamentos veterinarios en bovinos [Guide for the responsible use of veterinary medicines in bovines]. 2018. https://www.senasa.go.cr/informacion/centro-de-informacion/informacion/manuales-de-buenas-practicas/3659-guia-de-uso-responsable-de-medicamentos-veterinarios-en-bovinos. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Retningslinjer for brug af antibiotika til kvæg i Danmark [Guidelines for the use of antibiotics for cattle in Denmark]. 2013. https://www.ddd.dk/media/2331/retningslinjer-for-brug-af-antibiotika-kvaeg.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Kalmus P, Aasmäe B. Juhend Antibiootikumide Kasutamiseks Põllumajandusloomadel (Clinical guidelines, clinical practice guidelines) [Guidelines for the use of antibiotics in farm animals (clinical guidelines, clinical practice guidelines)]. 2020. https://pta.agri.ee/media/2231/download. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Recommendations for the use of antimicrobials in the treatment of the most significant infectious and contagious diseases in animals. 2018. https://www.ruokavirasto.fi/globalassets/viljelijat/elaintenpito/elainten-laakitseminen/hallittu_laakekekaytto/mikrobilaakekaytonperiaatteet/mikrobilaakkeiden_kayttosuositukset_en.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guidelines for the prudent use of veterinary antimicrobial drugs - with notes for guidance. 2015. https://www.bundestieraerztekammer.de/btk/downloads/antibiotika/AB_Leitlinien2015_EN.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Code of good practice regarding the responsible use of antimicrobials on dairy farms. 2019. https://animalhealthireland.ie/assets/uploads/2021/06/Code-of-Good-Practice-for-Responsible-Use-of-AMs-on-Dairy-Farms.pdf?dl=1. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Code of good practice regarding responsible use of antimicrobials on suckler and beef farms. 2020. https://www.apha.ie/Documents/Guidelines_Beef_Sept_2020.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Arrigoni N, Bassi P, Maragno D, Padovani A, Trambajolo G. Linee guida - Uso prudente dell'antibiotico nell'allevamento bovino da latte [Guidelines prudent use of antibiotics in dairy cattle breeding]. 2023. https://www.salute.gov.it/imgs/C_17_pubblicazioni_3347_allegato.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
소 항생제 처방 가이드라인 [Bovine antibiotic prescribing guidelines]. 2020. https://ebook.qia.go.kr/20210104_100444/. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
산업동물 수의사를 위한 항생제 길잡이 [Antibiotic guide for veterinarians of industrial animals]. 2022. http://qia.go.kr/downloadwebQiaCom.do?id=44774. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
D'Hoe K, Last WJ, Mölder P, Vendrig JC. Formularium vleeskalveren en vleesvee [Formulary for veal calves and beef cattle]. 2019. https://www.knmvd.nl/app/uploads/sites/4/2018/09/170315-wvab-formularium-vleeskalveren-en-vleesvee_definitief.docx.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Bierens JJM, van Beijnum LM, Dierikx CM, Palevliet JM, van Rossum nRJW, Vending JC. Werkgroep Vterinair Antibioticumbeleid - Formularium Melkvee [Working group on veterinary antibiotic policy - dairy cattle formulary. 2023. https://www.knmvd.nl/app/uploads/sites/4/2023/06/230531-formularium-melkvee-versie-1.931.pdf. Accessed 16 June 2024.
Antibiotic judicious use guidelines for the New Zealand veterinary profession in Dairy. 2018. https://www.amrvetcollective.com/assets/guidelines/guide_dairy.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guide to prudent use of antimicrobial agents in Red meat production. 2018. https://www.amrvetcollective.com/assets/guidelines/guide_redmeat.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Terapianbefaling: Bruk av antibakterielle midler til produksjonsdyr [Therapeutic recommendation: use of antibacterial agents for production animals]. 2022. https://www.dmp.no/globalassets/documents/veterinarmedisin/terapianbefalinger/terapianbefaling–-bruk-av-antibakterielle-midler-til-produksjonsdyr.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Wysocki M. Kodeks Rozważnego Stosowania Produktów Leczniczych Przeciwdrobnoustrojowych Przez Lekarzy Weterynarii [Code of the prudent use of antimicrobial medicinal products by veterinarians]. 2020. https://www.izbawetbial.pl/files/B202001.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Ramalho FA. Utilização prudente de antimicrobianos em animais - Vacas leiteiras [Prudent use of antimicrobials in animals dairy cows]. 2023. https://www.dgav.pt/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/HIPRA-UNIVERSITY_Filomena-Ramalho_MEDICAMENTOS-VETERINARIOS_.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guía de Uso Responsable de Medicamentos Veterinarios: Bovino [Guide for the responsible use of veterinary medicines: bovine]. 2017. https://www.vetresponsable.es/vetresponsable/guias-de-uso-responsable-por-especie-animal/bovino_3930_340_4076_0_1_in.html. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Recomendaciones para un uso prudente de los antibióticos en ganado bovino lechero [Recommendations for prudent use of antibiotics in dairy cattle]. 2021. https://neiker.eus/newsletters/documentos/guia-veterinario-es.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Guidelines for the use of antibiotics in production animals - Cattle, pigs, sheep and goats. 2017. https://www.svf.se/media/vd5ney4l/svfs-riktlinje-antibiotika-till-produktionsdjur-eng-2017.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Sveriges Veterinärförbunds Riktlinjer För Antibiotikaanvändning Till Nötkreatur & Gris [Swedish Veterinary Association guidelines for antibiotic use in cattle and pigs]. 2019. https://www.svf.se/media/segp21ok/abriktlinjer-no-tkreatur-och-gris-rev2019.pdf#/media/media/edit/11574. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guide thérapeutique pour les vétérinaires - Utilisation prudente des antibiotiques: Bovins, Porcs, Petits Ruminants et Camélidés du Nouveau Monde [Therapeutic guide for veterinarians - Prudent use of antibiotics: cattle, pigs, small ruminants and New World camelids]. 2022. https://www.blv.admin.ch/dam/blv/fr/dokumente/tiere/tierkrankheiten-und-arzneimittel/tierarzneimittel/therapieleitfaden.pdf.download.pdf/therapieleitfaden-fr.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Using medicines responsibly: as little as possible, but as much as necessary. 2020. https://projectblue.blob.core.windows.net/media/Default/Beef%20&%20Lamb/Using%20Medicines3784_200818_WEB.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guidelines on responsible use of antimicrobials in dry cow strategies. 2022. https://ruma.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Guidelines-on-Responsible-Use-of-Antimicrobials-in-Dry-Cow-Strategies.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guidelines for responsible use of antimicrobials in cattle production. 2022. https://www.ruma.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2023/06/RUMA_antimicrobial_long_cattle_-2022-revisions-Final-.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
van den Bosch MBW, Bouwman S, van den Brom R, Dijkstra E, van der Hidjen M, van den Oord P, et al. Werkgroep Vterinair Antibioticumbeleid - Formularium Geit [Veterinary antibiotic policy working group - goat formulary]. 2019. https://www.knmvd.nl/app/uploads/sites/4/2020/09/formularium-geit-versie-1.1_220920.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Guía de Uso Responsable de Medicamentos Veterinarios: Ovino y caprino [Guide for the responsible use of veterinary medicines: sheep and goats]. 2021. https://www.vetresponsable.es/vetresponsable/guias-de-uso-responsable-por-especie-animal/ovino-y-caprino_3931_340_4077_0_1_in.html. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Surveillance et utilisation des antibiotiques, y compris de ceux d’importance critique, chez les chevaux [Monitoring and use of antibiotics, including those of critical importance, in horses. Current situation and recommendations for the future.]. 2020. https://www.amcra.be/swfiles/files/Avis%20chevaux%20utilisation%20CIA_FR_Approuv%C3%A9%20CA%20AMCRA%2027.02.2020_403.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Equine antimicrobial use guidelines. 2022. https://assets.gov.ie/246259/efd59850-1944-452f-8725-958f67fe384d.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Bakker J, van Duijkeren E, Ensink JM, Panhuijzen JJA, van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan MMS, Stout TAE, et al. Werkgroep Vterinair Antibioticumbeleid - Formularium Paard [Working group on veterinary antibiotic policy - horse formulary]. 2021. https://www.knmvd.nl/app/uploads/sites/4/2021/03/wvab-formularium-paard-2016-versie-1.3.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Antibiotic judicious use guidelines for the New Zealand veterinary profession in equine. 2018. https://www.amrvetcollective.com/assets/guidelines/guide_equine.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guía de Uso Responsable de Medicamentos Veterinarios: Equinos [Guide for the responsible use of veterinary medicines: equines]. 2017. https://www.vetresponsable.es/vetresponsable/guias-de-uso-responsable-por-especie-animal/equino_3929_340_4075_0_1_in.html. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
The Swedish Veterinary Association’s guidelines for the clinical use of antibiotics in the treatment of horses. 2013. https://www.svf.se/media/tztkij4b/guidelines-antibiotics-in-horses.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Antimicrobial prescribing guidelines for sheep
Code of good practice regarding the responsible use of antimicrobials on sheep farms. 2020. https://www.apha.ie/Documents/Guidelines_Sheep_Sept_2020.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
van den Bosch MBW, Bouwman S, van den Brom R, Dijkstra E, van der Hidjen M, van den Oord P, et al. Formularium Kleine Herkauwers - Schaap [Formulary of small ruminants - sheep]. 2019. https://www.knmvd.nl/app/uploads/sites/4/2019/07/190619-formularium-schaap-definitief.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Locatt F, Duncan J, Hinde D, King L: Industry guidance document for veterinary surgeons and farmers on responsible use of antibiotics in sheep. 2019. https://ruma.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Responsible-Use-of-Antimicrobials-in-Sheep-Production.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Antimicrobial prescribing guidelines for pigs
Mesures pour un bon usage des antibiotiques lors d’un traitement de groupe des porcs [Measures for the correct use of antibiotics during group treatment of pigs]. 2021. https://www.amcra.be/swfiles/files/Finale-versie_na-goedkeuring-RvB_29012021_FR.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Rodríguez M, Cárcamo AP, Fonseca AM, Grizales AMP, Sierra EB, Sabogal AIR, et al. Manual de Buenas Prácticas en el uso de Medicamentos Veterinarios en la Porcicultura [Manual for good practices for the use of veterinary medicines in pig farming]. 2019. https://www.ica.gov.co/getattachment/Areas/Pecuaria/Servicios/Inocuidad-en-las-Cadenas-Agroalimentarias/LISTADO-DE-PREDIOS-CERTIFICADOS-EN-BPG/Manual-Uso-MEDICAMENTOS-1.pdf.aspx?lang=es-CO. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guideline for prescribing antimicrobial for pigs. 2018. https://foedevarestyrelsen.dk/Media/638225168488658373/Antimicrobial%20guideline%20for%20pigs%20Denmark%202018.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Code of good practice regarding the responsible use of antimicrobials on pig farms. 2019. https://animalhealthireland.ie/assets/uploads/2021/06/Code-of-Good-Practice-for-Responsible-Use-of-AMs-on-Pig-Farms.pdf?dl=1https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&rct=j&opi=89978449&url=. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Bassi P, Casadio C, Luppi A, Giuseppe M, Merialdi G, Padovani A, et al. Linee Guida - Uso prudente degli antibiotici nell’allevamento suino [Guidelines - prudent use of antibiotics in pig farming]. 2022. https://www.regione.umbria.it/documents/18/26005418/Allegato+C+-+Uso+prudente+dell%E2%80%99antibiotico+allevamento+suino.pdf/0a2fda20-df0c-4782-8b1a-965b8ac84df4. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
돼지 항생제 처방 가이드라인 [Swine antibiotic prescribing guidelines]. 2020. https://ebook.qia.go.kr/20210104_100841/. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Guía Del Buen Uso De Antimicrobianos En Cerdos [Guide to the good use of antimicrobials in pigs]. 2023. https://www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/attachment/file/837407/GU_A_DEL_BUEN_USO_DE_ANTIMICROBIANOS_EN_CERDOS.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
van Duijkeren E, Hartog PA, van Hout AJ, Kanters MJF, van Nes A, Schyns MAR. Werkgroep Vterinair Antibioticumbeleid - Formularium Varken [Working group on veterinary antibiotic policy - pig formulary]. 2019. https://www.knmvd.nl/app/uploads/sites/4/2019/09/formularium-varken_230919.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Guide to prudent use of antimicrobial agents in Pigs. 2020. https://www.amrvetcollective.com/assets/guidelines/AMR_Guide_Pigs.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guidelines for the use of antimicrobials in the South African pig industry. 2016. https://www.sava.co.za/wp-content/uploads/2017/05/Antibiotic-Guidelines-Pig-Industry-Ver-20161027-1.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Guía de Uso Responsable de Medicamentos Veterinarios: Porcino [Guide for the responsible use of veterinary medicines: porcine]. 2017. https://www.vetresponsable.es/vetresponsable/guias-de-uso-responsable-por-especie-animal/porcino_3928_340_4074_0_1_in.html. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Practical guide to responsible use of antibiotics on pig farms. 2018. https://ruma.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2022/08/Responsible-Use-Of-Antimicrobials-in-Pig-Production.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Pъкoвoдcтвo зa paзyмнa и oтгoвopнa yпoтpeбa нa aнтимикpoбни cpeдcтвa във вeтepинapнaтa мeдицинa и пpaктикa [Guidelines for the reasonable and responsible use of antimicrobial agents in veterinary medicine and practice]. 2023. https://www.mzh.government.bg/media/filer_public/2023/04/26/_za_razumna_i_otgovorna_upotreba_na_antimikrobni_sredstva_final.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Guide de bonnes pratiques de l’antibiothérapie vétérinaire à l’usage des vétérinaires [Guide to good practice in veterinary antibiotic therapy for veterinarians]. 2009. https://www.veterinaire.fr/system/files/files/2021-12/Guide_de_bonnes_pratiques_de_l_antibiotherapie_veterinaire_a_l_usage_des_veterinaires.pdf. Accessed 22 Jul 2024.
Εγχειριδιο εμποριασ, προμηθειασ και χρησησ κτηνιατρικων φαρμακευτικων προϊοντων [Handbook on marketing, supply and use of veterinary medicinal products]. 2020. https://www.minagric.gr/images/stories/docs/agrotis/ktiniatrika_Farmaka/enxeiridio_ktin_farmakon310521.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Az antibiotikum- kezelés minimumkövetelményeire vonatkozó útmutató [Guidelines for minimum requirements for antibiotic treatment]. 2022. https://portal.nebih.gov.hu/documents/10182/21360/Antibiotikumfelhasznalas-csokkentesi_terv.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Vademecum per un uso prudente e razionale degli antibiotici nelle produzioni zootecniche [Vademecum for the prudent and rational use of antibiotics in livestock production]. 2018. https://www.izslt.it/crab/wp-content/uploads/sites/8/2018/07/Vademecum-uso-razionale-e-prudente-degli-antibiotici.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Linee guida per l’uso prudente degli antimicrobici negli allevamenti zootecnici per la prevenzione dell’antimicrobico-resistenza e proposte alternative [Guidelines for the prudent use of antimicrobials in zootechnical farming for the prevention of antimicrobial resistance and alternative proposals]. 2018. https://www.salute.gov.it/imgs/C_17_pubblicazioni_2782_allegato.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Mičules G: Vadlīnijas antimikrobiālās rezistences attīstības ierobežošanai lauksaimnieciskās ražošanas posmā un veterinārmedicīnas praksē Latvijā [Guidelines for limiting the development of antimicrobial resistance during agricultural production in veterinary practice in Latvia]. 2018. https://lvb.lv/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/Vadlinijas.VPP_.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Ghidul naţional privind utilizarea prudentă a antimicrobienelor în medicina veterinară [National guidelines on the prudent use of antimicrobial in veterinary medicine]. 2020. http://www.ansvsa.ro/download/antimicrobieni/Ghidul-national-privind-utilizarea-prudenta-a-antimicrobienelor-in-medicina-veterinara-actualizat.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Splošna priporočila za uporabo antibiotikov v veterinarske namene [General recommendations for the use of antibiotics for veterinary purposes]. https://www.gov.si/assets/organi-v-sestavi/UVHVVR/Zdravila/Zdravila-v-veterinarski-medicini/splosna-veterinarski-namen.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
動物用抗菌剤の 『責任ある慎重使用』を 進めるために [To promote the responsible and prudent use of veterinary antimicrobial agents]. 2000. https://www.maff.go.jp/j/syouan/tikusui/yakuzi/pdf/vet_panf_prudent_use.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
畜産物生産における動物用抗菌性物質製剤の 慎重使用に関する基本的な考え方 [Basic concept regarding the prudent use of animal antibacterial preparations in livestock product production]. 2013. https://www.maff.go.jp/j/syouan/tikusui/yakuzi/pdf/prudent_use.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Code of good practice regarding the responsible prescribing and use of antibiotics in farm animals. 2018. https://www.apha.ie/Documents/Code%20of%20Good%20Practice%20Regarding%20the%20Responsible%20Prescribing%20and%20Use%20of%20Antibiotics%20in%20Farm%20Animals.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Empfehlungen für den sachgemäßen Einsatz von Antibiotika in der Tiergesundheit [Recommendations for the appropriate use of antibiotics in animal health]. 2022. https://agriculture.public.lu/dam-assets/veroeffentlichungen/broschueren/tiere/2022-einsatz-antibiotika-tiergesundheit.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Guía para el Buen Uso de Productos Farmacéuticos Veterinarios [Guide for the good use of veterinary pharmaceutical products]. 2021. https://acsaa.com.mx/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/Gu_a_para_buen_uso_de_productos_farmaceuticoss.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
The judicious use of medically important antimicrobial drugs in food-producing animals. 2012. https://www.fda.gov/media/79140/download. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Manual de Boas Práticas: Utilização de Antimicrobianos em Animais Produtores de Géneros Alimentícios [Manual of good practices for the use of antimicrobials in food-producing animals]. 2021. https://saaf.dgadr.gov.pt/images/DGAV_ManualBoasPraticas_Antimicrobianos.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Asean guidelines for the prudent use of antimicrobials in livestock. 2017. https://asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/ASEAN-Guidelines-for-Prudent-Use-of-Antimicrobials-in-Livestock.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Nasrullah, Rasa FST, Isriyanthi NMR, Ratnasari YE, Fauzi M, Utomo GB, et al.: Pedoman Umum Penggunaan Antibiotik di Bidang Peternakan dan Kesehatan Hewan [General guidelines - use of antibiotics in the field of animal husbandry and animal health]. 2021. https://repository.pertanian.go.id/server/api/core/bitstreams/6f3d4864-9d19-4d06-9e20-7302b7c2df1a/content. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Technical guidelines for responsible and prudent use of antimicrobials in veterinary medicine in South Africa. 2002. https://worldvet.org/uploads/docs/technical_guidelines_for_the_prudent_use_of_antimicrobials.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Directives concernant l'emploi judicieux des médicaments vétérinaires [Guidelines for the judicious use of veterinary drugs]. 2022. https://www.gstsvs.ch/fileadmin/user_upload/GST-SVS/Publikationen/Richtlinien_Umgang_TAM_f.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Code of practice for control of the use of veterinary drugs. 2009. https://faolex.fao.org/docs/pdf/tha176163.pdf. Accessed 12 Feb 2024.
Code of practice on the responsible use of animal medicines on the farm. 2014. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/responsible-use-of-animal-medicines-on-the-farm/code-of-practice-on-the-responsible-use-of-animal-medicines-on-the-farm. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
BVA policy position on the responsible use of antimicrobials in food producing animals. 2019. https://www.bva.co.uk/media/1161/bva-policy-position-on-the-responsible-use-of-antimicrobials-in-food-producing-animals-1.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
Vade-mecum d'AMCRA pour un usage responsable des produits antibactériens chez les animaux. https://formularium.amcra.be/. Accessed 16 Jul 2024.
Guidelines for veterinarians: judicious use of antimicrobials in livestock; guidance for industry. 2020. https://www.cdfa.ca.gov/ahfss/aus/docs/Guidelines_Veterinarians_Judicious_Use_of_Antimicrobials_Livestock.pdf. Accessed 1 Feb 2024.
OECD. Embracing a One Health framework to fight antimicrobial resistance. OECD health policy studies. Paris: OECD; 2023.
The European Union summary report on antimicrobial resistance in zoonotic and indicator bacteria from humans, animals and food in 2018/2019
Nordic vets against AMR - an initiative to share and promote good practices in the Nordic-Baltic region
Government of Canada. Canadian Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance System (CARSS) - antimicrobial use. 2024. https://health-infobase.canada.ca/carss/amu/results.html?ind=05. Accessed 23 Apr 2025.
Health Canada, Government of Canada. Responsible use of medically important antimicrobials in animals. 2024. https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/veterinary-drugs/antimicrobial-resistance/actions/responsible-use-antimicrobials.html#s6. Accessed 23 Apr 2025.
WHO. Global action plan on antimicrobial resistance. 2015. Available at: https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241509763. Accessed 12 Jan 2025.
European Union. Commission notice — guidelines for the prudent use of antimicrobials in veterinary medicine. 2015. p. 7–26.
European Union. Regulation (EU) 2019/6 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on veterinary medicinal products and repealing directive 2001/82/EC. 2019. p. 43–167.
European Commission. Farm to fork strategy - for a fair, healthy and environmentally-friendly food system. 2020. https://food.ec.europa.eu/horizontal-topics/farm-fork-strategy_en. Accessed 2 Aug 2024.
​FAO, UNEP, WHO, and WOAH. One Health Joint Plan of Action, 2022–2026. Working together for the health of humans, animals, plants and the environment. Rome; 2022. 10.4060/cc2289en.
OECD. Antimicrobial resistance in the EU/EEA: a one health response. Paris; OECD Publishing. 2022.
Factors influencing pig farmers’ perceptions and attitudes towards antimicrobial use and resistance
Health for Animals. Global trends in the animal health sector - 2022 outlook. https://healthforanimals.org/animal-health-in-data/parasites-diseases/global-trends-in-the-animal-health-sector/. Accessed 19 Jul 2024.
Richtlijn Toepassen van antimicrobiële middelen [Guideline for the use of antimicrobials]. 2015. https://www.knmvd.nl/app/uploads/2022/03/150513-Richtlijn-TAM-definitief-versie-1.1.pdf. Accessed 5 Feb 2024.
Global trends in antimicrobial use in food animals
OECD/FAO. Agricultural outlook 2024–2033. OECD-FAO agricultural outlook. OECD Publishing, Paris: OECD; 2024.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. World population prospects 2022: summary of results. UN DESA/POP/2022/TR/NO. 3. 2022.
OECD. Antimicrobial resistance - policy insights. 2016. Available from: https://issuu.com/oecd.publishing/docs/amr_brief_-_nov_2016/4. Accessed.
European Union. EU-Mexico agreement: the agreement in principle. https://policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/eu-trade-relationships-country-and-region/countries-and-regions/mexico/eu-mexico-agreement/agreement-principle_en. Accessed 23 Jul 2024.
UK-New Zealand FTA Chapter 5: Sanitary and phytosanitary measures. https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-new-zealand-fta-chapter-5-sanitary-and-phytosanitary-measures. Accessed 23 Jul 2024.
OECD. Agricultural Policy Monitoring and Evaluation 2023: Adapting Agriculture to Climate Change. OECD Publishing, Paris (2023). 10.1787/b14de474-en.
EU-Chile advanced framework agreement. https://policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/eu-trade-relationships-country-and-region/countries-and-regions/chile/eu-chile-agreement_en. Accessed 23 Jul 2024.
European Union – New Zealand FTA: guide for European SMEs. https://trade.ec.europa.eu/access-to-markets/en/country-assets/nz_sme.pdf. Accessed 22 Jul 2024.
Buczinski B, Chotteau P, Duflot B, Rosa A. The EU-Mercosur free trade agreement, its impacts on agriculture. 2023.
The European Union-Mercosur free trade agreement as a tool for environmentally sustainable land use governance
European Commission. Factsheet: EU-Mercosur partnership agreement. 2024. https://policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/eu-trade-relationships-country-and-region/countries-and-regions/mercosur/eu-mercosur-agreement/factsheet-eu-mercosur-partnership-agreement_en. Accessed 22 Apr 2025.
Factsheet: EU-Mercosur partnership agreement. 2024. https://policy.trade.ec.europa.eu/eu-trade-relationships-country-and-region/countries-and-regions/mercosur/eu-mercosur-agreement/factsheet-eu-mercosur-partnership-agreement_en. Accessed 22 Apr 2025.
WHO. WHO list of medically important antimicrobials - a risk management tool for mitigating antimicrobial resistance due to non-human use. 2024. Available from: https://cdn.who.int/media/docs/default-source/gcp/who-mia-list-2024-lv.pdf?sfvrsn=3320dd3d_2. Accessed 11 Mar 2024.
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2023/905. https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A32023R0905&qid=1684331329732 Accessed.
Rahman MRT, Fliss I, Biron E. Insights in the development and uses of alternatives to antibiotic growth promoters in poultry and swine production. Antibiotics (Basel). 2022;11(6). 10.3390/antibiotics11060766.
Is use of antimicrobial growth promoters linked to antimicrobial resistance in food-producing animals? A systematic review
Exploring probiotics as a sustainable alternative to antimicrobial growth promoters: mechanisms and benefits in animal health
Republic of South Africa, Department of agriculture, forestry and fisheries. Farm Feeds General Guidelines. Issued by Registrar: Act No. 36 of 1947.
Virulence and antimicrobial resistance profiling of salmonella serovars recovered from retail poultry offal in KwaZulu-Natal Province, South Africa
Global agricultural information network - Korea phases out antibiotic usage in compound feed. 2011. https://apps.fas.usda.gov/newgainapi/api/report/downloadreportbyfilename?filename=Korea%20Phases%20Out%20Antibiotic%20Usage%20in%20Compound%20Feed_Seoul_Korea%20-%20Republic%20of_7-13-2011.pdf. Accessed 25 Jul 2024.
Ministério da Agricultura, Pecuária e Abastecimento, Secretaria de Defesa Agropecuária. Instrução Normativa Nº1, de 13 de Janeiro de 2020. 2020.
The Swedish experience of the 1986 year ban of antimicrobial growth promoters, with special reference to animal health, disease prevention, productivity, and usage of antimicrobials
Antimicrobial consumption in food-producing animals in Thailand between 2017 and 2019: the analysis of national importation and production data
Ministerio de Agricultura, Subsecretaría de Agricultura, Servicio Agrícola y Ganadero, Dirección Nacional - Resolución 6801 Exenta - Establece Requisitos para el Registro, Comercialización y Uso de Antimicrobianos. Biblioteca de Congreso Nacional de Chile (2017). Available from: https://www.bcn.cl/leychile/navegar?idNorma=1111125&idVersion=2022-03-01&idParte=. Accessed 15 Jul 2025.
Ministry of Agriculture. Minister of agriculture regulation number 14/PERMENTAN/PK.350/5/2017 of 2017 concerning classification of veterinary medicines. 2017.
Servicio Nacional de Sanidad y Calidad Agroalimentaria. Resolución Senasa 455/2024. Boletín Oficial de la República Argentina (2024). Available from: https://www.boletinoficial.gob.ar/detalleAviso/primera/306555/20240429#. Accessed 15 Jul 2025.
Resolution no. 1966 - regulates the use of antimicrobial products or substances as growth promoters or feed efficiency enhancers. 1984. Available from: https://fenavi.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/04/RESOLUCION-1966-DE-1984-1.pdf. Accessed.
Ministry for Primary Industries, New Zealand food safety - antibiotics and resistance. https://www.mpi.govt.nz/food-safety-home/safe-levels-of-chemicals-in-food/fertilisers-pesticides-hormones-and-medicines-in-food/antibiotics-and-resistance/. Accessed 23 Jul 2024.
Ministry of Agriculture Rural Affairs. Announcement no. 194 of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People's Republic of China. 2019.
EPRUMA - European Platform for the Responsible Use of Medicines in Animals. https://epruma.eu/. Accessed 18 Jul 2024.
Antimicrobial use in animals: a journey towards integrated surveillance
Vade Mecum in ERCP, a roadmap to success: tips from experts for excelling in ERCP
Responsible use of Medicines in Agriculture (RUMA). https://www.ruma.org.uk/about/. Accessed 19 Jul 2024.
The Netherlands Veterinary Medicines Institute (SDa). https://www.autoriteitdiergeneesmiddelen.nl/nl. Accessed 19 Jul 2024.
Vetresponsable - Uso responsable de los medicamentos veterinarios. https://www.vetresponsable.es/medicamentos-veterinarios-animales-enfermedades/menusuperior/inicio_55_1_ap.html. Accessed 15 Jul 2025.
AMR Vet Collective. https://www.amrvetcollective.com/home/amr-vet-collective. Accessed.
Ontario Veterinary Medical Association. FAAST- farmed animal antimicrobial stewardship initiative. https://www.amstewardship.ca/about/. Accessed.
Plan Nacional Resistencia Antibióticos (PRAN) - Guía terapéutica de antimicrobianos veterinários. https://resistenciaantibioticos.es/es/lineas-de-accion/control/guia-terapeutica-antimicrobianos-veterinarios. Accessed 19 Jul 2024.
Developing and demonstrating the viability and availability of the multilevel implementation strategy for syncope optimal care through engagement (MISSION) syncope app: evidence-based clinical decision support tool
2022 international clinical practice guidelines for the treatment and prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism in patients with cancer, including patients with COVID-19
American College of Physicians (ACP). Clinical guidelines & recommendations - mobile clinical guidelines. https://www.acponline.org/clinical-information/clinical-guidelines-recommendations/mobile-clinical-guidelines. Accessed 11 Oct 2024.
The Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne. About clinical practice guidelines. https://www.rch.org.au/clinicalguide/About_Clinical_Practice_Guidelines/#clinical-practice-guidelines-app-now-available. Accessed 14 Oct 2024.
Making treatment guideline recommendations in chronic kidney disease and type 2 diabetes more accessible to primary care providers in the United States
Guidelines International Network (GIN). International guidelines library. https://g-i-n.net/international-guidelines-library. Accessed 11 Oct 2024.
Improving care for rare genetic neurodevelopmental disorders: a systematic review and critical appraisal of clinical practice guidelines using AGREE II
Critical appraisal of the quality of clinical practice guidelines for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Assessing the methodological strengths and limitations of the Spanish Society of Medical Oncology (SEOM) guidelines: a critical appraisal using AGREE II and AGREE-REX tool
Protocol for the development of guidance for stakeholder engagement in health and healthcare guideline development and implementation
Quality of guidelines for hyperthyroidism: systematic quality assessment using the AGREE II tool
Recommendations for improving maternal health services in Indonesian primary care under the COVID-19 pandemic: results of a systematic review and appraisal of international guidelines
Regulations on the use of antibiotics in livestock production in South America: a comparative literature analysis
Antimicrobial uses for livestock production in developing countries
Antimicrobial use and resistance in food-producing animals and the environment: an African perspective
Appraisal of the Australian veterinary prescribing guidelines for antimicrobial prophylaxis for surgery in dogs and cats
AGREE II appraisals of clinical practice guidelines in rehabilitation showed poor reporting and moderate variability in quality ratings when users apply different cuff-offs: a methodological study
AGREE II: advancing guideline development, reporting and evaluation in health care