Cardiomyopathy in valosin-containing protein multisystem proteinopathy: Evaluation, diagnosis, and management
Valosin-containing protein (VCP)-associated multisystem proteinopathy is a rare, autosomal dominant disease that affects skeletal muscle, bone, central nervous system, and the heart. While VCP mutations are well established as causing inclusion body myopathy, Paget's disease of bone, frontotemporal dementia, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, their role in cardiomyopathy remains underrecognized. This review aims to evaluate the pathophysiology, diagnostic approach, and management of VCP-associated cardiomyopathy to provide a framework for clinical care and future research.
Emerging evidence from animal models and human case studies suggests that VCP dysfunction disrupts cardiomyocyte homeostasis, impairs protein degradation, and alters mitochondrial function, leading to maladaptive cardiac remodeling and susceptibility to dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Echocardiographic studies in patients with VCP variants reveal a significant prevalence of diastolic dysfunction, conduction abnormalities, and variable degrees of systolic impairment. Despite these findings, there are no standardized guidelines for the diagnosis and management of VCP-associated cardiomyopathy. Current treatment strategies are extrapolated from heart failure guidelines, incorporating neurohormonal blockades with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, beta-blockers, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists.
Our review highlights the need for systematic screening protocols, genotype-phenotype correlation studies, and the development of targeted therapies. Future research should focus on identifying biomarkers for early detection, elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying cardiac dysfunction, and assessing the efficacy of novel treatment strategies. Recognizing VCP-associated cardiomyopathy as a distinct clinical entity will facilitate earlier diagnosis, improve patient outcomes, pave the way for disease-specific therapeutic interventions and insights into the mechanism for isolated cardiomyopathy.

Introduction
Valosin-containing protein (VCP) multisystem proteinopathy (MSP1), or inclusion body myopathy with early-onset Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD), is a rare autosomal dominant disease which may manifest as hereditary inclusion body myopathy (h-IBM), Paget's disease of bone (PDB), frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). VCP is responsible for facilitating protein release through ATP hydrolysis from large structures such as chromatin or ribosomes. These structures are further degraded by the ubiquitin-proteasome complex and autophagic pathways to prevent protein aggregation. The disease is associated with heterozygous variants in the VCP gene, located at 9p13 - p12. VCP, also known as endoplasmic reticulum ATPase p97, segregates proteins from sites such as protein assemblies, chromatin, and membrane surfaces. VCP is abundantly distributed primarily in the cytoplasm and ubiquitously expressed in all tissues. VCP also plays several critical roles, including ubiquitin-proteasome system and endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) of misfolded proteins, autophagy, mitochondria-associated degradation, chromatin remodeling, DNA helicase complex disassembly, and vesicle trafficking. Thus, VCP plays a multifunctional role with a critical impact on cellular homeostasis (OMIM #601023).
Comparable inherited cardiomyopathies highlight the distinction between structural and proteostatic mechanisms. Desminopathies (DES mutations) disrupt the intermediate filament network, producing desmin aggregates and intercalated disk loss with high arrhythmic risk, while CRYAB (αβ-crystallin) mutations impair chaperone function, leading to restrictive cardiomyopathy characterized by atrial enlargement, early atrial arrhythmias, and desmin/CRYAB co-aggregates. In contrast, VCP variants primarily impair proteostasis and mitochondrial quality control, predisposing to diastolic dysfunction, systolic impairment, and conduction disease without a single pathognomonic histologic lesion. This contrast underscores VCP cardiomyopathy as a distinct entity within the broader spectrum of inherited cardiac proteinopathies.
Variants in VCP lead to degeneration in skeletal muscle, central and peripheral nervous system, bone, and heart. Patients diagnosed with VCP multisystem proteinopathy develop progressive motor dysfunction and can progress to needing assistive devices like wheelchairs for mobility, and eventually may develop quadriparesis, with respiratory and cardiovascular failure ultimately leading to death in many cases.
Models of VCP disease and cardiac findings.
Table 1
Model	Description	Cardiac Findings	Translational Relevance	Reference(s)	 	p.R155H and p.A232E (mouse)	Overexpression of mutant VCP	Turnover of IκB-α, led to an inappropriate activation of the NF-κB signaling cascadeNo specific cardiac abnormalities were identified	Loss of myosin fiber integrity and degeneration of the normal sarcomeric structure	Sara K et al. 2010 	 	p.R155H Knock-in (mouse)	Homozygous humanized mutation	Progressive pathology, some cardiac involvement	Model of VCPMyopathy	Nalbandian et al. 2012 	 	TER94 RNAi (Drosophila)	VCP homolog silencing	Myofibrillar disarray, vacuoles	Model of VCP-related disorganization	Viswanathan et al. 2016 	 	Cardiac VCP overexpressed p.K524A VCP (mouse)	Overexpression of mutant VCP	ERAD upregulation, systolic dysfunction	ER stress and remodeling failure (Drosophila)	Brody et al. 2019 	 	Dominant-negative valosin- containing protein transgenic (mouse)	Cardiac-specific inhibition	Cardiac dilation, nuclear disruption	Links ATPase dysfunction to DCM	Sun et al. 2021 	 	CRISPR/ Cas9 VCP KO (mouse) (vcpex3/ex3)	Full-body knockout	Lethality, striated muscle damage	Essential role in proteostasis	Voisard et al. 2022
This table summarizes key cardiac phenotypes observed across various VCP disease models, including transgenic, knock-in, knockout, and RNAi approaches in mouse and Drosophila systems.
Abbreviations: RNAi (RNA interference), ERAD (endoplasmic reticulum associated degradation), DCM (dilated cardiomyopathy).
VCP is abundant in skeletal muscle as well as cardiac tissues. The biological purposes of VCP have been well established through animal models. Silencing of TER94, a Drosophila VCP homolog, led to disruption in myofibrillar organization and myocardial function. Histopathological analysis of this myocardium demonstrated abnormal architecture of channels and enlarged vacuoles, though echocardiogram failed to show any abnormalities in ventricular wall thickness, mass, chamber size, or function. VCP knock-out mice were not compatible with life, and thus, alternative techniques to study this disease were needed. Nalbandian et al. (2012) reported homozygous knock-in VCP mice carrying the R155H variant, which develops many clinical features of VCP-associated disease; however, only survive for 3 weeks. Electron microscopy (EM) analysis of cardiac muscle in VCPR155H/R155H mice revealed prominent vacuolar enlargement, along with enlarged vacuoles, highly disorganized and dilated vascular channels. Brody et al. (2019) developed heart-specific transgenic mice overexpressing normal VCP or VCPK524A mutation with impaired ATPase activity. The VCPK524A mice develop cardiomyopathy with cardiomyocytes exhibiting abnormal nuclear morphology, upregulation of ERAD and aggregation of large ribosomal subunit proteins, increased nuclear envelope proteins, and nuclear lamins. By 9 months of age, histological analysis of the transgenic mice reveals signs of cardiac enlargement, atrial dilation, and systolic dysfunction, interestingly, without evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) or structural remodeling. These findings align with clinical observations that individuals with VCP disease are prone to developing cardiomyopathy over time. The results suggest that impaired VCP function may limit the heart's ability to remodel and adapt to physiological stress. Other articles have discussed the same mechanism; more recently, the development of a novel cardiac-specific dominant-negative VCP transgenic mouse model, along with a CRISPR-based model, has provided further insight into the effects of impaired VCP function (Table 1).
VCP variants have been shown in several studies to cause various injuries to the cardiovascular system. First, VCP mutation restricts the normal cardiac response and physiological adaptation to a pressure overloaded state. Among mice undergoing transverse aortic constriction to induce pressure overload hypertrophy, mice with the VCP mutation developed dilated cardiomyopathy with reduced cardiac function compared to normal control mice with a relatively preserved cardiac response to pressure overload. In another study of hypertensive rats, VCP expression was downregulated in cardiomyocytes in the left ventricle compared with normotensive control mice. After undergoing transaortic constriction to induce a pressure overload state, normal rats developed significant LVH, yet cardiac function remained unchanged. However, rats with the VCP mutation did not develop LVH, a normal physiologic compensatory response after two weeks. Second, ischemia-reperfusion injury can cause substantial myocardial damage; however, VCP has been shown to mitigate this damage. In transgenic mice with cardiac-specific overexpression of VCP, there was a 50% reduction in infarct size after ischemia-reperfusion injury compared to wild type. Additionally, overexpression of VCP in cardiomyocytes significantly reduced celandine-induced myocardial apoptosis by upregulating the production of nitric oxide via inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and by improving mitochondrial function. There is also a cardioprotective effect exhibited by VCP overexpression mediated by attenuating cardiac hypertrophy through G protein-coupled receptors and inhibiting cell proliferation. The critical functions of VCP in cardiomyocytes have been well established, prompting significant interest in exploring VCP as a therapeutic target.
Despite various studies conducted over time, clear diagnostic and management guidelines of cardiomyopathy among patients, specifically with VCP disease, are sparse. Patients with this debilitating condition are often misdiagnosed with other diseases such as facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, ALS, limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, and other neuromuscular disorders. In patients with a delayed diagnosis, more advanced manifestations, including Paget, ALS, and cardiomyopathy, may develop, underscoring the importance of prompt diagnosis and timely initiation of treatment. Recent initiatives have proposed the involvement of a multidisciplinary team to expedite the diagnosis and treatment of this condition, yet clear treatment recommendations for management of cardiomyopathy remain elusive. This review explores the diagnosis and treatment of cardiomyopathy associated with VCP disease, aiming to establish a foundation for clinical care and research.

Epidemiology
Due to the rare nature of this disease, the prevalence of cardiomyopathy among patients with VCP-associated disease is unknown, with available data limited to case reports and case series. In several members of the first family originally reported with the c.464G → A, p.R155H variant, cardiomyopathy was observed to develop in the later stages of the disease. Among the eleven affected individuals, three (27%) developed cardiac manifestations. One patient experienced a myocardial infarction at age 47 years, which was followed by the development of cardiomyopathy. Another member developed cardiomyopathy at 38 years with early onset of coronary artery disease and eventually died from advanced heart failure. Hübbers et al. (2006) reported a 62-year-old female patient with a 3-year history of progressive proximal muscle weakness and dementia who died from pneumonia and cardiac failure. Autopsy revealed marked left ventricular dilatation and thickening of the left ventricular wall. Cardiac muscle revealed ubiquitin-positive inclusions. Miller et al. (2009) reported four cases (22%) of dilated cardiomyopathy in a family of 18 affected individuals with the same p.R155H variant. These four members were diagnosed via echocardiogram, and all were treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor. Two individuals experienced mild dyspnea on exertion; following treatment, one showed symptomatic improvement. The development of cardiomyopathy in individuals with VCP disease may vary among families depending on their specific genetic mutations. Additionally, our group reviewed the echocardiograms in 32 patients with VCP mutations, including 23 affected individuals diagnosed with myopathy with or without Paget disease of bone, and nine asymptomatic VCP variant carriers. Among the affected individuals, 95.7% presented with myopathy, 43.5% with Paget's disease of bone, and none with frontotemporal dementia. There was a 43.5% prevalence of diastolic dysfunction on echocardiogram among patients who were symptomatic. Among the five affected individuals who had sequential echocardiograms two to three years apart, two already had diastolic dysfunction at the initial study, and three affected individuals developed diastolic dysfunction. Interestingly, two presymptomatic siblings developed myopathy and congestive heart failure characterized by dilated cardiomyopathy attributed to pathogenic variants in both MYBPC3 and VCP.
Schiava et al. (2022) reported cardiac impairment in 17 out of 234 patients reported with VCP-associated disease; however, echocardiographic data were limited and only available for 28 patients in the study, indicating a possibly higher incidence of cardiomyopathy (12/28 up to 43%). Seven patients had changes compatible with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), and five patients had dilated cardiomyopathy on imaging. Four patients had conduction disease on ECG, including atrial fibrillation, right or left bundle branch block, and persistent tachycardia. Only four patients had a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50%–55% while all the other patients had LVEF less than 50%.

Diagnosis and treatment

Overview of cardiovascular symptoms
While there are a variety of neuromuscular, neurological, bony manifestations, and other symptoms accompanying VCP disease, cardiac manifestations have not been specifically studied. Individuals without extensive cardiac involvement may be asymptomatic from a cardiac perspective. If cardiomyopathy progresses to systolic dysfunction with left ventricular dilation and pressure overload, heart failure symptoms are more likely to manifest. Those with left ventricular failure may develop clinical signs of heart failure, including progressive dyspnea with increasing exercise intolerance and evidence of volume overload on physical assessment. Physical examination findings include elevated jugular venous pressure, crackles on pulmonary auscultation, and lower extremity edema. Conduction disease, including atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, may occur. In advanced stages, affected individuals may become functionally limited with limiting dyspnea, fatigue, and circulatory impairment; ultimately, respiratory and cardiac failure may be a life-limiting factor and contribute to death between the ages of 40–60 years.

Diagnostic testing
Diagnostic workup and management of multisystem proteinopathy
WES/WGS: Whole Exome Sequencing/Whole Genome Sequencing. EMG: Electromyography. IBMFRS: Inclusion Body Myositis Functional Rating Scale. PT: Physical Therapy. OT: Occupational Therapy. ALP: alkaline phosphatase. ALS: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging.Tc-99 bone scan: Technetium-99.
Fig. 1
Diagnostic workup and management of cardiomyopathy associated with multisystem proteinopathy
ECG: Electrocardiogram. ARNI ARB/ACEi: Angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor; angiotensin receptor blocker; angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. LVEF: Left ventricular ejection fraction. MRA: Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist. SGLT2i: Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor. LGE: Late gadolinium enhancement. MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging. AICD: Automatic implantable defibrillator. CRT*: Cardiac resynchronization therapy (if clinically indicated).
Fig. 2
Following the diagnosis of VCP disease, a baseline evaluation of organ involvement should be conducted with annual screenings thereafter or sooner if new symptoms arise. Multidisciplinary care involving specialists experienced in managing VCP disease should be implemented, including a neuromuscular neurologist, geneticist, endocrinologist, cardiologist, and other experts based on the specific organ systems affected (Fig. 1 and Fig. 2).
Cardiac imaging with an echocardiogram (ECHO) may be utilized to assess the overall structure and function of the heart. Importantly, there are known limitations of ECHO in patients with neuromuscular disorders, particularly Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), largely due to vertebral abnormalities (kyphosis or scoliosis) that obscure acoustic windows. While these limitations have not been systematically studied in VCP-associated cardiomyopathy, expert consensus suggests that similar technical challenges may arise. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging can overcome many of these issues and is often considered the gold standard to obtain accurate cardiac dimensions and function in many neuromuscular disorders. On this basis, some experts advocate for an initial evaluation with CMR and an electrocardiogram (ECG), with follow-up monitoring approximately every two years as a consensus-style, expert opinion recommendation pending validation in dedicated VCP cohorts. If multiple rounds of surveillance remain negative, subsequent imaging may be deferred until clinical symptoms arise. Conversely, if abnormalities are detected (e.g., late gadolinium enhanced (LGE) or ventricular dysfunction), closer follow-up such as six-monthly clinical evaluation and annual CMR has been suggested by expert opinion. These recommendations should be interpreted as interim guidance rather than evidence-based standards until large VCP-specific studies are available.

Pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment of VCP-associated cardiomyopathy
Angiotensin Receptor-Neprilysin Inhibitor (ARNI) (preferred over ACE inhibitor or Angiotensin II Receptor Blocker (ARB) when feasible)
Evidence-based β-blocker (e.g., Carvedilol, Metoprolol Succinate, or Bisoprolol)
Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist (MRA)
Sodium-glucose Cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor, irrespective of diabetes status
Patients with VCP-associated cardiomyopathy have not been included in large, dedicated randomized trials; thus, therapy is extrapolated from data in non-ischemic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) and neuromuscular cardiomyopathies, in conjunction with recent expert consensus guidance. Per the 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline and the 2024 ACC Expert Consensus Decision Pathway for HFrEF, patients with reduced LVEF (≤ 40%) who are symptomatic (NYHA class II-IV) should be started on the four foundational drug classes (“pillars”) of therapy:
Adjunctive therapies (loop diuretics for congestion; ivabradine, hydralazine plus isosorbide dinitrate, vericiguat, digoxin, etc.) are considered based on symptoms, heart rate, blood pressure, renal function, and comorbidities. Importantly, presence of LGE on CMR should not be used to determine initiation of MRAs or other foundational therapies, since current guidelines do not support using imaging markers as triggers for core GDMT. These practice recommendations are consensus-style, expert opinion applied in the absence of VCP-specific trial data.
If the VCP-associated cardiomyopathy progresses despite appropriate medical management, then additional non-pharmacologic therapies may be considered. These therapies include the implantation of an automated implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD), with or without cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT—D), as well as the use of an implantable left ventricular assist device (LVAD) or heart transplantation. The true benefits of these therapies in reducing the morbidity and mortality in VCP-associated cardiomyopathy remain unreported.

Limitations
This review is narrative and non-systematic in design. Available human data is derived from small, clinic-based cohorts that employ heterogeneous imaging protocols and diagnostic definitions. Many management considerations are informed by expert opinion or extrapolated from related neuromuscular disorders and general heart failure guidelines rather than VCP-specific trials. Longitudinal and interventional evidence in VCP cardiomyopathy remains scarce. Proposed surveillance strategies (i.e., cadence of CMR or ECG) are extrapolated from DMD and similar neuromuscular disorders and should be regarded strictly as expert opinion, consensus-style suggestions until validated in VCP-specific studies. Furthermore, potential selection and publication biases, as well as the presence of co-variants in other cardiomyopathy-associated genes, may limit the generalizability of reported findings.

Future directions and clinical trials
Advancements in understanding the role of VCP in the pathogenesis of MSP1 are promising for developing clinical trials for targeted therapies. Currently, there are no successful treatments for VCP-related myopathy or neurological manifestations, and the management of cardiomyopathy is similar to the treatment of other non-ischemic cardiomyopathies as outlined in the prior section.
Given that VCP is a multisystem proteinopathy caused by a missense gain-of-function variants, novel therapeutic developments have included targeted excision of the pathogenic variant by exon 5 skipping in mice, which would lead to downstream improvements on skeletal muscle, cardiomyocyte, and oligodendrocyte function. The treated mice showed improvements in muscle strength, quadriceps fibers architecture, autophagy signaling pathway, reduced brain pathology, and reduced severity of Paget-like bone changes with efficient mutated exon removal; however, cardiac parameters were not assessed in this study.
The specific pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying cardiac dysfunction in patients with VCP disease remains poorly understood, but emerging data in mouse models have resulted in further understanding of the role of VCP in cardiomyocytes and heart failure, as reviewed in this manuscript. VCP may have a primary role in cardiomyocyte survival through multiple mechanisms, including protein homeostasis, mitochondrial respiratory function, and elevated production of iNOS and subsequently nitric oxide, which is known to have a cardioprotective effect. Pathogenic variants in VCP are associated with mitochondrial dysfunction, impaired mitophagy, and disrupted energy metabolism, all of which increase cardiomyocyte susceptibility to stress, including ischemia/reperfusion injury. These dysfunctions contribute to the accumulation of damaged mitochondria and elevated oxidative stress. Notably, VCP variants linked to early disease onset or earlier loss of ambulation exhibit higher ATPase activity compared to those associated with later onset. While VCP normally protects cardiac tissue by maintaining protein homeostasis, supporting mitochondrial function, and regulating mTORC1 signaling, its pathogenic variants can predispose individuals to cardiac dysfunction. However, the absence of cardiomyopathy in some mutation carriers suggests that additional genetic, epigenetic, or environmental modifiers influence disease expression.
Understanding the pathophysiology of VCP-related cardiac disease, including genotype-phenotype correlations and epigenetic regulation, remains a critical area of research. The identification of disease-specific biomarkers could enable early risk assessment, track disease progression, and inform therapeutic strategies in VCP-associated cardiomyopathy.
Genotype-phenotype correlation studies have been done to evaluate various aspects of VCP disease including onset of symptoms, severity, and prevalence of diverse phenotypes including myopathy, Paget's disease of bone, FTD, ALS, Parkinson's or a combination of these. However, no prior studies to date have evaluated whether specific variants have a higher prevalence of cardiomyopathy. This is due to multiple reasons: VCP disease is a rare disorder with variations in phenotypic presentations even between members of the same family, and the prevalence of cardiomyopathy is unknown within this population. Future natural history studies are needed to collect data on cardiac parameters, including comprehensive imaging studies such as cardiac MRI; these data would further clarify the mechanisms of heart failure in VCP disease so that targeted therapies may be developed. Patients with VCP often face early morbidity and mortality due to skeletal muscle, respiratory weakness, or cardiomyopathy. Further detailed studies of this aspect of the multisystemic disease could help improve outcomes for those affected by this debilitating condition. Further investigation and experimental studies are essential to advance progress toward promising therapies.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Joshua M. Chan: Writing – original draft, Data curation, Conceptualization. Candela Romano: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Andy Y. Lee: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Data curation, Conceptualization. Stephani Wang: Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Dawn Lombardo: Writing – original draft, Data curation, Conceptualization. Forum Kamdar: Writing – original draft, Visualization. Michaela Dora: Visualization. Shaida Khan: Writing – original draft, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Pradeep Mammen: Writing – original draft, Validation, Data curation, Conceptualization. Virginia Kimonis: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, Data curation.

Ethical statement
This article is a narrative review and does not involve any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. As such, ethical approval and informed consent were not required.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: Shaida Khan reports financial support was provided by UCB pharma, and Argenx. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
The multiple faces of valosin-containing protein-associated diseases: inclusion body myopathy with Paget’s disease of bone, frontotemporal dementia, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
The VCP/p97 system at a glance: connecting cellular function to disease pathogenesis
The novel desmin mutant p.A120D impairs filament formation, prevents intercalated disk localization, and causes sudden cardiac death
The novel αB-crystallin (CRYAB) mutation p.D109G causes restrictive cardiomyopathy
Panorama of the distal myopathies
VCP disease associated with myopathy, Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal dementia: review of a unique disorder
Cardiac-restricted expression of VCP/TER94 RNAi or disease alleles perturbs
Targeted deletion of p97 (VCP/CDC48) in mouse results in early embryonic lethality
The homozygote VCP(R155H/R155H) mouse model exhibits accelerated human VCP-associated disease pathology
Disruption of valosin-containing protein activity causes cardiomyopathy and reveals pleiotropic functions in cardiac homeostasis
Functional inhibition of valosin-containing protein induces cardiac dilation and dysfunction in a new dominant-negative transgenic mouse model
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated constitutive loss of VCP (valosin-containing protein) impairs proteostasis and leads to defective striated muscle structure and function in vivo
Transgenic mice expressing mutant forms VCP/p97 recapitulate the full spectrum of IBMPFD including degeneration in muscle, brain and bone
Cardiac-restricted expression of VCP/TER94 RNAi or disease alleles perturbs Drosophila heart structure and impairs function
Functional inhibition of Valosin-containing protein induces cardiac dilation and dysfunction in a new dominant-negative transgenic mouse model
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated constitutive loss of VCP (Valosin-containing protein) impairs proteostasis and leads to defective striated muscle structure and function in vivo
The valosin-containing protein is a novel repressor of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by pressure overload
The valosin-containing protein is a novel mediator of mitochondrial respiration and cell survival in the heart in vivo
The valosin-containing protein promotes cardiac survival through the inducible isoform of nitric oxide synthase
Novel genomic targets of valosin-containing protein in protecting pathological cardiac hypertrophy
Emerging role of VCP/p97 in cardiovascular diseases: novel insights and therapeutic opportunities
Clinical and molecular studies in a unique family with autosomal dominant limb-girdle muscular dystrophy and Paget disease of bone
Development of a standard of care for patients with valosin-containing protein associated multisystem proteinopathy
Pathological consequences of VCP mutations on human striated muscle
Inclusion body myopathy with Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia (IBMPFD): clinical features including sphincter disturbance in a large pedigree
Management of cardiac involvement associated with neuromuscular diseases: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
Characteristics of VCP mutation-associated cardiomyopathy
Severe cardiomyopathy associated with the VCP p.R155C and c.177_187del MYBPC3 gene variants
Genotype-phenotype correlations in valosin-containing protein disease: a retrospective multicentre study
Contemporary cardiac issues in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Working Group of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute in collaboration with Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy
Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, part 2: respiratory, cardiac, bone health, and orthopaedic management
Clinical care recommendations for cardiologists treating adults with myotonic dystrophy
2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines
2024 ACC expert consensus decision pathway for treatment of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution set Oversight Committee
Targeted excision of VCP R155H mutation by Cre-LoxP technology as a promising therapeutic strategy for valosin-containing protein disease
Consortium Vrd. 215th ENMC International Workshop VCP-related multi-system proteinopathy (IBMPFD) 13-15 November 2015, Heemskerk, the Netherlands
Elevated VCP ATPase activity correlates with disease onset in multisystem proteinopathy-1
Genotype-phenotype study in patients with valosin-containing protein mutations associated with multisystem proteinopathy