Restoring brain barriers: an innovative approach for treating neurological disorders
The complex etiology of neurological disorders is a major challenge to the identification of therapeutic candidates. Tackling brain vascular dysfunction is gaining attention from the scientific community, neurologists and pharmaceutical companies, as a novel disease-modifying strategy. Here, we provide evidence that at least 41% of neurological diseases and related conditions/injuries display a co-pathology of blood-brain and blood-spinal cord barrier alterations and dysfunctions, and we discuss why this figure may represent only a fraction of a larger phenomenon. We further provide clinical evidence that barrier status may contribute to pathological and functional outcomes in patients. Finally, we discuss drug candidates under development to repair brain barriers.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12987-025-00688-z.

Introduction
According to the most recent Global Burden of Disease report published in 2024 in Lancet Neurology, 43% of the world’s population suffers from a condition affecting the nervous system. The most significant contributors to disability-adjusted life-years are stroke, neonatal encephalopathy, migraine, Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and related dementias, diabetic neuropathy, meningitis, epilepsy, neurological complications due to pre-term birth, autism, and cancers of the nervous system. Most neurological disorders significantly affect a person’s quality of life, ability to perform daily activities, evolve in the workplace and, in doing so, redefine an individual’s role in their own family and society at-large. Among the most disruptive consequences are the dependence on caregivers, and assistive technology may be required for mobility, communication, self-care, or domestic activities. Biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies have been leading efforts to identify, develop, and deploy therapeutic solutions to support and treat these patients. Among the most pressing unmet needs are therapeutic agents that halt or slow neurological disorders, but most clinical trials have been unsuccessful at developing safe and effective drugs for approval by regulatory agencies. In this context, conceptually novel approaches to drug design and unexplored target identification could benefit drug discovery efforts.
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is a specialized interface between the blood and the brain. It is composed of microvascular endothelial cells, endothelial and parenchymal basement membranes that embed pericytes, and astrocyte endfeet that form the glia limitans and serve as a secondary layer to protect the brain parenchyma. The BBB controls brain homeostasis by selectively regulating the passage of ions, nutrients, molecules and cells from the systemic circulation. Brain microvascular endothelial cells are connected via adherens, tight, and gap junctions, which are essential elements forming a tightly and selectively regulated polarized barrier that restricts the paracellular diffusion of ions and small molecules. A functionally equivalent barrier exists between the blood and the spinal cord, called the blood-spinal cord barrier (BSCB), characterized by structural and molecular differences that may render the BSCB more permeable than the BBB. The integrity of the BBB and BSCB is essential for proper brain and spinal cord function and by protecting the delicate tissues from potentially harmful agents, such as toxins, pathogens, and inflammatory mediators. Importantly, barrier properties of brain and spinal cord microvascular endothelial cells are not intrinsic, but rather rely on the cellular crosstalk with pericytes and astrocytes, which are in close contact with these endothelial cells. The cellular and acellular components contributing to barrier function of the central nervous system (CNS) microvascular endothelial cells are referred to as neurovascular unit (NVU). The term NVU may encompass additional cells like neurons, microglia and even circulating cells, when referring to the role of the NVU in regulating blood flow in the CNS.
A growing body of evidence now indicates that structural alterations and dysfunctions of brain barriers are a hallmark of numerous severe neurological diseases or injuries associated with inflammation and neurodegeneration. They include AD, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Huntington’s disease (HD), multiple sclerosis (MS) and Parkinson’s disease (PD) (Fig. 1). Numerous disturbances at the barrier interface have been reported to alter barrier functions. For example, altered caveolae-mediated transcytosis results in the trafficking of peripheral inflammatory factors and toxins into the brain, and the dysregulation of aquaporin-4 channels at astrocyte endfeet results in an abnormal entry of water into the brain. Inflammation of the endothelium results in an uncontrolled trafficking of immune cells and loss of tight junction (TJ) integrity. More particularly, the loss of TJ integrity can be triggered by altered TJ recycling or changes to TJ phosphorylation/oligomerization, and their compromised functionality may lead to enhanced paracellular diffusion of ions and molecules into the brain parenchyma. Additionally, dysregulation of P-glycoprotein efflux transporters at the surface of endothelial cells promotes the accumulation of undesirable metabolites in the brain. All of these disturbances at the barrier interface ultimately perturb homeostasis and lead to neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration, and eventually vasogenic edema such as in stroke and neurotraumas. Among them, the loss of TJs and related proteins, and the presence of blood elements and cells within the CNS parenchyma represent the most investigated structural alterations and dysfunctions of brain barriers. They may therefore serve as common measures to evaluate barrier repair by therapeutic agents.
Timeline of milestone discoveries in BBB and BSCB structural alterations and dysfunctions in neurological disorders. This figure depicts research milestones encompassing the first use of the French term “barrière hémato-encéphalique” by Lina Stern in 1921, later translated into “BBB”, the discovery of endothelial TJs in 1967 and associated proteins (ZO-1, occludin and claudin-5) and the early use of DCE-MRI for diagnosis of MS lesions in patients at the end of the 20th century. Rodent and human postmortem analyses of brain or spinal cord tissues to assess the extravasation of IgG, fibrin(ogen), albumin and/or hemoglobin provided the first demonstrations of BBB and BSCB leakage in neurological disorders, such as in AD, ALS, HD, MS and PD. In the last decade, advances in neuroimaging using DCE-MRI have paved the way for studying subtle BBB leakage in patients with neurological disorders, notably AD, HD and PD, allowing earlier evidence/diagnosis of BBB dysfunction in the progression of neurological disorders than postmortem analyses
This comprehensive and systematic review of the literature provides clear evidence that compromised brain barriers are ubiquitous pathological features across brain disorders, and are not restricted to a subset of diseases. In fact, at least ~ 41% of brain disorders display dysfunctions and/or structural alterations of brain barriers, as evidenced by published literature covering over a hundred neurological diseases and injuries for potential BBB and BSCB dysfunctions in animal models and humans. Barrier dysfunctions documented in this study include abnormal leakage of blood-derived elements and red blood cells, and increased migration of immune cells into the CNS. In addition, we also examined articles reporting alterations of TJ structures and protein levels (e.g. claudin-5, occludin), along with changes to ubiquitous scaffolding proteins that anchor TJ proteins to the cytoskeleton (zonula occludens-1, ZO-1). We then compiled clinical evidence for the possible causal relationships between barrier damage and progression of neurological disorders. Finally, we provide an overview of the mechanisms of action and stage of development of drug candidates currently pursued by biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies to repair brain barriers. Based on the collected evidence, we propose that restoring BBB and/or BSCB integrity represents an innovative disease-modifying therapeutic approach to address pressing unmet medical needs associated to neurological disorders. In essence, this review focuses on brain barriers dysfunctions, structural alterations, and therapeutic treatments currently under development to treat symptomatic patients.

Evidence of BBB & BSCB dysfunctions and structural alterations in neurological disorders

Definition of key terms
In this review, pathological dysfunctions of brain barriers are defined as the increased permeability of barriers to blood components (such as fibrinogen, IgG or albumin) or an exacerbated immune cell trafficking into the brain and spinal cord parenchyma. These features are mostly measured in postmortem tissues but occasionally, as in epilepsy, diseased brain samples are collected for diagnostics and can be used for research purposes. Live imaging additionally enables the detection of brain barriers dysfunction. For example, dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) is an imaging-based approach capable of identifying subtle abnormal enhancements of gadolinium (Gd) or Gd-derived contrast agents (such as gadobutrol or Dotarem) in the parenchyma, following injection of the molecule into the bloodstream. A common and similar technique consists in injecting exogenous tracers into the bloodstream that can reach the parenchyma where brain barriers are impaired, but this methodological approach is restricted to animal studies. These tracers include Evans blue, fluorescent dextrans or sodium fluorescein, and can be observed and quantified in postmortem tissues.
The loss or discontinuity of TJs that seal brain barriers can lead to abnormal leakage of blood components into the parenchyma and further disease processes. For the purpose of this review, structural barrier alterations are restricted to defects in TJ formation and maintenance, as defined by electron microscopy-based ultrastructural analyses of postmortem tissues, or by quantification of TJ-associated protein levels using protein-based assays. Among the large number of TJ-associated proteins, the most expressed and studied at the barrier are claudin-5, occludin and ZO-1.
Terms related to BBB and BSCB dysfunctions and structural alterations were searched on the PubMed database and include a total of 132 neurological disorders (retrieval strategy provided as Supplementary Material). BBB alterations and dysfunctions reported in brain cancers or after infection with viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 fall outside the scope of this review. In addition, studies specifically investigating the blood-cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) barrier were not discussed in this review, but measures of CSF/serum albumin ratio (Qalb) were reported throughout the relevant sections. Over 350 articles were retrieved from this initial literature survey and encompass studies performed in both animal models and humans (Fig. 2), but exclude in vitro studies. The main findings for each of the 54 neurological disorders with compromised barriers are summarized in Supplementary Table 1. The 54 pathologies identified in this review encompass a large number of rare and incurable life-threatening diseases of sporadic or genetic etiology, and pediatric diseases. For a more exhaustive and detailed overview of BBB and BSCB alterations and dysfunctions in specific disorders, please refer to recent reviews on AD, ALS, cerebral small vessel disease, degenerative cervical myelopathy, epilepsy, hepatic encephalopathy, ischemic stroke, MS, PD, or psychiatric disorders.
Histogram and venn diagram analysis using publications reporting BBB and BSCB alterations and dysfunctions in neurological disorders. The histogram depicts the main characteristics of the 359 articles used for the survey of this review. About one third of these articles provided evidence in patients with neurological disorders, and the rest in animal models. The venn diagram highlights 54 neurological disorders for which BBB or BSCB alterations or dysfunctions were evidenced thus far in animal models and in humans. It shed light on 9 neurological disorders for which all the defects were reported: AD, ALS, cerebral cavernous malformation, epilepsy, HD, hemorrhagic stroke, major depressive disorder, MS and PD. Overall, this figure demonstrates the growing interest of the scientific and medical communities for barriers integrity, and the increasing number of pathologies for which BBB or BSCB alterations or dysfunctions are discovered over time

Compromised brain barriers have been documented in most classes of neurological disorders
The heatmap presented in Fig. 3 highlights the occurrence of publications reporting barrier dysfunctions and alterations in 54 diseases/injuries affecting the CNS.
BBB and BSCB alterations and dysfunctions in neurological disorders. Barriers between the blood and the parenchyma are essential to human health by maintaining brain and spinal cord homeostasis. When these barriers are readily interrupted (for example through a degradation of TJ proteins or increased vesicular activity), they leak circulating blood elements (such as fibrin(ogen) or IgG), and sometimes red blood cells in case of hemorrhagic transformation. The uncontrolled recruitment of immune cells into the parenchyma across the inflamed vascular wall (diapedesis) represents another major dysfunction of these barriers. Today, these BBB and BSCB alterations and dysfunctions, in particular, have been reported in ~ 41% of neurological diseases and injuries, suggesting that they may contribute to the pathogenesis of many neurological disorders. The heatmap highlights evidence found in animal models and in humans ranked from the most relevant to human patients’ health to the less relevant (from the exterior to the interior of the circle: dysfunctions in humans, alterations in humans, dysfunctions in animal models and alterations in animal models). Features of barrier alterations included in this heatmap are a loss of TJs and/or decreased protein levels of TJ-associated proteins (claudin-5, occludin and/or ZO-1). Features of barrier dysfunctions are a leakage of circulating elements into the parenchyma and/or an increased/uncontrolled immune cell trafficking across the BBB. The numbers in the squares indicate the number of articles depicting these alterations and dysfunctions, and corresponding articles are reported in Supplementary Table 1
Brain barriers dysfunctions were reported in patients classified with neurovascular (cerebral small vessel disease, hemorrhagic stroke, ischemic stroke, cerebral cavernous malformation, Moyamoya disease) and autoimmune diseases (MS, autoimmune encephalitis, Susac syndrome). Brain or spinal cord vascular dysfunctions are also evident in patients with neurotraumas (traumatic brain injury, chronic traumatic encephalopathy, spinal cord injury) or neurodegenerative diseases. Besides AD, PD, epilepsy, Binswanger’s disease, degenerative cervical myelopathy, dementia with Lewy bodies and frontotemporal lobar degeneration, rare neurodegenerative diseases are also affected and include cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy, ALS, multiple system atrophy, HD, idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus, Batten disease, spinocerebellar ataxia, parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam, familial amyloid polyneuropathy and type 2 neurofibromatosis. Patients with psychiatric disorders (schizophrenia, major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder), hepatic encephalopathy or optic neuritis also displayed abnormal BBB leakage of blood components. Research performed in animal models supports barriers dysfunction in most of these pathologies (Fig. 3). Damage to TJs or TJ-associated proteins in both humans and animal models provide additional key evidence of structural barrier alterations (Fig. 3). Lastly, the following nine neurological disorders have been shown to display both barrier dysfunctions and structural alterations in animal models and humans: AD, ALS, cerebral cavernous malformation, epilepsy, HD, hemorrhagic stroke, major depressive disorder, MS and PD (Figs. 2 and 3).
Case studies also reported gadolinium extravasation into the spinal cord of patients with subacute combined degeneration, a rare neurodegenerative disease, and discontinuity of ZO-1 and/or claudin-5 was observed in the brain of patients with various leukodystrophies (Aicardi-Goutières syndrome, Alexander disease, cathepsin-A-related arteriopathy with strokes and leukoencephalopathy, LARS-2-related leukodystrophy) and DiGeorge syndrome, a rare genetic disorder.
In addition to the pathologies discussed above, compromised brain barriers have also been documented in experimental animal models of neurodevelopmental disorders including autism, Krabbe disease, Rett syndrome, Cockayne syndrome, Dravet syndrome and San Filippo syndrome type B. Experimental animal models of autoimmune diseases (neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder, limbic encephalitis), neuromuscular diseases (Duchenne muscular dystrophy) and peripheral neuropathy also provided evidence of barriers dysfunction. Animals with neoplasms and related conditions (paraneoplastic syndrome, tuberous sclerosis complex) or Sickle cell disease displayed reduced barrier integrity as well. Lastly, reduced levels of claudin-5 or its discontinuity in brain microvessels of animals with myasthenia gravis, a rare pediatric autoimmune disease, and in spinal muscular atrophy, a rare inherited pediatric neuromuscular disorder, further confirm that barrier pathology is a widespread feature across the plethora of brain disorders.
Altogether, several research groups have reported that BBB and BSCB alterations and dysfunctions occur early in the pathogenesis of neurological disorders, or even prior to the appearance of pathological hallmarks and symptoms in several genetic animal models of AD, ALS, Batten disease, cerebral cavernous malformation, cerebral small vessel disease, Cockayne syndrome, Duchenne muscular dystrophy, HD, Sanfilippo syndrome type B, spinal muscular atrophy, spinocerebellar ataxia and tuberous sclerosis complex (Supplementary Table 1). These observations could support a possible causal relationship between BBB or BSCB damage and the onset and/or progression of several neurological disorders.

Genetic mutations of tight junction proteins are also associated with neurological disorders
Mutations in genes encoding claudin-5 and occludin have been reported in patients with extremely rare neurological disorders, further emphasizing that endothelial junction proteins are affected in a large range of neurological disorders. For example, a de novo mutation (G60R) on the coding sequence of claudin-5 was found in two children with alternative hemiplegia who developed heterogenous cerebral calcifications. This mutation affects the extracellular loop of claudin-5 and converted TJs to anion-selective channels, thereby causing both a loss-of-function and a toxic gain-of-function in endothelial cell monolayers. Similarly, recessive mutations in occludin have been frequently identified in patients with band-like calcification with simplified gyration and polymicrogyria, characterized by cerebral calcifications, severe progressive microcephaly, early-onset seizures and developmental arrest. Lower levels of claudin-5 proteins induced by one allele variant in claudin 5 (rs10314) relates to schizophrenia, a psychiatric disorder observed in 30% of individuals with the 22q11 deletion syndrome.

Compromised brain barriers: cause or co-pathology of neurological disorders?
Over the last decade, there has been a 5-fold increase in the number of publications reporting barrier dysfunctions or alterations in diverse populations of patients (Fig. 2), along with a surge of observational clinical trials aimed at evaluating BBB leakage using DCE-MRI or circulating biomarkers. Most of these trials will enable statistical analyses to correlate BBB integrity with disease severity and disability and, in doing so, indicate whether barriers may be envisioned as potential cause or co-pathology for the diseases under investigation. They include trials in patients with autism (NCT04321915), cerebral small vessel disease (NCT05902039, NCT05746221), epilepsy (NCT06057233), ischemic stroke (NCT05585255, NCT05556395), leukoaraiosis (NCT06181981), major depressive disorder (NCT06203015) or type 2 diabetes (NCT06322212), but also trials in healthy volunteers with cardiovascular risk factors (NCT06116630) or suicidal behavior (NCT06047613). It is reasonable to believe that the 54 pathologies presented in Fig. 3 represent only the tip of the iceberg and that brain vascular dysfunction may be a frequent and common pathophysiological component of neurological disorders.
Three main patterns of barrier disruption in humans seem to be at play. Barrier disruption may aggravate with disease progression, such as in people with multiple system atrophy, and this is consistent with observations from animal models of AD, ALS, HD, Batten disease and Cockayne syndrome. Barrier disruption peaks early after neurotraumas or stroke and then gradually attenuates overtime. In some instances, barrier integrity fully recovers as in spinal cord injury, or it may remain damaged as in traumatic brain injury. Longitudinal studies are eagerly awaited to further evaluate how brain barriers disruption evolves over the course of each unique neurological disorder. Another pressing question is whether barrier disruption is a trigger or a significant contributor of specific neurological disorders, but not others. In this context, clinicopathological assessment and correlation analyses of BBB leakage rate, disease biomarkers, and patients’ symptoms may yield new discoveries and lead the field of neurological diseases into new directions.

Barrier integrity status influences the clinical portrait of patients with neurological disorders
The most accurate method currently available to evaluate brain barriers integrity in patients is to measure the rate of Gd and Gd-based contrasts agents (i.e., transfer coefficient (Ktrans) or influx constant (Ki)) using DCE-MRI. This approach allows the detection of subtle and regional BBB/BSCB disruption. However, this technique is relatively recent and expensive, especially when considering measuring barrier leakage in large-scale clinical studies. As a consequence, the literature correlating brain barrier leakage using DCE-MRI to clinical deficits in patients is rather sparse. Therefore, this review also accounted for published literature linking clinical deficits to Qalb, or the release of claudin-5, occludin or ZO-1 into the bloodstream. Qalb may reflect changes at the blood-CSF barrier as well as at the BBB and BSCB. TJ-associated proteins are not expressed specifically in brain and spinal cord endothelium. These biomarkers are thus less precise and not entirely specific to brain barrier leakage compared to measures using DCE-MRI. However, they represent additional putative indicators of a loss of integrity of brain barriers, while they also provide more affordable alternative methods. As a result, biomarker-based associations of brain barriers integrity with clinical outcomes are emerging in the literature. Postmortem analyses further provide valuable evidence to define how the severity of brain barrier leakage/alterations influenced the clinical phenotypes of individuals with neurological disorders. The following sections present key studies conducted with the consent of human participants for 17 neurological diseases and injuries linking brain barriers dysfunctions/alterations and clinical outcome. For a more comprehensive overview of common barriers dysfunctions and alterations in human diseases and injuries, Table 1 is provided in the Supplementary Material. In addition, we also detail findings collected from DCE-MRI studies on healthy elderly volunteers and individuals with mild cognitive impairments.

Healthy aged volunteers & Individuals with mild cognitive impairments
Advanced age is a frequent risk factor in neurodegenerative diseases, and it is important to note that several groups have reported increased BBB leakage of Gd-based contrast agents into regions critical for cognitive functions using DCE-MRI, as well as correlations with cognitive decline, in cohorts of healthy elderly volunteers and people with mild cognitive impairments:
age-dependent increase in Ki of gadobutrol into the white matter (WM) and grey matter (GM) of the cortex and hippocampus, and into higher-order cognition brain regions (orbitofrontal and cingulate cortex) in a sex-balanced cohort of 57 healthy volunteers (66 [47–91] ± 10 years old).
higher Ki of gadobutrol into the normal-appearing WM in a cohort of 39 healthy volunteers (69 ± 12 years old) was associated with lower scores on executive function using the Stroop color-word test interference score and information processing speed using the digit span forward test score. No correlation was found in this study between the vascular volume or index and memory function using the Rey auditory verbal learning test score.
higher BBB leakage rate of Gd-DTPA-BMA into the hippocampus of 11 individuals with mild cognitive impairments (74 ± 7 years old) compared to that of a age- and sex-matched cohort of 11 healthy volunteers. Furthermore, the vascular rate was negatively correlated with naming ability using the Boston naming test score. Conversely, no correlation was found between the vascular volume or rate and cognitive function when using the mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score.

Neurodegenerative diseases

Alzheimer’s disease
Several studies have reported increases in Ki of gadobutrol into the cortex and GM of patients with early AD and in Ktrans of Gd-DTPA into the hippocampus, cortex, occipital lobe and/or amygdala in AD patients with or without dementia, compared to age- and sex-matched healthy volunteers. Higher Ktrans did not correlate with cognitive deficits, nor disease severity using plasma Aβ1−42/Aβ1−40 concentrations ratio. However, when including healthy volunteers and patients with dementia with Lewy bodies, weak positive correlations were found between Ktrans in various brain areas (occipital lobe, frontal lobe, parietal lobe, pallidum, hippocampus, amygdala) and clinical dementia rating score or cognitive deficits, and between Ktrans in the cortex or parietal lobe and Aβ1−42/Aβ1−40 ratio. Higher BBB leakage rate of Gd-DTPA into the centrum semiovale was associated with high-grade enlarged perivascular spaces and reduced verbal fluency and attention. Fibrinogen extravasation was evidenced in WM lesions and normal-appearing WM of postmortem brains of AD patients with small vessel disease, regardless of Braak staging of neurofibrillary tangles and Aβ pathology. Fibrinogen burden was similar to that of non-cognitively impaired age- and sex-matched controls.
Claudin-5 and occludin protein levels, measured by ELISA, were specifically and strongly reduced in the cortex of postmortem brains of people with AD compared to healthy age-matched donors, particularly in patients characterized by advanced Braak staging of neurofibrillary tangles. Interestingly, the loss of TJ proteins was not correlated to cerebrovascular pathology or cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Lower TJ protein levels were associated with higher levels of insoluble Aβ1−40, Aβ1−42, and Tau, and with lower levels of synaptophysin and postsynaptic density protein-95; this latter correlation was found to be independent of higher levels of insoluble Aβ1−40 and Aβ1−42, and Tau. The authors suggested that loss of TJ proteins at the BBB “may contribute to AD pathogenesis in both synergistic and additive manners to typical Aβ and Tau pathologies”.
Combined, these studies demonstrated that elevated BBB leakage rate or cerebral loss of TJ proteins, but not fibrinogen burden, relates to greater disease severity and disability in AD patients.

Parkinson’s disease
A prospective clinical study has recently reported increases of at least 20% in Ktrans of Dotarem into the substantia nigra and posterior cortex, in both normal-appearing WM and WM lesions of PD patients compared to age- and sex-matched controls. Interestingly, no difference was found when comparing Ktrans changes in these regions with age- and sex-matched controls who had a stroke or transient ischemic attack within 3 months to 2 years prior to the study. The authors suggest a similar burden of cerebral vascular disease in patients with a history of stroke and PD patients, despite lower cardiovascular risk factors. However, no correlations were found between Ktrans and cognitive deficits, or disease severity using the unified PD rating scale. Importantly, levodopa equivalent daily dose was not associated with Ktrans increases in PD patients, suggesting that BBB leakage was not triggered by medication.

Epilepsy
Large increases in Qalb were reported in patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures or with post-encephalitic/encephalopathic epilepsy compared to controls. In subgroup analyses, Qalb was higher in patients with widespread lesions compared to those with focal lesions. Furthermore, a weak positive correlation was found between Qalb and monthly seizure frequencies.
Occludin and ZO-1 protein levels were decreased in isolated microvessels from the temporal neocortex (resections) of drug-resistant patients presenting with temporal lobe epilepsy compared to control autopsy samples. In contrast, claudin-5 protein levels were increased. No correlation between claudin-5, occludin or ZO-1 protein levels, and the age at onset, duration of epilepsy, or monthly frequency of seizures were found in these epileptic patients. It is important to note that there was a high inter- and intra-variability in the samples selected for these analyses in terms of age, sex, age at onset, disease duration, seizure frequency, and antiepileptic drug medication type.
Overall, these studies suggest that higher Qalb, but not changes in TJ protein cerebral levels, relates to greater disease severity in patients with epilepsy.

Dementia with lewy bodies
A recent prospective study reported increases in Ktrans of Gd-DTPA into the cortex, parietal lobe and occipital lobe of patients with dementia with Lewy bodies compared to age- and sex-matched healthy volunteers. Despite a trend towards a moderate negative correlation between Ktrans in the occipital lobe and MMSE score, higher Ktrans of any brain area did not relate to worse MMSE or cognitive scores. However, higher Ktrans related to greater disease severity, as shown by moderate positive correlations between Ktrans in the cerebral cortex or parietal lobe and plasma Aβ1−42/Aβ1−40 concentrations ratio. When including a higher number of participants (including healthy volunteers and patients with AD), weak positive correlations were found between Ktrans in the parietal or occipital lobe and clinical dementia rating score. A strong increase in Qalb was also reported in patients diagnosed with dementia with Lewy bodies compared to healthy volunteers. Interestingly, higher Qalb was associated with greater disease severity, as shown by a moderate negative correlation between Qalb and Aβ1−42 concentration in the CSF, while no correlations were found between Qalb and Tau or phosphorylated Tau. Overall, these studies suggest that increases in BBB leakage rate or Qalb relate to greater disease severity in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies.

Rare neurodegenerative diseases

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Qalb and blood proteins in the CSF were reported to be increased in patients with ALS compared to age- and/or sex-matched controls. Elevated Qalb was observed in 10–39% of patients with ALS. Qalb was higher in males than in females and more frequently elevated in patients with limb onset. No further increase of Qalb was observed in patients with mutation in the SOD1 gene or a pathological hexanucleotide expansion in the C9orf72 gene compared to sporadic patients. Several studies have shown that elevation in Qalb was related to an increased mortality risk in this patient population, using Cox regression analyses that allow to determine the influence of Qalb on survival time; two of them showed that this Qalb-associated increased mortality risk was mainly evident in males. Using the same type of analysis, elevated IgG levels in the CSF also related to an increased mortality risk. In addition, high levels of Qalb or CSF proteins were found to be poor prognostic indicators for patients with spinal pathology. Weak positive correlations between Qalb and disease severity or clinical disability were also reported by several independent groups. Altogether, these prospective studies suggest that elevated Qalb in patients with ALS relates to greater disease severity, disability, and poor prognosis.

Cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy
Adrenoleukodystrophy is a rare X-linked peroxisomal metabolic disorder caused by ABCD1 mutation preventing the degradation of very long chain fatty acids that accumulate within tissues, and which causes a severe demyelination of the brain WM. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation represents the standard of care to halt disease progression and improve overall survival in patients with early-stage cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.
In a cohort of 66 males (8.3 [4.4–47.1] years old), Gd extravasation into the brain was resolved by 30, 60, 100, 180 and 365 days after intravenous (i.v.) perfusion of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants for 43%, 77%, 90%, 94% and 98% of patients respectively. To evaluate the status of the graft, the number of neutrophils was measured in the blood of these patients (i.e., a sustained drop in the number of neutrophils relates to graft failure). Interestingly, neutrophil recovery was accelerated in patients with Gd resolution compared to patients without Gd resolution. Furthermore, patients with faster neutrophil recovery were more likely to show Gd resolution into the brain than those engrafting more slowly. Higher CD3 or CD15 donor chimerism, another strong positive prognostic indicator of graft success, was associated with greater Gd resolution, independently of donor sources. In a separate cohort of 20 patients with cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy, primary or secondary engraftment failure was associated with a decreased number of patients presenting Gd resolution at 30 and 60 post-transplant compared to the cohort of patients mentioned above with successful engrafting (12.5% and 7.7% of patients versus 43% and 77% of patients, respectively). In a small cohort of 6 boys (9 [6–12] years old) with advanced cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy and not eligible for transplantation, i.v. administration of bevacizumab (an antibody targeting vascular endothelial growth factor) every two weeks also reduced Gd enhancement surrounding WM lesions, but did not halt disease progression. Overall, these studies indicate that the resolution of BBB leakage may relate to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation halting disease progression and improving overall survival in patients with early-stage cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy.

Huntington’s disease
In a small cohort of 7 HD patients (with heterogeneous disease duration and disabilities), a study suggested trends towards increases in Ktrans of Gd-DTPA into the caudate and the putamen compared to sex-matched healthy volunteers, and corresponding positive correlations with mutant huntingtin burden score. More particularly, a strong positive correlation was identified between Ktrans in the right caudate and mutant huntingtin burden score, despite the low number of patients enrolled in this study. The increased BBB leakage rate found in these patients corroborate postmortem detections of fibrinogen deposits and decreased levels of TJ proteins in the putamen and spinal cord of individuals with HD (Supplementary Table 1).

Multiple system atrophy
A prospective clinical study recently reported a 29% increase in Qalb and a 69% increase in Ktrans of gadobutrol into the periventricular WM of patients with multiple system atrophy (mainly composed of cerebellar C type, and some parkinsonian type) compared to age-matched healthy volunteers. Subgroup analyses revealed that both parameters were higher at advanced disease stage (≥ 3 years) than at earlier stages. The authors of this study identified strong positive correlations between Qalb or Ktrans and clinical disability, as defined by the unified multiple system atrophy rating scale. Furthermore, Ktrans was strongly and positively correlated with the volume of WM hyperintensities in these patients.

Neurovascular diseases

Hemorrhagic stroke
Several studies have shown an increased BBB leakage rate of Gd-based contrast agents or permeability-surface area product of iodinated contrast agents (using computed tomographic perfusion) in the hematoma and perihematomal region in patients with hemorrhagic stroke compared to healthy volunteers. An increased extravasation of Gd-DTPA into the brain was found in patients with aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage compared to healthy controls as early as 24 h and for up to at least 6–12 months post-injury. In this patient cohort, BBB disruption was greater in patients with progressive disease course (i.e., decreased healthy brain tissue between initial and last magnetic resonance scans). Interestingly, early and persistent BBB damage was associated with poor long-term clinical outcome. Similarly, Ktrans of Dotarem was increased into the perihematomal region of the ipsilateral hemisphere of patients with acute supratentorial intracerebral hemorrhage compared to the contralateral hemisphere. Higher Ktrans in the contralateral hemisphere (but not in the perihematomal region) was associated with poor clinical outcome at 90 days post-injury assessed by the modified rankin scale (mRS) score. Higher Ktrans of Gd-DTPA into the perihematomal region of the ipsilateral hemisphere of patients with acute intracerebral hemorrhage compared to the contralateral hemisphere was associated with larger edema volume at one-day and one-week post-injury. Using a different method to evaluate BBB disruption (i.e., computed tomographic perfusion), contradictory studies have reported either positive or no correlations between increases in perihematomal BBB disruption and larger edema volume. A two-fold increase in the peripheral levels of occludin was observed in patients with intracerebral hemorrhage compared to age- and sex-matched healthy volunteers, and correlated with larger perihematomal edema. Overall, these studies imply that elevated BBB leakage rate, or increased peripheral levels of occludin, relate to greater disease severity and disability in patients with hemorrhagic stroke.

Ischemic stroke
A meta-analysis unveiled an increased BBB permeability using neuroimaging techniques in patients with ischemic stroke, from the hyperacute (≤ 6 h post-symptoms) to the chronic (≥ 30 days post-symptoms) phase. Higher BBB leakage rate was associated with hemorrhagic transformation in the hyperacute phase and with greater functional outcome in the subacute phase. The authors acknowledged that most of the studies did not meet criteria to be included in the meta-analysis and that all of them separately reported that higher BBB permeability was associated with poor neurological outcome regardless of phase.
A 40% increase in occludin serum levels was associated with hemorrhagic transformation in patients with ischemic stroke. This risk factor was independent of the poor neurological outcome in these patients, assessed by the NIH stroke scale. A two-fold increase in serum levels of occludin was also observed in patients with acute ischemic stroke enduring hemorrhagic transformations after recanalization compared to age- and sex-matched patients with ischemic stroke who did not. Interestingly, combination of peripheral occludin levels and clinical risk factors improved the accuracy of predicting hemorrhagic transformation in patients with ischemic stroke after recanalization. Increases in serum levels of occludin and claudin-5/ZO-1 ratio were evidenced in patients with acute ischemic stroke who experienced clinical deterioration caused by hemorrhagic transformation compared to age- and sex-matched patients who did not. Furthermore, higher serum levels of claudin-5 within 3 h following the onset of stroke symptoms were associated with clinical deterioration caused by hemorrhagic transformation. Blood levels of occludin within the first 24 h following the appearance of stroke symptoms were increased in patients with non-lacunar stroke (compared to those with lacunar stroke), a subtype of stroke related to worse functional outcome. However, there were no associations between levels of TJ proteins in the blood (claudin-5 and occludin) and the neurological status assessed by NIH stroke scale and mRS scores at 24 h following the manifestation of symptoms. Evaluation of NIH stroke scale, combined to a measure of TJ-associated proteins in the serum, was also proposed to distinguish stroke patients from patients who exhibit functional neurological disorders, migraine or seizures that mimic stroke.
A recent study revealed that serum levels of occludin were significantly reduced in patients with ischemic stroke treated with thrombolysis and normobaric hyperoxia compared to patients treated with thrombolysis alone at 1 and 7 days after the appearance of stroke symptoms. Accordingly, a reduction of the cerebral extravasation of an iodinated contrast agent was observed in patients who received normobaric hyperoxia compared to those who did not. Interestingly, patients who experienced BBB permeability resolution exhibited lower peripheral levels of occludin at one day post-symptoms. Furthermore, lower peripheral levels of occludin at 7 days after the manifestation of stroke symptoms were associated with a better prognosis assessed by the mRS score 83 days later.
Overall, these studies sustain that elevated BBB leakage rate, or increased peripheral levels of TJ proteins, relate to greater disease severity (hemorrhagic transformation) and disability in patients with ischemic stroke.

Cerebral small vessel disease
Patients with cerebral small vessel disease, whose cognitive function had declined over a 2-year period using the MMSE score, had a higher baseline BBB leakage volume and Ki of gadobutrol into the normal-appearing WM and cortical GM. Increased decline in executive function in this cohort was also correlated with higher baseline leakage volume in the normal-appearing WM and cortical GM, and higher baseline Ki in the cortical GM. Another group has shown that higher BBB leakage volume and Ki of gadobutrol into WM hyperintensities were associated with larger WM hyperintensities volume in patients with cerebral small vessel disease, but not in healthy volunteers. No correlation was found between the vascular volume or Ki and cognitive functions in this study. An increase in Ktrans of gadoterate meglumine into the brain of at least 40% was also reported in patients with either sporadic or HTRA1-related cerebral small vessel disease compared to healthy volunteers, whereas it was unchanged for patients with cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL). Furthermore, Ktrans was increased in normal-appearing WM of sporadic patients. No correlation was found between Ktrans and clinical disability using the mRS score. However, higher Ktrans in the deep GM was correlated with poorer global cognition in sporadic and HTRA1-related cerebral small vessel disease. In patients with the genetic form, higher Ktrans was also positively correlated with an increased number of enlarged perivascular space in the basal ganglia and centrum semiovale. A prospective study has further assessed colocalization of BBB leakage of gadobutrol hotspots and lesions (MRI) in patients with cerebral small vessel disease including symptomatic sporadic patients or with a diagnosis of CADASIL. They found that BBB disruption was particularly present at lacune edges (63%), WM hyperintensities core and edges (~ 50%), and microbleed edges (36%). A global decrease in cerebrovascular reactivity in WM hyperintensities core and edges was associated with the presence and number of hotspots at lacune edges which according to the authors, predicts tissue destruction and lacune formation. Overall, these studies demonstrate that elevated BBB leakage rate relates to greater lesion burden and disability in diverse subpopulations of patients with cerebral small vessel disease.

Neurotraumas

Traumatic brain injury
Ktrans of gadobenate dimeglumine was increased into the lesional, perilesional and non-lesional regions in patients with traumatic brain injury during the subacute phase (23 days post-injury on average) compared to age- and sex-matched healthy controls. No resolution of the contrast agent was observed between 23 and 204 days post-injury. Higher Ktrans related to poor satisfaction with life scale scores during the subacute phase. The relevance of BBB disruption to long-term outcomes after traumatic brain injury is further supported by histological detection of blood elements (fibrinogen and IgG) into the brain parenchyma years to decades after the injury.
Serum levels of claudin-5 and occludin were increased in military personnel subjected to repetitive subconcussive blast overpressure exposure induced by heavy weapon training compared to age- and sex-matched healthy controls. Experienced instructors showed even higher levels of peripheral TJ proteins than their trainees. A 16% increase in occludin was also observed in the plasma of patients with mild neurotraumas compared to age- and sex-matched healthy controls, whereas no changes in claudin-5 were found in patients or football players with mild traumas. However, higher serum levels of claudin-5 correlated with psychological symptoms in patients with traumatic brain injury.

Autoimmune diseases

Multiple sclerosis
Gadolinium enhancement is a standard criterion for diagnostic of MS, and is detected in acute inflammatory lesions of the WM and also in normal-appearing WM. A prospective study evaluated if BBB leakage resolution was a predictor of a positive treatment response to alemtuzumab (an anti-CD42 monoclonal antibody; 1 course per year) in a cohort of patients with relapsing-remitting MS over a 2-year period. Approximatively half of the patients in this study had a good treatment response, as defined by the absence of a disease activity-3 (NEDA-3) status, determined from T2-MRI lesion activity, expanded disability status scale (EDSS) score and the number of relapses, at 2 years after the initiation of treatment. The good treatment response group had a more prominent decrease in Ki of gadobutrol into the normal-appearing WM and GM between baseline and at 6- and 12-month follow-ups, than that of the poor treatment response group, despite similar EDSS scores among groups at baseline. Furthermore, ROC curve analysis of the Ki change in normal-appearing WM between baseline and 12 months post-treatment was a highly specific predictor of the loss of NEDA-3 status at 2 years post-treatment. Importantly, this study shows that BBB repair relates to clinical recovery. As suggested by the authors, the evolution of BBB leakage over the course of the disease, whether positive or negative, could be used as a surveillance readout to monitor treatment response. Such indicators could potentially guide neurologists in deciding whether to discontinue or continue a treatment.

Autoimmune encephalitis
An increase in Ktrans of gadobutrol into several brain regions, particularly into the parahippocampal gyrus, was recently observed in patients with autoimmune encephalitis compared to healthy elderly volunteers. This observation supports findings showing that Qalb is elevated in about one third of patients with autoimmune encephalitis. A recent study also compared Ktrans of gadobutrol in various brain areas in patients with autoimmune encephalitis at admission, with either a poor or a good response to their respective/individualized treatments at the last follow-up visit using the mRS score. The poor treatment response group presented higher Ktrans in the cerebellar cortex and the left postcentral gyrus than the good treatment response group.
Patients with neuronal surface antibody-mediated autoimmune encephalitis who presented an elevated Qalb were twice more likely to have brain lesions at admission, particularly in the basal ganglia, brainstem, frontal and parietal lobes, compared to those with a physiological Qalb. At admission, the percentage of prodromal symptoms, the number of white blood cells in the CSF, as well as the concentrations of IgG and albumin in the CSF were significantly increased in patients presenting an elevated Qalb. Furthermore, elevated Qalb at admission was associated with greater disability at discharge or last follow-up visit in patients using mRS and EDSS scores. Patients with anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) encephalitis whose Qalb was elevated were more prone to a decreased consciousness and admission to an intensive care unit than those with physiological Qalb. The neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio in the blood and the intrathecal IgG synthesis were also significantly increased in these patients. Similarly, in a larger cohort of patients, elevated Qalb at admission was associated with greater disability using the mRS score and the clinical assessment scale for autoimmune encephalitis at the follow-up visit 30 days later. The concentrations of IgG and the intrathecal IgG synthesis in the CSF were significantly increased in these patients. Conversely, no difference in MRI and electroencephalogram abnormalities or the neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio in the blood was found in this study.
Overall, these studies indicate that elevated BBB leakage rate or Qalb relates to greater disease severity, disability, and poor prognosis in patients with autoimmune encephalitis.

Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder
Qalb was found to be more elevated in patients with neuromyelitis optica compared to patients with MS, and increases in Qalb relates to greater disease severity and disability in these patients. Indeed, patients with an elevated Qalb were twice more likely to have brain lesions. Furthermore, positive correlations between higher Qalb and greater clinical disability using EDSS were found in patients with neuromyelitis optica.

Psychiatric disorders

Bipolar disorder
An extensive and diffuse BBB leakage of gadobenate dimeglumine into the brain was reported in 28% of patients with bipolar disorder. These individuals developed more severe depression, anxiety, and socio-occupational functioning disability than patients with a preserved BBB integrity. Furthermore, BBB disruption aggravated the occurrence and severity of manic and depressive episodes in patients with bipolar disorder.
Strong positive correlations between age at onset and claudin-5 protein levels were found in the hippocampus (GM and WM) and orbitofrontal cortex (WM) of individuals with bipolar disorder. In addition, a strong negative correlation was found between disease duration and claudin-5 levels in the orbitofrontal cortex (GM and WM). Conversely, no correlation was found between claudin-5 protein levels in the hippocampal GM and the age of onset or disease duration in patients with major depressive disorder.
Overall, these studies show that elevated BBB leakage rate or decreased cerebral claudin-5 levels relates to greater disease severity, disability and psychiatric morbidity in patients with bipolar disorder.

Schizophrenia
A higher Ktrans to gadopentetate meglumine was observed into the thalamus bilaterally, notably the medial and lateral pulvinar nuclei, of patients with schizophrenia compared to age- and sex-matched healthy volunteers. Higher Ktrans was strongly correlated with reduced brain and thalamus volumes, longer disease duration and greater symptom severity using various scales assessing general psychopathology or negative and positive symptoms. Higher IgA responses to claudin-5 and occludin in blood sera were observed in patients with deficit schizophrenia, who exhibit psychosis, hostility, excitation, mannerism and negative symptoms, as well as impairments in semantic and episodic memory, compared to age-matched cohorts of healthy volunteers and patients with nondeficit schizophrenia.
Levels of ZO-1 were increased by three-fold in the serum of patients with schizophrenia compared to age- and sex-matched healthy volunteers without a medical psychiatric history. A moderate positive correlation was established between ZO-1 levels and positive symptoms assessed by the positive and negative syndrome scale score. However, no correlations were found with disease duration, negative symptoms or general psychopathy.
Increases in Ktrans into the brain and ZO-1 levels in the blood in schizophrenic patients reported above corroborate studies showing an elevation in Qalb in 17–34% of patients with first-episode psychosis and in 50% of patients with multiple-episode psychosis.
A moderate negative correlation between age at onset and claudin-5 protein levels in postmortem brain samples of people with schizophrenia was found in the GM of the orbitofrontal cortex, suggesting that loss of TJ proteins might influence disease severity. Despite a decrease in claudin-5 protein levels in the hippocampal GM in postmortem samples from schizophrenic patients versus controls, no correlation was found with age of onset or disease duration.
Overall, these studies suggest that elevated BBB leakage rate, increased peripheral levels of ZO-1, or decreased cerebral levels of claudin-5, relate to greater disease severity, disability, and psychiatric morbidity in patients with schizophrenia.

Therapeutic agents to repair BBB/BSCB alterations and dysfunctions: mechanisms of action and stage of development

The causality dilemma: when and how to repair compromised brain barriers?
The exhaustive literature survey presented in this review provides valuable insights into how barrier integrity status (i.e., altered or repaired) influences pathological and functional outcomes in diverse diseases and injuries affecting the CNS. Loss of TJ integrity or elevated brain barrier leakage are associated with greater disease severity, worse clinical disability, and/or poor diagnosis in several neurological disorders. They include – so far – neurodegenerative diseases (AD, ALS, dementia with Lewy bodies, HD, multiple system atrophy), neurovascular diseases (cerebral small vessel disease, stroke), neuropsychiatric disorders (bipolar disorder, schizophrenia), neurotraumas (traumatic brain injury), autoimmune diseases (autoimmune encephalitis, MS, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder) and epilepsy. Furthermore, advanced age is a frequent risk factor in neurodegenerative diseases, and elevated BBB leakage rate of contrast agents into regions critical for cognitive functions, as well as correlations with cognitive decline, were reported in cohorts of healthy elderly volunteers and people with mild cognitive impairments. Importantly, accumulating evidence indicate that measures of improved barrier function correlated with a favorable clinical outcome in patients with autoimmune encephalitis, cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy, ischemic stroke and MS. Furthermore, recovery of BBB integrity at early stages of cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy may contribute to the efficacy of successful hematopoietic stem cell transplantations that halt disease progression. Indeed, restoring BBB integrity with another therapeutic approach and at a more advanced disease stage did not alter disease course.
In this context, the central question of when and how to repair compromised brain barriers is of the essence. Longitudinal studies evaluating the evolution of brain barriers disruption across the spectrum of neurological disorders would thus provide critical directions for the design of clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of therapeutic agents in a disease-specific manner.

Overview of the therapeutic landscape
Targeting BBB and BSCB alterations/dysfunctions is an emerging therapeutic avenue with the potential to mitigate disease progression, and thus serve as a disease-modifying strategy to a wide range of neurological disorders. Most ongoing efforts by biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies can be categorized into three approaches (Fig. 4): (1) restoring normal levels of TJ proteins in order to mitigate the entry of circulating factors and blood cells, (2) exogenously supplying extracellular matrix-derived biopolymers to rescue gaps in the endothelium triggered by the loss of TJ, or (3) reducing immune cell trafficking across the BBB and BSCB. We will additionally discuss a drug candidate that blocks blood-derived fibrin present in the brain parenchyma to reduce neuroinflammatory processes.
High-level mechanism of action landscape of therapeutic agents targeting BBB and BSCB alterations and dysfunctions as a treatment for neurological disorders. The left panel represents the barrier interface in physiological condition, whereas the right panel represents the barrier interface in neurological disorders with barrier alterations. Several dysfunctions of brain barriers occur in neurological disorders; herein, we define dysfunctions by the leakage of blood elements and red blood cells into the parenchyma, and increased/uncontrolled trafficking of immune cells across the BBB or BSCB. Strategies to reduce blood-to-brain leakage consist in: (1) restoring normal levels of TJ proteins by promoting their expression through the activation of specific receptors (β1-integrin or WntR; indicated in green), or by inhibiting/blocking receptors or intra/extracellular molecules or enzymes known to degrade TJs (VEGFR, SEMA4D, LpPLA2, ROCK2, sVCAM1, Hcy and (s)RGMa; indicated in orange), or (2) by adding an exogenous synthetic biopolymer to “replace” TJs. Strategies to reduce blood-to-brain immune cell entry consist in: (3) blocking the adhesion of immune cells to endothelial cells by blocking their interaction through α4β1-integrin with VCAM1 present at the cell surface (indicated in orange), or (4) by blocking the interaction of circulating tPA with GluN1-NMDAR present at the surface of endothelial cells to reduce the extravasation of immune cells across the BBB (indicated in orange). An alternative or complementary strategy to BBB repair aims at blocking one blood element (fibrin) present in the parenchyma to reduce neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. Tysabri® (i.e., Natalizumab) was added to this figure as the standard of care for reducing immune cell migration across the BBB in patients with RRMS. ECM: extracellular matrix; GluN1-NMDAR: GluN1 subunit of NMDAR; Hcy: homocysteine; IgG: immunoglobulin G; ITG: integrin; Lp-PLA2: lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2; NMDAR: N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor; (s)RGMa: (soluble) repulsive guidance molecule a; ROCK2: Rho-associated coiled-coil containing protein kinase 2; RRMS: relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis; SEMA4D: semaphorin 4D; sVCAM1: soluble VCAM1; TJ: tight junction; tPA: tissue plasminogen activator; VCAM1: vascular cell adhesion molecule 1; VEGFR: vascular endothelial growth factor receptor; WntR: Wnt receptor; α4β1-ITG: α4β1subunit of ITG; β1-ITG: β1
subunit of ITG
Drug development pipeline of therapeutic agents targeting BBB and BSCB dysfunctions for the treatment of neurological disorders. This figure depicts drug candidates in preclinical and clinical drug development for the treatment of BBB and BSCB dysfunctions (from companies’ pipeline online, and clinicaltrials.gov, accessed May 3rd, 2025). The administration route, the development stage, and the therapeutic modality are indicated whenever known for each drug candidate (name underlined in bold). Systemic administration routes include i.v., i.a., and s.c. For any agent at early developmental stage, we have reported the pathology and administration mode envisioned by the company for clinical trials in patients. Clinical trials are indicated as ongoing or completed (year of completion indicated). Tysabri® (i.e., Natalizumab) was added to this comprehensive SWOT analysis as the standard of care for reducing immune cell migration across the BBB in patients with RRMS. *clinical trial not disclosing brain barriers integrity biomarkers in the summary published on clinicaltrials.gov; CCM: cerebral cavernous malformation; CIS: clinically isolated syndrome; HAM: human T-cell leukemia virus type 1-associated myelopathy; i.a.: intraarterial; i.v.: intravenous; mAb: monoclonal antibody; MSA: multiple system atrophy; ND: neurological diseases; NVD: neurovascular diseases; RRMS: relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis; s.c.: subcutaneous; SCI: spinal cord injury; SWOT: strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats
Based on the retrieval strategy presented in the Supplementary information, a total of 11 therapeutic agents have been identified, and are currently being developed by 11 active biotechnology and pharmaceuticals companies to restore brain barriers integrity in neurodegenerative diseases and CNS injuries (Table 1; Figs. 4, 5 and 6). There are four candidates in phase 1 evaluation in healthy volunteers, and four companies have tested / are testing their drug candidates in diseased patients. More specifically, they include one phase 1 trial in human T-cell leukemia virus type 1-associated myelopathy (HAM), one phase 1/2 trial in AD, and four phase 2 clinical trials in ALS, HD, ischemic stroke and spinal cord injury.
Key features of therapeutic agents designed at repairing BBB and BSCB integrity. The upper panels depict two pie charts showing the respective proportions of each modality and development stage of all drug candidates currently being developed. On the lower panels, the two pie charts show the respective proportions of each administration route for agents at clinical stage in healthy volunteers or in patients, and of the number of patients with neurological disorders being /planned to be enrolled in clinical trials for evaluation of brain barriers therapeutic candidates. *clinical trial completed; **final number of patients enrolled; PoC: proof of concept
The common features of therapeutic agents targeting BBB and BSCB alterations and dysfunctions, including drug modalities (mAb, small molecule, peptide or biopolymer) and development stages, administration routes, and number of patients with neurological disorders enrolled in clinical trials, are presented in Fig. 6. Notably, mAbs and small molecules represent 80% of the therapeutic candidates discussed here, and they include Pepinemab, MT3921, THN391, LYS241 and NVQXXX (mAbs), and OV888, SNP318, NRL1049 and Axitinib (small molecules). The most advanced drugs in the pipeline have reached clinical stages, either phase 1 (OV888, SNP318, NRL1049 and THN391), or phase 2 (Pepinemab, MT3921, NX210c and OTR4132). Among these, ~ 50% are delivered i.v., while the three small molecules currently in phase 1 are administered orally. For agents that have been launched in the clinical realm in patients with neurological disorders, the three trials with the highest number of expected participants include Pepinemab, NX210c, and MT3921. More specifically, Pepinemab enrolled 132 placebo- and 133 drug-treated patients with HD, NX210c is recruiting 20 placebo- and 60 drug-treated patients with ALS (NCT06365216), and MT3921 enrolled 24 placebo- and 48 drug-treated patients with spinal cord injury (NCT04683848).
Each of these therapeutic agents are presented in details in the sections below, and introduced in the order of development stage, from the most advanced clinical trials to the initial stages of preclinical testing. Key characteristics of these drug candidates and details on clinical trials are summarized in Tables 1 and 2, respectively.
Key characteristics of therapeutic agents designed at repairing BBB and BSCB integrity. All drug candidates are indicated by name, modality, target, approach, administration route(s), indication(s) in neurological disorders, stage of development and the name of sponsor companies developing these drugs. They are sorted out from the most advanced stage of development to the earliest stage of development. For drug candidates in phase 1 clinical trials in healthy volunteers, the pathologies are those envisioned by the companies, when they submitted investigational brochures for clinical trial approval by regulatory authorities, and reported on clinicaltrials.gov. For drug candidates at early stages of development (discovery, optimization, preclinical), the pathologies and administration modes are those envisioned for clinical trials in the development plan, reported on company websites. THN391 represents an alternative or complementary drug candidate to BBB repair that aims at blocking one blood element (fibrin) present in the parenchyma (brown color). Tysabri® (i.e., Natalizumab) was added to this table as the standard of care for reducing immune cell migration across the BBB in patients with RRMS (blue color). *: clinical trial completed; CCM: cerebral cavernous malformation; CIS: clinically isolated syndrome; GluN1-NMDAR: GluN1 subunit of NMDAR; HAM: human T-cell leukemia virus type 1-associated myelopathy; HV: healthy volunteers; i.a.: intraarterial; i.v.: intravenous; ITG: integrin; Lp-PLA2: lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2; mAb: monoclonal antibody; MSA: multiple system atrophy; N/A: not applicable; ND: neurological diseases; NMDAR: N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor; NVD: neurovascular diseases; RGMa: repulsive guidance molecule a; ROCK2: Rho-associated coiled-coil containing protein kinase 2; RRMS: relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis; s.c.: subcutaneous; SCI: spinal cord injury; SEMA4D: semaphorin 4D; VEGFR: vascular endothelial growth factor receptor; WntR: Wnt receptor; α4β1-ITG: α4β1
subunit of ITG; β1-ITG: β1
subunit of ITG
List of clinical trials with therapeutic agents targeting brain barriers dysfunctions. This table reports key details of interventional clinical trials with barrier repair agents (to be) evaluated for safety, tolerability and/or efficacy in healthy volunteers or in patients with neurological disorders. THN391 represents an alternative or complementary drug candidate to BBB repair that aims at blocking one blood element (fibrin) present in the parenchyma (brown color). HAM: human T-cell leukemia virus type 1-associated myelopathy; HV: healthy volunteers; SCI: spinal cord injury

Pepinemab
Pepinemab is a drug candidate developed by Vaccinex Inc (Rochester (NY), USA) for the treatment of AD and HD (https://www.vaccinex.com/). Pepinemab (formerly known as VX15/2503) is a humanized IgG4 monoclonal blocking antibody targeting semaphorin 4D. Semaphorin 4D binds to plexin-1 receptors to trigger collapse of the actin cytoskeleton in cells and leads to the loss of homeostatic functions of glial cells, particularly astrocytes, in the brain and of dendritic cells in the immune system. Accordingly, Pepinemab and its parental mouse antibody (MAb67-2) were shown to promote remyelination and neuroprotection, reduce astrogliosis and microgliosis, and restore BBB integrity. Additional mechanistic investigations were carried out using a human 3D BBB-on-chip model consisting of endothelial cells and astrocytes. Pepinemab was found to alleviate recombinant semaphorin 4D-induced decrease in transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER), and partially rescue claudin-5 protein levels in chips exposed to TNF-α. Furthermore, MAb67-2 reduced disease progression and promoted functional recovery in animal models of MS, HD and Rett Syndrome. MS-related investigations, carried out in an experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mouse model, showed that MAb67-2 reduced fibrinogen extravasation into the spinal cord.
Pepinemab was well-tolerated with a favorable safety profile in clinical trials in different neurological conditions. A double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled phase 1a (NCT01764737) evaluated the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of single ascending dose of Pepinemab (i.v. at 1–20 mg/kg) in patients with MS in 2014 (enrollment of 20 patients). The maximum concentration (Cmax) and plasmatic half-life were increased in a dose-dependent manner. The plasmatic half-life was 20 days when given at 20 mg/kg. Cellular saturation with the antibody persisted for more than 155 days. Most adverse events were mild to moderate, and included urinary tract infection, contusion, muscular weakness, insomnia and headache. One patient had a grade 3 event of increased Gd-positive lesions that were possibly related to the drug. A double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled phase 2 (NCT02481674, “SIGNAL”) evaluated the safety, tolerability, pharmacokinetic and efficacy of Pepinemab in early manifest and late prodromal HD patients in 2020 (enrollment of 265 patients). Pepinemab was administered by i.v. infusions at 20 mg/kg every 4 weeks for up to 18 months of treatment. A pharmacokinetic study demonstrated that Pepinemab was detected at 348 ng.mL− 1 in the CSF and that its average CSF/serum concentration ratio was of 0.38%. Most adverse events were mild to moderate, and serious adverse events slightly more frequent in Pepinemab-treated HD patients than vehicle-treated patients (19% and 15%, respectively). Common adverse events included headache, nasopharyngitis, fall, nausea and vomiting. Although the trial did not meet its co-primary efficacy endpoints, Pepinemab significantly improved motor functional outcome from baseline to 17 months after treatment initiation compared to the placebo group. A double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled phase 1b/2 (NCT04381468, “SIGNAL-AD”) further recently assessed the safety of Pepinemab and its effect on brain metabolic activity in AD patients for up to 8 months (enrollment of 50 patients; completed in June 2024).

MT3921
MT3921 is a drug candidate developed by Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma (Osaka, Japan) for the treatment of HAM and spinal cord injury (https://www.mt-pharma.co.jp/e/). MT3921 (also known as unasnemab) is a humanized IgG1 monoclonal antibody targeting repulsive guidance molecule-a (RGMa). RGMa is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-transmembrane protein that also exists in a soluble form, and both impede neurite growth by binding to neogenin receptors present at the surface of neurons. In addition, when expressed by endothelial cells, RGMa impairs barrier integrity by reducing claudin-5 and ZO-1 protein levels. The protein is also expressed by bone marrow-derived dendritic cells and binds to neogenin receptors at the surface CD4-positive T cells, which increases adhesion of T cells to intracellular adhesion molecule-1 at the surface of endothelial cells. In this context, MT3921 and its parental rat antibody were shown to promote neurogenesis, neurite growth, neuroregeneration and remyelination, and to restore BSCB integrity. Treatment with these anti-RGMa antibodies was associated with a reduction of disease progression and improved functional recovery in animal models of EAE, neuromyelitis optica, spinal cord injury and vascular dementia.
The effect of MT3921 on BSCB integrity was first evaluated in mice subjected to EAE, followed by an intraspinal injection of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α and IFN-γ) 3 weeks later. Intravenous injections of MT3921 (10 mg/kg) twice a week reduced Gd extravasation into the spinal cord in 5 days, and reduced neurological deficits within 12 days. A microarray analysis of the spinal cord tissue collected 5 days after initiating the treatment showed that several genes, expressed at the BSCB interface and upregulated with EAE, were reduced after exposure to MT3921. These markers include genes that trigger: (1) BBB dysfunction such as Selp, Timp1 and Spp1, (2) extracellular matrix production such as Col4a1, Col6a1, and Hspg2, and (3) endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition such as Col1a1, Snai2 and Acta2.
The effect of MT3921 on BBB integrity was also evaluated in rats subjected to neuromyelitis optica. Prophylactic i.v. injection of MT3921 prevented the entry of aquaporin-4 antibodies into the CSF and parenchyma. MT3921 restored a physiological Qalb and may have reduced the infiltration of neutrophils and monocytes into the thoracic spinal cord, as suggested by a decreased number of myeloperoxidase-positive cells and a decrease of CXCL1 and CXCL2 mRNA levels. This may have triggered the reduction of astrogliosis observed in the acute phase. A decrease in IL-17 A and neurofilament light chain (NfL) levels was also noticed in the CSF, suggesting anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective effects of MT3921. As a result, the anti-RGMa mAb restored neurological scores back to the levels of control animals.
A quadruple-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled phase 1 clinical trial (NCT05240612) assessed the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of MT3921 delivered by i.v. injections to Japanese patients diagnosed with HAM (enrollment of 15 patients; completed in December 2023). A phase 2 clinical trial (NCT04683848) also evaluated the safety and efficacy of MT3921 in patients with acute cervical spinal cord injury (enrollment of 72 patients). This quadruple-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled trial investigated the effect of MT3921 injected i.v., with a scheduled follow-up at 6-month post-treatment, on the upper extremity motor score as the primary endpoint. Secondary endpoints explored spinal cord independence measurement III score, grated redefined assessment of strength, sensibility and prehension score, spinal cord ability ruler, and proportion of responders (i.e., subjects with cutoff number or greater increase in the upper extremity motor score compared to baseline). Results may be expected shortly, since the study was completed in April 2025.

NX210c
NX210c is a drug candidate developed by Axoltis Pharma (Lyon, France) for the treatment of neurological diseases characterized by BBB/BSCB impairments. The product is currently at the clinical stage of evaluation in ALS patients (phase 2), and at preclinical stages for AD, PD and spinal cord injury (https://www.axoltis.com/). In addition, the company used a Quantitative System Pharmacology in silico modelling to predict potential effects of NX210c in virtual MS patients. NX210c is a 12-amino acid peptide analogue of the most conserved sequence of type 1 thrombospondin repeats. It promotes neuroprotection against glutamate-induced excitotoxicity, improves synaptic transmission in basal and hypoxic conditions, and restores BBB integrity. NX210c mediates its neuroprotective effects via integrins containing the β1 subunit, a class of receptors implicated in synaptic transmission and BBB integrity maintenance. NX210c has been shown to attenuate disease progression and promote functional recovery in animal models of AD, ischemic stroke, schizophrenia and spinal cord injury. The BBB-protective properties of NX210c include increased levels of claudin-5 and occludin in bEnd3 endothelial cell monolayers, which improved TEER and reduced BBB permeability to a 40-kDa FITC-dextran. Similarly, NX210c increased TEER in human brain microvascular endothelial cell (HBMVEC) monolayers and tricultures with human astrocytes and pericytes. Furthermore, NX210c increased TEER and barrier integrity by reducing permeability of a 4-kDa FITC dextran tracer in a microfluidic-based model of the BBB, consisting of HBMVECs, human astrocytes, and pericytes. Finally, few systemic injections of NX210c (10 mg/kg) increased claudin-5 and occludin levels in the cortex and hippocampus of old mice. In healthy elderly volunteers (69 [56–91] ± 8 years old), i.v. injections of NX210c at concentrations of 5 or 10 mg/kg, following a regimen of three injections per week for a total of 4 weeks, were shown to be safe and well-tolerated in a phase 1b multiple ascending dose study (NCT05827653). No serious adverse events were reported and those observed were mild, transient, and related to the CNS such as headache. NX210c pharmacokinetics showed a dose-dependent Cmax reached within 6 to 8 min and with ~ 17 to 18 min half-life, with no accumulation following multiple doses. NX210c treatment decreased circulating claudin-5 in the plasma of healthy elderly volunteers. Furthermore, pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationships were observed for soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule 1, homocysteine, claudin-5 and NfL in the plasma of healthy aged participants treated with NX210c, denoting a beneficial effect of NX210c on BBB integrity and neuroprotection.
A phase 2 double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled clinical trial (NCT06365216, “SEALS”) has been recruiting patients with ALS since October 2024 to evaluate the safety, tolerability and efficacy of NX210c (enrollment goal of 80 patients). This trial will investigate the effects of 5 and 10 mg/kg NX210c, following a regimen of three 10-minutes i.v. injections per week for a total of 4 weeks, with a scheduled 3-month follow-up after the end of treatment. The primary endpoints of the trial are changes in serum NfL or in Qalb. Secondary endpoints will explore: (1) additional biomarkers related to the drug mechanism of action and ALS pathophysiology, in CSF, blood and urine, and (2) a comprehensive assessment of disease-related symptoms, including evaluations based on the ALS functional rating scale-revised. Results of this study are expected in Q2 2026.

OTR4132
OTR4132 is a biological device developed by OTR3 Science for Regeneration (Paris, France) for the treatment of stroke (https://www.otr3.com/en/home/). OTR4132 (also known as HSm4131; 132 kDa) is composed of synthetic polysaccharides with a dextran backbone engineered to mimic heparan sulfate functions (extracellular matrix scaffold element, protection of extracellular matrix proteins and storage of peptides needed for cell-cell communication), while remaining more resistant to proteoglycanases than the physiological heparan sulfates. OTR4132 was neuroprotective in rats injected via the intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) route with the cholinergic immunotoxin 192 IgG-saporin that triggers degeneration of the septohippocampal cholinergic pathway. It was also shown that a fluorescein-labeled OTR4132, injected via the i.c.v. or intramuscular route immediately after injury, accumulated specifically at the lesion site. It also reduced the lesion volume and promoted functional recovery in a rat model of transient ischemic stroke. A biodistribution study using [99mTc]-labeled OTR4132 demonstrated radioactivity in the brain, with a peak of the signal 3 h after i.v. injection in the lesioned hemisphere. The product’s patent application described that an intravenous injection of OTR4132 1 h after ischemia in rats reduced the extravasation of a Gd-based contrast agent into the brain within 24–48 h, and of Evans blue 72 h post-injury in the ischemic hemisphere.
A phase 2 clinical trial (NCT06700824, “MATRISS-II”) has been announced to evaluate the safety and efficacy of OTR4132 in patients with acute ischemic stroke (enrollment of 60 patients). This quadruple-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled trial will investigate the effect of OTR4132 on baseline-adjusted 24-hour NIH stroke scale as primary endpoint. Secondary endpoints will explore the rate of intracerebral hemorrhage at 24 h, and changes in mRS, lesion volume and Barthel index at 3-month follow-up. Completion of this study is expected by March 2026. This trial builds on an open-label and single ascending dose study which enrolled 19 patients with acute ischemic stroke to evaluate the safety and tolerability of a single intraarterial injection of OTR4132 (0.2–2.5 mg), that was completed in June 2024 (NCT04083001, “MATRISS”).

OV888
OV888 is a drug candidate developed at preclinical and clinical stages by Ovid Therapeutics and Graviton BioScience (New-York (NY), USA) for the treatment of neurovascular diseases and cerebral cavernous malformation, respectively (https://ovidrx.com/; https://gravitoncorp.com/). OV888 (formerly known as GV101) is a highly selective and potent small molecule inhibitor of the serine/threonine Rho-associated coiled-coil containing kinase isoform 2 (ROCK2). This molecule’s selectivity to inhibit ROCK2 is more than 1000-fold greater than that of ROCK1, with IC50 at 8 nM and > 30 µM, respectively. RhoA/ROCK2 is a critical signaling pathway for endothelial cell barrier function by acting on actin cytoskeletal processes, cellular to extracellular matrix adhesion and fibrosis. However, abnormal activation of this pathway causes endothelial cell barrier dysfunction by phosphorylating and inactivating myosin light chain phosphatase, subsequently leading to actin polymerization and formation of stress fibers. In turn, these processes increase endothelial cell contraction, detachment of TJ proteins and subsequently, paracellular permeability. This ultimately leads to intracerebral hemorrhage, notably in cerebral cavernous malformation. A less potent inhibitor of ROCK2, Fasudil, (IC50 = 1.9 µM), marketed in Japan and China for the treatment of cerebral vasospasm, was shown to preserve BBB integrity in various in vitro and in vivo models, including EAE. Fasudil was safe and well tolerated by patients with ALS in a phase 2 study (sponsor: University Medicine Göttingen, Germany). Furthermore, it significantly reduced the loss of muscle motor units in ALS patients. Overall, these results collected on Fasudil suggest a beneficial effect of inhibiting ROCK2 on BBB repair and neuroprotection.
Phase 1 single and multiple ascending dose studies (referenced in clinicaltrials.gov as NCT05068947 or in the company’s website; enrollment of 16 and 50 healthy volunteers, respectively) evaluated the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetic of OV888 administered orally either as tablets (50–400 mg) or liquid suspension (400–1200 mg) once a day (o.d.) for up to 7 days. More recently, the company performed a double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled phase 1 multiple ascending dose (100, 200, 400 and 600 mg) study (not registered on clinicaltrials.gov) launched in Q3 2023 to confirm the safety of OV888 given orally as tablets o.d. for 7 days and to establish the maximum dose tolerated. No serious adverse events were recorded, all other adverse events were mild and resolved within 24 h (mainly headache). Blood levels of bilirubin and creatine phosphokinase were increased in 30% and 7% of the total number of participants, respectively; these increases had no clinical impacts (i.e., no jaundice, nor muscle pain or weakness). The Cmax and total drug exposure over time were dose-dependent for up to the 400 mg dose, and the plasmatic half-life was ~ 12 h when a 400 mg dose of the molecule was ingested daily for a total of 7 days. Furthermore, a pharmacodynamic response on the reduction of the secretion of proinflammatory interleukins, IL-17 and IL-21, by peripheral blood mononuclear cells, validated the target engagement of OV888 to selectively inhibit ROCK2. The company has recently obtained a phase 2 authorization for cerebral cavernous malformation, but has paused this program to evaluate clinical studies recently completed by other companies in the same therapeutic indication.

SNP318
SNP318 is a drug candidate developed by SciNeuro Pharmaceuticals (Rockville (MD), USA) for the treatment of AD (https://scineuro.com/). SNP318 is a small molecule that inhibits lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) enzyme which produces pro-inflammatory mediators and thereby damages BBB integrity. SNP318 is the second-generation of Rilapladib, a compound shown to be beneficial for improving executive function and working memory in patients with mild AD in a placebo-controlled phase 2a trial sponsored by GSK (62 placebo- and 62 drug-treated patients) (NCT01428453). Rilapladib (250 mg, o.d. for 24 weeks) did not impact the levels of Aβ1−42 in the CSF, but this trial provided preliminary evidence for the reduction of Qalb, Tau/pTau and NfL with a Lp-PLA2 inhibitor (p > 0.05).
A placebo-controlled and randomized phase 1 single ascending dose (starting at 1 mg) and multiple ascending dose (starting at 30 mg) study (NCT05792163) was performed in 2023 to evaluate the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of SNP318 given orally for up to 20 days to healthy volunteers (enrollment of 76 subjects), with the long-term objective to treat neurodegenerative diseases including AD. This trial revealed that SNP318 penetrated the brain and was more potent than first-generation Lp-PLA2 inhibitors, thereby achieving better target engagement and broader anti-inflammatory benefits.

NRL1049
NRL1049 is a drug candidate developed by Neurelis (San Diego (CA), USA) for the treatment of cerebral cavernous malformation (https://www.neurelis.com/). NRL1049 (formerly known as BA1049) is a selective and potent small molecule inhibitor of ROCK2. This molecule’s selectivity to inhibit ROCK2 is more than 43-fold greater than that of ROCK1, with IC50 at 0.59 µM and 26 µM, respectively. In different models of cerebral cavernous malformation and brain injury, NRL1049’s protective effects could be mediated by the maintenance of BBB integrity via a decrease in ROCK2 activation. A dose-dependent reduction in the lesion volume was observed in CCM3+/− mice after oral administration of NRL1049 for 90 days. Iron deposits were also reduced regardless of NRL1049 concentration, and fewer large stage 2 lesions were reported in treated animals. In CCM1+/− mice that exhibit smaller lesions than CCM3+/− mice, only the higher dose of NRL1049 administered for 120 days reduced the lesion volume, and there was a dose-dependent decrease in the number of mice that had lesions. In mice subjected to a cortical cryo-injury, intraperitoneal (i.p.) dosing with NRL1049 after the injury was associated with lower rates of brain edema and seizures. A non-significant drop of Evans blue extravasation across the BBB was also observed in injured mice treated with NRL1049. In rats subjected to transient ischemic stroke, i.p. dosing with NRL1049 15 min after reperfusion reduced intracerebral hemorrhage and Evans blue extravasation into the ischemic hemisphere.
A double-blind, randomized and placebo-controlled phase 1 single ascending dose study (not registered on clinicaltrials.gov) assessed the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetics of NRL1049 in healthy volunteers (completed in 2024). The maximum tolerated dose of a single oral dose of NRL1049 was established. Pharmacokinetics showed a dose-dependent Cmax of NRL1049 and its metabolite (NRL2017) that is also active for ROCK2 over ROCK1; their half-life was short and both were rapidly eliminated. No significant safety issues were reported by the company.

THN391
THN391 is a drug candidate developed by Therini Bio (Sacramento (CA), USA) for the treatment of AD (https://www.therinibio.com/). THN391 is a first-in-class humanized affinity-matured IgG1 monoclonal antibody targeting the P2 cryptic epitope of fibrin fragments, which prevents their binding to CD11b and CD11c on microglia, macrophages and dendritic cells, responsible for driving neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration. THN391 has a 100-fold greater affinity for fibrin P2 and improved development properties than its parental mouse antibody 5B8 targeting the cryptic fibrin epitope of γ377−395 developed by the Akassoglou’s team. Both THN391 and 5B8 antibodies selectively inhibit fibrin-induced inflammation and oxidative stress without interfering with blood clotting. Indeed, 5B8 antibody was shown to suppress fibrin-induced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase activation as well as the expression of pro-inflammatory genes. The 5B8 antibody was also shown to cross the BBB/BSCB in rodent models of MS and AD and bind to fibrin present in the parenchyma, which reduced the activation of innate immunity and amyloid-induced neurodegeneration, respectively.
Phase 1 single ascending dose (0.3, 1.0, 3.0, and 10 mg/kg) and multiple ascending dose (3 mg/kg, every 2 weeks and every 4 weeks) studies (not registered in clinicaltrials.gov) were launched in May 2023 to evaluate the safety and tolerability of THN391 injected i.v. in healthy volunteers. According to the Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, interim results presented at Clinical Trials in Alzheimer’s Disease meeting in 2023 suggested that THN391 was well-tolerated and did not generate serious adverse events. The half-life of THN391 in the plasma was ~ 50 days when given as single ascending doses at 0.3 and 1 mg/kg.

Axitinib
Axitinib is a drug candidate developed at preclinical stage by CAVA Healthcare Inc (Surrey, Canada) for the treatment of AD (https://www.cavahealthcare.ca/). Axitinib is a potent and selective small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitor (386 kDa) that targets the phosphorylation of vascular endothelial growth factor receptors, reaching 50% inhibition with concentrations at a sub-nanomolar range. This anti-angiogenic drug is approved as a second line treatment for advanced renal cell carcinoma and the recommended starting dose is set at 5 mg twice daily orally. Common adverse events of Axitinib include diarrhea, fatigue and hypertension. Axitinib is absorbed rapidly with a dose-dependent Cmax reached within 4 h and a plasmatic half-life ranging from 2.5 to 6.1 h. Plasmatic levels attain a steady-state within 15 days, with no accumulation.
Preclinical evidence recently published in the Tg2576 mouse model of AD and in a rat model of transient ischemic stroke suggest the drug repurposing potential of Axitinib for the treatment of these neurological disorders. Pharmacokinetics studies of Axitinib given to mice by oral gavage have shown a total drug exposure over time of 55 nM×h in the plasma and 0.00885 pM×h in the brain. In the same study, Axitinib attenuated neoangiogenesis and amyloidogenesis in aged Tg2576 mice. Furthermore, the drug restored normal protein levels of ZO-1 and occludin, reduced TJ disruption in mature blood vessels and thereby significantly attenuated BBB leakage of Evans blue into the brain. In line with these observations, Axitinib restored memory and cognitive functions in Tg2576 mice. In bEnd3 endothelial cell monolayers exposed to oxygen glucose deprivation, Axitinib partially restored claudin-5 and occludin protein levels and slightly improved TEER measures. The BBB-protective effect of Axitinib was likely a consequence of a greater endothelial cell survival under treatment. Accordingly, in rats subjected to transient ischemic stroke, i.v. administration of Axitinib at the beginning of reperfusion reduced the lesion volume and edema in the acute phase. Anti-angiogenic and anti-inflammatory effects of Axitinib were accompanied by a restoration of normal protein levels of claudin-5 and occludin in the penumbra, and a reduced extravasation of Evans blue into the brain. In addition, Axitinib ameliorated neurological deficits triggered by ischemic stroke.

LYS241
LYS241 is an antibody developed by Lys Therapeutics (Caen, France) for the treatment of MS, PD, multiple system atrophy, stroke and clinically isolated syndrome (www.lystherapeutics.com). LYS241 is an IgG1 humanized monoclonal blocking antibody targeting the amino-terminal domain of the GluN1 subunit of NMDAR to prevent the binding of endogenous tissue plasminogen activator or its recombinant forms (alteplase and tenecteplase), which are the gold standard thrombolytic treatments for ischemic stroke. Although tissue plasminogen activator plays essential roles in physiological conditions (notably synaptic transmission for learning and memory functions), it potentiates glutamate-induced excitotoxic neuronal death and loss of BBB integrity in pathological conditions. A mouse monoclonal antibody targeting the N-terminal domain of the GluN1 (amino acids at position 169–192) (named Glunomab) was shown to reduce glutamate-induced neuronal death, immune cell migration across the BBB and BBB leakage. Consequently, Glunomab reduced disease progression and promoted functional recovery in animal models of PD, ischemic stroke and MS.

NVQXXX
NVQXXX is an antibody developed by Neuvasq Biotechnologies (Charleroi, Belgium) for the treatment of neurological diseases (https://neuvasq.com/). Little is known about this new drug candidate, given that it is at early stage of development, but it activates the Wnt signaling pathway as a barrier-repair strategy. Proof of concept studies support the relevance of the Wnt7a/b/β-catenin pathway in barrier repair mechanisms, notably in SARS-CoV-2-induced cognitive impairments, ischemic stroke, and glioblastoma expansion. The same company also developed NVQ401, another Wnt surrogate antibody, for the treatment of wet age-related macular degeneration and diabetic macular edema.

Conclusions & perspectives
In this review, we evaluated over 350 scientific publications reporting on BBB and/or BSCB alterations and dysfunctions in more than 130 neurological diseases (Supplementary Tables 1 and Figs. 2 and 3). This extensive survey indicates that 54 pathologies display BBB and/or BSCB dysfunction, which represent over 40% of neurological disorders being associated with barrier impairments. Among the remaining 60%, barriers dysfunction and structural alterations were not systematically reported or investigated and additional studies are necessary to conclude on this potential aspect of disease pathology.
The field of brain barriers is emerging as an important contributor to the understanding of the causes and consequences of neurological disorders. The clinical studies discussed in this review have shed light on several factors critical to data interpretation and that need to be considered when designing future studies. For example, increased cardiovascular risk factors, or concomitant cerebrovascular or inflammatory diseases, represent major cofounding factors to barrier disruption in neurological disorders. Barrier integrity is also compromised during normal aging and may vary in a sex-dependent manner. For example, in ALS, elevated levels of biomarkers of barrier disruption are more frequent in males than in females, and relate to poor prognosis in males. This observation emphasizes the need to design adequate pairing of sex- and age-balanced cohorts to enable sex- and age-based analyses, and identify subpopulations at-risk of developing brain barriers pathologies. Such information would allow more accurate evaluations of how barrier disruption influences the clinical portrait of patients respective to their own pathology. Importantly, barrier damage is also not observed in all patients suffering from the same pathology. For example, extravasation of gadolinium-based contrast agents was observed in 28% and 38% of patients with bipolar disorder and spinal cord injury, respectively. Similarly, elevation of Qalb was observed in 17–29%, 27–29%, and 10–39% of patients with schizophrenia, anti-NMDAR encephalitis and ALS, respectively.
Established biomarkers to evaluate and measure the evolution of barrier disruption in humans are currently limited as of today. They mainly consist in measuring Qalb or the kinetics of penetration of contrast agents into the brain or spinal cord. The levels of TJ-related proteins in the blood have been measured, thus far, in psychiatric disorders (bipolar disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, schizophrenia), autism, stroke, Moyamoya disease, traumatic brain injury, MS and AD. While these proteins are ubiquitously expressed in several organs and therefore their presence in the bloodstream may not be specific to neurological disorders, these biomarkers correlate with disease progression and clinical outcome in AD, autism, schizophrenia and stroke. Whether these proteins can serve as biomarkers to evaluate barrier integrity across the diversity of neurological disorders, or whether they are disease-specific remains to be determined. They may possibly provide a window into the stage of disease progression, severity, and clinical outcomes. However, challenges remain to determine what should be considered “physiological” levels of TJ-related proteins in the bloodstream, and if changes accurately reflect various states of brain barriers integrity. Indeed, barriers are dynamic structures that undergo continuous remodeling and recycling of TJs under physiological conditions. Furthermore, it should be considered that TJ-associated proteins assemble into multiprotein complexes and hence following only the blood level of a given monomer of a TJ protein may be misleading.
In our opinion, there is an urgent need to establish standardized protocols for the detection of barriers disruption in patients. As a first step, it would be advisable to establish a list of circulating biomarkers for systematic inclusion in clinical protocols. If biomarkers are measured concomitantly with the detection of BBB leakage using appropriate neuroimaging techniques, studies may unravel peripheral markers indicative of barrier damage and severity. Biomarkers of barrier damage, in conjunction with other disease-specific biomarkers, could guide diagnostic and help determine disease onset, progression, and prognosis in patient populations. Lessons learnt from past clinical studies and efforts to identify putative biomarkers of brain barriers disruption may also provide precious insights for drug development. Companies developing therapeutic agents targeted to repair brain barriers could leverage these blood biomarkers to refine study protocols for clinical trials. They may include stratifying patients using barrier disruption biomarkers, or defining appropriate inclusion/exclusion criteria. Altogether, it would allow a more precise targeting of patient subpopulations that may best respond to specific treatments. In this sense, personalized medicine may also benefit patients or individuals at risk of barrier disruption. To develop such approaches, establishing dedicated platforms specialized in modeling patient-derived brain barriers would be key to determining if and how barriers are altered, what signaling pathways are specifically implicated, and which therapeutic agents may best support each patient’s needs. The relevance of such platforms is supported by a recent study by Wasielewska and colleagues, who demonstrated that induced pluripotent stem cells-derived BBB models developed from asymptomatic carriers of C9ORF72 mutations exhibited evidence of a compromised barrier in vitro, and these individuals eventually developed ALS later in life. In fact, while this review focused primarily on human- and animal-based in vivo studies, the recent development of in vitro BBB models using patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells also provided evidence of brain barriers dysfunctions and alterations in neurological disorders. They include ALS, cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy, cerebral cavernous malformation, DiGeorge syndrome, HD, Friedreich’s ataxia, MS, PD, psychiatric disorders and tuberous sclerosis complex.
Most existing therapeutic approaches do not stop or slow the progression of neurological disorders, leaving patients and their families suffering the burden of debilitating motor and/or cognitive deficits. In this context, it can be argued that therapeutic avenues aimed at safeguarding the integrity of brain barriers will offer a novel strategy for treating neurological disorders, and could be a game changer for patients and their caregivers.

Strengths & weaknesses
This article offers a comprehensive and systematic review of over one hundred neurological disorders that have been evaluated for possible brain barriers alterations and leakage. In doing so, this manuscript provides readers with a global overview of the extent of barrier dysfunction in individuals affected by neurological disorders, and suggests that brain barriers may be leveraged as drug targets. Using the classification of diseases from the World Health Organization, we have attempted to cover a large number of diseases of the nervous system, as well as diseases classified in other categories but associated with the nervous system. For a subset of illnesses and injuries where brain barriers alterations and dysfunctions have been extensively investigated in animal models, such as AD, MS, spinal cord injury, stroke, and traumatic brain injury, we focused our efforts on presenting results in well-known models for each pathology. Lastly, the molecular mechanisms underlying barrier dysfunction are complex and they implicate a large range of transporters as well as the activation of signaling pathways. This article focused primarily on surveying the scientific literature that reported alterations of TJs and associated proteins, and extravasation of blood-borne factors; we did not review additional indicators such as changes in the phosphorylation and oligomerization of TJ proteins, dysfunctions of efflux transporters (such as P-glycoprotein) or ion/water channels. Furthermore, perturbations in the dynamic crosstalk between endothelial cells, glial cells and neurons are important contributors of NVU dysfunctions to be considered.

Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Abbreviations
3D
Three dimensional
Aβ
Amyloid beta
AD
Alzheimer’s disease
ALS
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
BBB
Blood-brain barrier
BSCB
Blood-spinal cord barrier
CADASIL
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy
CD
Cluster of differentiation
Cmax
Maximum concentration
CNS
Central nervous system
CSF
Cerebrospinal fluid
CXCL
Chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand
DCE-MRI
Dynamic contrast enhanced-MRI
DTPA
Diethylenetriamine penta-acetic acid
EAE
Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
EDSS
Expanded disability status scale
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
FITC
Fluorescein isothiocyanate
Gd
Gadolinium
GM
Grey matter
HAM
Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1-associated myelopathy
HBMVEC
Human brain microvascular endothelial cell
HD
Huntington’s disease
i.c.v.
Intracerebroventricular
i.p.
Intraperitoneal
i.v.
Intravenous(ly)
IC50
Half-maximal inhibitory concentration
IFN-γ
Interferon-γ
IgA
Immunoglobulin A
IgG
Immunoglobulin G
IL
Interleukin
Ki
Influx constant
Ktrans
Transfer coefficient
Lp-PLA2
Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2
mAb
Monoclonal antibody
MMSE
Mini-mental state examination
MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging
mRNA
Messenger ribonucleic acid
mRS
Modified rankin scale
MS
Multiple sclerosis
NEDA-3
No evidence of disease activity-3
NfL
Neurofilament light chain
NIH
National institutes of health
NMDA
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor
NVU
Neurovascular unit
o.d.
Once a day
PD
Parkinson’s disease
Q
Quarter
Qalb
CSF/serum albumin ratio
RGMa
Repulsive guidance molecule-a
ROC
Receiver operating characteristic
ROCK
Rho-associated coiled-coil containing kinase isoform
SAB
Scientific advisory board
SARS-CoV-2
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
TEER
Transendothelial electrical resistance
TJ
Tight junction
TNF-α
Tumor necrosis factor-α
WM
White matter
ZO-1
Zonula occludens-1
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
SL drafted the manuscript and the figures. AdRJ corrected and commented on the first draft of the manuscript and figures. BE, FC, GB, AJ, YG, HB, MC and AdRJ provided corrections, additions and critical comments on the second draft of the manuscript with a focus on their own expertise in neurology (AJ), medicine (GB), drug development (YG), and BBB/BSCB alterations and dysfunctions in ALS (HB, BE), epilepsy (MC), HD (FC), MS (BE), PD (AdRJ, FC), schizophrenia (MC), stroke (GB) and TBI (MC). All the authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.

Funding
BE is supported by the Swiss MS Society and the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant number IZLJZ3_214086). FC received funding from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR, PJT-162164 and PJT-168865) to conduct her HD-related research. AdRJ is supported by a Launch Award from the Parkinson’s Foundation and a FRQS Junior 1 Research Scholar Award.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Competing interests
SL and AJ are employed by Axoltis Pharma and are respectively chief scientific officer and chief medical officer of the company. YG is chief executive officer and a shareholder of Axoltis Pharma. BE, GB, FC and MC are members of the scientific advisory board (SAB) of Axoltis Pharma. BE and MC are members of the SAB of Neuvasq Biotechnologies. As employees, chief executive officer, or SAB members of companies working on drug candidates for barrier repair in neurological disorders, we have deliberately chosen to stay neutral on the third part of this review by just reporting factual elements without interpretation and comparison of the mechanisms of action of the drug candidates being developed, to avoid any conflict of interest.

Ethics approval
Not applicable.

Consent to publication
Not applicable.

Consent to participate
Not applicable.

References
Global, regional, and National burden of disorders affecting the nervous system, 1990–2021: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2021
Alzheimer’s disease: key insights from two decades of clinical trial failures
Neuroprotection: challenges and opportunities
The blood-brain barrier: composition, properties, and roles in brain health
Claudin-5: gatekeeper of neurological function
Selective permeability of [3H]-D-mannitol and [14 C]-carboxyl-inulin across the blood-brain barrier and blood-spinal cord barrier in the rabbit
Neurovascular unit: a focus on pericytes
Astrocyte-endothelial interactions at the blood-brain barrier
The neurovascular unit coming of age: a journey through neurovascular coupling in health and disease
Endothelial dysfunctions in blood-brain barrier breakdown in alzheimer’s disease: from mechanisms to potential therapies
Cellular and noncellular approaches for repairing the damaged blood-CNS-barrier in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Blood-CNS barrier dysfunction in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: proposed mechanisms and clinical implications
Taking advantages of blood-brain or spinal cord barrier alterations or restoring them to optimize therapy in ALS?
Non-contrast assessment of blood-brain barrier permeability to water in mice: an arterial spin labeling study at cerebral veins
Impairment of blood-brain barrier is an early event in R6/2 mouse model of huntington disease
Cerebrovascular and blood-brain barrier impairments in huntington’s disease: potential implications for its pathophysiology
Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in multiple sclerosis: causes, consequences, and potential effects of therapies
The blood-brain barrier-a key player in multiple sclerosis disease mechanisms
Reviewing the significance of blood-brain barrier disruption in multiple sclerosis pathology and treatment
Blood-brain barrier alterations and their impact on parkinson’s disease pathogenesis and therapy
Blood-brain barrier and neurovascular unit dysfunction in parkinson’s disease: from clinical insights to pathogenic mechanisms and novel therapeutic approaches
Caveolae-mediated transcytosis and its role in neurological disorders
Aquaporin-4 water channel in the brain and its implication for health and disease
Decreased blood-brain barrier P-glycoprotein function in the progression of parkinson’s disease, PSP and MSA
Wu J, Wu H, Zhou F, Wang Y, Wang C, Ji J. Blood-brain barrier alterations as an initiator of brain metastasis from lung cancer: a new take on an old story. Cancer Gene Ther. 2025. 10.1038/s41417-025-00916-6
Blood-brain barrier disruption and sustained systemic inflammation in individuals with long COVID-associated cognitive impairment
Endothelial cells as key players in cerebral small vessel disease
Blood-spinal cord barrier disruption in degenerative cervical myelopathy
Vascular abnormalities and the role of vascular endothelial growth factor in the epileptic brain
Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in hepatic encephalopathy: pathophysiology, diagnostic assessment and therapeutic perspectives
Recent advances in tissue repair of the blood-brain barrier after stroke
Neuroinflammation, stroke, blood-brain barrier dysfunction, and imaging modalities
Claudin-5 and occludin levels in patients with psychiatric disorders - a systematic review
Blood-brain barrier disruption in schizophrenia: insights, mechanisms, and future directions
The role of blood-brain barrier dysfunction in cognitive impairments in bipolar disorder-a narrative review
Heterogeneous blood-brain barrier dysfunction in cerebral small vessel diseases
Microglial activation without peripheral immune cell infiltration characterises mouse and human cerebral small vessel disease
Assessment of the clinical feasibility of detecting subtle blood-brain barrier leakage in cerebral small vessel disease using dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI
Blood-brain barrier leakage hotspots collocating with brain lesions due to sporadic and Monogenic small vessel disease
Blood-brain barrier leakage at baseline and cognitive decline in cerebral small vessel disease: a 2-year follow-up study
Blood-brain barrier leakage in relation to white matter hyperintensity volume and cognition in small vessel disease and normal aging
Blood brain barrier leakage is not a consistent feature of white matter lesions in CADASIL
Blood-brain barrier leakage is more widespread in patients with cerebral small vessel disease
Neuroinflammation and blood-brain barrier breakdown in acute, clinical intracerebral hemorrhage
Temporal evolution of perihematomal blood-brain barrier compromise and edema growth after intracerebral hemorrhage
Early blood-brain barrier dysfunction predicts neurological outcome following aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage
Blood-brain barrier compromise does not predict Perihematoma edema growth in intracerebral hemorrhage
Magnetic resonance imaging profile of blood-brain barrier injury in patients with acute intracerebral hemorrhage
Enhancing blood-brain barrier integrity in patients with acute ischemic stroke via Normobaric hyperoxia
The evolution of blood-brain barrier permeability changes after stroke and its implications on clinical outcome: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Focal low and global high permeability predict the possibility, risk, and location of hemorrhagic transformation following intra-arterial thrombolysis therapy in acute stroke
Evolution of blood-brain-barrier permeability after acute ischemic stroke
DCE-MRI blood-brain barrier assessment in acute ischemic stroke
Effects of microvascular permeability changes on contrast-enhanced T1 and Pharmacokinetic MR imagings after ischemia
Inflammation and neutrophil extracellular traps in cerebral cavernous malformation
Ultrastructural and immunocytochemical evidence that an incompetent blood-brain barrier is related to the pathophysiology of cavernous malformations
Ultrastructural pathological features of cerebrovascular malformations: a preliminary report
In vivo demonstration of blood-brain barrier impairment in Moyamoya disease
Quantification of blood-brain-barrier permeability dysregulation and inflammatory activity in MS lesions by dynamic-contrast enhanced MR imaging
Blood-brain barrier permeability changes in the first year after alemtuzumab treatment predict 2-year outcomes in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis
Blood-brain barrier permeability measured using dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging: a validation study
Abnormal blood-brain barrier permeability in normal appearing white matter in multiple sclerosis investigated by MRI
Persistent endothelial abnormalities and blood-brain barrier leak in primary and secondary progressive multiple sclerosis
The blood-brain barrier in cortical multiple sclerosis lesions
Tight junctional abnormality in multiple sclerosis white matter affects all calibres of vessel and is associated with blood-brain barrier leakage and active demyelination
Abnormal endothelial tight junctions in active lesions and normal-appearing white matter in multiple sclerosis
Breakdown of the blood-brain barrier precedes symptoms and other MRI signs of new lesions in multiple sclerosis. Pathogenetic and clinical implications
Dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI quantification of altered vascular permeability in autoimmune encephalitis
Cyclooxygenase-2-positive macrophages infiltrate the alzheimer’s disease brain and damage the blood-brain barrier
CD8(+) T cell-mediated endotheliopathy is a targetable mechanism of neuro-inflammation in Susac syndrome
Fibrin promotes oxidative stress and neuronal loss in traumatic brain injury via innate immune activation
Pediatric traumatic brain injury and microvascular blood-brain barrier pathology
Dynamic contrast enhanced MRI for characterization of blood-brain-barrier dysfunction after traumatic brain injury
Blood-brain barrier disruption in mild traumatic brain injury patients with post-concussion syndrome: evaluation with region-based quantification of dynamic contrast-enhanced MR imaging parameters using automatic whole-brain segmentation
Slow blood-to-brain transport underlies enduring barrier dysfunction in American football players
Dynamic blood-brain barrier regulation in mild traumatic brain injury
Disruption of blood-brain barrier integrity associated with brain lesions in Chinese neuromyelitis Optica spectrum disorder patients
Mechanical disruption of the blood-brain barrier following experimental concussion
Blood-brain barrier disruption is an early event that May persist for many years after traumatic brain injury in humans
Extravasation of plasma proteins in brain trauma
Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in a boxer with chronic traumatic encephalopathy and schizophrenia
Blood-brain barrier dysfunction as a hallmark pathology in chronic traumatic encephalopathy
Assessment of gadolinium leakage into traumatic spinal cord lesion using magnet resonance imaging
Gd-DTPA-enhanced MR imaging of injured spinal cord
Enlarged perivascular spaces correlate with blood-brain barrier leakage and cognitive impairment in alzheimer’s disease
Tracer kinetic model detecting heterogeneous blood-brain barrier permeability to water and contrast agent in alzheimer’s disease and dementia with lewy bodies
Blood-brain barrier breakdown in dementia with lewy bodies
Assessing blood-brain barrier dysfunction and its association with alzheimer’s pathology, cognitive impairment and neuroinflammation
Three-dimensional imaging of fibrinogen and neurovascular alterations in alzheimer’s disease
Activation of Wnt/beta-catenin pathway mitigates blood-brain barrier dysfunction in alzheimer’s disease
Mediators of cerebral hypoperfusion and blood-brain barrier leakiness in alzheimer’s disease, vascular dementia and mixed dementia
Extravascular fibrinogen in the white matter of alzheimer’s disease and normal aged brains: implications for fibrinogen as a biomarker for alzheimer’s disease
Differing associations between Abeta accumulation, hypoperfusion, blood-brain barrier dysfunction and loss of PDGFRB pericyte marker in the precuneus and parietal white matter in alzheimer’s disease
Subtle blood-brain barrier leakage rate and Spatial extent: considerations for dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI
Blood-brain barrier leakage in patients with early alzheimer disease
A leaky blood-brain barrier, fibrinogen infiltration and microglial reactivity in inflamed alzheimer’s disease brain
Blood-brain barrier in alzheimer dementia and in non-demented elderly. An immunocytochemical study
Blood-brain barrier leakage is increased in parkinson’s disease
Deep-brain stimulation associates with improved microvascular integrity in the subthalamic nucleus in parkinson’s disease
Striatal blood-brain barrier permeability in parkinson’s disease
Restoration of blood brain barrier integrity post neurosurgical resection in drug resistant epilepsy
Imaging blood-brain barrier dysfunction in drug-resistant epilepsy: a multi-center feasibility study
Microvascular stabilization via blood-brain barrier regulation prevents seizure activity
Blood-brain barrier damage and new onset refractory status epilepticus: an exploratory study using dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging
Blood-brain barrier leakage May lead to progression of Temporal lobe epilepsy
Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in binswanger’s disease; an immunohistochemical study
Long-term blood-brain barrier permeability changes in Binswanger disease
Validation of biomarkers in subcortical ischaemic vascular disease of the Binswanger type: approach to targeted treatment trials
Spinal cord swelling with abnormal gadolinium-enhancement mimicking intramedullary tumors in cervical spondylosis patients: three case reports and review of the literature
Clinical significance of intramedullary Gd-DTPA enhancement in cervical myelopathy
Detection of microbleeds in post-mortem brains of patients with frontotemporal Lobar degeneration: a 7.0-Tesla magnetic resonance imaging study with neuropathological correlates
A novel mouse model for cerebral inflammatory demyelination in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy: insights into pathogenesis and potential therapeutic targets
Targeting VEGF-mediated blood-brain barrier disruption in advanced cerebral leukodystrophy
Successful donor engraftment and repair of the blood-brain barrier in cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy
Brain endothelial dysfunction in cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy
Blood-spinal cord barrier leakage is independent of motor neuron pathology in ALS
Impaired blood-brain/spinal cord barrier in ALS patients
Deposits of IgG and C3 in the spinal cord and motor cortex of ALS patients
Blood-brain barrier dysfunction in multiple system atrophy: a human postmortem study
Role of complement activation and disruption of the blood-brain barrier in the pathogenesis of multiple system atrophy
Blood-brain barrier impairment is functionally correlated with clinical severity in patients of multiple system atrophy
Elucidating cortical neurovascular involvement in huntington’s disease using human brain tissue microarrays
Mutant Huntingtin protein expression and blood-spinal cord barrier dysfunction in huntington disease
Cellular changes at the glia-neuro-vascular interface in definite idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus
Blood-brain barrier leakage of blood proteins in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus
IgG entry and deposition are components of the neuroimmune response in Batten disease
The blood-brain barrier is disrupted in Machado-Joseph disease/spinocerebellar ataxia type 3: evidence from Transgenic mice and human post-mortem samples
Cerebrovascular inflammation is associated with Tau pathology in Guam parkinsonism dementia
Neuroradiologic and clinicopathologic features of oculoleptomeningeal type amyloidosis
Blood-brain barrier permeability of normal-appearing white matter in patients with vestibular schwannoma: a new hybrid approach for analysis of T(1) -W DCE-MRI
Higher blood-brain barrier leakage in schizophrenia-spectrum disorders: a comparative dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging study with healthy controls
Increased blood-brain barrier permeability of the thalamus correlated with symptom severity and brain volume alterations in patients with schizophrenia
A preliminary report: the hippocampus and surrounding Temporal cortex of patients with schizophrenia have impaired blood-brain barrier
Increased macrophages and changed brain endothelial cell gene expression in the frontal cortex of people with schizophrenia displaying inflammation
Higher blood-brain barrier permeability in patients with major depressive disorder identified by DCE-MRI imaging
Blood-brain barrier imaging as a potential biomarker for bipolar disorder progression
Chaganti J, Zeng G, Patil A, Lockart I, Dellalana M, Montagnese S et al. Altered blood-brain barrier permeability is associated with abnormal distant connectivity and regional homogeneity in Covert hepatic encephalopathy - a cross sectional study. Hepatology. 2025. 10.1097/HEP.0000000000001343
Novel magnetic resonance KTRANS measurement of blood-brain barrier permeability correlated with Covert HE
Permeability of the blood-brain barrier predicts conversion from optic neuritis to multiple sclerosis
MRI demonstration of reversible impairment of the blood-CNS barrier function in subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord
Pathology of the neurovascular unit in leukodystrophies
Disruption of the blood-brain barrier in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome
Endothelial SHANK3 regulates tight junctions in the neonatal mouse blood-brain barrier through beta-catenin signaling
Gestational Fisetin exerts neuroprotection by regulating mitochondria-directed canonical Wnt signaling, BBB integrity, and apoptosis in prenatal VPA-induced rodent model of autism
Shielding effect of Ryanodine receptor modulator in rat model of autism
Potential cross talk between autism risk genes and neurovascular molecules: a pilot study on impact of blood brain barrier integrity
Protective effect of nimodipine against valproic-acid induced biochemical and behavioral phenotypes of autism
Waning efficacy in a long-term AAV-mediated gene therapy study in the murine model of Krabbe disease
Blood-brain barrier permeability to horseradish peroxidase in twitcher and cuprizone-intoxicated mice
Blood-brain barrier integrity is perturbed in a Mecp2-null mouse model of Rett syndrome
Neurovascular dysfunction and neuroinflammation in a Cockayne syndrome mouse model
Investigation in blood-brain barrier integrity and susceptibility to immune cell penetration in a mouse model of Dravet syndrome
Blood-brain barrier impairment in an animal model of MPS III B
Effects of long-term magnesium L-threonate supplementation on neuroinflammation, demyelination and blood-brain barrier integrity in mice with neuromyelitis Optica spectrum disorder
Inhibition of repulsive guidance molecule-a ameliorates compromised blood-spinal cord barrier integrity associated with neuromyelitis Optica in rats
Glucose-regulated protein 78 autoantibody associates with blood-brain barrier disruption in neuromyelitis Optica
Selective limbic blood-brain barrier breakdown in a feline model of limbic encephalitis with LGI1 antibodies
Effects of prednisolone on the dystrophin-associated proteins in the blood-brain barrier and skeletal muscle of dystrophic Mdx mice
Altered blood-brain barrier development in dystrophic MDX mice
Inhibition of the Notch pathway alleviates nab-paclitaxel-induced peripheral neuropathic pain in rats by suppressing HMGB1/caveolin-1 signaling in the spinal cord
Blood-spinal cord barrier breakdown and pericyte deficiency in peripheral neuropathy
Tumor-induced disruption of the blood-brain barrier promotes host death
Blood-brain barrier breakdown and cerebellar degeneration in the course of experimental neoplastic disease. Are Circulating cytokine-induced neutrophil chemoattractant-1 (CINC-1) and– 2alpha(CINC-2alpha) the involved mediators?
Cerebral vascular and blood brain-barrier abnormalities in a mouse model of epilepsy and tuberous sclerosis complex
Mast cells induce blood brain barrier damage in SCD by causing Endoplasmic reticulum stress in the endothelium
Impaired cerebral microvascular endothelial cells integrity due to elevated dopamine in myasthenic model
Vascular defects and spinal cord hypoxia in spinal muscular atrophy
Vascular senescence and leak are features of the early breakdown of the blood-brain barrier in alzheimer’s disease models
Analysis of cerebral small vessel changes in AD model mice
Neurovascular unit pathology is observed very early in disease progression in the mutant SOD1(G93A) mouse model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
The blood-brain barrier is disrupted in a mouse model of infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: amelioration by Resveratrol
20 kDa isoform of connexin-43 augments Spatial reorganization of the brain endothelial junctional complex and lesion leakage in cerebral cavernous malformation type-3
Epimedium flavonoids improve cerebral white matter lesions by inhibiting neuroinflammation and activating neurotrophic factor signal pathways in spontaneously hypertensive rats
Recurrent de Novo mutations in CLDN5 induce an anion-selective blood-brain barrier and alternating hemiplegia
OCLN gene variants identified in three patients with severe neurodevelopmental disorder associated with epilepsy, intellectual disability and malformation of cortical development
Comprehensive molecular screening strategy of OCLN in band-like calcification with simplified gyration and polymicrogyria
Band-like calcification with simplified gyration and polymicrogyria: report of 10 new families and identification of five novel OCLN mutations
Dose-dependent expression of claudin-5 is a modifying factor in schizophrenia
Increased type I interferon signaling and brain endothelial barrier dysfunction in an experimental model of alzheimer’s disease
Impaired blood-brain and blood-spinal cord barriers in mutant SOD1-linked ALS rat
Evidence of compromised blood-spinal cord barrier in early and late symptomatic SOD1 mice modeling ALS
Increase in blood-brain barrier leakage in healthy, older adults
Vascular volume and blood-brain barrier permeability measured by dynamic contrast enhanced MRI in hippocampus and cerebellum of patients with MCI and normal controls
Selective loss of cortical endothelial tight junction proteins during alzheimer’s disease progression
Chronic dysfunction of blood-brain barrier in patients with post-encephalitic/encephalopathic epilepsy
Disruption of the blood-brain barrier after generalized tonic-clonic seizures correlates with cerebrospinal fluid MMP-9 levels
Expression of VEGF- and tight junction-related proteins in the neocortical microvasculature of patients with drug-resistant Temporal lobe epilepsy
Increased albumin csf/serum ratio in dementia with lewy bodies
Associations of cerebrospinal fluid profiles with severity and mortality risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Blood-brain barrier dysfunction and Myelin basic protein in survival of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with or without frontotemporal dementia
Elevated cerebrospinal fluid homocysteine is associated with blood-brain barrier disruption in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients
Blood-CSF barrier integrity in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Implication of central nervous system barrier impairment in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: gender-related difference in patients
Relationship between cerebrospinal fluid/serum albumin quotient and phenotype in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a retrospective study on 328 patients
Elevated cerebrospinal fluid proteins and albumin determine a poor prognosis for spinal amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Blood-brain barrier disruption is not associated with disease aggressiveness in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Outcomes after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation for childhood cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy: the largest single-institution cohort report
Association of serum occludin levels and perihematomal edema volumes in intracranial hemorrhage patients
Serum occludin level combined with NIHSS score predicts hemorrhage transformation in ischemic stroke patients with reperfusion
The combination model of serum occludin and clinical risk factors improved the efficacy for predicting hemorrhagic transformation in stroke patients with recanalization
Serum tight-junction proteins predict hemorrhagic transformation in ischemic stroke patients
Plasma levels of occludin and claudin-5 in acute stroke are correlated with the type and location of stroke but not with the neurological state of patients-preliminary data
Circulating blood-brain barrier proteins for differentiating ischaemic stroke patients from stroke mimics
Blood-based biomarkers of repetitive, subconcussive blast overpressure exposure in the training environment: a pilot study
Exploring blood-brain barrier hyperpermeability and potential biomarkers in traumatic brain injury
Serum protein biomarkers of inflammation, oxidative stress, and cerebrovascular and glial injury in concussed Australian football players
Predictive blood biomarkers of targeted intervention for chronic mental health symptoms following traumatic brain injury
Evaluation of CSF albumin quotient in neuronal surface antibody-associated autoimmune encephalitis
The clinical features and prognosis of anti-NMDAR encephalitis depends on blood brain barrier integrity
CSF findings in patients with anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-encephalitis
Impact of blood-brain barrier disruption on clinical features and treatment response in patients with newly diagnosed autoimmune encephalitis
Increased serum matrix metalloproteinase-9 in neuromyelitis optica: implication of disruption of blood-brain barrier
Acute neuromyelitis Optica spectrum disorder patients’ clinical analysis of disability-related biomarkers
Blood-brain barrier disruption is more severe in neuromyelitis Optica than in multiple sclerosis and correlates with clinical disability
Blood-brain barrier associated tight junction disruption is a hallmark feature of major psychiatric disorders
Breakdown of the paracellular tight and adherens junctions in the gut and blood brain barrier and damage to the vascular barrier in patients with deficit schizophrenia
ZO-1 serum levels as a potential biomarker for psychotic disorder
Blood-brain barrier dysfunction and folate and vitamin B12 levels in first-episode schizophrenia-spectrum psychosis: a retrospective chart review
Cerebrospinal fluid abnormalities in first- and multi-episode schizophrenia-spectrum disorders: impact of clinical and demographical variables
Pepinemab antibody Blockade of SEMA4D in early huntington’s disease: a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 2 trial
Pepinemab: a SEMA4D antagonist for treatment of huntington’s and other neurodegenerative diseases
SEMA4D compromises blood-brain barrier, activates microglia, and inhibits remyelination in neurodegenerative disease
Anti-semaphorin 4D rescues motor, cognitive, and respiratory phenotypes in a Rett syndrome mouse model
Anti-semaphorin 4D immunotherapy ameliorates neuropathology and some cognitive impairment in the YAC128 mouse model of huntington disease
Safety/tolerability of the anti-semaphorin 4D antibody VX15/2503 in a randomized phase 1 trial
Conclusions of the SIGNAL study in huntington and implications for treatment of other slowly progressive neurodegenerative diseases
Repulsive guidance molecule-A as a therapeutic target across neurological disorders: an update
RGMa participates in the blood-brain barrier dysfunction through BMP/BMPR/YAP signaling in multiple sclerosis
RGMa modulates T cell responses and is involved in autoimmune encephalomyelitis
Anti-RGMa neutralizing antibody ameliorates vascular cognitive impairment in mice
Humanized anti-RGMa antibody treatment promotes repair of blood-spinal cord barrier under autoimmune encephalomyelitis in mice
RGMa Inhibition promotes axonal growth and recovery after spinal cord injury
SCO-spondin-derived peptide protects neurons from glutamate-induced excitotoxicity
NX210c peptide promotes glutamatergic receptor-mediated synaptic transmission and signaling in the mouse central nervous system
A subcommissural organ-spondin-derived peptide (NX210c) improves the recovery of synaptic transmission after in vitro ischemia. BRAIN and BRAIN-PET 2022 abstracts
NX210c drug candidate peptide strengthens mouse and human blood-brain barriers
Integrin-driven actin polymerization consolidates long-term potentiation
Distinct roles of the beta 1-class integrins at the developing and the mature hippocampal excitatory synapse
beta1 integrins play a critical role maintaining vascular integrity in the hypoxic spinal cord, particularly in white matter
beta1 integrin is essential for blood-brain barrier integrity under stable and vascular remodelling conditions; effects differ with age
Interendothelial claudin-5 expression depends on cerebral endothelial cell-matrix adhesion by beta(1)-integrins
Subcommissural organ-spondin-derived peptide restores memory in a mouse model of alzheimer’s disease
SCO-spondin-derived peptide NX210 rescues neurons from cerebral ischemia/reperfusion injury through modulating the integrin-beta1 mediated PI3K/Akt pathway
SCO-spondin derived peptide NX210 induces neuroprotection in vitro and promotes fiber regrowth and functional recovery after spinal cord injury
Safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetic-pharmacodynamic relationship of NX210c peptide in healthy elderly volunteers: randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind, multiple ascending dose study
Protective effects of a synthetic glycosaminoglycan mimetic (OTR4132) in a rat immunotoxic lesion model of septohippocampal cholinergic degeneration
A Heparan sulfate-based matrix therapy reduces brain damage and enhances functional recovery following stroke
Barritault D, Bernaudin M, Touzani O, Toutain J, Khelif Y. inventors; organes Tissus regeneration reparation remplacement, assignee. Composition for the protection and repair of the blood brain barrier. France patent WO2020/239356. 2019;30 Apr 2020. https://worldwide.espacenet.com/patent/search/family/068138337/publication/WO2020239356A1?q=WO2020%2F239356
Selectivity matters: selective ROCK2 inhibitor ameliorates established liver fibrosis via targeting inflammation, fibrosis, and metabolism
Endothelial cell-cell adhesion and signaling
Increased activity of Rho kinase contributes to hemoglobin-induced early disruption of the blood-brain barrier in vivo after the occurrence of intracerebral hemorrhage
A brain-targeted orally available ROCK2 inhibitor benefits mild and aggressive cavernous Angioma disease
Rho kinase Inhibition rescues the endothelial cell cerebral cavernous malformation phenotype
Effects of fasudil on blood-brain barrier integrity
The effects of fasudil on the permeability of the rat blood-brain barrier and blood-spinal cord barrier following experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
Safety, tolerability, and efficacy of fasudil in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ROCK-ALS): a phase 2, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
Ovid Therapeutics. Ovid R&D Day. 2023. Available from: https://investors.ovidrx.com/events-and-presentations/events/event-details/2023/Ovid-RD-Day/default.aspx
Ovid Therapeutics. Ovid Therapeutics and Graviton Bioscience announce topline data from a phase 1 clinical trial studying OV888/GV101 capsule, a potential first-in-class therapy for cerebral cavernous malformations. 2024. Available from: https://investors.ovidrx.com/news/news-details/2024/Ovid-Therapeutics-and-Graviton-Bioscience-Announce-Topline-Data-from-a-Phase-1-Clinical-Trial-Studying-OV888GV101-Capsule-a-Potential-First-In-Class-Therapy-for-Cerebral-Cavernous-Malformations/default.aspx?_ga=2.2298613.499700970.1739355008-880086808.1736179630.
A 24-week study to evaluate the effect of Rilapladib on cognition and cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers of alzheimer’s disease
SciNeuro Pharmaceuticals. Deciphering the enigma of brain disease. 2023. Available from: https://www.nature.com/articles/d43747-023-00121-0
The novel ROCK2 selective inhibitor NRL-1049 preserves the blood-brain barrier after acute injury
Neurelis. Neurelis pipeline update - Advancements to address unmet needs in neuroscience 3.7.24. 2024. Available from: https://vimeo.com/1017961143/b99041b328?share=copy
Fibrin-targeting immunotherapy for dementia
Fibrin-targeting immunotherapy protects against neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration
Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation. THN391. 2024. Available from: https://www.alzdiscovery.org/cognitive-vitality/researchers
Axitinib plasma pharmacokinetics and ethnic differences
Phase I trial of the oral antiangiogenesis agent AG-013736 in patients with advanced solid tumors: Pharmacokinetic and clinical results
Reversing pathology in a preclinical model of alzheimer’s disease by hacking cerebrovascular neoangiogenesis with advanced cancer therapeutics
The protective effects of axitinib on blood-brain barrier dysfunction and ischemia-reperfusion injury in acute ischemic stroke
Tenecteplase versus Alteplase in acute ischaemic cerebrovascular events (TRACE-2): a phase 3, multicentre, open-label, randomised controlled, non-inferiority trial
tPA in the injured central nervous system: different scenarios starring the same actor?
Tissue-type plasminogen activator controls neuronal death by Raising surface dynamics of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors
The interaction of tPA with NMDAR1 drives neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in alpha-synuclein-mediated neurotoxicity
Improving stroke outcomes in hyperglycemic mice by modulating tPA/NMDAR signaling to reduce inflammation and hemorrhages
Nonionotropic action of dndothelial NMDA receptors on blood-brain barrier permeability via Rho/ROCK-mediated phosphorylation of myosin
Neuroendothelial NMDA receptors as therapeutic targets in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis
Engineered Wnt7a ligands rescue blood-brain barrier and cognitive deficits in a COVID-19 mouse model
Engineered Wnt ligands enable blood-brain barrier repair in neurological disorders
Serum Zonulin and claudin-5 levels in patients with bipolar disorder
Serum claudin-5, but not zonulin, May be associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder
Serum Zonulin and claudin-5 levels in children with obsessive-compulsive disorder
Akın-Kınay F, Uzun N, Kılınç İ, Kılıç AO. Tight junction proteins and blood-brain barrier integrity in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder: a study on claudin-5, claudin-12, occludin, tricellulin, and angulin-1. Clin Psychopharmacol Neurosci. 2025. 10.9758/cpn.25.1293
Serum claudin-5, claudin-11, occludin, vinculin, paxillin, and beta-catenin levels in preschool children with autism spectrum disorder
MMP-9 as a biomarker for predicting hemorrhagic strokes in Moyamoya disease
Circulating levels of tight junction proteins in multiple sclerosis: association with inflammation and disease activity before and after disease modifying therapy
Association of plasma claudin-5 with age and alzheimer disease
A patient-derived amyotrophic lateral sclerosis blood-brain barrier model for focused ultrasound-mediated anti-TDP-43 antibody delivery
C9ORF72 patient-derived endothelial cells drive blood-brain barrier disruption and contribute to neurotoxicity
Establishment of a novel amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patient (TARDBP (N345K/+))-derived brain microvascular endothelial cell model reveals defective Wnt/beta-catenin signaling: investigating diffusion barrier dysfunction and immune cell interaction
Modeling and rescue of defective blood-brain barrier function of induced brain microvascular endothelial cells from childhood cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy patients
Modeling blood-brain barrier formation and cerebral cavernous malformations in human PSC-derived organoids
22q11.2 deletion-associated blood-brain barrier permeability potentiates systemic capillary leak syndrome neurologic features
Inhibition of Abl kinase by Imatinib can rescue the compromised barrier function of 22q11.2DS patient-iPSC-derived blood-brain barriers
Investigation of neurodevelopmental deficits of 22 q11.2 deletion syndrome with a patient-iPSC-derived blood-brain barrier model
Modelling the human blood-brain barrier in huntington disease
Brain microvascular endothelial cells differentiated from a friedreich’s Ataxia patient iPSC are deficient in tight junction protein expression and paracellularly permeable
Intrinsic blood-brain barrier dysfunction contributes to multiple sclerosis pathogenesis
The contribution of inflammatory astrocytes to BBB impairments in a brain-chip model of parkinson’s disease
Schizophrenia endothelial cells exhibit higher permeability and altered angiogenesis patterns in patient-derived organoids
Brain microvascular endothelial cells and blood-brain barrier dysfunction in psychotic disorders
Rescue of impaired blood-brain barrier in tuberous sclerosis complex patient derived neurovascular unit
Recherches Sur Le Liquide Céphalorachidien. I. Les rapports entre Le Liquide Céphalorachidien et La circulation sanguine
Fine structural localization of a blood-brain barrier to exogenous peroxidase
The tight-junction-specific protein ZO-1 is a component of the human and rat blood-brain barriers
Occludin: a novel integral membrane protein localizing at tight junctions
Endothelial claudin: claudin-5/TMVCF constitutes tight junction strands in endothelial cells
Multiple sclerosis: gadolinium enhancement in MR imaging
Annexin A1 restores Abeta(1–42) -induced blood-brain barrier disruption through the Inhibition of RhoA-ROCK signaling pathway
Serum amyloid P in alzheimer’s disease. Implications for dysfunction of the blood-brain barrier
Subcellular localization of IgG from the Sera of ALS patients in the nervous system
Correlation of morphologic brain lesions with physiologic alterations and blood-brain barrier impairment in 3-nitropropionic acid toxicity in rats
Inflammation and dephosphorylation of the tight junction protein occludin in an experimental model of multiple sclerosis
Supravital analysis of disorders in the cerebral vascular permeability II. Two cases of multiple sclerosis
6-hydroxydopamine-induced alterations in blood-brain barrier permeability