How I manage patients with New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase and OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales infections: a practical approach
Purpose of review
Infections caused by New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase (NDM) and OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales pose a critical threat due to increasing global prevalence and limited therapeutic options. This review provides an updated overview of evolving epidemiological trends, clinical implications, and both current and emerging treatment options.
Recent findings
In the past decade, the epidemiology of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales (CRE) has changed, with NDM and OXA-48 replacing KPC in several regions. Outcomes of infections caused by NDM-producing CRE remain poor, due to limited treatment options. Ceftazidime/avibactam and aztreonam is the first-line therapeutic option, whereas cefiderocol represents an alternative if susceptibility is confirmed. Resistance to both aztreonam/avibactam and cefiderocol has been reported among NDM-5–producing Escherichia coli, raising concerns in the scientific community. New agents, including cefepime–zidebactam and cefepime–taniborbactam, are currently in development and may expand the future treatment landscape. For OXA-48–producing CRE, ceftazidime/avibactam and cefiderocol are currently available therapeutic options, whereas cefepime/enmetazobactam may become available in the next future.
Summary
Optimal management of NDM- and OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales requires individualized approach guided by pathogen type, resistance profile, and patient characteristics. Improved diagnostics and surveillance are essential to guide early treatment, while novel agents may enhance therapeutic options in the near future.

INTRODUCTION
Over the past decades, the global spread of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales (CPE) has become one of the greatest challenges for human health [▪▪,]. Until the early 2010 s, KPC was the most prevalent carbapenemase worldwide in the United States, Europe, and Israel. This led to widespread use of the terms CRE and “carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales” as near-synonyms. At that time, metallo-β-lactamases (MBL) were primarily reported in Enterobacterales in the Indian subcontinent but were sporadic in Europe. OXA-48 was historically more commonly detected in Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli from North Africa and Turkey. In recent years, the epidemiological landscape has greatly changed. Both NDM- and OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales have expanded beyond their original endemic regions, becoming increasingly prevalent in several settings.
Thus, knowledge of local epidemiology, use of rapid diagnostic testing methods and implementation of therapeutic strategies to manage infections caused by NDM- or OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales are critical for an optimal patient management. Here, the practical management of a patient with NDM-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae infection is discussed.
no caption available

CLINICAL VIGNETTE
A 75-year-old man with multiple comorbidities, including type 2 diabetes, chronic kidney disease, and benign prostatic hyperplasia, was admitted to the Emergency Department with fever. Over the past year, he had experienced recurrent urinary tract infections (UTIs) and he had also been recently hospitalized for a complicated UTI caused by extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL)-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae treated with meropenem. On admission, the patient had hypotension, fever and oliguria. Laboratory exams revealed elevated inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein 34 mg/dl, procalcitonin >100 ng/ml), lactates 4 mmol/l and acute kidney injury (creatinine values 2.3 mg/dl). A urinary source was suspected. A rectal swab for molecular screening, performed upon admission as part of the hospital's surveillance protocol, tested positive for New Delhi metallo-β-lactamases (NDM). Bedside ultrasonography revealed right-sided hydronephrosis and a large obstructive calculus lodged at the ureteropelvic junction. A percutaneous nephrostomy tube was urgently placed to relieve the obstruction and allow for urine drainage. Urine and blood cultures were collected, and empiric antimicrobial therapy was initiated pending microbiological confirmation and susceptibility testing.
What empirical antibiotic therapy would you start in this patient?

EPIDEMIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Current epidemiology of New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase-producing carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales
Figure 1 shows the current global spread of NDM-producing Enterobacterales and details about the reported circulating clones. As shown, NDM-producing CRE are characterized by broad species and clonal diversity, which varies by country and region. This heterogeneity is clinically relevant, as resistance profiles can differ according to the specific NDM variant. Underreporting and lack of data about circulating clones from several countries further complicate the landscape.
Global epidemiology of NDM-producing CRE.
In the United States, the proportion of KPC-producing Enterobacterales decreased from 73.8% in 2019 to 57.1% in 2021, whereas MBL-producing CRE, particularly NDM-producers, increased from 3.8% to 20.4% in the same period Among them, NDM-5-producing Escherichia coli has emerged as a significant threat, with isolates identified in both human and animal sources.
Similar trends have been observed in Europe. In Italy, a large regional outbreak of NDM-producing Enterobacterales was reported in Northwestern area of the Tuscany region in 2018, resulting in a shift from KPC to NDM as the predominant carbapenemase in the region [▪▪,]. This outbreak is mainly due to the clonal spread of ST-147 NDM-1-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae [▪▪,]. More recently, a novel clone, ST6668 (within clonal complex 147), has been reported to spread rapidly in Northern Italy. It differs from ST147 by a point mutation (C414T) in the phoE locus. Recently, co-production of NDM and OXA-48 in Enterobacterales has been increasingly reported in various Italian regions.
In the United Kingdom, the epidemiology is heterogeneous. Between July 2023 and June 2024, the most common carbapenemase families reported across all regions were NDM (35.7%) and OXA-48-like (35.1%), whereas KPC represented the 20.5% of carbapenemases. The distribution of carbapenemase families varied regionally: NDM predominates in London and the Southeast, whereas OXA-48-like enzymes are more common in Eastern England
In Israel, long dominated by KPC-producing strains, NDM-producing Enterobacterales is increasingly detected. In a retrospective study including 1694 individuals colonized with KPC- or NDM-producing Enterobacterales who underwent the process of isolation discontinuation, the majority were KPC carriers (78.9%), followed by NDM (18%) and KPC/NDM (3.1%) carriers. Recent data showed that NDM now account for 34.9% of incident CPE cases in Israel. NDM-1-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae represents the most prevalent MBL-CPE.

NDM-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae versus NDM-producing Escherichia coli
An important global threat is represented by NDM-producing Escherichia coli. In fact, resistance to newly available treatment options, including both aztreonam/avibactam (ATM/AVI) and cefiderocol, has been reported in NDM-producing Escherichia coli, particularly among isolates that produce NDM-5 that carry penicillin-binding protein 3 (PBP-3) mutations and harbor variants of CMY-42, a transferable AmpC enzyme.
A variety of NDM-5-producing Escherichia coli isolates with diverse clonal backgrounds exhibiting decreased susceptibility or resistance to aztreonam/avibactam have already disseminated worldwide (Switzerland, Denmark, Finland, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Pakistan, India, Kuwait, Thailand, Israel and the USA) (Fig. 1).
A recent rapid risk assessment published by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) reported a concerning increase in Escherichia coli isolates carrying the carbapenemase gene blaNDM-5 across the European Union. The isolates were predominantly associated with globally disseminated lineages, including ST167, ST405, ST410, ST361, and ST648, all of which are well recognized for their role in the spread of antimicrobial resistance genes and their adaptability to both healthcare and community settings. Notably, around 84% of isolates were linked to travel or hospitalization outside the EU/EEA, particularly in South Asia and North Africa.

Current epidemiology of OXA-48 producing carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales
Following its initial identification in Turkey in 2001, OXA-48–like carbapenemases have rapidly disseminated, becoming endemic in several regions, particularly across the Mediterranean basin, the Middle East, and North Africa (Fig. 2). In Europe, Spain and France have experienced sustained endemicity of OXA-48 producers, driven by the clonal expansion of Klebsiella pneumoniae ST11, ST405, and ST15, often harboring IncL/M plasmids encoding blaOXA-48[▪▪]. Surprisingly, OXA-48 producing Enterobacterales are sporadic in Italy, that remains characterized by a high prevalence of KPC and increasing occurrence of MBL carbapenemases. In the Arabian Peninsula NDM-1 were detected in the 46.5% and OXA-48 in 32.5% of CPE. Interestingly, a recent population-based study reported an increasing spread of OXA-48-producing Escherichia coli in Israel during 2016–2023, both in nosocomial and community settings.
Global epidemiology of OXA-48 producing CRE.
In contrast, in North America, Northern Europe, and Latin America only sporadic or travel-related cases of OXA-48 producers have been reported [▪▪]. However, the risk of a silent spread is concerning, especially due to the low-level hydrolytic activity of OXA-48 against extended-spectrum cephalosporins, which can lead to misclassification as susceptible and delays in detection [▪▪,]. This can lead to under-diagnosis and under-reporting of this carbapenemase.

CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS

Risk factors
Infections caused by NDM or OXA-48-producing CRE are associated with several risk factors, including rectal colonization, previous hospitalization, and exposure to broad-spectrum antibiotics.
A multicenter study showed that previous antimicrobial therapy, invasive procedure, and geographical proximity (defined as a room located adjacent to or in front of the index patient's room), were factors independently associated with the acquisition of OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography has been implicated in nosocomial transmission of carbapenemase-producing organisms, including NDM and OXA-48, due to persistent contamination of duodenoscopes despite high-level disinfection.
In the CHIMERA study, which evaluated bloodstream infections (BSIs) in patients with rectal colonization by Klebsiella pneumoniae carrying different carbapenemases, multisite extraintestinal colonization, solid organ transplantation, invasive procedures, intravascular device, admission to intensive care unit, cephalosporin, fluoroquinolones and NDM rectal colonization were independently associated with an increased risk of BSI.
Rectal colonization has been recognized as a key predictor of BSI etiology. In a recent study, 15.6% of patients colonized with CRE developed a BSI caused by the same colonizing strain, with high concordance rate observed for KPC- and NDM-producing Enterobacterales. Knowledge of colonization status may facilitate timely initiation of early active antimicrobial therapy, especially in cases of septic shock, where timing of administration of active treatment is critical. Thus, in high-risk patients and in endemic settings, the rectal screening for CPE using molecular assays able to discriminate different carbapenemases is of critical importance. Further prospective studies are warranted to validate the clinical benefit of a colonization-driven empirical therapy strategy and its impact on patient outcome.

THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS FOR MBL-PRODUCING CARBAPENEMASE-PRODUCING ENTEROBACTERALES

Limited therapeutic landscape and clinical impact
The management of infections caused by MBL-producing Enterobacterales represents a challenge in the clinical practice due to limited treatment options. This therapeutic gap might contribute to the poor outcomes in patients infected with MBL-producing strains. In the prospective ALARICO study including more than 1200 patients with BSIs caused by carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacilli, the attributable mortality for MBL-producing Enterobacterales was 35%, substantially higher than that reported for KPC-producing strains (5%). This difference likely reflects the lack of effective antimicrobial options for MBL, in contrast to the last decade's wave of development targeting KPC. Currently available and new treatment options for MBL-producing CRE are summarized in Table 1.
Therapeutic options for MBL-producing CRE
Antibiotic	Available studies	Limitations in the clinical practice	Future perspectives	 	Combo CZA plus ATM	Observational cohort studies, Lack of RCTs	Lack of standardized testing methodsNeed of multiple lines for infusion	Harmonized testing methodologiesATM/AVI might replace CZA plus ATM, but it's not clear whether CZA plus ATM may remain useful in specific situations (e.g. NDM-producing E. coli with PBP3 mutations)	 	Cefiderocol	Post-hoc analysis of phase 3 RCTs (CREDIBLE-CR, APEKS-NP)	Absence of standard susceptibility testing (DD versus BMD).Different breakpoints provided by CLSI and EUCAST.Challenges in interpreting susceptibility results (e.g. ATU).Reduced activity against NDM-producing CRE and reported outbreaks of NDM-producing CRE resistant to cefiderocol. Need of susceptibility testing before clinical use.	Optimization of susceptibility testingEvaluation of a partner drug for NDM-producing CRE	 	ATM/AVI	Phase 3 RCT (REVISIT) including MBL-infections	Limited data in patients with MBL infections.Reported resistant NDM-5 producing E. coli isolates.	RCT and observational cohort studies specifically conducted among MBL-producing CRE infections	 	Eravacycline	In vitro studies	Limited PK/PD data for bloodstream and urinary tract infections.No observational clinical studies or RCT in patients with MBL infections.	It may be useful in polymicrobial intra-abdominal or deep-seated infections.	 	Cefepime–taniborbactam	RCT (CERTAIN-1) including MBL-infections	No specific data against MBL-infections.Emerging resistance in variants such as blaNDM-9	New potential weapon	 	Cefepime–zidebactam	In vitro studies, Case reports	No specific data against MBL-infections.	New potential weapon	 	Other investigational agents	Preclinical or early-phase clinical studies (e.g., QPX7728, ANT2681, SPR206)	Under investigation	New potential weapons with novel mechanisms.
ATM, aztreonam; ATU, area of technical uncertainty; AVI, avibactam; CZA, ceftazidime/avibactam; MBL, metallo-β-lactamases; RCT, randomized controlled trial.

Ceftazidime/avibactam plus aztreonam
Current guidelines recommend the use of ceftazidime/avibactam (CZA) in combination with aztreonam (ATM) as preferred option for the treatment of severe infections due to MBL-producing Enterobacterales. Avibactam inhibits serine β-lactamases (e.g., ESBLs, AmpC), thereby protecting ATM from degradation by serine enzymes, that are coproduced in these isolates. This combination was found to be active against MBL in more than 97% of isolates [▪▪]. Clinical studies support the efficacy of this combination. A large recent cohort study including 343 patients with infections caused by MBL-producing CRE showed that the combination CZA plus ATM was associated with reduced mortality compared to colistin-containing regimens, also after propensity score matching [▪▪].
a major challenge is the lack of a standardized approach to assess the in vitro activity. Several approaches, including the disc approximation method, the broth disc elution method, and the gradient test superposition method, are used but all these methods are not standardized and results are prone to subjective interpretations [▪▪];
the simultaneous administration of CZA plus ATM may be difficult in patients without multiple vascular lines. It is not known whether the nonsimultaneously administration of CZA plus ATM may affect the serum levels and pharmacokinetics of the drugs;
some cases of NDM-producing Escherichia coli resistant to ATM/AVI have been reported, potentially limiting the use of CZA plus ATM.
However, some limitations to the use of CZA plus ATM should be underlined:

Cefiderocol
In the CREDIBLE-CR trial, cefiderocol was associated with better outcome compared to the best available therapy in the MBL subgroup. A post hoc analysis of the phase 3 clinical trials APEKS-NP and CREDIBLE-CR evaluating the efficacy of cefiderocol in treating infections caused by MBL-producing Gram-negative bacteria, showed a higher clinical cure rate in patients with infections caused by MBL-producing CRE treated with cefiderocol (73.3%) compared to those treated with comparators (20%).
However, there are some concerns about the use of cefiderocol against MBL. NDM-producing CRE display high MIC values, usually close to the EUCAST breakpoint. At 2 μg/ml, cefiderocol inhibited only 41% of NDM-producing Enterobacterales. Data from the SIDERO-CR 2014–2016 surveillance study in Europe showed susceptibility to cefiderocol in 79.0% of VIM producers and 51.4% of NDM producers based on EUCAST breakpoints. Moreover, in the largest available cohort study, only 33.2% of MBL-producing CRE were fully susceptible to cefiderocol, whereas the majority had an alone of inhibition within the area of technical uncertainty (ATU), according to 2023 EUCAST breakpoints [▪▪,]. The new ATU definition (21–23 mm) further adds complexity, as a significant proportion of test results fall within this range, making definitive categorization challenging. Moreover, determining the susceptibility of MBL to cefiderocol remains a challenge due to the lack of standardized and universally reliable testing methods. Broth Microdilution (BMD) is considered the reference method. It requires the use of iron-depleted cation-adjusted Mueller–Hinton broth (ID-CAMHB) to mimic the drug's mechanism of utilizing bacterial iron transport systems. Despite its accuracy, BMD is labor-intensive and not routinely available in many clinical laboratories, limiting its widespread use. Disk Diffusion (DD) offers a more accessible alternative but presents several limitations. Studies have shown that DD results can be influenced by the composition of the agar medium and the presence of isolated colonies within inhibition zones, leading to variability in zone diameter measurements and potential misclassification of susceptibility. Additionally, discrepancies between interpretive criteria set by different standards organizations further complicate susceptibility assessments. CLSI and EUCAST have established differing breakpoints, leading to variations in susceptibility categorization. Using EUCAST criteria there may be a higher proportion of isolates being categorized as resistant compared to CLSI criteria.
Taken together, these considerations suggest that cefiderocol may be used against MBL after confirming its susceptibility. There is a crucial need for having susceptibility testing using more reliable methods in the clinical practice.

Aztreonam/avibactam
Surveillance data from the ATLAS program showed that ATM/AVI inhibited 99.8% of Enterobacterales isolates at concentrations ≤8 mg/l. Phase 2 (REJUVENATE) and phase 3 (REVISIT) trials showed a good efficacy and safety of ATM/AVI in patients with complicated intra-abdominal infections (cIAI) or hospital-acquired/ventilator-associated pneumonia (HAP/VAP) caused by Gram-negative bacteria [▪▪]. However, data in the subset of infections by MBL-producing CRE are limited. Further studies focusing exclusively on patients infected with MBL-producing organisms are warranted.
NDM-5 producing Escherichia coli may have reduced susceptibility to ATM/AVI. Interestingly, Tamma et al. recently published a commentary on the REVISIT trial, advocating for continuing to consider CZA plus ATM combination against MBL. The authors emphasized the importance of accounting for specific mutations in PBP3 which may influence the choice between CZA plus ATM versus ATM/AVI [▪▪,]. In fact, while both ceftazidime and ATM target PBP3, they also display differential binding affinities to other PBPs, such as PBP1a, PBP1b, and PBP2. This broader inhibition profile suggests that the CZA plus ATM combination may retain antimicrobial activity against certain MBL-producing Enterobacterales isolates harboring modified PBP3 targets, such as those with characteristic four-amino acid insertions observed in PBP3 of NDM-producing Escherichia coli. In contrast, ATM/AVI relies exclusively on aztreonam's activity, which is limited to PBP3, and may therefore be rendered ineffective in the presence of such mutations. This hypothesis should be confirmed in larger microbiological or clinical studies.

Eravacycline
Eravacycline has demonstrated in vitro activity against a broad range of multidrug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens, including NDM-producing CRE. In vitro studies have shown that eravacycline exhibits lower MICs than tigecycline against NDM-producing Enterobacterales. However, while eravacycline is approved for cIAIs, its clinical utility against NDM producers in bloodstream or urinary tract infections remains less defined due to limited pharmacokinetic data in these compartments and a lack of clinical studies in such settings. Nevertheless, its excellent tissue penetration, favorable safety profile, and lack of cross-resistance with β-lactams make it a potentially valuable option in the treatment of infections caused by NDM-producing organisms, particularly in polymicrobial or deep-seated infections.

Future options
Several investigational agents may offer future therapeutic options for infections caused by MBL-producing Enterobacterales.
Cefepime–taniborbactam (VNRX-5133) is a β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combination that includes a boronic acid–based inhibitor with activity against serine β-lactamases and some MBLs, including NDM. In the phase 3 CERTAIN-1 trial cefepime–taniborbactam was associated with higher rate of composite clinical and microbiologic success at the test-of-cure visit compared to meropenem (70.6% vs. 58.0%), meeting criteria for both noninferiority and superiority. NDM-variants (e.g., NDM-9) and VIM-variants (e.g., VIM-83) with single amino acid substitutions may have reduced susceptibility to inhibition by taniborbactam. It has been hypothesized that MBL escape variants can arise from changes in electrostatic features due to single amino acid substitutions in MBL active site loops, leading to ineffective binding of taniborbactam.
Cefepime–zidebactam (WCK 5222) is another β-lactam/β-lactam enhancer combination currently in phase I/II trials. Although zidebactam is not directly active against MBL, it possesses an ‘enhancer’ effect on the PBP2 while its β-lactam partner (i.e. cefepime) acts on PBP3. Interestingly, a recent study evaluated the in vitro activity of both cefepime/taniborbactam and cefepime/zidebactam against aztreonam/avibactam resistant E. coli. All the isolates produced NDM (mainly NDM-5), coproduced CMY-42 and harbored a four amino acid insertion into the PBP3 protein. The resistance rate to cefepime/taniborbactam was 100%, whereas all strains were susceptible to cefepime/zidebactam. Cefepime/taniborbactam was significantly impacted by the same resistance mechanisms that have been shown to counteract the efficacy of aztreonam/avibactam (that is the co-production of CMY-42 and NDM and the modification of the PBP3 target). Conversely, the PBP3 modifications did not impact the MICs for cefepime/zidebactam, confirming its enhancing effect on the E. coli PBP2.
Other options, such as cefepime–ANT2681, cefepime–QPX7728 (that can be also deliver via oral route), and SPR206 (a novel polymyxin with better safety compared to colistin) are under investigations. Although these agents are not yet widely available, their development underscores the dynamic innovation in this field.

THERAPEUTIC OPTIONS FOR OXA-48-PRODUCING ENTEROBACTERALES
Table 2 shows available antibiotic therapy against OXA-48 producing Enterobacterales. Ceftazidime–avibactam is recommended as the first line option for the treatment of infections caused by OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales. A retrospective study compared ceftazidime–avibactam to best available therapy in patients with BSI due to OXA-48-producing K. pneumoniae and found that ceftazidime–avibactam was associated with higher clinical success rates and lower 14-day mortality compared to comparators. Similarly, Alqahtani et al. demonstrated favorable clinical outcomes, with a 30-day mortality rate of 21% and a clinical cure rate of 78% in 171 patients with OXA-48 infections treated with ceftazidime/avibactam. Similar findings were more recently confirmed among patients with OXA-48-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae infections in Turkey, where OXA-48 is endemic.
Therapeutic options for OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales
Antibiotic	Available studies	Limitations in the clinical practice	Future perspectives	 	Ceftazidime–avibactam	Observational cohort studies	Lack of activity if MBL are co-expressed	Need for more data to confirm real-world effectiveness	 	Cefiderocol	RCT (CREDIBLE-CR) including 7 patients with OXA-48 infections	ATU and lack of testing standardization	Need for more data to confirm real-world effectiveness.	 	Cefepime–enmetazobactam	RCT (ALLIUM) including 4 patients with OXA-48 infections	No clinical studies available in patients with infections by OXA-48 producing CRE	Need for more data to confirm real-world effectiveness.
ATU, area of technical uncertainty; MBL, metallo-β-lactamases; RCT, randomized controlled trial.
Cefiderocol also exhibits in vitro activity against OXA-48-producing strains. However, the CREDIBLE-CR study included a very limited number of patients with OXA-48 infections. Further clinical studies are needed in this setting.
More recently, cefepime–enmetazobactam, a next-generation β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combination, has shown promising activity against ESBL- and OXA-48- producing Enterobacterales. OXA-48 producers displayed high susceptibility to cefepime-enmetazobactam, which is similar to ceftazidime-avibactam, including for OXA-48 producers that coproduce a ceftazidime hydrolyzing enzyme (extended-spectrum β-lactamases or AmpC). In the ALLIUM phase 3 trial including patients with complicated UTI or acute pyelonephritis caused by Gram-negative pathogens, cefepime/enmetazobactam, compared with piperacillin/tazobactam, met criteria for noninferiority as well as superiority with respect to clinical cure and microbiological eradication.
However, studies about the optimal management of OXA-48 infections are limited. Further clinical studies are needed to better delineate the optimal therapeutic choice depending on infection site, resistance profile, and patient-specific factors.

CLINICAL VIGNETTE MANAGEMENT
The patient was treated empirically with a combination of CZA 2.5 g i.v. every 8 h plus ATM 2 g i.v. every 8 h. The standard dosage was maintained despite impaired renal clearance, given the patient's hemodynamic instability. Blood cultures and urine culture confirmed a BSI caused by NDM-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae. The in vitro synergy of CZA plus ATM was screened with a double disk synergy test and evaluated using a gradient-test superposition method. It was also confirmed using checkerboard analysis. Cefiderocol, tested using DD, showed an alone of inhibition of 21 mm (interpreted as ATU). After 7 days of antibiotic therapy, the patient underwent removal of the urinary stone with placement of a ureteral stent. Antibiotic treatment was continued for an additional 5 days following the procedure, with good clinical outcome.

CONCLUSION
Infections caused by NDM- and OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales represent an increasing global health threat. They are spreading worldwide and, in some epidemiological settings, have replaced KPC as the predominant mechanism of carbapenem resistance.
Currently, the combination of CZA plus ATM and cefiderocol are considered key therapeutic options for NDM-producing strains. However, emerging resistance mechanisms, particularly in NDM-5–producing E. coli, are of growing concern, especially due to resistance to last-resort agents such as ATM/AVI.
For OXA-48-producing Enterobacterales, CZA and cefiderocol remain the mainstay of therapy, with promising alternatives, such as cefepime/enmetazobactam, available in the near future.
The global rise of non-KPC carbapenemases underscores the urgent need to strengthen microbiological surveillance, implement robust infection control measures, and promote antimicrobial stewardship to contain further dissemination and preserve treatment efficacy.

Acknowledgements
None.

Financial support and sponsorship
None.

Conflicts of interest
G.T. received honoraria by Shionogi, Angelini, Menarini for educational meetings, participated at scientific board by Advanz, Pfizer and MSD. M.F. received unconditional grants from MSD and grants/or speaker honoraria from Angelini, Shionogi, Pfizer, Menarini, Gilead, TermoFisher and Nordic Pharma. The remaining authors have no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READING
▪ of special interest
▪▪ of outstanding interest
Papers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:

REFERENCES
Attributable deaths and disability-adjusted life-years caused by infections with antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the EU and the European Economic Area in 2015: a population-level modelling analysis
Mortality attributable to bloodstream infections caused by different carbapenem-resistant Gram-Negative bacilli: results from a nationwide study in Italy (ALARICO Network)
Clinical epidemiology of the global expansion of Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemases
Predictors of outcome in ICU patients with septic shock caused by Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase-producing K. pneumoniae
Time to appropriate antibiotic therapy is a predictor of outcome in patients with bloodstream infection caused by KPC-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae
Meropenem-vaborbactam as salvage therapy for ceftazidime-avibactam-, cefiderocol-resistant ST-512 Klebsiella pneumoniae-producing KPC-31, a D179Y variant of KPC-3
The global epidemiology of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae
The Israeli national policy for discontinuation of isolation of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales carriers by carbapenemase type: a retrospective cohort study
Carbapenem-resistant enterobacterales, carbapenem resistant organisms, carbapenemase-producing Enterobacterales, and carbapenemase-producing organisms: terminology past its “sell-by date” in an era of new antibiotics and regional carbapenemase epidemiology
Infections with VIM-1 metallo-β-lactamase-producing enterobacter cloacae and their correlation with clinical outcome
The difficult-to-control spread of carbapenemase producers among Enterobacteriaceae worldwide
Changing epidemiology of carbapenemases among carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales from United States hospitals and the activity of aztreonam-avibactam against contemporary Enterobacterales (2019–2021)
Multiple NDM-5-expressing Escherichia Coli isolates from an immunocompromised pediatric host
An NDM-producing Escherichia coli clinical isolate exhibiting resistance to cefiderocol and the combination of ceftazidime-avibactam and aztreonam: another step toward pan-β-lactam resistance
New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase-5-producing Escherichia coli in companion animals, United States
Prolonged outbreak of New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase-producing carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales (NDM-CRE), Tuscany, Italy, 2018 to 2019
Clinical features and outcomes of infections caused by metallo-β-lactamase-producing Enterobacterales: a 3-year prospective study from an endemic Area
Extremely drug-resistant NDM-9-producing ST147 Klebsiella pneumoniae causing infections in Italy, May 2020
Clinical Features and outcomes of bloodstream infections caused by New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase-producing Enterobacterales during a regional outbreak
Emerging antimicrobial-resistant high-risk Klebsiella pneumoniae clones ST307 and ST147
Rapid spread of a novel NDM-producing clone of Klebsiella pneumoniae CC147, Northern Italy, February to August 2023
Detection of NDM-1/5 and OXA-48 co-producing extensively drug-resistant hypervirulent Klebsiella pneumoniae in Northern Italy
Emergence of two novel sequence types (3366 and 3367) NDM-1- and OXA-48-co-producing K. pneumoniae in Italy
Molecular features and transmission of NDM-producing Enterobacterales in Israeli hospitals
International circulation of aztreonam/avibactam-resistant NDM-5-producing Escherichia coli isolates: successful epidemic clones
High prevalence of Escherichia coli clinical isolates in India harbouring four amino acid inserts in PBP3 adversely impacting activity of aztreonam/avibactam
Rapid cross-border emergence of NDM-5-producing Escherichia coli in the European Union/European Economic Area, 2012 to June 2022
Emergence of OXA-48-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae in Turkey
Global spread of carbapenemase producing Enterobacteriaceae
Rapidly spreading Enterobacterales with OXA-48-like carbapenemases
Carbapenemase-producing enterobacteriaceae in Spain in 2012
OXA-48-like β-lactamases: global epidemiology, treatment options, and development pipeline
Characterization of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae with high rate of autochthonous transmission in the Arabian peninsula
Population-based study of emergence and spread of Escherichia coli producing OXA-48-like carbapenemases, Israel, 2007–2023
The difficulties of identifying and treating Enterobacterales with OXA-48-like carbapenemases
Risk factors for acquisition of OXA-48-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae among contact patients: a multicentre study
Endoscopy-associated transmission of carbapenemase-producing Enterobacteriaceae: return of 5 years’ experience
Bloodstream infections in patients with rectal colonization by Klebsiella pneumoniae producing different types of carbapenemases: a prospective, cohort study (CHIMERA study)
Rectal colonization with multidrug-resistant organisms and risk for bloodstream infection among high-risk Greek patients
Ceftazidime-Avibactam use for Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase-producing K. pneumoniae infections: a retrospective observational multicenter study
Real-world experience with meropenem/vaborbactam for the treatment of infections caused by ESBL-producing Enterobacterales and carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae
Infectious Diseases Society of America 2024 guidance on the treatment of antimicrobial-resistant gram-negative infections
ESCMID guidelines for the treatment of infections caused by multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacilli
Diagnosis and management of infections caused by multidrug-resistant bacteria: guideline endorsed by the Italian Society of Infection and Tropical Diseases (SIMIT), the Italian Society of Anti-Infective Therapy (SITA), the Italian Group for Antimicrobial Stewardship (GISA), the Italian Association of Clinical Microbiologists (AMCLI) and the Italian Society of Microbiology (SIM)
Treatment of infections caused by multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacilli: a practical approach by the Italian (SIMIT) and French (SPILF) Societies of Infectious Diseases
In vitro synergy between ceftazidime-avibactam and aztreonam against metallo-β-lactamase-producing Gram-negative bacilli
Efficacy of ceftazidime-avibactam plus aztreonam in patients with bloodstream infections caused by metallo-β-lactamase-producing Enterobacterales
Pragmatic options for dose optimization of ceftazidime/avibactam with aztreonam in complex patients
Activity of aztreonam/avibactam and ceftazidime/avibactam against Enterobacterales with carbapenemase-independent carbapenem resistance
Efficacy and safety of cefiderocol or best available therapy for the treatment of serious infections caused by carbapenem-resistant Gram-negative bacteria (CREDIBLE-CR): a randomised, open-label, multicentre, pathogen-focused, descriptive, phase 3 trial
Cefiderocol for the treatment of infections due to metallo-B-lactamase-producing pathogens in the CREDIBLE-CR and APEKS-NP Phase 3 randomized studies
In vitro activity of cefiderocol, a siderophore cephalosporin, against multidrug-resistant Gram-Negative bacteria
In vitro activity of the siderophore cephalosporin, cefiderocol, against molecularly characterized, carbapenem-nonsusceptible gram-negative bacteria from Europe
Cefiderocol for the treatment of metallo-β-lactamases producing Gram-negative bacilli: lights and shadows from the literature
Real-world performance of susceptibility testing for cefiderocol: insights from a prospective multicentre study on Gram-negative bacteria
Cefiderocol antimicrobial susceptibility testing considerations: the Achilles’ heel of the Trojan horse?
In vitro activity of aztreonam-avibactam against Enterobacterales isolates collected in Latin America, Africa/Middle East, Asia, and Eurasia for the ATLAS Global Surveillance Program in 2019-2021
Pharmacokinetics and safety of aztreonam/avibactam for the treatment of complicated intra-abdominal infections in hospitalized adults: results from the REJUVENATE study
Aztreonam-avibactam versus meropenem for the treatment of serious infections caused by Gram-negative bacteria (REVISIT): a descriptive, multinational, open-label, phase 3, randomised trial
Revisiting REVISIT: the case for ceftazidime/avibactam plus aztreonam
In vitro activity of eravacycline against carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae and Acinetobacter baumannii
VNRX-5133 (Taniborbactam), a broad-spectrum inhibitor of serine- and metallo-β-lactamases, restores activity of cefepime in Enterobacterales and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Cefepime-taniborbactam in complicated urinary tract infection
The metallo-β-lactamases strike back: emergence of taniborbactam escape variants
Structural basis of metallo-β-lactamase resistance to taniborbactam
In vitro activity of cefepime/zidebactam and cefepime/taniborbactam against aztreonam/avibactam-resistant NDM-like-producing Escherichia coli clinical isolates
Novel specific metallo-β-lactamase inhibitor ANT2681 restores meropenem activity to clinically effective levels against NDM-positive Enterobacterales
QPX7728, an ultra-broad-spectrum b-lactamase inhibitor for intravenous and oral therapy: overview of biochemical and microbiological characteristics
Safety and pharmacokinetics of SPR206 in subjects with varying degrees of renal impairment
Ceftazidime-avibactam treatment in bacteremia caused by OXA-48 carbapenemase-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae
Evaluation of ceftazidime/avibactam for treatment of carbapenemase-producing carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales with OXA-48 and/or NDM genes with or without combination therapy
Multicenter evaluation of ceftazidime-avibactam use in carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae bloodstream infections in OXA-48 endemic regions
Activity of the novel siderophore cephalosporin cefiderocol against multidrug-resistant Gram-negative pathogens
In vitro activity of cefepime-enmetazobactam on carbapenem-resistant Gram negatives
Effect of cefepime/enmetazobactam vs piperacillin/tazobactam on clinical cure and microbiological eradication in patients with complicated urinary tract infection or acute pyelonephritis: a randomized clinical trial