Approach to Diagnosis and Management of Clitorodynia
The approach to clitorodynia involves dividing chronic clitoral pain into structural compared with neuropathic causes through understanding of clitoral anatomy, symptomology, and region-based evaluation.
Clitorodynia, pain involving the clitoris, is considered a localized form of vulvodynia. This review aims to provide the general obstetrician–gynecologist a general framework for diagnostic evaluation of clitorodynia. This is simplified by dividing chronic clitoral pain into structural causes and neuropathic causes. Knowledge of clitoral anatomy, including the corona of the glans clitoris, symptomatology, and evaluation based on the concept of regions is necessary in evaluating chronic clitoral pain. Structural causes are clitoral adhesions or phimosis with debris or keratin pearls, which may be managed with in-office lysis of clitoral adhesions. Neuropathic causes include pudendal neuralgia and meningeal and spinal pathology determined with neurophysiologic testing, imaging studies, and diagnostic nerve blocks. Treatment includes behavioral measures, pelvic floor physical therapy, serial nerve blocks, and targeted nerve release procedures. Obstetrician–gynecologists are well-positioned to identify and provide first-line approaches to diagnosis and treatment of clitorodynia.
The clitoris is a predominant source of both sexual pleasure and pain but is often overlooked in examination. Clitorodynia, pain involving the clitoris, is considered a localized form of vulvodynia. The 2015 International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal Disease, International Society for the Study of Women's Sexual Health, and International Pelvic Pain Society’s consensus statement on terminology and classification of persistent vulvar pain defines vulvodynia as, “vulvar pain of at least 3 months' duration without clear identifiable cause.” Vulvodynia may be further described as localized (clitorodynia or vestibulodynia) pain or generalized pain. Pain may be provoked, spontaneous or mixed, of primary or secondary onset, and follow a temporal pattern. Vulvodynia (including clitorodynia) is differentiated from pain caused by a specific disorder, such as a known infection (recurrent candidiasis), inflammatory condition (vulvar lichen sclerosus), hormonal deficiency (genitourinary syndrome of menopause), neurologic conditions (postherpetic neuralgia), neoplasm, trauma, or iatrogenic cause.
It stands to reason that even pain “without clear identifiable cause” still has pathophysiologic etiology, but alternative proposed causes often lack research and awareness in the field. For example, individuals with pudendal neuralgia may develop pain involving the clitoris, which could be undiagnosed without a proper physical examination of the pudendal nerves. The same is true for structural causes, such as clitoral adhesions, as until this year it was debated as to whether the corona of the glans clitoris (a major landmark in clitoral pathology) even existed.
Multidisciplinary sexual medicine researchers have been grappling with diagnosis and etiology of vulvodynia for decades. Research and expert opinion on etiology, diagnosis, and focused treatment for clitorodynia is even more recent. This review aims to provide the general obstetrician–gynecologist a general framework to approach the diagnostic evaluation of clitorodynia. This is simplified by dividing chronic clitoral pain into structural compared with neuropathic causes.

ANATOMY
To delineate cause, it is essential to understand clitoral anatomy, vasculature, and innervation. The clitoris was first noted in the 16th century, with multiple anatomists claiming to have been the first, including Colombo, Falloppia, Swammerdam, and De Graff. Most regarded the vagina as the female structure equivalent to the penis, and Vesalius even went as far as to argue that the clitoris did not exist in healthy women.
There has been obscurity around clitoral anatomy, as for centuries it was intentionally excluded from medical text and anatomic drawings. Much of clitoral anatomy is described based on homologous male parts. For example, Netter describes a dorsal clitoral artery akin to the dorsal penile artery, although there is no ventral version in the female clitoris. The clitoris includes external structures (the glans with the corona of the glans clitoris marking the peripheral border and the prepuce [hood]), and internal structures (the deeper body that branches into bilateral crura and bulbs, with a root that connects the body to the crura) (Fig. 1).
Components of the clitoris and vulvar innervation. Reprinted with permission from American Association of Clinical Anatomists, British Association of Clinical Anatomists, Australian and New Zealand Association of Clinical Anatomists, and Anatomical Society of Southern Africa. Clinical anatomy. Anatomy of the clitoris and the female sexual response. John Wiley & Sons Inc.; 1988. p. 376–384.
Krapf. Approach to Clitorodynia. O&G Open 2025.
Zdilla et al discusses the controversy of the corona of the glans clitoris and notes that this landmark was first documented in the late 18th century, but there has been confusion to its existence as recently as 10 years ago, leading to a lack of reference in the International Federation of Associations of Anatomists and the Society for Gynecologic Surgery Pelvic Anatomy Group anatomy terminology. However, the corona of the glans clitoris is an important anatomical landmark in determination of clitoromegaly, clitoral adhesions, and in urologic and gynecologic surgery involving the clitoris. A recent study of more than 100 donor bodies found that the corona of the glans clitoris is a ubiquitous anatomic structure. In addition, the researchers noted that 37% of donors had clitoral (keratin) pearls (round, hardened white collections adherent to the glans) on dissection, more commonly found in donors with more extensive adhesions and rarely in those without adhesion. The authors conclude that the corona of the glans clitoris should be included in anatomical texts and illustrations, quipping “it is time to formally coronate the clitoris.”
Innervation of the glans clitoris is through the dorsal nerve of the clitoris, which is the superior branch of the pudendal nerve, and runs with the dorsal artery and vein of the clitoris. The pudendal nerve consists of the ventral rami from S2, S3, and S4 of the sacral plexus. It exits the pelvis inferior to the piriformis muscle through the greater sciatic foramen, where it bends around the posterior aspect of the sacrospinous ligament, briefly in the gluteal region near the medial ischial spine, before entering the perineum through the lesser sciatic foramen. After reentering the pelvis, the nerve divides into three branches within the pudendal canal (Alcock's canal), a structure made up of the fascia of the obturator internus muscle. The first branch is the inferior rectal nerve, followed by the perineal nerve, and last the dorsal nerve of the clitoris (Fig. 1). It was recently discovered that the human clitoris has innervation from more than 10,000 myelinated nerve fibers.

PREVALENCE AND SYMPTOMOLOGY
Vulvodynia is estimated to affect up to 16% of women in U.S. populations; however, the prevalence of clitorodynia is unknown. A major barrier to prevalence data is that there is no International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision code specific to clitoral pain. Unfortunately, the International Classification of Diseases, Eleventh Revision is also not aligned with consensus-approved International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal Disease, International Society for the Study of Women's Sexual Health, and International Pelvic Pain Society terminology for vulvodynia.
Much of what is known concerning clinical presentation of clitorodynia is based on case reports, expert opinion, and two cohort studies that mainly were comprised of online participants without confirmatory examination. A small early article reported on seven women evaluated with clitorodynia and 14 online volunteers. Participants reported pain to contact, light touch, and pressure. In a more robust study about 10 years ago, Parada et al surveyed 126 women from the United States and Canada with clitoral pain through an online questionnaire to determine clinical characteristics and association with sexual function, using the short-form McGill pain questionnaire and the FSFI (Female Sexual Function Index). Mean age of pain onset was 31 years (range 8–69 years). Women reported experiencing clitoral pain for a mean of 8 years (range 0–48 years).
Respondents reported mean episodes of clitoral pain two to three times weekly, and almost 30% reported daily clitoral pain, with pain episodes lasting from 1 minute to 24 hours. Participants with continuous clitoral pain most described their pain as “tender,” “aching,” and “throbbing.” Those with intermittent clitoral pain described the pain as “sharp,” “stabbing,” and “shooting.” Intensity of pain was rated 6.16 and distress 6.13 on an 11-point scale. Two-thirds of participants reported concomitant vulvovaginal pain, and 26% reported clitoral pain alone. Participants reported consulting an average of four medical professionals and 1.3 non–medical professionals specifically for clitoral pain. Only 36.5% of respondents were under treatment at the time of the survey, with the most common treatments being antidepressants (25%), anticonvulsants (21%), and local anesthetics (21%). This report was published almost 10 years ago, and, unfortunately, we have not come much further in the standard evaluation of clitorodynia, despite advances in research.

EVALUATION
Although most physicians likely learned how to examine the clitoris, it is not clear if this is a routine component of the gynecologic examination in practice. There is limited training and clinical exposure to benign vulvar pain conditions in general and clitoral pathology specifically. Ideally, examination of the clitoris should be done routinely during the vulvar examination, which should be a routine component of the pelvic examination. In cases of genitopelvic pain, examination of the clitoris is essential.
Evaluation of genitopelvic pain, including clitorodynia, can be approached using the model of regions presented in the 2021 International Society for the Study of Women's Sexual Health Process of Care for the management of persistent genital arousal disorder and genitopelvic dysesthesia. Region 1 is the end organ (the clitoris, the vulva), region 2 is the pelvis, region 3 is the cauda equina, region 4 is the spinal cord, and region 5 is the brain. Using this model, examples of region 1 pathology include structural causes, such as clitoral phimosis, balanitis, peri-clitoral mass, neuroma, and keratin (clitoral) pearls. Region 2 involves overactive pelvic floor musculature, vasculature, and pudendal neuropathy. Regions 3 and 4 include spinal sacral meningeal cysts, lumbar disc disease, and spinal cord pathology. Region 5 is related to medications and organic disorders in the brain. Figure 2 illustrates the model adapted to structural and neurogenic causes of clitorodynia.
Structural and neurogenic causes of clitorodynia.
Krapf. Approach to Clitorodynia. O&G Open 2025.
Examination of the clitoris involves inspecting the glans and prepuce for evidence of infection (balanitis), phimosis, adhesions, dermatoses (lichen sclerosus, lichen planus), and foreign bodies causing a peri-clitoral mass. To adequately examine the glans, it is necessary to retract the prepuce to expose the anatomic landmark of the corona of the glans clitoris. If the corona of the glans clitoris cannot be visualized with retraction of the prepuce, this indicates phimosis and possibly adhesions (Fig. 3). In addition, it should be noted if there is debris, which can be a source of pain.
Clitoral adhesions and clitoral phimosis identified with tethering of the prepuce to the glans with inability to fully retraction the clitoral prepuce from the glans. Photo courtesy of Jill Krapf, MD. Used with permission.
Krapf. Approach to Clitorodynia. O&G Open 2025.
It is also important to evaluate for neurogenic causes of clitoral pain or dysesthesia. This involves a cotton swab test of the vulva, including the prepuce and glans. Although light touch to the glans may be sensitive, it should not be painful. In addition, unwanted arousal symptoms (such as persistent genital arousal disorder) should be considered. The pelvic floor musculature should be evaluated for hypertonicity and spasm. In addition, pudendal neuralgia can be elicited either transvaginally or transrectally with digital examination of the pudendal nerve as it traverses the ischial spines bilaterally.

STRUCTURAL CAUSES OF CLITORODYNIA
Clitorodynia may be related to structural causes, such as clitoral adhesions. Clitoral adhesions describe fibrotic tissue tethering the clitoral prepuce to the glans clitoris and may be associated with clitoral phimosis, which is inability to retract the clitoral prepuce from the glans clitoris to visualize the entire glans clitoris including the corona. Phimosis causing pain is well documented in the urologic literature regarding the glans penis, but not as well recognized regarding the glans clitoris.
Prevalence has been estimated to be between 22% and 33% with most clitoral phimosis described as “mild” in asymptomatic women. Although a classification system for clitoral phimosis has not yet been validated, a Delphi study was conducted to determine expert consensus in these definitions (unpublished data). It is important to note that adhesions and phimosis are often present without clitoral pain or arousal symptoms. However, in the setting of clitoral pain, a structural cause must be ruled out.
Clitoral pain in the setting of adhesions may be related to the presence of smegma, debris, hair, keratin pearls, or a combination of these. Smegma is the secretion of sebaceous glands consisting of sebum and keratinized desquamated epithelial cells, found chiefly under the clitoral prepuce in females or the foreskin in males. A keratin pearl describes a focus of central keratinization within concentric layers of squamous cells due to accumulation of smegma (Fig. 4). Several studies evaluating patients with clitorodynia have noted the presence of adhesions and keratin pearls. Adhesions with keratin pearls are associated with clitoral pain and sexual dysfunction. In a sample of 35 women with clitorodynia associated with adhesions and keratin pearls, 91% met criteria for female sexual dysfunction based on the FSFI and 89% met criteria for distress based on the Female Sexual Distress Scale.
Three keratin pearls adherent to the glans clitoris associated with clitoral adhesions without visualization of the corona of the glans clitoris. Photo courtesy of Jill Krapf, MD. Used with permission.
Krapf. Approach to Clitorodynia. O&G Open 2025.
Treatment may be recommended for adhesions or phimosis in the case of clitoral pain or decreased sexual function that is distressing to the patient or both. There is a case report in the physical therapy literature describing myofascial release techniques to treat pain related to clitoral phimosis. This is described as a sustained stretch of the clitoral prepuce away from the glans along the length of the prepuce with and without stabilization of the glans, performed with lubricant. Myofascial release techniques were done by the physical therapist in session and the patient at home. Energy-based treatments, such as CO2 laser, have been studied in the setting of genitourinary syndrome of menopause and lichen sclerosus, with mixed results. There is an older case report of CO2 laser for treatment of clitoral phimosis in the setting of lichen sclerosus and lichen planus, but in the 20 patients treated, five developed reagglutination and three required reoperation. Given lack of data, this modality is considered experimental.
There have been two recent studies evaluating surgical procedures for lysis of clitoral adhesions and excision of keratin pearls with local anesthesia (topical cream or dorsal clitoral nerve block or both) to treat clitoral pain in the setting of partial phimosis and keratin pearls. Myers et al described an in-office lysis procedure performed with fine Jacobsen mosquito forceps to separate the prepuce from the glans, with removal of smegma and keratin pearls until the corona of the glans clitoris was completely visualized. Postprocedure care included retraction of the prepuce from the glans at least once daily and application of topical agents, such as local hormones, corticosteroids, antifungals, or petroleum jelly in different cases. Among 41 respondents who underwent the procedure, 16 had clitoral pain as a symptom of adhesions. In those presenting with clitoral pain, 76% reported decreased pain postprocedure, with 72% noting at least moderate improvement in pain. Authors indicated that some patients had keratin pearls excised, but the percentage of patients with keratin pearls was not presented or further analyzed. The recurrence rate for symptoms or adhesions or both was 24%, with most of these patients undergoing only one additional procedure. There were no additional risks or adverse events reported.
A more recent study evaluated the effectiveness of in-office lysis of clitoral adhesions and keratin pearl excision as a treatment of clitoral pain and sexual dysfunction. Procedural technique for lysis of clitoral adhesions and keratin pearl excision involved application of a topical anesthetic ointment or dorsal clitoral nerve block or both, followed by the lysis of adhesions using a lacrimal duct probe and excision of keratin pearls with fine surgical forceps with the aid of a vulvoscope until the corona of the glans clitoris was completely visualized (Fig. 5). Postprocedural care included retraction of the prepuce six times per day and application of a topical antibiotic or corticosteroid ointment or both twice daily for at least 2–4 weeks. Topical anesthetic ointment, ibuprofen, and ice was used for postprocedure pain control. This pre–post interventional study of 32 women with clitorodynia who underwent lysis of clitoral adhesions and keratin pearl excision found a significant decrease in clitoral pain scores, from 6.9 to 2.5, on an 11-point visual analogue scale with improvement in FSFI scores. There was an overall recurrence rate of 28% with a median of two procedures necessary. In addition to recurrence risk, the procedure itself can be painful and it is essential to provide adequate anesthesia in the form of topical anesthetic ointment, a dorsal clitoral nerve block with local anesthetic, and other more systemic analgesic options to achieve adequate pain control.
A. Glans clitoris with adhesions with three adherent keratin pearls. B. Glans clitoris with retraction of the prepuce after lysis of clitoral adhesions with keratin pearl excision with visualization of the corona of the glans clitoris. Photo courtesy of Jill Krapf, MD. Used with permission.
Krapf. Approach to Clitorodynia. O&G Open 2025.

NEUROPATHIC CAUSES OF CLITORODYNIA
When a structural cause is not identified on examination or symptoms fail to improve with this course of treatment, neuropathic clitoral pain should be suspected. Common causes of neuropathic pain include: prolonged sitting; horseback riding; cycling; rowing; instrument assisted deliveries; sacrospinous fixation or mesh erosion; herpetic infection; trauma; and, rarely, tumors that compress the pudendal nerve. Nantes criteria, which provides a standardized approach to diagnosing pudendal neuralgia, include the following five essential diagnostic criteria: pain in the anatomical territory of the pudendal nerve, increased pain with sitting, pain that does not cause wakening at night, no objective sensory loss evident on clinical examination, and pain that is relieved by anesthetic pudendal nerve block. Tinel's sign, originally described for carpal tunnel syndrome, can be adapted for pudendal nerve evaluation. A positive Tinel's sign occurs when light pressure to the path of the nerve near the sacrospinous ligament medial to the ischial spines elicits pain or paresthesia in its distribution. Pudendal neuralgia found at this level (region 2), can also be related to hypertonicity of the pelvic floor muscles. This underscores the necessity for evaluation of the pelvic floor muscles and pudendal nerves during pelvic examination.
A comprehensive examination may also include neurophysiologic testing, imaging studies, and diagnostic nerve blocks to confirm the diagnosis and guide treatment strategies. It is helpful for the clinician to start with the most distal aspect of clitoral innervation (the glans) and work cephalad until the source of neuropathology is located. Diagnostic testing involves anesthesia of the clitoris with a topical anesthetic or a dorsal clitoral nerve block or both. If pain symptoms do not resolve locally, bilateral pudendal nerve blocks may be performed using a transgluteal or transvaginal approach, which may necessitate referral to a specialist. In a prospective case series of 66 women, half of whom reported clitoral and labial pain in addition to other symptoms in the distribution of the pudendal nerve, 87% had a reduction in one or more pain symptoms after pudendal nerve block. In the subset of patients who reported clitoral and labial pain, 52% had pain reduce over the course of 64 hours, 22% had pain resolve and 26% had pain return to pretreatment level within this timeframe. If pain persists without improvement despite pudendal nerve block, imaging of the lumbosacral spine with magnetic resonance imaging is warranted and an epidural nerve block is considered in cases of disc herniation, annular tear, or Tarlov cysts. In this diagnostic paradigm, the vulva (including the clitoris) and the perianal area are within the pain distribution of the pudendal nerve, just as foot pain can be due to sciatica.
First-line treatment involves behavioral measures, such as avoiding prolonged sitting, not sitting on hard surfaces, and using a donut cushion to decrease pressure on the pudendal nerve at the level of the ischial spines. Referral to pelvic floor physical or occupational therapists familiar with pudendal neuralgia is recommended for both hypertonic pelvic floor muscle dysfunction and pudendal neuralgia associated with region 2. Next steps in treatment may include serial nerve blocks with corticosteroids if the initial nerve block (as described above) provides pain relief. Targeted injections of local anesthetic or corticosteroids or both at the level of spinal or meningeal pathology by caudal epidural, perineural spinal, or ganglion impar injections may be indicated in coordination with a pain management specialist. Procedural treatment modalities for pudendal neuralgia include pudendal nerve decompression (transgluteal or laparoscopic), radiofrequency, and nerve stimulator implantation; however, there are no current recommendations based on treatment efficacy. There are small case reports of persistent genital arousal disorder with concurrent pudendal neuralgia treated with chronic pudendal neuromodulation and neurolysis. Lumbar endoscopic spinal surgery for persistent genital arousal disorder–genitopelvic dysesthesia in cases of annular tear and Tarlov cysts has been described in small observational studies. Systemic treatment options include gabapentin, pregabalin, amitriptyline, nortriptyline, and duloxetine. However, potential side effects should be considered in risk-benefit analysis. It is no longer acceptable to start a tricyclic antidepressant, such as amitriptyline, for “vulvodynia” without first identifying a neuropathic component, as was done in years past.

CONCLUSION
Despite advances in research and process of care documents in the sexual medicine literature, there is still uncertainty in the approach to clitorodynia in general obstetrics and gynecology practice. Obstetrician–gynecologists are well-positioned to identify and provide first-line approaches to diagnosis and treatment of chronic clitoral pain. Awareness of structural and neuropathic causes of clitoral pain and the treatments available are crucial to this objective. With complex or refectory cases, referral to a vulvar pain specialist, a gynecologist, urologist, or other practitioners with additional training and experience in sexual medicine, may be warranted and these clinicians may be found on directories from the International Society for the Study of Women's Sexual Health, the International Society for the Study of Vulvovaginal Disease, or the National Vulvodynia Association. These organizations also provide training, education, and research funding opportunities specific to genitopelvic pain. With increased knowledge and training in approach to clitorodynia, we can decrease delay in diagnosis for individuals suffering with this pain.
Financial Disclosure The authors did not report any potential conflicts of interest.
Each author has confirmed compliance with the journal's requirements for authorship.
Peer reviews and author correspondence are available at http://links.lww.com/AOG/D997.

REFERENCES
2015 ISSVD, ISSWSH and IPPS consensus terminology and classification of persistent vulvar pain and vulvodynia
Pudendal neuralgia
Pudendal canal syndrome as a cause of vulvodynia and its treatment by pudendal nerve decompression
Multilevel local anesthetic nerve blockade for the treatment of generalized vulvodynia: a pilot study
International Society for the Study of Women's Sexual Health (ISSWSH) review of epidemiology and pathophysiology, and a consensus nomenclature and process of care for the management of persistent genital arousal disorder/genito-pelvic dysesthesia (PGAD/GPD)
Anatomy of the clitoris: the corona of the glans clitoris, clitoral coronal papillae, and the coronopreputial frenulum
Clitorodynia: a descriptive study of clitoral pain
Clinical presentation of clitorodynia associated with clitoral adhesions and keratin pearls
Clitoral adhesions: a review of the literature
Efficacy of in-office lysis of clitoral adhesions with excision of keratin pearls on clitoral pain and sexual function: a pre-post interventional study
Anatomy of the clitoris
Anatomy of the clitoris and the female sexual response
The coronation of the clitoris: formally introducing the corona of the glans clitoris
How many nerve fibers innervate the human glans clitoris: a histomorphometric evaluation of the dorsal nerve of the clitoris
Vulvodynia: definition, prevalence, impact, and pathophysiological factors
The International Classification of Diseases, 11th revision: a step-back for women with vulvodynia?
Clitoral pain: the great unexplored pain in women
Vulvovaginal disease education in Canadian and American gynecology residency programs: a survey of program directors
Adequacy of dermatology and ob-gyn graduate medical education for inflammatory vulvovaginal skin disease: a nationwide needs assessment survey
A periclitoral mass as a cause of persistent genital arousal disorder
Prevalence of phimosis in males of all ages: systematic review
The prevalence of phimosis of the clitoris in women presenting to the sexual dysfunction clinic: lack of correlation to disorders of desire, arousal and orgasm
The prevalence of examiner-diagnosed clitoral hood adhesions in a population of college-aged women
Retrospective study of the prevalence and risk factors of clitoral adhesions: women's health providers should routinely examine the glans clitoris
Pathologic and physiologic phimosis: approach to the phimotic foreskin
Successful management of clitorodynia closed compartment syndrome: MP48-07
A retrospective case series on patient satisfaction and efficacy of non-surgical lysis of clitoral adhesions
Treatment of clitoral keratin pearls with topical estrogen cream: case report
Patient satisfaction of surgical treatment of clitoral phimosis and labial adhesions caused by lichen sclerosus
The use of specific myofascial release techniques by a physical therapist to treat clitoral phimosis and dyspareunia
A novel approach to the surgical management of clitoral phimosis
Diagnostic criteria for pudendal neuralgia by pudendal nerve entrapment (Nantes criteria)
Correlation between anatomical segments of the pudendal nerve and clinical findings of the patient with pudendal neuralgia
Response to pudendal nerve block in women with pudendal neuralgia
Advances in the therapeutic approach of pudendal neuralgia: a systematic review
Pudendal neuromodulation as a treatment for persistent genital arousal disorder-A case series
Persistent genital arousal disorder: review of pertinent peripheral nerves
Surgical outcomes of PGAD/GPD patients with sacral radiculopathy associated with Tarlov cyst
Lumbar endoscopic spine surgery for persistent genital arousal disorder/genitopelvic dysesthesia resulting from lumbosacral annular tear-induced sacral radiculopathy
Pain specialist management of sexual pain–IV. Pharmacological