Artificial intelligence and oral photography: an approach to the epidemiology of dental caries
ABSTRACT
OBJECTIVE
Dental caries is an important public health issue due to its high prevalence around the world, its impact on people’s quality of life, and the existence of effective methods to control and prevent it. This study aims to find the state of the art regarding the diagnosis of caries with the use of artificial intelligence in the scientific literature, which could represent future advances in its use in oral health epidemiology.
METHODS
A scoping review was carried out based on a search strategy on the main health databases that found 1,439 articles by descriptors or keywords related to caries, diagnosis, and artificial intelligence.
RESULTS
After analysis, 17 scientific articles composed the final sample. Of these, 94.1% are quite recent, published from 2020 onward. Although the articles were based on a clinical perspective, their objectives, results, and conclusions signal the possible effectiveness of artificial intelligence as a strategic tool for epidemiology. Frontal, lateral, and occlusal photographs served to diagnose caries on all sides of the teeth.
CONCLUSION
It is essential to invest in alternatives related to artificial intelligence and oral photography to replace traditional epidemiological surveys, which would enable the full development of oral health surveillance.

INTRODUCTION
Dental caries is an important public health issue   since its average prevalence reaches 29% of the global population  . Its aggravation leads to pain, significantly impacting individuals’ quality of life and absenteeism at work  . Nevertheless, governments can intervene to prevent caries with effective and efficacious collective measures, such as the fluoridation of the public water supply  .
The approach to caries in the Brazilian Unified Health System still characterize an enormous challenge, especially due to the accumulation of the Brazilian population’s needs and the organization of local planning that focuses on equity and follows an epidemiological reference  .
Epidemiological surveys in Brazil  can find the national magnitude of the problem but they are unable to identify the specific oral health needs of a population group in a territory. Moreover, finding families and individuals at risk in a community requires applying observation instruments to the entire population group rather than only to a sample, rendering traditional epidemiological surveys to assess the local situation of dental caries unfeasible.
Thus, artificial intelligence offers an alternative to detect caries lesions, especially from images. Studies have used dental radiography  for such diagnosis, which would avoid the need for clinical examinations. However, this alternative is unfeasible for epidemiological purposes due to its high cost for public health systems and the risk related to ionizing radiation  .
Considering this difficulty, studies indicate the possibility of detecting caries lesions from photographic images and artificial intelligence, which can contribute to an epidemiological reference   that is indispensable for local oral health planning.
Thus, this study aims to synthesize scientific evidence related to the diagnosis of caries via photographic images and artificial intelligence that could represent perspectives of its use in oral epidemiology.

METHODS

Type of Study
This scoping review   was proposed to map the scientific production in health that would evince the advances and challenges related to diagnosing caries with images and artificial intelligence. The recommendations proposed by the Joanna Briggs Institute   and its results were adapted for this review according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews  .
To build the initial question of this research, the Population/Concept/Context strategy was used, in which Population equaled people with caries; Concept, epidemiological surveys of caries by imaging; and Context, use of artificial intelligence. These elements built the guiding question of this research: “What is the current situation of epidemiological caries surveys that are developed by images using artificial intelligence?”
However, a search strategy on BVS: Biblioteca Virtual de Saúde (Virtual Health Library), Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System Online (MEDLINE), Web of Science (WoS), and Abstract and Citation Database of Peer-Reviewed Literature (Scopus) found no articles that met those criteria.
Due to this inadequacy, the PCC strategy was reformulated, in which the Concept was defined as caries diagnosis by imaging and the original Population (people with caries) and Context (use of artificial intelligence) criteria were retained as in the first search. This change obtained the following guiding question: “What is the current situation of caries diagnosis developed by images and artificial intelligence?”

Information Sources and Search Strategy
The searches were carried out from May to August 2024, with a publication deadline of August 20, 2024, on BVS, MEDLINE, WoS, and Scopus. Based on the relevant terms on Medical Subject Headings, searches were carried out according to the specificities of each database. Such strategy is detailed in Chart 1.
Search strategy used in databases based on descriptors. CAPES Journals, Brazil, 2024.
Database	Search strategy	 	BVS	((artificial intelligence or machine learning or deep learning or fuzzy logic or computational intelligence or machine intelligence or computer reasoning or algoritm)) AND ((caries or lesion or dental cavity or dental cavities or white spot or decay)) AND ((diagnostic or diagnosis or detection or detecting or classification or classifying or screening or prediction or predicting)) Title, abstract, subject	 	MEDLINE	(“artificial intelligence”[Title] OR “machine learning”[Title] OR “deep learning”[Title] OR “fuzzy logic”[Title] OR “computational intelligence”[Title] OR “machine intelligence”[Title] OR ((“computability”[All Fields] OR “computable”[All Fields] OR “computating”[All Fields] OR “computation”[All Fields] OR “computational”[All Fields] OR “computations”[All Fields] OR “compute”[All Fields] OR “computed”[All Fields] OR “computer s”[All Fields] OR “computers”[MeSH Terms] OR “computers”[All Fields] OR “computer”[All Fields] OR “computes”[All Fields] OR “computing”[All Fields] OR “computional”[All Fields]) AND “reasoning”[Title]) OR “algorithm”[Title] AND (“caries”[Title] OR “lesion”[Title] OR “dental cavity”[Title] OR “dental cavities”[Title] OR “white spot”[Title] OR “decay”[Title]) AND (“diagnostic”[Title] OR “diagnosis”[Title] OR “detection”[Title] OR “detecting”[Title] OR “classification”[Title] OR “classifying”[Title] OR “screening”[Title] OR “prediction”[Title] OR “predicting”[Title])	 	WoS	(artificial intelligence or machine learning or deep learning or fuzzy logic or computational intelligence or machine intelligence or computer reasoning or algoritm) AND (caries or lesion or dental cavity or dental cavities or white spot or decay) AND (diagnostic or diagnosis or detection or detecting or classification or classifying or screening or prediction or predicting) (Title)	 	Scopus	TITLE-ABS-KEY (artificial AND intelligence OR machine AND learning OR deep AND learning OR computational AND intelligence OR algorithm) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY (caries OR lesion OR dental AND cavity OR dental AND cavities) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY (diagnostic OR diagnosis OR detection OR detecting OR classification OR classifying OR screening OR prediction OR predicting)
CAPES: Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior; BVS: Biblioteca Virtual de Saúde (Virtual Health Library); MEDLINE: Medical Literature Analysis and Retrievel System Online; WoS: Web of Science; Scopus: Abstract and Citation Database of Peer-Reviewed Literature.
The Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews flowchart with the investigative path related to article retrieval, the definition of the selection and eligibility criteria, and the evaluation and inclusion of the articles is available in Figure.
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews Flowchart.
Note that the gray literature was ignored to preserve the validity, reliability, and consistency of the analyses of scientific production in peer-reviewed journals.

Data Collection
From the information in the articles on the databases, a specific instrument was structured on Microsoft Excel to tabulate the data and extract the main results.
Only complete articles published in English (with no time limitation) that contained descriptors or keywords related to caries, diagnosis, and artificial intelligence were included in this review.

Data Analysis
The articles were independently reviewed by two reviewers, whose disagreements were resolved by consensus. First, all titles were read to find the pertinent studies for this research. If reading their title failed to define the eligibility of a study, the abstract of that scientific article was analyzed. The variables to compose this study were related to authorship, year, objectives, type of study, study population, data source, variables, main results, and conclusion.
All articles at the end of this search strategy were exported to Mendeley, a free reference manager, to organize the documents for later analysis.

RESULTS
The initial search in the defined databases retrieved 1,439 scientific articles that were published in English. This review excluded 1,216 of them because they failed to align themselves with the theme of this research and another 135 because they were related to images such as radiography, ultrasound, infrared, among others. It also excluded editorials, letters, and reviews (28) and 14 duplicates as they failed to directly meet the focus of this research. Of the remaining 46 articles, this study excluded 29 that failed to contain the terms “photo,” “smartphone,” “artificial intelligence,” “deep learning,” or “machine learning;” strategic elements to address the possibility of articulating epidemiology with artificial intelligence based on images. Thus, 17 articles composed the sample of this scoping review.
Analyzing these articles shows that only one was published before 2020. Chart 2 lists the articles and their title, main author, and year of publication.
Title, lead author, and year of publication of the articles in this scoping review, 2024.
Article title	Author/year	 	The accuracy of asynchronous tele-screening for detecting dental caries in patient-captured mobile photographs: a pilot study	Qari et al.14 (2023)	 	Assessing a smartphone app (AICaries) that uses artificial intelligence to detect dental caries in children and provides interactive oral health education: protocol for a design and usability testing study	Xiao et al.17 (2021)	 	Automated caries detection with smartphone color photography using machine learning	Duong et al.18 (2021)	 	Deep learning application in dental caries detection using intraoral photographs taken by smartphones	Thanh et al.19 (2022)	 	Mobile photographic screening for dental caries in children diagnostic performance compared to unaided visual dental examination	Estai et al.20 (2021)	 	Artificial Intelligence-powered smartphone application AlCaries improves at home dental caries screening in children: moderated and unmoderated usability test	Al-Jallad et al.21 (2022)	 	Detection of dental caries in oral photographs taken by mobile phones based on the YOLOv3 algorithm	Ding et al.22 (2021)	 	Development and evaluation of deep learning for screening dental caries from oral photographs	Zhang et al.23 (2020)	 	Visual diagnostics of dental caries through deep learning of non-standardized photographs using a hybrid yolo ensemble and transfer learning model	Tareq et al.24 (2023)	 	A computer-aided automated methodology for the detection and classification of occlusal caries from photographic color images	Berdouses et al.25 (2015)	 	Detecting white spot lesions on dental photography using deep learning: a pilot study	Askar et al.26 (2021)	 	A hybrid mask RCNN-based tool to localize dental cavities from real-time mixed photographic images	Rashid et al.27 (2022)	 	Caries detection on intraoral images using artificial intelligence	Kühnisch et al.28 (2022)	 	Caries detection with tooth surface segmentation on intraoral photographic images using deep learning	Park et al.29 (2022)	 	Simultaneous detection of dental caries and fissure sealant in intraoral photographs by deep learning: a pilot study	Xiong et al.30 (2024)	 	Automated detection of posterior restorations in permanent teeth using artificial intelligence on intraoral photographs	Engels et al.31 (2022)	 	Employing CNN ensemble models in classifying dental caries using oral photographs	AlSayyeda et al.32 (2023)
RCNN: Region-Based Convolutional Neural Networks; CNN: Convolutional Neural Networks.
All articles diagnosed caries by using photography to simulate the images dental surgeons observe during clinical examinations. In total, seven studies   used smartphones to photograph participants’ mouths, three used digital cameras  , and seven other studies chose to take intraoral photographs using professional photographic equipment  .
Moreover, three studies  used methods that enabled parents or family members to take photographs without the need for a healthcare provider. Along the same lines, a study   proposed a software to support dental surgeons and patients in the preliminary stages of diagnosis. All other studies were directly related to the possibility of dental surgeons detecting dental caries outside the clinic.
Sample units showed great variety. Some studies focused on extracted teeth, using artificial intelligence to diagnose caries based on images of these teeth. Of these, one study   focused on anterior teeth, whereas two   analyzed the occlusal aspect of premolars and molars (the most affected by dental caries). Also, two studies   had parents and children taking photographs in their homes to provide them greater knowledge and enable family members to detect caries early due to such health education. Another study   promoted self-photography with patients of a clinic in a Dentistry course also under such educational perspective. Most of the studies carried out their research with patients from teaching clinics or health services. Four of these were carried out with patients from dental clinics or hospitals, of which one study   worked with photographs in patients’ medical records, whereas the other three involved photographs from patients who were receiving treatment  ; six studies included patients from dentistry courses, two   of which investigated photographs in the course records from research conducted for educational purposes and four that worked directly with patients  . An epidemiological study   targeted children aged from four to 14 years, carrying clinical examinations and photographs at the school. All the images of the studies in this scoping review corresponded to photographs of the mouth, with special emphasis on the teeth.
Still, two articles   ignored detailing the type of photograph they used as these qualitative studies focused on obtaining feedback on the usability of their application and flow between family members regarding their health education strategies. Moreover, eight studies used photographs of specific teeth   and three took photographs of specific areas of the dental arch  . Of greater interest to this study, four studies photographed the occlusal portion of participants’ teeth, of which one   used only such photographs; another   added frontal photographs (buccal surface of the anterior teeth); and two  , in addition to the frontal photographs, included lateral photographs (buccal surface of the posterior teeth).
Regarding the type of study, two studies showed a qualitative design  , whereas the others, an accuracy one. Of these, one study compared the pattern of oral photographs taken by dental students and patients  , whereas four others compared the results of the clinical examination with the photographs  . One study   associated photographs and radiographs to compare its results with a previously proposed artificial intelligence system. Nine others only compared the results of artificial intelligence system analyses of photographs  .
Table shows a consolidated report on the addressed aspects, and Chart 3 details the main conclusions of the analyzed articles.
Total and percentages of the variables in this scoping review, 2024.
Variable	 	Total	%	 	Studied period	After 2020	16	94.1	 	Up to 2019	1	5.9	 	Photographic equipment	Smartphones	7	41.2	 	Intraoral camera	7	41.2	 	Digital Camera	3	17.6	 	Study objective	Detect dental caries in non-clinical settings	13	76.5	 	Analyze photographic taken by parents or relatives	3	17.6	 	Develop software to support the preliminary stages of diagnosis	1	5.9	 	Sampling units	Patients of Dentistry courses	6	35.3	 	Patients in clinics or hospitals	4	23.5	 	Extracted teeth	3	17.6	 	Parents and children at home	2	11.8	 	Children aged from 4 to 14 years	1	5.9	 	Self-photography (patients of Dentistry course)	1	5.9	 	Photographed mouth region	Individual teeth	8	47.1	 	Occlusal areas	4	23.5	 	Specific regions of the dental arch	3	17.6	 	No identification of the photographed region	2	11.8	 	Study design	Qualitative	2	11.8	 	Accuracy	15	88.2
Main conclusion of the articles in this scoping review according to lead author and year of publication, 2024.
Author/year	Conclusion	 	Qari et al.14 (2023)	The teletriage based on reviewing photographs participants took can be a valid and reliable alternative to clinical examination.	 	Xiao et al.17 (2021)	With the AlCaries application, parents can use regular smartphones to take pictures of their children’s teeth, detect early childhood caries, reduce the risk of caries, and seek treatment at an early stage of caries.	 	Duong et al.18 (2021)	Integrated artificial intelligence application to help people give an early warning about their oral health conditions and help dentists to reduce clinical examination times.	 	Thanh et al.19 (2022)	YOLOv3 and Faster RCNN are promising artificial intelligence applications to detect cavitated caries lesions but the accuracy and sensitivity of the four models in detecting early caries lesions remained lower than expected.	 	Estai et al.20 (2021)	The photographic approach to dental screening produced an acceptable diagnostic level of caries detection, particularly in children with deciduous dentition.	 	Al-Jallad et al.21 (2022)	Perceived benefits of using the AICaries app include convenient screening of caries lesions at home, caries lesion risk information, education, and family involvement.	 	Ding et al.22 (2021)	Deep learning algorithms can improve the unequal distribution of public health resources by using photographs taken from smartphones for detection (especially of primary caries lesions).	 	Zhang et al.23 (2020)	Deep learning algorithms can improve public health by automatic screenings of diseases using photographs captured from cameras, which can be used for self-examination.	 	Tareq et al.24 (2023)	The model can improve access to oral healthcare in rural areas with limited resources and may aid automated diagnostics and advanced teledentistry applications.	 	Berdouses et al.25 (2015)	Objective, fully automated caries diagnostic system for occlusal caries lesions with similar or better performance than a trained dental surgeon.	 	Askar et al.26 (2021)	Deep learning has shown satisfactory accuracy in detecting white spot lesions, particularly fluorosis.	 	Rashid et al.27 (2022)	The developed tool proved to effectively detect carious regions by dental photographs	 	Kühnisch et al.28 (2022)	It was possible to achieve more than 90% agreement in caries detection using the artificial intelligence method with standardized photographs of a single tooth.	 	Park et al.29 (2022)	Deep learning with tooth surface segmentation holds promise for detecting caries lesions in intraoral camera photographic images, with time and cost savings.	 	Xiong et al.30 (2024)	ToothNet achieved simultaneous multitasking detection in intraoral photographs, with advantages in the detection of caries lesions and equivalence in the detection of fissure sealants when compared to the clinical examination performed by the dentist.	 	Engels et al.31 (2022)	It was possible to automatically categorize types of posterior restorations in intraoral photographs with good accuracy.	 	AlSayyeda et al.32 (2023)	The proposed set structure for caries lesion detection is a step to build an automated and effective support system.
RCNN: Region-Based Convolutional Neural Networks.

DISCUSSION
Although the emergence of artificial intelligence with the potential to intervene in health processes dates back more than 70 years, its limitations prevented its wide acceptance and application, which will occur with the advent of deep learning  . As in this study, although the first analyzed article was published in 2015, 94.1% of the sample emerged from 2020 onwards, which enables us to state that interest in the topic is quite recent.
Preliminary studies showed the large scientific production related to the clinical diagnosis of dental caries mediated by artificial intelligence (always according to the feasibility of these applications for dental clinics, under the logic of individual care). These studies reported advances in artificial intelligence, especially in predicting (planning of preventive dental care and oral hygiene care) and diagnosing caries (patients at higher risk)  . However, most of these studies were ineligible for this scoping review due to their interest in epidemiology.
Although this review retrieved no articles that directly referred to epidemiology, several studies   evinced the need for specific research on artificial intelligence under this focus. Such indications are in line with the need to reach families and individuals at risk in communities.
Regarding the objectives of the studies in this present review, some sought to empower parents or family members for the early detection of caries and its systematic follow-up, greatly collaborating with health education actions  . They aimed towards reducing the risk of caries and treating the early stage of caries  , which would be essential for the effective development of oral health surveillance.
However, articles that aimed to detect dental caries based on artificial intelligence and images outside the clinical environment stood out. In view of these characteristics, a potential contribution in using these tools in activities to identify families and individuals at risk in an area covered by a primary health care unit would refer to its reduction of spontaneous demand and its increase in programmed demand under the principles of equity.
Studies with images such as periapical, interproximal, and panoramic radiographs, ultrasonography, fluorescence, or infrared would show no epidemiological feasibility due to their cost and difficulty of access; thus, this research excluded them.
Considering this limitation, this study chose articles using photographs of volunteers’ mouths to meet its objective. Photographs are quite common in dental education, especially to observe the before and after of treatments.
This type of dentistry technique to record detailed images of patients’ mouth offer oral healthcare providers a clear and accurate view of dental structures and soft tissues, aiding diagnosis and treatment planning.
However, using this type of equipment would make it unfeasible to diagnose caries by photographic images due to the cost of the equipment and the risks related to its use in certain territories. Thus, an alternative to this difficulty could refer to smartphones (seven studies) or digital cameras (three studies). While smartphone cameras may fail to offer the same image quality as their professional or intraoral counterparts, their wide availability, cost-effectiveness, and applicability in public health research make them promising tools for this purpose  . Moreover, artificial intelligence advances show the ability to improve the quality of the original photographic image by specific technology  .
Another important element refers to the type of photographic record according to the sample unit proposed by the articles. The photographs of specific teeth or areas of each dental arch were related to aspects regarding the accuracy of details and tests based on artificial intelligence, which fail to exactly correspond to the purposes of this study. However, six articles brought a fundamental contribution towards a solution for the development of epidemiological studies as they focused on areas of the mouth, and their dataset indicated an approximation of the diagnosis of caries. Studies based on frontal and lateral photographs diagnosed caries on the buccal surfaces of the teeth, whereas that of occlusal portions focused on diagnosing caries on the portions with the highest occurrence of dental caries (occlusal and proximal)  .
Considering the objectives in the retrieved articles, most constituted accuracy studies, which allows us to evaluate how much the results of a measurement correspond to the true state of the analyzed phenomenon  . The analysis showed that most studies signaled promising results in using oral photographs as substitutes for the clinical examinations in epidemiological surveys.
The conclusion of some articles offered elements that support future studies on the use of artificial intelligence in epidemiology, evincing that photographic evaluations showed similar or better performance than that in epidemiological surveys on dental surgeons’ examinations  . Reinforcing this perspective, studies have showed satisfactory results with artificial intelligence systems based on photographic images  . An article   drew attention to the possibility of auxiliary personnel producing accurate photographs, which would be very important for a greater involvement of oral health teams in epidemiological surveys. Similarly, some articles   reported very satisfactory results from parents’, other family members’, or patients’ photographs.
The conclusions in the retrieved studies that proved decisive for the contribution of this review (i.e., that these tools show potential) stem from those articles the objectives of which were related to the clinic (but which significantly contribute to solutions for collective health). Studies have signaled the possibility of improving public health by decreasing unequal distribution of resources  , enabling the automatic screening of suspected cases of diseases  , and offering access to oral health in rural areas  . Moreover, a study evinced potentially cost-effective and user-friendly screening   to provide reliable, affordable, and less invasive, dangerous, and time-consuming dental caries lesion screening.
The analysis of the results of this study shows a positive view of the possibilities of artificial intelligence in health area, as per a study that highlighted significant benefits for advances in patient access to health services  .
However, despite the technological advances and added value for decision-making processes in health care provided by artificial intelligence, other challenges continue to concern patients and healthcare providers. The careful, ethical, and humanized use of these resources by healthcare providers must prioritize respect for patients, ensuring that technology configures an ally in care. Social and ethical implications, especially those related to privacy and security measures for patient data and the actual capacity for health monitoring should be part of this care  .

FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
There is an urgent need to develop solutions based on scientific evidence and technological advances that allow healthcare providers (especially those in primary care) to develop local oral health planning based on an epidemiological framework.
It is possible to signal the future adoption of oral photographs as strategic instruments to replace the complex logistics and the imperative need to involve dental surgeons in epidemiological surveys (the only reference for collective diagnosis).
It is also important to note the satisfactory accuracy for epidemiological surveys in several studies that used the diagnosis of caries mediated by artificial intelligence from photographs despite lacking the ideal result for clinical practice.
Based on the evidence in this review, it would be essential to develop specific studies that could add advances in artificial intelligence to the Brazilian epidemiological reality.
And, once the advances are achieved, it would be essential to include this type of information and images in the Citizen’s Electronic Health Record e-SUS Primary Healthcare  , thus enabling oral health surveillance.
Data Availability: Since this is a scoping review, no primary data was generated for the development of the article.
Funding: Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (CAPES – financing code 001, process: 88887.717096/2022-00 – 2023).

REFERENCES
Avaliação do impacto da dor de dente, da cárie não tratada e suas consequências na qualidade de vida de crianças brasileiras
Absenteísmo por causa odontológica: uma revisão de literatura relacionada à ausência no trabalho e a saúde bucal do trabalhador
Fluoretação da água no Brasil: distribuição regional e acurácia das informações sobre vigilância em municípios com mais de 50 mil habitantes
Projeto SB Brasil 2010: elemento estratégico na construção de um modelo de vigilância em saúde bucal
Artificial intelligence for radiographic imaging detection of caries lesions: a systematic review
Transforming dental caries diagnosis through artificial intelligence-based techniques
Riscos Ocupacionais em Odontologia: Revisão da Literatura
Deep learning for caries detection: a systematic review
The accuracy of asynchronous tele-screening for detecting dental caries in patient-captured mobile photographs: a pilot study
PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation
Assessing a smartphone app (AICaries) that uses artificial intelligence to detect dental caries in children and provides interactive oral health education: protocol for a design and usability testing study
Automated caries detection with smartphone color photography using machine learning
Deep learning application in dental caries detection using intraoral photographs taken by smartphones
Mobile photographic screening for dental caries in children diagnostic performance compared to unaided visual dental examination
Artificial Intelligence-powered smartphone application ALCaries improves at home dental caries screening in children: moderated and unmoderated usability test
Detection of dental caries in oral photographs taken by mobile phones based on the YOLOv3 algorithm
Development and evaluation of deep learning for screening dental caries from oral photographs
Visual diagnostics of dental caries through deep learning of non-standardised photographs using a hybrid yolo ensemble and transfer learning model
A computer-aided automated methodology for the detection and classification of occlusal caries from photographic color images
Detecting white spot lesions on dental photography using deep learning: a pilot study
A hybrid mask RCNN-based tool to localize dental cavities from real-time mixed photographic images
Caries detection on intraoral images using artificial intelligence
Caries detection with tooth surface segmentation on intraoral photographic images using deep learning
Simultaneous detection of dental caries and fissure sealant in intraoral photographs by deep learning: a pilot study
Automated detection of posterior restorations in permanent teeth using artificial intelligence on intraoral photographs
Employing CNN ensemble models in classifying dental caries using oral photographs
History of artificial intelligence in medicine
application and performance of artificial intelligence technology in detection, diagnosis and prediction of dental caries (DC): a systematic review
Detecting dental caries on oral photographs using artificial intelligence: a systematic review
The evolution of image reconstruction for CT - from filtered back projection to artificial intelligence
Machine learning techniques for periodontitis and dental caries detection: a narrative review
Acurácia em métodos de relacionamento probabilístico de bases de dados em saúde: revisão sistemática
Tomada de decisão nas organizações: o que muda com a Inteligência Artificial?
Recent advances of artificial intelligence in healthcare: a systematic literature review
Ten years of the Citizen's Electronic Health Record e-SUS Primary Healthcare: in search of an electronic Unified Health System

Inteligência artificial e fotografia bucal: aproximação à epidemiologia da cárie dentária
Noro
Luiz Roberto Augusto
Manzanares Céspedes
Maria Cristina
RESUMO
OBJETIVO
A cárie dentária configura-se como importante problema de saúde pública, considerando sua alta prevalência ao redor do mundo, seu impacto na qualidade de vida das pessoas e a existência de métodos eficazes para seu controle e prevenção. O objetivo do presente estudo foi identificar na literatura científica o estado da arte relativo ao diagnóstico da cárie por meio da inteligência artificial que pudesse representar futuros avanços da sua utilização na epidemiologia em saúde bucal.
MÉTODOS
Foi realizada revisão de escopo a partir da estratégia de busca definida nas principais bases da área da saúde, nas quais foram identificados 1.439 artigos com os descritores ou palavras-chave relacionados à cárie, diagnóstico e inteligência artificial.
RESULTADOS
Após análise, dezessete artigos científicos compuseram a amostra final. Desses artigos, 94,1% são bastante recentes, uma vez que foram publicados a partir de 2020. Apesar dos artigos terem sido desenvolvidos na perspectiva clínica, seus objetivos, resultados e conclusões sinalizam a possibilidade da efetividade da inteligência artificial como ferramenta estratégica para a epidemiologia. A utilização de fotografias frontais, laterais e oclusais permitiram o diagnóstico de cárie de todas as faces dos dentes.
CONCLUSÃO
É fundamental investir-se em alternativas relacionadas à inteligência artificial e fotografias bucais para substituição dos tradicionais inquéritos epidemiológicos, o que permitirá o desenvolvimento pleno da vigilância em saúde bucal.
Cárie Dentária
Inteligência Artificial
Epidemiologia
Diagnóstico
Fotografia Dental

INTRODUÇÃO
A cárie dentária configura-se como importante problema de saúde pública  , uma vez que sua prevalência média atinge 29% da população mundial  . Seu agravamento leva à dor, impactando significativamente na qualidade de vida e no absenteísmo no trabalho  . Apesar desse quadro, o poder público pode intervir na prevenção da cárie com medida coletiva eficaz e efetiva, como a fluoretação da água de abastecimento público  .
No âmbito do Sistema Único de Saúde (SUS) a abordagem à cárie ainda se caracteriza como enorme desafio especialmente pelo acúmulo de necessidades vivenciadas pela população, assim como pela organização do planejamento local com foco na equidade e com referencial epidemiológico  .
Os inquéritos epidemiológicos realizados no Brasil  permitem identificar a amplitude do problema no âmbito nacional, entretanto, não são capazes de identificar as necessidades de saúde bucal específicas de um determinado grupo populacional num dado território. Acresce que, quando o objetivo é identificar famílias e indivíduos em situação de risco na comunidade, há necessidade de aplicar os instrumentos de observação em todo o grupo populacional e não somente em uma amostra, o que torna inviável a realização de levantamentos epidemiológicos tradicionais para conhecer a situação de cárie dentária em âmbito local.
Em função disso, projeta-se a inteligência artificial como alternativa para a detecção de lesões de cárie, em especial a partir de imagens. Estudos têm sinalizado a utilização da radiografia odontológica  para a construção desse diagnóstico, o que evitaria a necessidade do exame clínico para essa finalidade. Entretanto, essa alternativa não é viável para finalidade epidemiológica considerando o seu alto custo para o sistema público de saúde e o próprio risco relacionado ao uso da radiação ionizante  .
Considerando essa dificuldade, estudos sinalizam a possibilidade de detecção de lesões de cárie a partir de imagens fotográficas associadas à inteligência artificial, as quais podem contribuir para a construção de referencial epidemiológico  , indispensável ao planejamento local em saúde bucal.
Com essas premissas, o objetivo do presente estudo foi realizar a síntese de evidências científicas relativas ao diagnóstico da cárie por meio de imagens fotográficas, mediadas pela inteligência artificial, que pudesse representar perspectivas da sua utilização na epidemiologia bucal.

MÉTODOS

Tipo de Estudo
Para realizar um mapeamento da produção científica da área da saúde que permitisse identificar os avanços e desafios relacionados ao diagnóstico da cárie por meio de imagens com utilização da inteligência artificial foi proposta a presente revisão de escopo  . Visando adequação à utilização desse tipo de revisão, foram seguidas as recomendações propostas pelo Joanna Briggs Institute    e os seus resultados foram organizados por meio do Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses Extension for Scoping Reviews (Prisma-ScR)  .
Para a construção da pergunta inicial da pesquisa foi utilizada a estratégia PCC (População/Conceito/Contexto), na qual População = pessoas com cárie; Conceito = inquérito epidemiológico da cárie por imagem; e Contexto = uso da inteligência artificial. Com esses elementos foi possível a construção da seguinte pergunta norteadora da pesquisa: “Qual a situação atual dos inquéritos epidemiológicos da cárie desenvolvidos por meio de imagens com utilização da inteligência artificial?”.
Entretanto, a partir da estratégia de busca definida nas bases Biblioteca Virtual de Saúde (BVS), Medical Literature Analysis and Retrievel System Online (Medline), Web of Science (WoS) e Abstract and Citation Database of Peer-Reviewed Literature (Scopus), não foram identificados artigos que cumprissem os critérios previamente estabelecidos.
Em função dessa inadequação, foi reformulada a estratégia PCC passando o Conceito a ser definido como diagnóstico da cárie por imagem, mantendo-se a População (pessoas com cárie) e o Contexto (uso da inteligência artificial). A partir dessa alteração, a pergunta norteadora da pesquisa passou a ser a seguinte: “Qual a situação atual do diagnóstico da cárie desenvolvido por meio de imagens com utilização da inteligência artificial?”

Fontes de Informação e Estratégia de Busca
As buscas foram realizadas de maio a agosto de 2024, tendo como data limite de publicação o dia 20 de agosto de 2024, nas bases de dados BVS, Medline, WoS e Scopus. A partir dos termos relacionados à pergunta da pesquisa sinalizados no Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), foram realizadas buscas de acordo com as especificidades de cada base de dados, cuja estratégia encontra-se detalhada no Quadro 1.
Estratégia de busca utilizada nas bases de dados a partir dos descritores. Periódicos Capes, Brasil, 2024.
Base de dados	Estratégia de busca	 	BVS	((artificial intelligence or machine learning or deep learning or fuzzy logic or computational intelligence or machine intelligence or computer reasoning or algoritm)) AND ((caries or lesion or dental cavity or dental cavities or white spot or decay)) AND ((diagnostic or diagnosis or detection or detecting or classification or classifying or screening or prediction or predicting)) Título, resumo, assunto	 	Medline	(“artificial intelligence”[Title] OR “machine learning”[Title] OR “deep learning”[Title] OR “fuzzy logic”[Title] OR “computational intelligence”[Title] OR “machine intelligence”[Title] OR ((“computability”[All Fields] OR “computable”[All Fields] OR “computating”[All Fields] OR “computation”[All Fields] OR “computational”[All Fields] OR “computations”[All Fields] OR “compute”[All Fields] OR “computed”[All Fields] OR “computer s”[All Fields] OR “computers”[MeSH Terms] OR “computers”[All Fields] OR “computer”[All Fields] OR “computes”[All Fields] OR “computing”[All Fields] OR “computional”[All Fields]) AND “reasoning”[Title]) OR “algorithm”[Title] AND (“caries”[Title] OR “lesion”[Title] OR “dental cavity”[Title] OR “dental cavities”[Title] OR “white spot”[Title] OR “decay”[Title]) AND (“diagnostic”[Title] OR “diagnosis”[Title] OR “detection”[Title] OR “detecting”[Title] OR “classification”[Title] OR “classifying”[Title] OR “screening”[Title] OR “prediction”[Title] OR “predicting”[Title])	 	WoS	(artificial intelligence or machine learning or deep learning or fuzzy logic or computational intelligence or machine intelligence or computer reasoning or algoritm) AND (caries or lesion or dental cavity or dental cavities or white spot or decay) AND (diagnostic or diagnosis or detection or detecting or classification or classifying or screening or prediction or predicting) (Title)	 	Scopus	TITLE-ABS-KEY (artificial AND intelligence OR machine AND learning OR deep AND learning OR computational AND intelligence OR algorithm) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY (caries OR lesion OR dental AND cavity OR dental AND cavities) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY (diagnostic OR diagnosis OR detection OR detecting OR classification OR classifying OR screening OR prediction OR predicting)
Capes: Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior; BVS: Biblioteca Virtual de Saúde; Medline: Medical Literature Analysis and Retrievel System Online; WoS: Web of Science; Scopus: Abstract and Citation Database of Peer-Reviewed Literature.
O fluxograma Prisma-ScR com o percurso investigativo relativo à identificação dos artigos, à definição dos critérios para seleção e elegibilidade e à avaliação e inclusão dos artigos encontra-se disponibilizado na Figura.
Fluxograma Prisma ScR.
Vale ressaltar que a literatura cinzenta não foi consultada para preservar a validade, confiabilidade e consistência das análises da produção científica realizada em periódicos com revisão por pares.

Coleta dos Dados
A partir de todas as informações dos artigos disponibilizadas em cada uma das bases, foi estruturado instrumento específico no software Microsoft Excel para tabulação dos dados e extração dos principais resultados.
Foram incluídos na revisão somente artigos completos publicados em inglês, sem delimitação de tempo, que continham os descritores ou palavras-chave relacionados à cárie, diagnóstico e inteligência artificial.

Análise de Dados
A revisão dos artigos foi realizada de forma independente por dois revisores, cujas discordâncias foram solucionadas por consenso. Primeiramente, todos os títulos foram lidos com a intenção de identificar os estudos pertinentes para desenvolvimento da pesquisa. Nas situações nas quais a leitura do título não era suficiente para identificar a elegibilidade ou não do estudo, foi feita a leitura do resumo do artigo científico. As variáveis selecionadas para comporem o estudo relacionaram-se à autoria, ano, objetivos, tipo de estudo, população de estudo, fonte de dados, variáveis, resultados principais e conclusão.
Todos os artigos selecionados ao final da estratégia de busca foram exportados para o Mendeley, gerenciador de referências gratuito com a finalidade de organizar os documentos para posterior análise.

RESULTADOS
A busca inicial nas bases de dados definida trouxe 1.439 artigos científicos, todos publicados em língua inglesa. Desses, 1.216 foram excluídos, pois não se alinhavam com o tema da pesquisa, e outros 135 artigos foram excluídos por estarem relacionados a imagens como radiografia, ultrassom, infravermelho, entre outras. Foram ainda excluídos editoriais, cartas e revisões (28), além de 14 artigos repetidos, uma vez que não respondiam diretamente ao foco da pesquisa. Dos 46 artigos restantes, foram excluídos 29 que não traziam os termos “photo”, ou “smartphone”, ou “artificial intelligence”, ou “deep learning” ou “machine learning”, elementos estratégicos para se abordar a possibilidade da articulação da epidemiologia com a inteligência artificial a partir de imagens. Ao final, 17 artigos compuseram a amostra para a presente revisão de escopo.
Ao serem analisados os 17 artigos selecionados, é possível observar que apenas um foi publicado antes do ano de 2020. A relação dos artigos com seu título, autor principal e ano de publicação encontra-se disponibilizada no Quadro 2.
Título, autor principal e ano de publicação dos artigos incluídos na revisão de escopo, 2024.
Título do artigo	Autor/ano	 	The accuracy of asynchronous tele-screening for detecting dental caries in patient-captured mobile photos: a pilot study	Qari et al.14 (2023)	 	Assessing a smartphone app (AICaries) that uses artificial intelligence to detect dental caries in children and provides interactive oral health education: protocol for a design and usability testing study	Xiao et al.17 (2021)	 	Automated caries detection with smartphone color photography using machine learning	Duong et al.18 (2021)	 	Deep learning application in dental caries detection using intraoral photos taken by smartphones	Thanh et al.19 (2022)	 	Mobile photographic screening for dental caries in children diagnostic performance compared to unaided visual dental examination	Estai et al.20 (2021)	 	Artificial Intelligence-powered smartphone application AlCaries improves at home dental caries screening in children: moderated and unmoderated usability test	Al-Jallad et al.21 (2022)	 	Detection of dental caries in oral photographs taken by mobile phones based on the YOLOv3 algorithm	Ding et al.22 (2021)	 	Development and evaluation of deep learning for screening dental caries from oral photographs	Zhang et al.23 (2020)	 	Visual diagnostics of dental caries through deep learning of non-standardized photographs using a hybrid yolo ensemble and transfer learning model	Tareq et al.24 (2023)	 	A computer-aided automated methodology for the detection and classification of occlusal caries from photographic color images	Berdouses et al.25 (2015)	 	Detecting white spot lesions on dental photography using deep learning: a pilot study	Askar et al.26 (2021)	 	A hybrid mask RCNN-based tool to localize dental cavities from real-time mixed photographic images	Rashid et al.27 (2022)	 	Caries detection on intraoral images using artificial intelligence	Kühnisch et al.28 (2022)	 	Caries detection with tooth surface segmentation on intraoral photographic images using deep learning	Park et al.29 (2022)	 	Simultaneous detection of dental caries and fissure sealant in intraoral photos by deep learning: a pilot study	Xiong et al.30 (2024)	 	Automated detection of posterior restorations in permanent teeth using artificial intelligence on intraoral photographs	Engels et al.31 (2022)	 	Employing CNN ensemble models in classifying dental caries using oral photographs	AlSayyeda et al.32 (2023)
RCNN: Region-Based Convolutional Neural Networks; CNN: Convolutional Neural Networks.
O diagnóstico da cárie foi sinalizado por todos os artigos a partir da utilização da fotografia para simular a mesma imagem observada pelo cirurgião-dentista ao realizar um exame clínico. Sete estudos   utilizaram smartphones para a tomada fotográfica da boca, três utilizaram câmera digital   e outros sete estudos optaram por fazer a tomada fotográfica intraoral por meio de equipamentos fotográficos profissionais  .
Três estudos  tinham como objetivo métodos que permitiam a tomada fotográfica por pais ou familiares, sem a necessidade de um profissional de saúde para essa realização. Nessa mesma linha, um estudo   propôs o desenvolvimento de um software para apoiar o cirurgião-dentista e os pacientes nas fases preliminares do diagnóstico. Todos os outros estudos estavam diretamente relacionados à possibilidade de o cirurgião-dentista detectar cárie dentária fora do ambiente clínico.
Quanto às unidades amostrais, houve grande variedade. Alguns estudos trabalharam com dentes extraídos, nos quais se utilizava a inteligência artificial para o diagnóstico da cárie a partir da imagem desses dentes. Desses, um estudo   foi destinado a dentes anteriores, enquanto outros dois   analisaram a face oclusal de pré-molares e molares, a mais atingida pela cárie dentária. Dois estudos   tiveram a participação de pais e filhos na tomada fotográfica em ambiente domiciliar, com a finalidade de propiciar maior conhecimento e detecção precoce da cárie visando educação em saúde com os próprios membros da família. Um outro estudo   promoveu a autofotografia por pacientes de clínica em curso de Odontologia, também com essa perspectiva educativa. A grande maioria dos estudos foi realizada com pacientes de clínicas de ensino ou de serviços de saúde. Quatro desses estudos foram realizados com pacientes de clínicas odontológicas ou hospitais, sendo que um estudo   trabalhou com fotografias presentes no prontuário dos pacientes, enquanto três estudos foram feitos com fotos tomadas dos pacientes que se encontravam em tratamento  . Seis estudos foram realizados com pacientes de cursos de Odontologia, sendo que dois estudos   investigaram fotos armazenadas nos registros dos cursos a partir de pesquisas conduzidas para fins educacionais e quatro trabalharam diretamente com os pacientes  . Destaca-se que um estudo   foi desenvolvido com finalidade epidemiológica e teve como público-alvo escolares abrangendo crianças de 4 a 14 anos, cujos exames clínicos e fotografias foram realizadas na escola. Todas as imagens dos estudos selecionados para a presente revisão de escopo corresponderam a fotografias da boca, com especial destaque para os dentes.
Dois artigos   não detalham o tipo de foto utilizada por se tratarem de estudos qualitativos que tinham como perspectiva obter o feedback sobre a usabilidade do aplicativo e de seu fluxo entre familiares, relacionado à estratégia de educação em saúde. Oito estudos utilizaram fotografias de dentes específicos  , assim como três estudos realizaram a tomada fotográfica de áreas específicas da arcada dentária  . De maior interesse para o presente estudo, quatro estudos realizaram tomadas oclusais. Desses estudos, um   utilizou apenas a tomada oclusal, outro   agregou fotografias frontais (face vestibular dos dentes anteriores) e dois   incluíram, além das fotografias frontais, as fotografias laterais (face vestibular dos dentes posteriores).
Quanto ao tipo de estudo, dois estudos caracterizaram-se como estudos qualitativos  , ao passo que os demais foram estudos de acurácia. Desses, um estudo teve como foco a comparação entre o padrão de fotografias bucais tomadas por estudantes de Odontologia e pacientes  , enquanto outros quatro fizeram a comparação dos resultados do exame clínico com as fotografias  . Um estudo   associou fotografias e radiografias para comparação dos resultados com o sistema de inteligência artificial previamente proposto. Nove preocuparam-se em comparar os resultados apresentados a partir da análise realizada apenas a partir das fotografias com o sistema de inteligência artificial  .
Um consolidado relativo aos aspectos abordados encontra-se disponibilizado na Tabela, enquanto as principais conclusões dos artigos analisados encontram-se disponibilizadas no Quadro 3.
Total e percentagem das variáveis presentes na revisão de escopo, 2024.
Variável	 	Total	%	 	Período do estudo	Após 2020	16	94,1	 	Até 2019	1	5,9	 	Equipamento para tomada fotográfica	Smartphones	7	41,2	 	Câmera intraoral	7	41,2	 	Câmera digital	3	17,6	 	Objetivo do estudo	Detectar cárie dentária em ambientes não clínico	13	76,5	 	Analisar tomada fotográfica realizada por pais ou familiares	3	17,6	 	Desenvolver software para apoiar nas fases preliminares do diagnóstico	1	5,9	 	Unidades amostrais	Pacientes de cursos de Odontologia	6	35,3	 	Pacientes de clínicas ou hospital	4	23,5	 	Dentes extraídos	3	17,6	 	Pais e filhos em domicílio	2	11,8	 	Crianças de 4 a 14 anos	1	5,9	 	Autofotografia (pacientes de curso de Odontologia)	1	5,9	 	Região da boca fotografada	Dentes individualmente	8	47,1	 	Tomadas fotográficas oclusais	4	23,5	 	Regiões específicas da arcada dentária	3	17,6	 	Sem identificação da região fotografada	2	11,8	 	Tipo de estudo	Qualitativo	2	11,8	 	Acurácia	15	88,2
Principal conclusão dos artigos incluídos na revisão de escopo de acordo com autor principal e ano de publicação, 2024.
Autor/ano	Conclusão	 	Qari et al.14 (2023)	A abordagem de teletriagem baseada na revisão de fotografias tiradas pelos participantes pode ser uma alternativa válida e confiável ao exame clínico.	 	Xiao et al.17 (2021)	Com o aplicativo AlCaries os pais podem usar smartphones comuns para tirar fotos dos dentes de seus filhos, detectar cárie da primeira infância, reduzir o risco de cárie e buscar tratamento em um estágio inicial da cárie.	 	Duong et al.18 (2021)	Aplicativo integrado de inteligência artificial para auxiliar as pessoas a darem um alerta precoce sobre suas condições de saúde bucal, assim como auxiliar os cirurgiões-dentistas a reduzir o tempo de exame clínico.	 	Thanh et al.19 (2022)	YOLOv3 e Faster RCNN são aplicações promissoras de inteligência artificial para detectar lesões de cáries cavitadas, entretanto, a acurácia e a sensibilidade dos quatro modelos na detecção de lesões de cáries iniciais permaneceram menores do que o esperado.	 	Estai et al.20 (2021)	A abordagem fotográfica do rastreio dentário produziu um nível diagnóstico aceitável de detecção de cárie, particularmente em crianças com dentição decídua.	 	Al-Jallad et al.21 (2022)	Os benefícios percebidos pelo uso do aplicativo AICaries incluem triagem conveniente de lesões de cáries em casa, informações sobre risco de lesões de cáries e educação, além do envolvimento dos familiares.	 	Ding et al.22 (2021)	Algoritmos de aprendizado profundo podem melhorar a distribuição desigual de recursos de saúde pública usando fotografias tiradas por smartphones para detecção especialmente de lesões de cáries primárias.	 	Zhang et al.23 (2020)	Algoritmos de aprendizado profundo podem melhorar a saúde pública ao permitir a triagem automática de doenças usando fotografias capturadas de câmeras fotográficas, podendo ser usado para autoexame.	 	Tareq et al.24 (2023)	O modelo pode melhorar o acesso à saúde bucal em áreas rurais com recursos limitados e tem o potencial de auxiliar em diagnósticos automatizados e aplicações avançadas de teleodontologia.	 	Berdouses et al.25 (2015)	Sistema de diagnóstico de cárie objetivo e totalmente automatizado para lesões de cárie oclusais com desempenho semelhante ou melhor que um cirurgião-dentista treinado.	 	Askar et al.26 (2021)	O aprendizado profundo mostrou precisão satisfatória na detecção de lesões de manchas brancas, principalmente fluorose.	 	Rashid et al.27 (2022)	A ferramenta desenvolvida apresentou-se eficaz para detectar regiões cariosas por meio de fotografias dentárias	 	Kühnisch et al.28 (2022)	Foi possível alcançar mais de 90% de concordância em detecção de cárie usando o método inteligência artificial com fotografias padronizadas de um único dente.	 	Park et al.29 (2022)	O aprendizado profundo com segmentação da superfície do dente é promissor para detecção de lesões de cáries em imagens fotográficas com câmera intraoral, com economia de tempo e custos.	 	Xiong et al.30 (2024)	O ToothNet alcançou detecção simultânea multitarefa em fotos intraorais, com vantagens na detecção de lesões de cáries e equivalência na detecção de selantes de fissuras, em comparação ao exame clínico feito pelo cirurgião-dentista.	 	Engels et al.31 (2022)	Foi possível categorizar diferentes tipos de restaurações posteriores em fotografias intraorais de forma automática e com boa acurácia.	 	AlSayyeda et al.32 (2023)	A estrutura de conjunto proposta para detecção de lesões de cáries é um passo em direção à construção de um sistema de suporte automatizado e eficaz.
RCNN: Region-Based Convolutional Neural Networks.

DISCUSSÃO
Apesar do surgimento da inteligência artificial com potencial para intervir em processos na área da saúde datar de mais de setenta anos, suas limitações impediram sua ampla aceitação e aplicação no princípio, o que vai ocorrer a partir do advento do aprendizado profundo  . Conforme foi possível observar no presente estudo, apesar do primeiro dos artigos analisados ter sido publicado em 2015, 94,1% dos artigos analisados aconteceram a partir de 2020, o que permite afirmar que o interesse pela temática é bastante recente.
Os estudos preliminarmente levantados permitiram observar a grande produção científica relacionada ao diagnóstico clínico da cárie dentária mediado pela inteligência artificial, mas sempre tendo como referência a viabilidade dessas aplicações para a clínica odontológica, na lógica do atendimento individual. São relatados, nesses estudos, avanços a partir da inteligência artificial, em especial para predição (planejamento de cuidados odontológicos preventivos e cuidados de higiene bucal) e diagnóstico de cárie (pacientes com maior risco)  . Entretanto, a maioria desses estudos não foi elegível para desenvolvimento da presente revisão de escopo pelo interesse na aproximação com a área da epidemiologia.
Apesar de não terem sido identificados artigos que se referissem diretamente à questão da epidemiologia, vários estudos   sinalizaram a necessidade de se propor pesquisas específicas que considerassem a inteligência artificial com esse foco. Tal sinalização vai ao encontro da necessidade de se identificar famílias e indivíduos de risco na comunidade.
Entre os objetivos dos estudos incluídos na presente revisão, alguns buscaram empoderar pais ou familiares para a detecção precoce da cárie e seu acompanhamento sistemático, colaborando sobremaneira com ações de educação em saúde  . Com isso, pretenderam contribuir para reduzir o risco de cárie e buscar tratamento em um estágio inicial da cárie  , o que seria essencial para o desenvolvimento efetivo da vigilância em saúde bucal.
Entretanto, quanto ao objetivo, destacaram-se artigos com a proposta de detectar a cárie dentária a partir da inteligência artificial por meio de imagens, fora do ambiente clínico. Diante dessas características, observou-se potencial contribuição para o uso dessas ferramentas em atividades voltadas à identificação de famílias e indivíduos de risco na área de abrangência de uma determinada unidade de atenção primária à saúde, a fim de reduzir a demanda espontânea e aumentar a demanda programada, sob os princípios da equidade.
Foram excluídos estudos que trabalharam com imagens como radiografias (periapicais, interproximais, panorâmicas), ultrassonografia, fluorescência ou infravermelho, as quais não seriam viáveis para se pensar na perspectiva da epidemiologia por seu custo e dificuldade de acesso.
Considerando essa limitação, a imagem eleita para responder aos objetivos do presente estudo foi a fotografia bucal. O registro por meio de fotografias no ensino odontológico é bastante comum, em especial com a finalidade de observação da situação previamente ao tratamento e após sua finalização.
Esse tipo de técnica utilizada na odontologia para registrar imagens detalhadas da boca do paciente permite que os profissionais de saúde bucal tenham uma visão clara e precisa das estruturas dentárias e tecidos moles, auxiliando no diagnóstico e no planejamento de tratamentos.
Entretanto, a utilização desse tipo de equipamento tornaria inviável a realização de diagnóstico de cárie por meio de imagens fotográficas considerando o custo do equipamento e os riscos relativos ao seu uso em determinados territórios. Dessa forma, uma alternativa para essa dificuldade seria a utilização de smartphones, presente em sete estudos ou câmeras digitais utilizadas em três estudos. Embora câmeras de smartphones possam não oferecer a mesma qualidade de imagem que seus homólogos profissionais ou intraorais, sua ampla disponibilidade, custo-benefício e aplicabilidade em pesquisas de saúde coletiva os tornam promissoras ferramentas com essa finalidade  . Além disso, os avanços sinalizados pela inteligência artificial demonstram capacidade na melhoria da qualidade da imagem fotográfica original por meio de tecnologia específica para esse fim  .
Outro elemento importante é o tipo de tomada fotográfica de acordo com a unidade amostral proposta pelo estudo. As fotografias de dentes específicos ou áreas de cada arcada dentária estiveram relacionadas a aspectos relacionados à precisão dos detalhes e testes a partir da inteligência artificial, o que não corresponde exatamente aos propósitos do presente estudo. Entretanto, seis artigos trazem contribuição fundamental para busca de solução para desenvolvimento de estudos epidemiológicos, pois trabalham com áreas da boca e o conjunto dos dados sinalizaram aproximação do diagnóstico da cárie. Pôde-se observar que estudos a partir de fotografias frontais e laterais permitiram o diagnóstico de cárie nas faces vestibulares dos dentes, ao passo que as oclusais ocuparam-se do diagnóstico da cárie nas faces de maior ocorrência da cárie dentária (oclusal e proximais)  .
Considerando os objetivos propostos pelos estudos, a maioria dos artigos caracterizou-se como estudos de acurácia, os quais permitem avaliar o quanto os resultados de uma aferição correspondem ao verdadeiro estado do fenômeno aferido  . A análise desses estudos permitiu observar que a maioria dos estudos sinalizou resultados promissores na utilização de fotografias bucais como substitutos do exame clínico realizado nos inquéritos epidemiológicos.
A conclusão de alguns estudos permitiu elementos que subsidiam estudos futuros visando a utilização da inteligência artificial em epidemiologia sinalizando que a avaliação fotográfica apresentou desempenho semelhante ou melhor do que o próprio exame realizado pelo cirurgião-dentista em levantamentos epidemiológicos  . Reforçando essa perspectiva, estudos sinalizaram resultados satisfatórios com sistemas criados tendo como referência a imagem fotográfica por meio da inteligência artificial  . Um artigo   chama atenção para a possibilidade de tomadas fotográficas realizadas com precisão por pessoal auxiliar, o que seria muito importante para um maior envolvimento da equipe de saúde bucal nos inquéritos epidemiológicos. Da mesma forma, alguns artigos   reportaram a tomada fotográfica realizada por pais, outros membros da família ou o próprio paciente, com resultados bastante satisfatórios.
Entre as conclusões, as que foram determinantes na contribuição dessa revisão de escopo para propor essas ferramentas como potenciais referem-se a artigos desenvolvidos a partir de objetivos relacionados à clínica, mas que contribuem significativamente com soluções para a saúde coletiva. Estudos sinalizaram a possibilidade de melhorar a distribuição desigual de recursos em saúde coletiva  , melhorar a saúde pública ao permitir a triagem automática de casos suspeitos de doenças  , melhorar o acesso à saúde bucal em áreas rurais  . Além disso, um estudo sinaliza a oportunidade de oferecer triagem potencialmente econômica e de fácil utilização  , proporcionando triagem de lesões de cáries dentárias confiável, acessível, menos invasiva, menos perigosa e menos demorada.
A análise dos resultados do presente estudo revela visão positiva sobre as possibilidades da Inteligência Artificial na área da saúde, coincidindo com estudo que destaca benefícios significativos para avanços no acesso dos pacientes aos serviços de saúde  .
Entretanto, apesar do avanço tecnológico e do valor agregado para processos de tomada de decisão em assistência à saúde proporcionados pela inteligência artificial, outros desafios continuam preocupando pacientes e os próprios profissionais de saúde. A utilização cuidadosa, ética e humanizada pelos profissionais de saúde desses recursos deve priorizar o respeito ao paciente, garantindo que a tecnologia seja uma aliada no cuidado. As implicações sociais e éticas, em especial relacionadas às medidas de privacidade e segurança para dados de pacientes e a real capacidade de monitoramento de saúde devem fazer parte desses cuidados  .

CONSIDERAÇÕES FINAIS
É urgente o desenvolvimento de soluções baseadas nas evidências científicas e nos avanços tecnológicos que permitam aos profissionais de saúde, em especial os da atenção básica, desenvolverem o planejamento local em saúde bucal a partir de referencial epidemiológico.
É possível sinalizar a futura adoção de fotografias bucais como instrumentos estratégicos na substituição da complexa logística e da necessidade imperiosa do envolvimento do cirurgião-dentista na realização de inquéritos epidemiológicos, utilizados como referência única para o diagnóstico coletivo.
Também é importante observar que a acurácia obtida em vários estudos que utilizaram o diagnóstico de cárie mediado pela inteligência artificial a partir de fotografias, apesar de não ter o resultado ideal para a clínica, apresentam-se bastante satisfatórios para inquéritos epidemiológicos.
A partir das evidências sinalizadas na presente revisão, seria fundamental o desenvolvimento de estudos específicos que pudessem agregar à realidade epidemiológica brasileira os avanços da inteligência artificial.
E, uma vez que os avanços venham a ser alcançados, seria fundamental a inclusão desse tipo de informação e imagens no Prontuário Eletrônico do Cidadão do e-SUS APS  , viabilizando, com isso, a vigilância em saúde bucal.
Disponibilidade de Dados: Por se tratar de uma revisão de escopo, não foram gerados dados primários para desenvolvimento do artigo.
Financiamento: Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior (Capes – Código de Financiamento 001, processo: 88887.717096/2022-00 – 2023).