Investigating the mediating roles of psychological resilience and digital addiction in the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health: a meta-analytic structural equation modeling approach
Introduction
Research shows that university students are increasingly becoming more prone to digital addiction, leading to serious mental health problems. Emotional intelligence and psychological resilience, on the other hand, are considered to play a role in their likelihood of experiencing digital addiction and mental health problems. Studies investigating the interrelationships between these constructs are rare despite their growing significance in the contemporary digital world. Therefore, this study aims to investigate the dual and multiple relationships between these variables by testing a hypothetical research model.
Method
This study uses meta-analytic structural equation modeling (MASEM) analysis to test the structural relationships in the study model. The study also tests some alternative models regarding the relationships among the study variables to offer a more nuanced understanding. Data for the study were collected step-wise from Web of Science (WoS), Scopus, and Google Scholar. Data analysis was conducted using correlation coefficients gathered from 257 studies included in the dataset.
Results
By quantitatively synthesizing results from 257 studies, the study showed that university students' emotional intelligence can be associated with mental health problems both directly and indirectly through digital addiction and psychological resilience.
Discussion
By testing an integrated model of emotional, psychological, and behavioral factors within a single exploratory framework, the study provided a more comprehensive account of mental health functioning among university students and suggested important implications for promoting university students' mental health.

Introduction
Advancements in digital technologies continue to reshape many aspects of daily life from patterns of communication to socialization, entertainment, or learning. Despite many conveniences they provide, they bear significant risks to human health through interacting with several psychological processes such as identity development, attachment styles, or emotion regulation mechanisms, as well as their addictive potential.
In recent years, excessive exposure to or problematic use of digital technologies, namely digital addiction, has been classified as a behavioral addiction because it is likely to cause impairments in daily life, difficulties in impulse control, and a significant decline in social relationships. Studies have shown that digital addiction is strongly associated with various psychological risks such as depression, anxiety, stress, loneliness, low self-esteem, attention problems, and sleep disorders.
The mental health literature indicates that digital addiction is not only linked to psychological wellbeing but also affects executive functions, attention processes, and social relationships in a multifaceted way. For example, studies on social media addiction, a subtype of digital addiction, reveal that students' constant desire to be online increases their tendency for social comparison, which can later trigger depressive symptoms. Similarly, intensive smartphone use is associated with difficulties in emotion regulation and increased stress in individuals. Furthermore, sleep disruption is associated with digital addiction, suggesting that late-night screen exposure suppresses melatonin secretion and leads to a decrease in both sleep duration and quality. Existing evidence suggests that digital addiction can influence mental health through many interconnected underlying mechanisms.
Research indicates that university students are more prone to digital addiction compared to other age groups. Empirical results suggest that university students' search for social belonging, academic stress and anxiety, search for social approval and pressure to present oneself, having more free time and constant access to personal devices as well as the influence of digital platforms on their identity formation processes are some of the significant reasons for the increased risk of digital addiction among university students. Furthermore, research findings suggest that online education practices and the increasing need for digital communication can also trigger digital addiction among university students.
Studies focusing on the link between university students' digital addiction and mental health reveal a significant negative correlation between psychological resilience and digital addiction, indicating that students with high psychological resilience are better at coping with real-life stressors and therefore less likely to resort to escapist coping strategies through excessive digital media consumption. Similarly, university students with higher emotional intelligence are observed to have a lower risk of digital addiction and mental health problems due to having higher psychological resilience and a greater capacity to cope with negative emotions. To conclude, emotional intelligence and psychological resilience are considered to play a role in reducing mental health problems associated with digital addiction.
Taking digital addiction as an umbrella term encompassing problematic use of digital technologies such as the internet, smartphone, social media, AI-apps, online gaming, or digital communication devices, this study aims to examine the interrelationships between emotional intelligence, digital addiction, psychological resilience, and mental health problems in university students within a more holistic framework. Using data from previous research on dual or multiple relationships among the variables, the study analyzes how university students' emotional intelligence affects their mental health both directly and indirectly through digital addiction and psychological resilience. To this end, we employed a meta-analytic structural equation modeling approach (MASEM), which combines meta-analysis and structural equation modeling to test a theoretical model using aggregated evidence from many studies. MASEM goes beyond traditional meta-analyses, which are limited to isolated effect sizes and do not capture interdependencies among several variables, by simultaneously estimating direct and indirect (mediated) relationships among study variables and examining relative effects and indirect pathways within a unified theoretical system, and thus testing a theory-driven system of relationships rather than separate bivariate links. Therefore, by integrating emotional intelligence, mental health, digital addiction, and psychological resilience within a single MASEM framework, the present study moves beyond fragmented evidence to provide a coherent test of their joint functioning, enabling the examination of interdependencies and indirect pathways linking emotional intelligence to mental health through digital addiction and psychological resilience within a unified theoretical model.

Theoretical framework and the hypotheses

Emotional intelligence and mental health problems
Emotional intelligence refers to an individual's emotional strength and capability to regulate their own and others' emotions. Research has shown that people with higher emotional intelligence are better able to protect themselves from the negative effects of stress, reporting less depression, hopelessness, and suicidal ideation, suggesting that emotional intelligence can act as a mechanism to prevent mental health problems. It is often argued that negative emotional states are associated with unhealthy physiological functioning patterns. Similarly, all three dimensions of emotional intelligence, wellbeing, self-control, and sociability, have been shown to positively influence mental health. Based on these findings, we propose our first hypothesis:
H1. University students' emotional intelligence has a significant negative effect on their mental health problems.

Emotional intelligence and digital addiction
Research indicates a relationship between individuals' emotional intelligence levels and digital addiction behaviors. Individuals with low emotional intelligence may be more prone to internet addiction, while those with high emotional intelligence are less inclined to excessive internet use and its negative consequences. Studies have shown a significant negative correlation between emotional intelligence and internet addiction, suggesting that higher levels of emotional intelligence can reduce internet addiction among university students. Based on this evidence, we propose our second hypothesis:
H2. University students' emotional intelligence has a significant negative effect on their digital addiction.

Emotional intelligence and psychological resilience
Emotional intelligence and psychological resilience are interrelated psychological concepts associated with several behavioral outcomes. Emotional intelligence enhances empathy, responsiveness to others' emotions, and emotional self-regulation by supporting an individual's stress responses and coping strategies, which can, in turn, support psychological resilience. It has also been reported that emotional intelligence affects students' wellbeing both directly and through enhancing psychological resilience, underscoring the critical role of developing emotional intelligence and psychological resilience in educational settings. Similarly,) showed a positive correlation between emotional intelligence and psychological resilience in university students. Based on this evidence, we propose our third hypothesis:
H3. University students' emotional intelligence has a significant positive effect on their psychological resilience.

Digital addiction and mental health problems
While digital technologies offer various benefits for young people, their problematic and extensive use bears significant risks. Students' excessive use of digital technologies such as smartphones or social media can result in addiction. Meta-analytic studies report a high correlation between problematic digital technology use and various mental health problems such as depression, anxiety, and sleep disorders.
In their study with university students,) found that increased smartphone use and high addiction rates worsened their quality of life and caused several mental health problems. Several other studies have revealed that problematic and pathological internet use is associated with various psychopathological symptoms. In their research,) found that young people with digital addiction reported lower self-ratings of mental health. Similarly,) reported that digital addiction had a negative impact on the physical and mental health of university students. Based on these findings, we propose our fourth hypothesis:
H4. University students' digital addiction has a significant positive effect on their mental health problems.

Psychological resilience and mental health problems
The term resilience is used to describe various phenomena ranging from preventing mental health problems to successful adaptation and rapid recovery after experiencing life challenges such as post-traumatic psychological growth. Similarly, psychological resilience refers to the process of multiple biological, psychological, social, and ecological systems interacting to help individuals regain, maintain, or improve their mental wellbeing when faced with one or more risk factors. Empirical evidence suggests that psychological resilience can act as a regulatory mechanism for mental health. For instance,) found that lower levels of psychological resilience were associated with somatic illnesses, while) revealed a significant correlation between psychological resilience and mental health. Based on these results, we propose our fifth hypothesis:
H5. University students' psychological resilience has a significant negative effect on their mental health problems.

Psychological resilience and digital addiction
A significant negative correlation has been found between digital addiction and psychological resilience, and higher psychological resilience is said to reduce behaviors that lead to digital addiction. It is predicted that individuals with high psychological resilience reduce their tendency toward excessive digital media consumption, while low psychological resilience increases susceptibility to digital escapism and behavioral addiction.) found that digital game addiction led to lower levels of psychological resilience, suggesting that psychological resilience can predict problematic internet use or internet addiction. Based on this evidence, we propose our sixth hypothesis:
H6. University students' digital addiction has a significant negative relationship with their psychological resilience.

Mediating roles of digital addiction and psychological resilience
Emotional intelligence is negatively correlated with behavioral addictions and plays both a moderating and mediating role in the relationships between behavioral addictions and mental health problems. Emotional intelligence can affect students' mental health both directly and indirectly by moderating their tendency to develop digital addiction. Thus, we propose our seventh hypothesis as follows:
H7. Digital addiction mediates the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health problems.
Psychological resilience is considered a sign of a healthy psychological state and may partially mediate the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health problems. Emotional intelligence can support psychological resilience by enhancing individuals' ability to manage stress and cope with problems. Considering the positive effects of psychological resilience on mental health, psychological resilience can also mediate the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health problems. Thus, we propose our eighth hypothesis as follows:
H8. Psychological resilience mediates the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health problems.
Within the context of existing evidence regarding the relationships among variables and the hypotheses developed from this evidence, we developed the research model presented in Figure 1.
The proposed research model.

Methodology
This study employs meta-analytic structural equating modeling (MASEM) to test the relationships in the hypothesized model on emotional intelligence, digital addiction, psychological resilience, and mental health problems. The analyses are conducted using the Pearson correlations gathered from 257 studies on the particular variables involved in the model.

Data collection
Data for the study were collected step-wise from Web of Science (WoS), Scopus, and Google Scholar. The initial search was conducted on 28 September, 2025 on WoS and Scopus using a combination of study variables, as well as the other types of digital addictions, such as smartphone, social media, or video-game addiction. This search yielded 212 documents from WoS and 268 from Scopus. Following the psychological PRISMA 2020 guidelines, we employed a detailed data extraction (Figure 2).
The PRISMA diagram.
Two independent reviewers from among the researchers conducted the whole data search and extraction process, which was later double-checked by two other independent reviewers from among the researchers. The following inclusion/exclusion criteria was applied during data extraction:
INCLUDE: peer-reviewed articles reporting Pearson correlations in the context of university students; articles written in English.
EXCLUDE: thesis, books (book chapters or conference proceedings; qualitative, review, conceptual studies; quantitative studies not reporting Pearson correlation; K-12 or general population context; non-English articles.
First, we compared the WoS and Scopus documents and identified 178 duplicate records. Next, we scanned through the titles and abstracts of the remaining 302 documents to identify documents falling out of our research scope (e.g., focusing on K-19 students, adults, etc.), and 49 documents were removed for this reason. Next, we scanned through the results sections of the remaining 253 documents and extracted 62 studies to obtain the Pearson correlation values. At this stage, we also skimmed the references of these articles and identified 40 additional papers that were missed earlier. Finally, we conducted a final search on Google Scholar to identify any recent research that might not have been indexed on the two databases yet. We identified 26 documents to be included in the dataset. Consequently, a total of 257 documents were included in the final dataset.

Data analysis
A two-stage structural equation modeling approach was used to determine the overall effect size of the relationship between variables and to test the goodness-of-fit of the constructed models, using Pearson's correlation coefficients extracted from the 257 studies. In the first stage, a total correlation matrix is created from the correlation matrices extracted from the primary studies. For this purpose, correlation matrices were combined according to the random effects model to calculate the aggregate correlation matrix and the variance-covariance components (Tau2) representing inter-study heterogeneity. This calculation was performed using the full information maximum likelihood (FIML) estimation method. In the second stage, structural equation models are constructed using this matrix to assess model-data fit. At this stage, parameter estimation was performed using the weighted least squares (WLS) method, where the inverse of the asymptotic sampling covariance matrix obtained from the first stage was used as the weighting matrix. webMASEM, a web-based software, was used for this analysis. First, correlation matrices were combined according to the random effects model to determine the overall effect size and the magnitude of heterogeneity (I2) of the relationship between the variables. The overall effect sizes were calculated using) scale according to which heterogeneity up to 0.10 is “very small”, up to 0.20 “small”, up to 0.30 “medium”, up to 0.40 “wide”, and above 0.40 “very wide”. The magnitude of heterogeneity up to 25% was evaluated as “small”, up to 50% “medium”, and up to 75% “high”. To determine whether publication bias had any effect on the calculated mean effect sizes, we used the funnel plot, and performed Egger's regression test to determine if the asymmetry in the funnel plot was significant. When the result of this test shows no significant asymmetry, this indicates no statistically significant effect of publication bias. Next, model-data fits were evaluated for both the proposed and alternative models by calculating the RMSEA, SRMR, CFI, and TLI indices. An RMSEA value equal to or below 0.05 was interpreted as “excellent” fit; a value between 0.05 and 0.08 was interpreted as acceptable fit. A SRMR value of 0.08 or less is considered an excellent “fit,” while a value between 0.08 and 0.1 is considered an acceptable fit. For comparative fit indices, TLI and CFI values >0.95 indicate an “excellent fit,” while values between 0.90 and 0.95 indicate an acceptable fit. Furthermore, AIC and BIC values were examined to determine which model best fit the data, and the model with the lowest AIC and BIC values was identified as the best-fit model.

Results

Summary effects
Correlation matrices were constructed by combining the correlation coefficients extracted from studies in the dataset according to the random effects model. The calculated effect sizes are presented in Table 1.
Summary of MASEM analysis.
Associations	k	Total sample	r	%95 Confidence Interval	I2	Egger's Sig.	 					Lower Limit	Upper Limit			 	DA&MH	103	65967	0.338	0.308	0.368	%93.9	0.275	 	DA&PR	51	30463	−0.264	−0.295	−0.233	%86.6	0.388	 	DA&EI	42	21242	−0.316	−0.371	−0.260	%95.1	0.237	 	MH&PR	78	45384	−0.383	−0.414	−0.351	%93.1	0.257	 	MH&EI	44	21254	−0.341	−0.397	−0.285	%95.9	0.925	 	PR&EI	46	17737	0.512	0.459	0.565	%96.9	0.897
DA, digital addiction; MH, mental health; PR, psychological resilience; EI, emotional intelligence.

Test of the mediation analysis
The effect size between digital addiction and mental health problems was calculated as r = 0.338, 95% CI[0.308, 0.368], which is interpreted as “large”. The effect size between digital addiction and emotional intelligence was calculated as r = −0.316, 95% CI[−0.371, −0.260], which is negative and “large”. The effect size between digital addiction and psychological resilience was calculated as r = −0.264, 95% CI[−0.295, −0.233], which is negative and “moderate”. The effect size between emotional intelligence and mental health problems was calculated as r = −0.341, 95% CI [−0.397, −0.285], while the correlation effect size between psychological resilience and mental health problems was calculated as r = −0.383, 95% CI[−0.414, −0.351], showing mental health problems are negatively and largely correlated with emotional intelligence and psychological resilience. A significant “moderate” correlation (r = 0.270, 95% CI[0.143, 0.398]) was found between emotional intelligence and psychological resilience. I2 values range from 86.6% to 96.9%, indicating a “high” level of variance between effect sizes, suggesting a significant portion of the variation in effect sizes may stem from the specific characteristics of the studies included in the meta-analysis. A regression analysis was conducted to examine the effect of publication bias on mean effect sizes, which revealed that asymmetry in the funnel plots (Appendix) was not statistically significant at the 95% confidence interval (p < 0.05). This result indicates that publication bias is not statistically significant, and therefore the calculated mean effect sizes are valid and reliable.

Test of the proposed model
The correlation matrices obtained from studies were combined to analyze the model-data fit of the proposed research model. The calculated goodness-of-fit indices are given in Table 2.
The goodness-of-fit indices for the proposed model.
Model	χ2(df)	p-value	RMSEA	RMSEA %95 Li	RMSEA %95 Ui	SRMR	TLI	CFI	AIC	BIC	 	Original Model	9.69(1)	0.002	0.008	0.004	0.013	0.035	0.973	0.996	7.689	−2.138
The chi-square test for the Proposed Model was not statistically significant (χ2 = 9.689, p > 0.05). RMSEA showed an “excellent” fit with a 95% CI of 0.008 [0.004, 0.013]; SRMR showed a “good” fit with a value of 0.035; TLI showed an “excellent” fit with a value of 0.973, and CFI showed an “excellent” fit with a value of 0.996. Taken together, the model shows a good model-data fit. The path graph of the proposed research model is shown in Figure 3.
The path graph of the proposed research model. (DA, digital addiction; MH, mental health; PR, psychological resilience; EI, emotional intelligence).
As shown in Figure 3, emotional intelligence had a large negative effect (β = 0.335, 95% CI = [−0.389, −0.281]) on digital addiction. Similarly, emotional intelligence had a large positive effect on psychological resilience (β = 0.535, 95% CI [0.484, 0.586]). Emotional intelligence explains 11% of the variance in digital addiction and 29% of the variance in psychological resilience, indicating that emotional intelligence can significantly influence mental health and psychological resilience. Digital addiction had a moderate positive effect on mental health problems (β = 0.258, 95% CI [0.223, 0.292]) while psychological resilience had a large negative effect (β = −0.328, 95% CI [−0.362, −0.293]). These findings indicate that digital addiction can increase mental health problems, while psychological resilience can reduce them. Digital addiction and psychological resilience explain 22% of the variance in mental health problems.
Digital addiction and psychological resilience have a very small negative correlation (r =-0.080, 95% CI = [−0.125, −0.036]), and both mediate the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health problems. To determine whether these variables are full or partial mediators, a regression arrow was drawn from emotional intelligence to mental health problems. The path graph of the mediation model is shown in Figure 4.
The path graph of the mediation model. (DA, digital addiction; MH, mental health; PR, psychological resilience; EI, emotional intelligence).
Because the mediating model became saturated (df = 0), no goodness-of-fit index was calculated. The regression coefficient between emotional intelligence and mental health problems was negative, small, and significant (β = −0.141, 95% CI = [−0.227, −0.056]). Accordingly, digital addiction and psychological resilience are partial mediators in the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health problems. In other words, the effect of emotional intelligence on mental health may occur both directly and indirectly through digital addiction and psychological resilience, indicating that emotional intelligence can contribute to the resolution of mental health problems by reducing digital addiction and strengthening psychological resilience.

Test of alternative models
Three alternative models to the proposed research model were created and tested to identify whether any better model fit could be obtained. The calculated goodness-of-fit indices are given in Table 3.
Goodness-of-fit indices for the alternative models.
Model	χ2(df)	p-value	RMSEA	RMSEA %95	RMSEA %95	SRMR	TLI	CFI	AIC	BIC	 	Model 1	99.90(1)	0.000	0.027	0.023	0.031	0.094	0.690	0.949	97.9	88.07	 	Model 2	199.97(2)	0.000	0.027	0.024	0.030	0.095	0.691	0.897	196	176.3	 	Model 3	131.65(2)	0.000	0.022	0.019	0.025	0.120	0.798	0.933	127.7	108	 	Model 4	316.61(2)	0.000	0.034	0.031	0.037	0.132	0.509	0.836	312.6	293
In the first alternative model (Model 1), the independent variable of the proposed model (emotional intelligence) was exchanged with the dependent variable of digital addiction. The path graph of the alternative model 1 is shown in Figure 5.
The path graph of the alternative model 1. (DA, digital addiction; MH, mental health; PR, psychological resilience; EI, emotional intelligence).
All regression coefficients of Model 1 were found to be significant at the 95% confidence level (p < 0.05). Considering the goodness-of-fit indices of Model 1 given in Table 3, the RMSEA value of 0.027 95% [0.023, 0.032] indicates an “excellent” fit. In contrast, the CFI value of 0.949 indicates an “acceptable” fit. The SRMR value of 0.949 is within the acceptable range. In contrast, the TLI value of 0.691 is well below the acceptable level. TLI penalizes complex, or less restrictive, models with a downward correction, while parsimonious, or more restrictive models are rewarded with an increase in the fit index. Therefore, the TLI being below the acceptable level may have resulted from the model having a low degree of freedom (df = 1), implying that this model fits the data and validly explains the structural relationships between the variables.
To increase the degrees of freedom and improve the TLI value, models with multiple independent variables (df = 2) were established. In Model 2, digital addiction and emotional intelligence were considered as independent variables, and both were determined as predictors of psychological resilience, which in turn predicts mental health problems. The path graph of alternative model 2 is shown in Figure 6.
The path graph of the alternative model 2. (DA, digital addiction; MH, mental health; PR, psychological resilience; EI, emotional intelligence).
All regression coefficients of Model 2 were found to be significant at the 95% confidence level (p < 0.05). A comparison between the goodness-of-fit indices of Model 1 and Model 2 reveals that the RMSEA (0.027), SRMR (0.095), and TLI (0.691) indices of Model 2 have similar values to the indices of Model 1. However, the CFI index for Model 2 remains below the “acceptable” limits, indicating that Model 2 does not fit the data.
Unlike Model 2, the positions of emotional intelligence and psychological resilience were reversed in Model 3, with emotional intelligence serving as the mediating variable. The path graph of the alternative model 3 is shown in Figure 7.
The path graph of the alternative model 3. (DA, digital addiction; MH, mental health; PR, psychological resilience; EI, emotional intelligence).
All regression coefficients of Model 3 were statistically significant at the 95% confidence level (p < 0.05). The RMSEA (0.019) for Model 3 showed an excellent fit, but SRMR (0.12) was below the acceptable limit. Although the TLI (0.798) value increased, it remained below the acceptable limit. Similarly, CFI (0.933) increased slightly, reaching an “acceptable” fit level. These results imply that the model-data fit is not achieved for Model 3, so it is insufficient to explain the structural relationships between the variables.
Finally, Model 4 was constructed, in which the positions of digital addiction and emotional intelligence were swapped, with digital addiction as the mediating variable. The path graph of alternative model 4 is shown in Figure 8.
The path graph of the alternative model 4. (DA, digital addiction; MH, mental health; PR, psychological resilience; EI, emotional intelligence).
All regression coefficients in Model 3 were statistically significant at the 95% confidence level (p < 0.05). However, all indices except RMSEA (0.034) (SRMR, TLI, and CFI) were well below acceptable levels, indicating that Model 4 did not fit the data well.
One way to determine the best model to explain the structural relationships between the variables is to check the AIC and BIC indices. A model with lower AIC and BIC indices is considered to fit the data best. Accordingly, the AIC (=7.689) and BIC (=-2.14) calculated for the Proposed Model were the lowest among the models. Based on these results and the goodness-of-fit indices calculated for the proposed model, it can be said that the proposed model best explains the relational structure in the dataset. Among the alternative models, Model 1 (AIC = 97.9; BIC = 88.1) is the most suitable model for the data. The fundamental difference between the Proposed Model and Model 1 lies in whether the independent variable is emotional intelligence or digital addiction. Accordingly, the fact that both models fit the data indicates that emotional intelligence can reduce digital addiction and vice versa.

Discussion
This study employed a novel and advanced methodology, (MASEM), to examine the dual and multifaceted relationships among emotional intelligence, psychological resilience, digital addiction, and mental health problems among university students in a single theoretical model. Using the proposed research model and other alternative models developed during structural equation analysis, the analyses yielded comprehensive and generalizable results that will contribute to the relevant literature and guide practitioners.
Analyses have shown that higher levels of emotional intelligence can be linked to reduced levels of digital addiction and mental health problems in university students. Research showed that individuals with low emotional intelligence are more prone to internet addiction, while those with high emotional intelligence are less inclined to excessive internet use and its associated negative consequences. Specifically, high emotional intelligence has been associated with lower levels of internet addiction among university students. Similarly, individuals with improved ability to regulate their own emotions and the emotions of others are more protected against the negative effects of stress, thus having a lower probability of developing depression, hopelessness, and suicidal ideation. In other words, emotional intelligence, with all three dimensions of wellbeing, self-control, and sociability, has been closely linked to improved mental health. Regarding psychological resilience, existing evidence shows that emotional intelligence strengthens coping and self-regulation skills by supporting adaptive responses in stressful situations, thus significantly contributing to psychological resilience. Studies in the educational context have found positive and significant relationships between emotional intelligence and psychological resilience among university students, emphasizing the importance of developing these two constructs together.
Our study adds to the existing evidence by showing that digital addiction among university students can be linked to mental health problems. Meta-analytic studies reveal strong associations between problematic digital technology use and psychological problems that can lead to mental health problems such as depression, anxiety, and sleep disorders. Studies, particularly those conducted on university students, highlight the negative influence of digital addiction on quality of life and mental health. Key reasons why digital addiction is a significant risk factor for young people's mental health include using technology to escape negative emotions, exposure to intense social comparison on social media, and damage to self-image. Furthermore, excessive screen use disrupts sleep patterns, makes time management difficult, reduces face-to-face social interaction, and increases feelings of loneliness. Declines in academic functioning, decreased physical activity, and developmental vulnerabilities of adolescents and young adults can also lead to both digital addiction and mental health problems, such as anxiety and depression.
The study revealed a correlation between psychological resilience and digital addiction. Previous studies have shown that individuals with high levels of psychological resilience are better able to control behaviors leading to digital addiction, develop alternative coping strategies instead of using digital environments as a means of emotional relief, and thus are less likely to enter the addiction cycle. Conversely, low psychological resilience can increase individuals‘ tendency to use digital environments to cope with stress, loneliness, and negative emotions, raising the risk of digital escapism and behavioral addiction. Indeed, recent research has supported this reciprocal interaction, showing that as students' digital game addiction increases, their psychological resilience levels decrease.
Analyses have revealed that psychological resilience can be associated with the risk of digital addiction and mental health problems in university students. Indeed, psychological resilience is directly and positively correlated with indicators of mental health. Empirical research confirms a strong relationship between psychological resilience and mental health, underpinning the protective role of psychological resilience for mental wellbeing.
Mediation analyses revealed that both digital addiction and psychological resilience partially mediate the emotional intelligence-mental health relationship. Therefore, emotional intelligence can be associated with university students' mental health both directly and indirectly through digital addiction and psychological resilience. In other words, higher levels of emotional intelligence can be directly linked to reduced digital addiction and lower risk of mental health problems. In addition, university students' psychological resilience can influence the strength of this relationship. Emotional intelligence can directly support mental health by strengthening individuals' abilities to recognize, regulate, and cope with stress. Psychological resilience can also partially mediate the relationship between emotional intelligence and psychological wellbeing, through its protective function in mental health. Additionally, the more emotional intelligence strengthens psychological resilience, the better individuals respond to stressors, which might result in reduced risk of mental health problems. On the other hand, individuals with high emotional intelligence are less likely to turn to digital environments as a coping mechanism, which might result in higher risk of digital addiction with possible negative consequences on mental health.
In addition to the proposed research model, four alternative models were developed and tested to examine the relationships among variables and potential mediating effects. The analyses showed that the best model-data fit was achieved with the proposed model. In contrast, with the alternative Model 1, where digital addiction was the independent variable, the fit was only partial. These results indicate that although emotional intelligence is relatively more stable and fundamental than digital addiction, digital addiction may also be associated with university students' emotional intelligence levels. Although findings showing that individuals with internet addiction have relatively low levels of emotional intelligence exist in the literature, this deserves and warrants further investigation to gain better insights.

Conclusion and implications
This study tested a theoretical model of the relationship between emotional intelligence and mental health problems of university students with a particular focus on how this relationship can be influenced by their digital addiction and psychological resilience. Findings have not only extended prior research that has typically investigated these variables in isolation but also offered a more comprehensive account of mental health functioning among university students by testing an integrated model of emotional, psychological, and behavioral factors within a single exploratory framework.
The results indicated that university students with higher levels of emotional intelligence are likely to experience fewer mental health problems since they are better at regulating their emotions, coping with the hassles of daily life, and recovering from stress. In addition, emotional intelligence not only functions as a personal resource that strengthens their adaptive coping capacities but also mitigates their maladaptive use of digital technologies through enhancing their self-regulation capacity. Similarly, the findings showed that university students' emotional intelligence can also enhance their mental wellbeing through fostering their psychological resilience. Taken together, these results highlight the importance of targeting both protective (i.e., emotional intelligence and psychological resilience) and risk factors (i.e., digital addiction) to enhance the mental wellbeing of university students.
The findings offer important implications for promoting university students' mental health. First, designing programs to enhance their emotion recognition, regulation, and empathy could be a promising entry point for preventive efforts. Second, interventions targeting psychological resilience through stress management, adaptive coping, and mindfulness-based programs may be particularly effective when integrated with emotional intelligence development. These interventions should also target promoting self-regulated digital engagement and help students develop healthier alternatives to emotionally driven, problematic use of digital technologies. Universities may consider embedding such programs within orientation courses, counseling services, or co-curricular activities.

Limitations
Despite the strengths of meta-analytical approaches in synthesizing empirical evidence, several limitations of the present study should be acknowledged. First, because the findings of the current study depend on data from published studies, any weaknesses in the design, measurement, or analysis of the primary studies may have influenced the pooled effect estimates. Second, due to variations in sample characteristics, research contexts, study designs, and measurement instruments, substantial heterogeneity is inherently observed in the dataset. Although we used a random-effects model to accommodate this variability, the sources of heterogeneity cannot be fully explained. Therefore, the results might not apply uniformly across contexts or populations. Furthermore, moderator analyses based on variables such as region, measurement instrument, or research design were not conducted to examine the sources of the high heterogeneity (I2 > 85%) observed in the pairwise relationships between variables because the main objective of the study was not to determine the sources of inter-study differences, but to test the theoretically proposed structural model and four alternative models. However, the adoption of the random effects TSSEM approach in the first stage allowed for the statistical reflection of inter-study variability in the pooled correlation matrix and the estimates in the second stage. It is recommended that future research contribute to the generalizability of the findings by systematically examining cultural, measurement, and design-based moderators. In addition, the findings reflect the state of the literature at the time of data collection and may not incorporate the most recent evidence. Similarly, the dataset might have missed some relevant research, although we employed a meticulous data search and extraction procedure.
Edited by: Siddiqua Aamir, Prince Mohammad bin Fahd University, Saudi Arabia
Reviewed by: Hüseyin Doğan, Agri Ibrahim Cecen University, Türkiye
Burcu Karafil, Yalova University, Türkiye

Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author/s.

Author contributions
TK: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Resources, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. TT: Data curation, Investigation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. BH: Data curation, Resources, Validation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Investigation. SK: Data curation, Formal analysis, Methodology, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. MO: Data curation, Investigation, Resources, Visualization, Writing – original draft. AK: Data curation, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. NA: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Resources, Writing – review & editing.

Conflict of interest
The author(s) declared that this work was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Generative AI statement
The author(s) declared that generative AI was not used in the creation of this manuscript.
Any alternative text (alt text) provided alongside figures in this article has been generated by Frontiers with the support of artificial intelligence and reasonable efforts have been made to ensure accuracy, including review by the authors wherever possible. If you identify any issues, please contact us.

Publisher's note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

References
From digital mental health interventions to digital “addiction”: where the two fields converge
The relationship between emotional intelligence, resilience, and psychological distress among nurses in Jordan
Psychological resilience, mental health, and inhibitory control among youth and young adults under stress
Relationship between emotional intelligence, internet addiction, and sociodemographic factors among university students: a cross-sectional study
The prediction of the mediating role of resilience between psychological well-being and emotional intelligence in students
Emotional intelligence in mental health nurses talking about practice
Religiosity, psychological resilience, and mental health among breast cancer patients in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
The relationship between emotional intelligence, internet addiction, and psychological well-being among university nursing students
Internet addiction and associated factors among undergraduate students of Jimma University; Jimma, South West Ethiopia, institutional based cross-sectional study
The interplay between Facebook use, social comparison, envy, and depression
Emotional intelligence and psychological resilience to negative life events
Investigating the mediating role of digital game addiction in the relationship between adolescents' school belonging and resilience
Challenges of the digital age: the relationship between internet addiction, loneliness and psychological resilience of university students
Digital addiction: systematic review of computer game addiction impact on adolescent physical health
The relationship between resilience, emotional intelligence and their influence on psychological wellbeing: a study with medical students
Defining digital addiction: key features from the literature
Smartphone use, digital addiction and physical and mental health in community-dwelling older adults: a population-based survey
Online learning satisfaction and internet addiction during the COVID-19 pandemic: a two-wave longitudinal study
Emotional intelligence and behavioural addictions: a systematic review
Facing loneliness and anxiety during the COVID-19 isolation: the role of excessive social media use in a sample of Italian adults
Social efficacy and internet addiction among university students: a descriptive and correlational study
Correlation among psychological resilience, loneliness, and internet addiction among left-behind children in China: a cross-sectional study
The association between pathological internet use and comorbid psychopathology: a systematic review
Narcissism and problematic social media use: a systematic literature review
The relationship between problematic internet use, interpersonal cognitive distortions, and life satisfaction among university students
Internet Addiction in adolescence: neurobiological, psychosocial and clinical issues
Smartphone addiction and victimization predict sleep problems and depression among children
Fixed- and random-effects meta-analytic structural equation modeling: examples and analyses in R
Emotional intelligence moderates the relationship between stress and mental health
Risk factors of smartphone addiction: a systematic review of longitudinal studies
Digital addiction and sleep
Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple, graphical test
Problematic smartphone use: a conceptual overview and systematic review of relations with anxiety and depression psychopathology
Bedtime mobile phone use and sleep in adults
The relationship between emotional intelligence and the mental health of students
The association between resilience and mental health in the somatically ill: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Mobile phone addiction and depression among Chinese medical students: the mediating role of sleep quality and the moderating role of peer relationships
Dimensions of emotional intelligence related to physical and mental health and to health behaviors
Internet addiction and emotional intelligence in university nursing students: a cross-sectional study
Evaluating effect size in psychological research: sense and nonsense
A ‘components' model of addiction within a biopsychosocial framework
Exploring the moderating effect of spiritual resilience on the relationship between psychological resilience and mental health
Digital addiction and related factors among college students
Measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses
Craving Facebook? Problematic social media use associated with psychological markers
A meta-analysis of the trait resilience and mental health
Meta-analytic structural equation modeling made easy: a tutorial and web application for one-stage MASEM
Emotional intelligence, resilience and mental health of women college students
Meta-analysis in information systems research: review and recommendations
Internet addiction, emotional intelligence and anxiety in youth
A comprehensive review on emerging trends in the dynamic evolution of digital addiction and depression
A conceptual and methodological critique of internet addiction research
Exploring the interplay of emotional intelligence, psychological resilience, perceived stress, and life satisfaction: a cross-sectional study in the Turkish context
Problematic Instagram use: the role of perceived feeling of presence and escapism
Predictive roles of psychological resilience and coping skills on social media addiction
Do psychological resilience and emotional intelligence vary among stress profiles in university students? A latent profile analysis
The relationship between technology addictions and psychological resilience of high school students in the COVID-19 period
Social networking sites and addiction: ten lessons learned
Problematic smartphone use on mental health: a systematic mapping study and taxonomy
Fear of missing out and smartphone addiction mediates the relationship between positive and negative affect and sleep quality among Chinese university students
Nursing students' post-traumatic growth, emotional intelligence and psychological resilience
Internet addiction increases in the general population during COVID-19: evidence from China
Psychological “effects” of digital technology: a meta-analysis
Association of smartphone use and digital addiction with mental health, quality of life, motivation and learning of medical students: a two-year follow-up study
Depression, anxiety, and smartphone addiction in university students-A cross sectional study
Global prevalence of digital addiction in the general population: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Exploring individual differences in online addictions: the role of identity and attachment
Relationship of resilience with emotional intelligence, psychological well-being and life satisfaction among university students
Emotional intelligence and psychological resilience on workplace bullying and employee performance: a moderated-mediation perspective
The relationship between digital game addiction and psychological resilience in university students
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Education leaders as managers: exploring the relationship between emotional intelligence and psychological resilience
Societal impacts of artificial intelligence: ethical, legal, and governance issues
Resilience and smartphone addiction in college students: a systematic review
Literature review of emotional intelligence and mental health
Problematic internet use (PIU) in youth: a brief literature review of selected topics
Resilience in mental health: linking psychological and neurobiological perspectives
Problematic smartphone use and specific problematic Internet uses among university students and associated predictive factors: a systematic review
The relationship between emotional intelligence and internet addiction among youth and adults
Internet addiction among college students from 20 countries: scoping review of risk factors and impact on academic procrastination and sleep quality
Evaluating the fit of structural equation models: tests of significance and descriptive goodness-of-fit measures
Self-control and problematic smartphone use among Italian university students: the mediating role of the fear of missing out and of smartphone use patterns
Exploring the relationship of emotional intelligence with mental health among early adolescents
Impact of digital addiction on youth health: a systematic review and meta-analysis
The relationship between postgraduates' emotional intelligence and well-being: the chain mediating effect of social support and psychological resilience
Digital addiction: a conceptual overview
Identity development in the digital context
Prevalence of problematic smartphone usage and associated mental health outcomes
A review of theories and models applied in studies of social media addiction and implications for future research
Internet addiction and sleep quality among medical students during the COVID-19 pandemic: a multinational cross-sectional survey
Resilience and mental health: how multisystemic processes contribute to positive outcomes
Students' use of information and communication technologies in the classroom: uses, restriction, and integration
Predictive value of psychological resilience for mental health disturbances: a three-wave prospective study among police officers
Emotional intelligence of mental health nurses
Effects of physical activity on mobile phone addiction among university students: the mediating roles of self-control and resilience
Psychological resilience buffers the association between cell phone addiction and sleep quality among college students in Jiangsu Province, China
A review of psychological interventions for internet addiction
The impact of mobile social media use on depressive mood among college students: a chain mediating effect of upward social comparison and cognitive overload
Emotional competence as a mediator of the relationship between internet addiction and negative emotion in young adolescents in Hong Kong
Passive social media use and psychological well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic: the role of social comparison and emotion regulation
Investigating the mediating role of emotional intelligence in the relationship between internet addiction and mental health among university students
The relationships among self-control, psychological resilience, and digital addiction in college students: a meta-analytic structural equation modeling

Appendix

The funnel plots of the pairwise results
The funnel plot of the relationship between DA&MH.
The funnel plot of the relationship between DA&PR.
The funnel plot of the relationship between DA&EI.
The funnel plot of the relationship between MH&EI.
The funnel plot of the relationship between PR&MH.
The funnel plot of the relationship between PR&EI.