In Vitro Evaluation of Hemiarthroplasty Bearing Materials: A Scoping Review (Part I)
ABSTRACT
Hemiarthroplasty is used to treat joint damage confined to one side, aiming to preserve the remaining healthy cartilage and bone while addressing conditions like femur fractures and osteonecrosis; however, challenges persist due to cartilage wear and inconsistent clinical outcomes. This scoping review evaluates in vitro studies on hemiarthroplasty bearing materials (HBM), focusing on the HBM tested, cartilage specimens, experimental setups, outcome variables, and the comparability of results. Of 1798 identified studies, 72 met the inclusion criteria, with 48 classified as in vitro. HBMs tested included metals (42%) and soft polymers (30%) and 45% of studies utilized multiple distinct HBMs. Cartilage specimens were predominantly bovine (65%), mostly from the tibial‐femoral joint (69%). The two most common experimental set ups were tribometers (75%) and simulators (25%) both using commercial and custom‐built rigs. Tribometer configurations included pin‐on‐disc and pin‐on‐plate models and simulators highlighted ball‐on‐joint set ups. Tribometer motions included linear reciprocating (62%) or multidirectional reciprocating (24%). Input parameters included contact stress (8.8 kPa to 23.3 MPa, mean 2.1 MPa), velocity (0.5‐100 mm/s, mean 16.46 mm/s), testing duration (0.03–33.8 h, mean 5.4 h), and distance (5.4 cm to 9000 m, mean 393 m). Simulators used inputs of loads ranging from 25 N to 1.5 kN, 500 to 500,000 cycles and a variety of flexion‐extension profiles together with secondary motions. Lubricants were mostly bovine calf serum (38%) and saline‐based solutions (21%). Outcome variables mainly included coefficient of friction and damage to cartilage and/or HBM, but the methods to assess these outputs varied. Methodological differences and inconsistent reporting of outcomes limited the ability to draw firm conclusions about the relative performance of HBMs.

Introduction
Hemiarthroplasty is a surgical procedure in which only one of the articulating surfaces of a joint is replaced, traditionally used in cases where joint damage is confined to a single side. Most commonly performed in the hip—particularly for femoral neck fractures in elderly patients or osteonecrosis in younger individuals—hemiarthroplasty has also been widely adopted for shoulder conditions such as proximal humeral fractures and avascular necrosis of the humeral head. More recently, its indications have expanded beyond these classic applications to include distal humeral fractures and end‐stage osteoarthritis of smaller joints, such as the first metatarsophalangeal joint. The development of additive manufacturing and personalized medicine has further opened the door to applying hemiarthroplasty techniques to previously challenging sites like the wrist [, ], where one‐sided joint damage—such as from osteoarthritis (OA) or trauma—may benefit from tailored, bone‐preserving interventions. This evolution reflects a broader trend in orthopedic surgery toward joint‐preserving and patient‐specific solutions when total joint replacement is not yet warranted.
The benefits of hemiarthroplasty are shorter surgery time, bone preservation, lower infection risk, and reduced blood loss, but in the long term hemiarthroplasty carries a risk of acetabular wear and revision surgery. Accelerated wear of the opposing cartilage remains a critical issue in hemiarthroplasty, significantly increasing the risk of poor clinical outcomes. Thus, optimizing the performance of hemiarthroplasty bearing materials (HBMs) remains essential for long‐term success. Consistent, standardized bench‐top and preclinical testing protocols would yield data that could be aggregated to better predict the in vivo performance of HBMs and, ultimately, patient outcomes. However, HBM testing protocols have never been systematically surveyed.
This 2‐part scoping review was therefore performed to survey the state‐of‐the‐art of HBM testing. Specifically, this review examined HBM assessment in preclinical testing against cartilage, focusing on: (a) tested HBMs and cartilage sources, (b) experimental setups and input parameters, and (c) outcome variables and their assessment. Part I covers in vitro studies modeled as tribological systems, where cartilage articulated against HBMs at a lubricated interface, and Part II covers in vivo HBM testing. The articulation of HBMs and cartilage may cause wear, the gradual loss of material from one or both surfaces due to mechanical action, including contact stress, friction, and relative movement. In this context, wear occurs as the HBM and cartilage interact within the system (Figure 1), influenced by input parameters (e.g., contact load, velocity, cycle frequency). System output includes damage to cartilage and HBM and wear debris released into the lubricant/media. Interfacial conditions (e.g., lubricant status), typically evaluated by measuring the coefficient of friction (COF), also impact system output.
Schematic representation of the tribological system for hemiarthroplasty testing. The figure illustrates the interaction between the hemiarthroplasty bearing material (HBM) and cartilage, with the lubricant acting as the interfacial medium. The environment is defined by the surrounding conditions of the experiment (e.g., temperature, gas pressure, etc.).

Methods

Literature Search
This scoping review was conducted using the Arksey and O'Malley framework. The search strategy, developed with research librarians at Rush University and the University of Illinois, Chicago, utilized keywords and Medical Subject Headings to retrieve studies related to hemiarthroplasty, ensuring a broad range of publications. (Table 1 and Appendix 1: Search Strings). Searches were conducted using the PubMed, Scopus, Google Scholar, and the Cochrane Library databases in December 2024. Identified titles were compiled in Covidence, and articles were screened to retain those that specifically articulated HBMs against cartilage.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the review. Finite Element Analysis (FEA), Patient‐Reported Outcome Measures (PROM), Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS), Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC),12‐Item Short Form Health Survey (SF‐12).
Inclusion criteria	Exclusion criteria	 	Research conducted in vitro or in vivoEvaluations of articular cartilage articulated against HBMs, including benchtop mechanical testing.Preclinical and clinical reports assessing cartilage wear from articulation with HBMs, including X‐ray imaging (joint space narrowing or bony erosion).	Solely modeling or FEA analyses. Clinical assessments using only PROMs (e.g., KOOS, WOMAC, SF‐12)Non‐English languagesReview ArticlesTextbook Chapters

Data Extraction
Authors (VM, FDV) independently extracted key study data, summarized in Table 2, resolving disagreements by consensus with a third author.
Data extracted from each study for HBMs and cartilage.
Category	Data components	 	HBM and Cartilage Characteristics	HBM type (metal, ceramic, hard and soft polymer) and subtype (e.g., Cobalt chromium (CoCr) and stainless steel (SS))Species age and joint type	 	Experimental set up	Testing concept, apparatus, motion type, cartilage shape	 	Input parameters	System variables: Contact Stress (MPa), Velocity (mm/s), Frequency (Hz), Testing Time (h), Distance (m), Cycle countLubricant type	 	Outcome variables	Methods (quantitative or qualitative) used to describe and categorize the system‐dependent parameters and system outputs

Data Analysis
Data were summarized descriptively, with continuous variables visualized in box plots and categorical data as counts (n), representing the number of occurrences across all studies, and proportions. Calculations were performed in Microsoft Excel with data organization and visualization using MATLAB R2024b and GraphPad.

Results

Literature Review
The initial search yielded 3509 titles from clinical and basic science studies. After removing 1711 duplicates, 1798 abstracts and titles were screened based on inclusion and exclusion criteria (Figure 2). Following full‐text review, 72 studies met the inclusion criteria—48 in vitro and 24 in vivo. Part I of this review reports data from the 48 in vitro studies.
PRISMA flow diagram for study selection process for the scoping review.

Hemiarthroplasty Bearing Materials (HBMs)
Metals and soft polymers were the most frequently tested HBMs, collectively accounting for 74% of the total HBMs (n total = 96) examined across the 48 in vitro studies (Figure 3 and Table 3). Among metals, CoCr and SS were predominant, while hydrogels and polycarbonate urethane (PCU) were the most common soft polymers evaluated (Table 3).
Distribution of HBM used in studies (%). Metals were the most reported HBM (n = 42, 44%), followed by soft polymers (n = 29, 30%), hard polymers (n = 13, 13.5%), ceramics (n = 11, 11.5%), and synthetic carbon (n = 1,1%).
Summary of HBM tested in hemiarthroplasty wear studies. This table presents the frequency of tested HBM (n total = 96), sorted by type (metals, soft polymers, hard polymers, ceramics, and synthetic carbon) and sub‐type. HBM sub‐type include, Alumina ceramic (Al₂O₃), Alumina‐zirconia composite ceramic (AZC), Cobalt‐Chromium (CoCr), Glass, Highly Cross‐Linked Polyethylene (HXLPE), Hydrogels, Polycarbonate‐Urethane (PCU), Polyether‐Ether‐Ketone (PEEK), Polyurethane (PU), Pyrolytic Carbon (PyC), Stainless Steel (SS), Titanium (Ti), Ultrahigh Molecular Weight Polyethylene (UHMWPE), and Zirconia (ZrO₂) (Appendix 2: HBM).
HBM Type	HBM Subtype and Count (n)	 	Metals	CoCr (n = 23)	 		SS (n = 17)	 		Aluminum (n = 1)	 		Titanium alloy (n = 1)	 	Soft Polymers	Hydrogels (n = 15)	 		PCU (n = 7)	 		PU (n = 6)	 		Vinyl (n = 1)	 	Hard Polymers	PEEK (n = 9)	 		HXLPE (n = 2)	 		UHMWPE (n = 2)	 	Ceramics	Alumina (n = 4)	 		Glass (n = 3)	 		AZC (n = 2)	 		OxZr (n = 1)	 		Zirconia (n = 1)	 	Synthetic Carbon	PyC (n = 1)
Twenty‐six studies (55%) tested a single HBM against cartilage, while 21 (45%) compared different HBMs. Seventeen out of the 21 comparative studies included metals. Eight focused on CoCr, and seven on SS, comparing them to polymers and ceramics. One study found SS (10 nm Ra) and low‐carbon CoCr (27 nm Ra) led to more cartilage damage than glass (10 nm Ra) or smoother CoCr (10 nm Ra). Comparative studies ranked HBMs by relative performance, consistently placing CoCr and SS below alternatives (Appendix 3: HBM Ranking).

Cartilage Source
Cartilage was most often sourced were from cattle, followed by pigs, human cadavers, and sheep (Figure 4). Age ranges are summarized in Table 4, with further details provided in the Appendix 4: Cartilage Source. Most specimens were harvested from the tibiofemoral joint (TFJ) (n = 33), primarily from the femoral condyles (n = 15) and patellofemoral groove (n = 11) (Appendix 3: Cartilage Source).
Distribution of cartilage sources used in studies (%). Cartilage was most often obtained from cattle (n = 32, 65%), followed by pigs (n = 11, 23%), human cadavers (n = 4, 8%), and sheep (n = 2, 4%).
Distribution of specimen types by age range and count. Sorted from youngest to oldest within each respective source. “Not specified” indicates cases where no information was available. (Appendix 3: Cartilage Source).
Specimen type	Age range	 	Bovine/cattle	1–3 weeks (n = 1)	 		3–5 months (n = 1)	 		5–6 months (n = 1)	 		6–8 months (n = 4)	 		12–24 months (n = 2)	 		18 months (n = 7)	 		18–24 months (n = 8)	 		18–30 months (n = 1)	 		24 months (n = 2)	 		24–48 months (n = 1)	 		Adult (n = 2)	 		Not specified (n = 1)	 	Pig	3 months (n = 1)	 		4–6 months (n = 2)	 		6 months (n = 4)	 		6–9 months (n = 1)	 		12 months (n = 1)	 	Human Cadaver	Not specified (n = 2)	 		Adult (mean age 43 years) (n = 2)	 	Sheep	18–24 months (n = 2)	 	Not specified	(n = 1)

Experimental Set Up
Fifty experimental setups were used across 48 studies. All testing was conducted using tribometers (n = 37) and simulators (n = 13). Tribometers used smaller isolated cartilage specimens where the cartilage and HBM configuration may be varied. Figure 5 illustrates common configurations employed by the studies reviewed. In contrast, simulator setups used a dissected whole joint, with the cartilage retained on its native bone and articulated against the HBM, after removing all ligaments and soft tissues. Among the tribometers, 54.1% of the tribometers were custom‐built (n = 20), 40.5% were commercial (n = 15), and 5.4% were not specified (n = 2). For the simulators, 53.9% of the simulators were custom‐built (n = 7), while 46.1% were commercial (n = 6). The tribometer configurations were primarily pin‐on‐disc and pin‐on‐plate, comprising approximately three‐fourths of testing setups (Figure 6A), while approximately half of the simulator configurations were ball‐on‐joint followed by plate‐on‐joint and pin‐on‐joint (Figure 6B).
Experimental tribometer configurations: (A) pin‐on‐plate with linear reciprocating motion, (B) pin‐on‐plate with combined linear reciprocating and oscillating rotational pin motion leading to cross‐shear, (C) pin‐on‐disc with unidirectional rotational motion, (D) pin‐on‐disc with oscillating disc motion, (E) ball‐on‐disc with linear reciprocating motion, and (F) ball‐on‐disc with ball oscillation and disc rotation leading to cross‐shear and contact migration at the surface. In all configurations, cartilage is shown in tan and HBMs in blue. Arrows indicate the direction of motion during testing.
Experimental configurations across studies. (A) Tribometer configurations included pin‐on‐disc and pin‐on‐plate models and (B) simulators highlighted HBM ball‐on‐joint set ups. Ball‐on‐joint (n = 7), followed by plate‐on‐joint (n = 3), pin‐on‐joint (n = 2), and disc‐on‐joint (n = 1).
Tribometers have several common configurations, pin‐on‐disc tests involve sliding contact between a fixed pin and rotating disc, while pin‐on‐plate tests involve reciprocating linear motion between the fixed pin and reciprocating plate (Figure 5). Five tribometer setups used a “ball” instead of a pin, which referred to spherical HBMs such as CoCr femoral heads, in ball‐on‐disc or ball‐on‐plate configurations, with the cartilage being the flat opposing surface. The most common cartilage test surface used in tribometer testing was the pin (70.0%, n = 26), followed by the disc (27.0%, n = 10) and the plate (3.0%, n = 1). Tribometer motion was most frequently reciprocating linear (62.2%, n = 23), followed by multidirectional motion (24.3%, n = 9) and then unidirectional rotational motion (13.5%, n = 5). (Appendix 5: Experimental Configuration).

3.6. Input Parameters

Tribometer System Variables
Input parameters for the tribometer systems varied widely across studies (Table 5), reflecting differences in experimental setups. Variations in load application, contact mechanics, lubrication conditions, and testing duration were determined by the chosen study design and testing approach.
Summary of input parameters for tribometer testing. Contact stress at the contact interface, calculated as the applied load divided by the nominal contact area. Velocity represents relative rate of motion of the two surfaces. Frequency indicates the number of repetitive motion cycles performed per second. Testing time refers to the total duration of cartilage and HBM articulation. Distance represents the total traveled distance during the study, and cycles denote the total number of completed motion cycles throughout the experiment (Appendix 6.1: Testing Input, Tribometers). Not all the presented parameters were explicitly reported, some needed to be calculated from the information provided. (Supplemental Material Calculations).
Contact stress (MPa)	Velocity (mm/s)	Frequency (Hz)	Testing time (h)	Distance (m)	Cycles (×103)	 	Average	2.08	16.5	0.76	4.9	606	20.8	 	Median	1.00	10.0	0.50	1.2	80	3.6	 	Mode	1.00	4.0	1.00	1.0	14	3.6	 	Standard deviation	3.85	20.9	0.63	8.1	1,706	43.6	 	Minimum	0.01	0.5	0.01	90 (s)	0.05	0.001	 	Maximum	23.3	100.0	2.50	33.9	9,000	204.6

Simulator Input Variables
The inputs for the 13 studies that utilized simulator testing, including load, cycles, and range of motion profiles, are summarized and reported in Table 6. Four studies incorporated an additional secondary rotational movement.
Input parameters for simulator testing. Summary of input parameters for simulator testing, including load (N), number of cycles (×103), and range of flexion and extension (°), presented as the applied load ranged from 25 to 1500 N (average: 413 N, median: 250 N), while the number of cycles varied from 0.5 × 103 to 500 × 103 (average: 123.8 × 103, median: 7.2 × 103), highlighting the broad range of testing conditions. (Appendix 6.2: Testing Input, Simulators).
Joint	Load (N)	Cycles (×103)	Range of Motion	 	Shoulder 	1000	0.9	Flexion: 25°, Internal rotation: ±15°	 	Shoulder 	1500	3.6	Pendulum	 	Elbow 	Not specified	350	Pronation: 0–55°, Supination: 0–55°	 	Hip 	25–800	7.2	Flexion‐extension: ±15°	 	Hip 	45–340	500	Flexion‐extension: ±15°	 	Hip 	100–1000	Not specified	Flexion‐extension: ±35°	 	Knee 	1000	7.2	Flexion‐extension: 0–21°, Tibial rotation: ±1.6°	 	Knee 	80–600	10.8	Flexion‐extension: 5–23°, Patella abduction/adduction: −2.5° to 1°	 	Knee 	30–160	43.2	Flexion‐extension: −10° to 13.1°	 	Knee 	25–800	7.2	Flexion‐extension: −10° to 13.1°	 	Knee 	100	0.5	Flexion‐extension: 0–75°	 	Knee 	250–1000	3.6	Flexion‐extension: ±10°	 	Knee 	66‐1000	3.6	Flexion‐extension: −10° to 13.1°

Lubricant/Media
Bovine calf serum (BCS) and saline‐based solutions (SBS) were the most common lubricants/media (Figure 7), with other lubricants including hyaluronic acid (HA), custom culture media formulations, and bovine synovial fluid (Appendix 7.1: Lubricants). Seven studies compared different lubricants using the same HBMs, while one study used no lubricant. Variations in lubricants significantly influenced friction and material performance, with more complex lubricant compositions generally resulting in a lower COF (Appendix 7.2: Comparative Lubricants).
Distribution of lubricants used. Bovine calf serum (BCS), saline‐based solutions (SBS), hyaluronic acid (HA), custom, de‐ionized water (DI) and bovine synovial fluid (SF).

Outcome Variables
The outcome variables reported across 48 studies are summarized in Figure 8.
Outcome variables assessed across studies. Count (n) represents number of occurrences across the 48 studies. The coefficient of friction (COF) was the most frequently reported variable (n = 40), followed by cartilage surface damage (n = 29), wear debris analysis (n = 15), and cartilage thickness or volume (n = 12), cartilage mechanical properties (n = 12), cartilage sub‐surface damage (n = 11), HBM surface analysis (n = 11), Biological assessments (cell viability and metabolic activity) (n = 7), and HBM wear volume and rate (n = 1).

Coefficient of Friction and Cartilage Mechanical Properties
Friction and other mechanical properties of cartilage were assessed and reported via various methods as shown in Table 7.
Measurement and reported variables with their counts (n) across the 48 studies. The Coefficient of Friction (COF) is categorized as continuous time‐dependent (n = 22), continuous other dependent factors such as load, cycles, or other variables (n = 8), and noncontinuous (n = 10). The “Other” category includes variables such as energy dissipation, dynamic creep, and strain response (n = 12).
Measurement	Reported variable and count (n)	 	COF	Continuous, time‐dependent (n = 22)Continuous, other‐dependent factors (n = 8)Noncontinuous (n = 10)	 	Cartilage mechanical properties	Energy dissipation (n = 2) Strain response (n = 2) Elastic modulus, permeability, & creep (n = 5) Theoretical contact mechanics (n = 1) Shear stress (n = 1) Cartilage hydration & swelling (n = 1)
Continuous time‐dependent COFs were sorted by HBM type (metals, ceramics, hard and soft polymers) and then subtype (e.g., CoCr, SS). COFs after 600, 1800, and 3600 s of testing were summarized, as interstitial fluid pressurization may decrease over time. COF was highly variable for each HBM. For example, COF values obtained after 3600 s of testing are shown in Figure 9.
Box plot of the coefficient of friction (COF) at 3600 s for HBMs. (CoCr, SS, alumina, PEEK, HXLPE, hydrogel, PCU, PU, and silicone), showing median COF, interquartile range (IQR), and min/max values for each HBM. Data points were extracted from published figures by analyzing weight measurements taken six times. The values were then averaged to obtain a single representative measurement. This was done with MATLAB R2024b.
The effect of testing time and type of lubricant on COF was evaluated by summarizing the data for the tribometer testing of SS and CoCr at 600, 1800, and 3600 s, revealing a consistent time‐related increase in COF for both HBMs and both lubricant types (Figure 10).
(A) Coefficient of friction (COF) for stainless steel (SS) and cobalt‐chromium (CoCr) after tribometer testing for 600, 1800, and 3600 s. (B) COF for CoCr after testing for 600, 1800, and 3600 s, stratified by lubricants: bovine calf serum (BCS) and phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS).

Wear Debris Analysis
Post‐testing lubricant solutions were used to assess cartilage degradation by quantifying biochemical markers (n total = 15) (Table 8). One study analyzed posttest solutions for particulates using a particle size analyzer and calculated the wear rate volumetrically.
Methods used to assess biomarkers across studies with respective biomarker and count (n). Sulfated glycosaminoglycan (GAG), dimethylmethylene blue dye assay (DMMB), high‐performance liquid chromatography‐mass spectrometry (HPLC‐MS), hydroxyproline (Hyp), spectrophotometric absorption (Spectro abs), orthohydroxyproline assay (OHP), interleukin‐1 beta (IL‐1β), enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), gas chromatography (GC), bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) and superficial zone protein (SZP).
Method used	Biomarkers and count (n)	 	DMMB assay	GAG (n = 5) 	 	HPLC‐MS	Hyp (n = 3) 	 	ELISA	SZP (n = 1) IL‐1β (n = 1) 	 	BCA assay	Total protein (n = 1) 	 	GC	Phospholipids (n = 1) 	 	OHP assay	Collagen (n = 1) 	 	Spectro. abs.	Hyp (n = 1) 	 	Western blot	Aggrecan (n = 1)

Methods for Assessing Changes in Cartilage Thickness and Volume: Physical and Imaging‐Based Approaches
Methods for assessing cartilage thickness and volume were classified as physical or imaging‐based (n = 12). Physical thickness measurements (n = 5) included confocal laser scanning microscopy, dial indicators, calipers, and a digital height gauge, while imaging‐based height assessment used microcomputed tomography (n = 1). Volume measurements were performed using profilometry, sectioning and imaging, light‐based profiling (n = 4), and nuclear magnetic resonance (n = 1).

Cartilage Surface Damage
Qualitative observations, such as macroscopic scoring or microscopic morphological assessments, were frequently used to describe surface changes, including fibrillation, delamination, or roughening. These observations provide descriptive context and often complement quantitative surface measurements, though they are typically subject to evaluator bias and lack standardization. Cartilage surface damage was assessed using various methods, including macroscopic evaluation with Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) grading (n = 3) and imaging techniques such as optical microscopy, laser confocal microscopy, White Light Interferometry (WLI), optical profilometer, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM), MRI (n = 13). Quantitative assessments reported the surface roughness of the cartilage with Arithmetic Average Roughness (Ra), which is the average of the absolute deviations of surface height from the mean line over a specified length. Methods included SEM, WLI, Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), laser confocal microscopy, optical 3D microscopy and contact profilometry (n = 13)
Of those studies that reported an Ra value for cartilage, only one study used a simulator, while the rest employed tribometers. The average test duration was 3.47 h, with a maximum of 15 h and a minimum of 0.5 h. The change in cartilage surface roughness (final minus initial) was extracted where numerical values were available, with positive changes indicating increased surface roughness (Figure 11). One study reported no change in Ra of cartilage, and only one study evaluated cartilage articulated against ceramic.
The change in cartilage surface roughness, determined by subtracting baseline value from the posttest value, against five HBM. Positive values indicate a roughness increase. Data were available for CoCr, SS, PEEK, hydrogel, and PCU.

Sub‐Surface Damage
Cartilage sub‐surface damage was assessed via histology (n total = 11) followed by semi‐quantitative scoring (e.g., OARSI grading and modified Mankin scoring) (n = 3) or qualitative reporting methods (n = 8) (Appendix 8: Histology).

Biological Assessment
Chondrocyte viability was evaluated using fluorescent viability staining with confocal microscopy (n = 5). Metabolic activity was assessed using a resazurin‐based assay (n = 1) and radiolabeled sulfate incorporation (n = 1).

Damage Analysis of HBM
HBM surface damage was assessed qualitatively and quantitatively. Qualitative methods included digital microscopy, ESEM, SEM, confocal laser microscopy, and AFM (n = 6). Quantitative HBM surface damage was evaluated via AFM, confocal laser microscopy, optical profilometery, and one study did not specify the method (n = 5). The change in HBM surface roughness (final minus initial) was extracted when numerical values were available, with positive changes indicating increased surface roughness (Figure 12). One study reported on Alumina and UHMWPE were reported. Additionally, no numerical data were provided for a report showing no change in Ra of SS, PU, and silicone.
The change in HBM surface roughness, determined by subtracting baseline value from the posttest value for CoCr, hydrogel, and SS. Positive values indicate a roughness increase.

HBM Wear Rate
HBM wear volume was determined by dividing the wear mass (dry polyurethane weight change) by its density, with wear rate calculated using the applied force and sliding distance (n total = 1). This approach, while appropriate for the polyurethane‐based HBM studied, may not be directly applicable to other HBMs with differing physical and mechanical properties.

Discussion
This review evaluated the methodologies used to assess HBMs against cartilage in preclinical studies. This Part I focused on in vitro investigations. Using the Arksey and O'Malley framework, 48 studies were identified and analyzed. Most studies utilized tribometers (75%) or simulators (25%), with cartilage predominantly sourced from bovine (65%) and pig (23%) specimens. Overall, most specimens (67%) were harvested from the tibiofemoral joint. Lubricants included BCS (38%) and SBS (21%). The primary outcomes reported were the COF (29%), surface damage to cartilage (21%), and wear debris analysis (11%). Notably, only 5 of the 48 studies included in this review evaluated biological responses. The heterogeneity in testing protocols and outcome reporting presents challenges in establishing standardized methodologies and drawing definitive conclusions on HBM performance. This review also serves to summarize the current state of the art in the field and may inform the development of standardized testing protocols for hemiarthroplasty bearing materials, which could enhance the comparability and clinical relevance of future in vitro studies.
Metals, particularly CoCr, were the most frequently tested HBMs. While CoCr offers strength and toughness, concerns about tribocorrosion and ion release raise issues about its tissue compatibility and toxicity. Soft polymers, especially hydrogels and PU, were the second most tested materials, but were challenged in load‐bearing applications. CoCr and SS were consistently ranked lower in relative performance compared to HBM counterparts, despite their common use in hemiarthroplasty. However, the metrics of performance varied across studies. While these findings indicate that softer polymers and ceramics may offer improved short‐term compatibility—particularly in reducing cartilage damage—these results should be interpreted with caution due to variability in experimental design and study endpoints. Moreover, longer‐term degradation and wear of soft polymers have been reported and warrant further investigation to evaluate their durability in clinically relevant conditions.
Bovine cartilage was most commonly used due to its similarity to human cartilage in mechanical behavior, morphology, and loading response, with validated friction, wear, and degradation patterns. About 70% of studies using bovine cartilage reported specimen ages of 18 months or older, with cartilage and skeletal maturity reached between 18 and 24 months. During this period of maturation, cartilage undergoes key biochemical and structural changes—such as increased glucosamine, galactose, N‐acetylneuraminic acid, and protein levels, plus altered proteoglycan structure. Location‐specific sampling is also crucial, as cartilage properties vary across joint locations and growth stages, challenging comparisons. Thus, factors such as animal age and harvest location should be considered when interpreting results across studies.
Tribometers—especially cartilage pin‐on‐HBM disc and cartilage pin‐on‐HBM plate setups—were the most common testing methods. While pin‐on‐disc is a standard screening tool for evaluating total joint arthroplasty bearing materials, no such standards exist for hemiarthroplasty. Nevertheless, tribometers made up the majority of setups, with reciprocating linear motion being the most frequent. Fewer studies attempted to incorporate more natural multidirectional motion patterns, including joint rolling and gliding kinematics. For instance, the hip joint experiences wear paths that form quasi‐elliptical tracks, leading to multidirectional motion. Beyond capturing multidirectional motion, incorporating migrating contact is essential for in vitro cartilage wear models to reflect in vivo conditions because dynamic sliding promotes rehydration and maintains fluid pressure, whereas static loading depletes fluid and increases friction and wear. Insufficient rehydration leads to a decrease in fluid load support, causing an increased interaction of the HBM with the solid phase of cartilage. This leads to an increase in COF with time as illustrated in Figure 10. Although the influence of motion type on wear mechanisms have been studied for HBMs, such as UHMWPE —where unidirectional motion induces strain‐hardening (a molecular reorganization that leads to unrealistic low wear rates)—it remains unclear how cartilage fails under similar unidirectional versus multidirectional motions. Further investigation is needed, particularly regarding the role of collagen fiber alignment in cartilage integrity and joint function.
While the type of motion plays a significant role in wear mechanisms, the shape of the cartilage test surface is equally important. The most common test surface was the pin. Geometry influences wear behavior: pin‐shaped specimens with linear motion and constant loading promote localized wear, fluid exudation, and elevating friction (Figures 8, 9, 10), whereas disc‐shaped specimens allow for migrating contact, leading to more distributed wear and fluid pressure. As friction increases and fluid is depleted, lubrication shifts to boundary conditions, where molecules like lubricin and hyaluronate initially reduce friction and wear but are quickly depleted, potentially accelerating cartilage degradation. Ultimately, both motion type and test surface geometry should be considered to understand how these factors influence the wear mechanisms of cartilage.
Overall, contact stresses and testing velocities aimed to represent in vivo conditions. Healthy human articular cartilage typically experiences contact stresses of 1–6 MPa during walking, with peak pressures exceeding 10 MPa during high‐load activities such as squatting, and up to 18 MPa in instrumented femoral head prostheses during transitions from sitting to standing. These stresses fluctuate during the gait cycle, with peak stresses being brief and occurring at varying locations on the cartilage surface. In vitro studies have shown that elevated contact stresses increase the COF and wear, primarily due to limited rehydration and reduced fluid support. The observed median and average contact stresses of 1 and 2 MPa reported in this review are reasonable for constant loading conditions. Testing velocities ranged from 0.5 to 100 mm/s, capturing joint velocities in the stance phase of walking that typically fall between 24 and 50 mm/s, while knee joint velocities can exceed 100 mm/s during the swing phase. Sliding velocity is crucial for cartilage rehydration; insufficient speeds may hinder rehydration, leading to increased friction and potential cellular damage.
The maximum number of cycles observed in this review was 204,624, equivalent to approximately 2 months of activity thus reflecting only short‐term analysis given that research suggests at least 6000 steps (3,000 gait cycles) per day, and approximately one million gait cycles annually. In contrast, standards for total joint replacement (TJR) studies aim to simulate long‐term joint loading across 1 to 7 million cycles, equating to sliding distances of 25–245 km. For in vitro testing of cartilage, the primary obstacle in replicating long‐term joint loading conditions is biological turnover and degradation. Despite these limitations, in vitro testing may still be valuable in the early stages of screening for cartilage wear as significant cartilage degradation in short‐term testing would likely indicate poor long‐term performance.
Simulator loads ranged from 25 to 1500 N, with an average of 413 N, (Table 6) reflecting the diverse loading conditions associated with different joints and activities. Clinically, joint forces vary based on body weight, activity type, and joint mechanics, with peak loads often exceeding 3 kN during dynamic movements. Different joints exhibit distinct biomechanical demands, requiring varied range of motion profiles in testing. For example, knee joint motion during walking typically ranges from 0° to 60° of flexion, with internal and external rotations. In this review, hip studies primarily utilized flexion‐extension, whereas some knee, shoulder, and elbow studies incorporated additional rotational components (Table 6). These variations influence wear patterns and biomechanical responses, complicating direct outcome comparisons. Differences in flexion‐extension limits, rotational components, and applied loads must be considered, as they directly affect cartilage wear, friction, and HBM performance. While simulator testing provides valuable insights under controlled conditions, variability in joints, load, and motion profiles remains a key factor in replicating real‐life joint mechanics. Extreme dynamic forces encountered in daily activities are not always captured in current in vitro setups. In summation, advancing testing protocols to incorporate more joint‐specific, physiologically relevant loading and motion may enhance the predictive value of in vitro studies for long‐term hemiarthroplasty outcomes.
BCS was the most commonly used lubricant, which is also supported by ISO and ASTM standards for TJR wear testing. Other lubricants, included SBS, DI water, and SF. While BCS is favored in in vitro testing of polyethylene, due to its ability to mimic proteins found in SF, it does lack key constituents such as hyaluronan, lubricin, and lipid vesicles which are important for cartilage lubrication. These constituents can significantly reduce wear and friction compared to saline or PBS. Similarily, SBS (e.g., PBS, NaCl) and DI water lack the complex composition of SF that contributes to natural lubrication. While SF is ideal, there's a limited volume for extraction from animal joints. Additionally, the complexity of SF and its replacements, like BCS, complicates the use of specific biochemical assays and biomarkers for wear and lubricant analysis due to the interference of various biomolecules that can mask or influence the results. Furthermore, these lubricants do not adequately nourish cells during long‐term ex vivo culture, which requires a mix of water, nutrients, vitamins, and other factors to support cell activity and viability. The advantages and limitations of lubricants in preclinical studies remains to be more fully investigated.
The COF was the most frequently reported outcome variable in the reviewed studies. While COF is commonly measured, its reliability is influenced by several factors. It is inherently time‐dependent, increasing under constant load until equilibrium is reached, which complicates direct comparisons across studies. Moreover, accurately measuring COF for cartilage is challenging due to its typically low values, making it susceptible to cross‐talk with normal force, bearing friction of the testing apparatus, and inertial effects during acceleration and deceleration in reciprocating tests. Due to these challenges and the substantial variability observed across HBMs, this review was unable to discriminate the relative performance of HBMs based solely on COF. Its variability across HBMs and lubricants raises concerns about its reliability as a wear predictor. Thus, COF variability across test conditions, along with its complex relationship with cartilage damage highlight the challenges in using it as a reliable predictor of wear. Future analyses should explore the relationship between COF and cartilage damage, and further examine how selected input parameters, such as contact stress and velocity, influence friction behavior and relationship with cartilage damage.
This variability of COF highlights the need for alternative methods to assess cartilage wear directly. One such method involves assessment of cartilage height and volume changes. These assessments parallel OA diagnostics, where joint space narrowing indicates wear progression, typically in later stages. Alternatives in clinical settings include MRI, which is primarily used to assess cartilage volume, integrity, water content, and early‐stage OA biomarkers. This review identified only one study that utilized MRI to assess cartilage integrity post‐testing; however, it did not present the findings in a quantifiable manner. Ultimately, current techniques for evaluating cartilage in vitro primarily capture short‐term deformation (which may be recoverable) and may overlook the potential long‐term effects.
Another outcome for assessing cartilage was surface damage through qualitative and quantitative measures (e.g., surface roughness). Common tools included SEM, TEM, AFM, WLI, and profilometry, to evaluate cartilage damage and surface changes. There is scope to develop standardized qualitative assessment frameworks, which could include defined grading criteria or structured imaging‐based scoring systems. Such efforts may improve inter‐study comparability and help integrate qualitative observations more systematically into cartilage wear evaluation protocols. Quantitative data showed varying changes in cartilage surface roughness, with positive values indicating increased roughness (Figure 10). However, due to differing input parameters, definitive conclusions couldn't be made, and the correlation between surface roughness changes and cartilage degradation remains unclear in short‐term testing, while it is well appreciated that the surface of OA cartilage is notably rougher, offering some potential as a metric.
Subsurface cartilage damage was investigated with histology (e.g., H&E and Safranin‐O staining) to assess structural components, including collagen and proteoglycan content. Histological analysis can complement wear measurements. Evaluations can detect cartilage changes as early as a few days post‐injury, while long‐term assessments, such as at 48 weeks, capture more significant repair or degeneration changes. Studies have shown that histology is sensitive to early‐stage degeneration and can track cartilage changes over several months, depending on the injury or disease progression.
Only 5 of 48 studies examined biological changes, compared to 40 studies that reported changes in COF. The limited use of biological assessments likely reflects tribology's traditional emphasis on friction, wear, and lubrication. However, evaluating biological and metabolic changes can offer crucial insights into cartilage degradation, inflammation, and cellular damage. This underscores the imbalance in research focus, as many studies do not incorporate biological assessments. Integrating cartilage biology into direct HBM articulation studies could provide a more comprehensive understanding of the biological impact of implant interactions.
Finally, methods for assessing HBM damage included in this review included common techniques such as optical microscopy, SEM (surface analysis), surface profilometry (Ra measurement), X‐ray, CT (internal wear), FTIR spectroscopy (chemical composition), AFM (nanoscale details), and mass loss measurement (wear rate) (section 3.6.1.6).
Overall, this review found that more methods were reported to assess cartilage damage than HBM damage, which may be due to the expectation that cartilage would sustain more damage. The wide range of techniques and observed variability may reflect uncertainty about the most effective methods for evaluating cartilage wear.
One limitation of this scoping review was the challenge of developing a comprehensive search strategy in the context of an emerging and evolving body of literature. Relevant terminology was not consistently indexed using standardized Medical Subject Heading (MeSH) terms, and key concepts were described using varied or inconsistent terms across studies. As a result, some relevant studies may have been inadvertently missed, particularly those published in non‐indexed journals or using unconventional terminology. To mitigate this, a broad search strategy was employed, incorporating variations in MeSH terms and keyword combinations to capture as many relevant studies as possible. Additionally, restricting inclusion to English‐language studies may have led to the omission of relevant articles published in other languages.
This review addresses the progress and challenges in in vitro models of hemiarthroplasty. While testing setups—particularly tribometers using pin‐on‐plate and pin‐on‐disc configurations—are becoming generally more consistent, variability in input parameters and outcome measures remains. These inconsistencies complicate drawing definitive conclusions, and the clinical relevance of preclinical findings remains unvalidated. In particular, exploring the relationship between tribological metrics—such as coefficient of friction and wear—and cartilage damage under physiologically relevant loading and motion conditions may help bridge the gap between in vitro findings and clinical outcomes. Further research is essential to optimize HBM selection and testing methods, ultimately enhancing the long‐term performance and clinical outcomes of hemiarthroplasty implants.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization: Victoria P. Marino, Takayuki Koya, Francesca De Vecchi, Landon M. Begin, Douglas C. Moore, Joseph J. Crisco, Markus A. Wimmer; Search Strategy & Methodology: Victoria P. Marino, Takayuki Koya, Francesca De Vecchi, Douglas C. Moore, Joseph J. Crisco, Markus A. Wimmer; Screening—Title & Abstract: Victoria P. Marino, Takayuki Koya, Francesca De Vecchi, Landon M. Begin, Douglas C. Moore, Joseph J. Crisco, Markus A. Wimmer; Screening—Full Text Review: Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi; Data Extraction: Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi; Data Validation: Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi, Markus A. Wimmer; Data Analysis: Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi; Data Interpretation: Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi, Douglas C. Moore, Joseph J. Crisco, Markus A. Wimmer; Writing—Original Draft Preparation: Victoria P. Marino; Writing—Review & Editing: Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi, Landon M. Begin, Douglas C. Moore, Joseph J. Crisco, Markus A. Wimmer; Figure Preparation: Victoria P. Marino, Joseph J. Crisco; Table Preparation: Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi; Supervision: Markus A. Wimmer; Project Administration: Joseph J. Crisco, Markus A. Wimmer; Funding Acquisition: Joseph J. Crisco, Markus A. Wimmer.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

References
. Hemiarthroplasty for Femoral neck and head fractures with hip dislocation. AO Surgery Reference [cited 2025 Jun 10], https://surgeryreference.aofoundation.org/orthopedic-trauma/adult-trauma/proximal-femur/femoral-neck-and-head-fracture-with-hip-dislocation/hemiarthroplasty.
The Comparison Between Total Hip Arthroplasty and Hemiarthroplasty in Patients With Femoral Neck Fractures: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis Based on 25 Randomized Controlled Trials
Total Hip Arthroplasty Versus Hemiarthroplasty for Displaced Femoral Neck Fracture: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials
The Eighth Annual Report of the AJRR on Hip and Knee Arthroplasty 2021
Total Hip Arthroplasty Compared to Bipolar and Unipolar Hemiarthroplasty for Displaced Hip Fractures in the Elderly: A Bayesian Network Meta‐Analysis
Outcomes and Complications of Distal Humeral Hemiarthroplasty for Distal Humeral Fractures—A Systematic Review
Metallic Hemiarthroplasty or Arthrodesis of the First Metatarsophalangeal Joint as Treatment for Hallux Rigidus: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
A Comparison of Hemiarthroplasty Versus Dynamic Hip Screw Fixation for Intertrochanteric Femoral Fractures: A Systematic Review
The Effect of Type of Femoral Component Fixation on Mortality and Morbidity After Hip Hemiarthroplasty: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Survivorship of Total Shoulder Arthroplasty vs. Hemiarthroplasty for the Treatment of Avascular Necrosis At Greater Than 10‐year Follow‐Up
Outcomes of Hemiarthroplasty and Total Hip Arthroplasty for Femoral Neck Fracture: A Medicare Cohort Study
Four‐Year Outcomes of Midcarpal Hemiarthroplasty for Wrist Arthritis
When Are Patients With Osteoarthritis Referred for Surgery?
Shoulder Hemiarthroplasty: Outcomes and Long‐Term Survival Analysis According to Etiology
Hemiarthroplasty for the Treatment of Distal Humerus Fractures: Long‐Term Clinical Results
Survivorship of Total Shoulder Arthroplasty vs. Hemiarthroplasty for the Treatment of Avascular Necrosis at Greater Than 10‐year Follow‐Up
Total Hip Arthroplasty and Hemiarthroplasty in Mobile, Independent Patients With a Displaced Intracapsular Fracture of the Femoral Neck. A Randomized, Controlled Trial
Hemiarthroplasty for Displaced Femoral Neck Fractures in the Elderly Has a Low Conversion Rate
Hemiarthroplasty or Total Hip Arthroplasty in Recent Femoral Neck Fractures?
Clinical, Radiographic, and Patient‐Perceived Outcome After Radial Hemi‐Wrist Arthroplasty With a New Implant: 20 Cases With 5‐Year Follow‐Up
Primary Wrist Hemiarthroplasty for Irreparable Distal Radius Fracture in the Independent Elderly
The Natural History of the Hemiarthroplasty for Displaced Intracapsular Femoral Neck Fractures: 302 Patients Followed Until Revision or Death
Higher Risk of Reoperation for Bipolar and Uncemented Hemiarthroplasty
Factors Associated With Reoperation After Pyrocarbon Proximal Interphalangeal Joint Arthroplasty for the Arthritic Joint: A Retrospective Cohort Study
Current Concepts in Distal Humeral Hemiarthroplasty
A Larger Sized Cup Accelerates Cartilage Erosion of Acetabulum After Bipolar Hemiarthroplasty in Elderly With Femur Neck Fracture
Cost‐Effectiveness of Unicompartmental Compared With Total Knee Replacement: A Population‐Based Study Using Data From The National Joint Registry for England and Wales
Comparison of Cobalt Chromium, Ceramic and Pyrocarbon Hemiprostheses in a Rabbit Model: Ceramic Leads to More Cartilage Damage Than Cobalt Chromium
Wear Characteristics of the Canine Acetabulum Against Different Femoral Prostheses
An Introduction to Tribology
Scoping Studies: Towards a Methodological Framework
, www.covidence.org.
, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/excel.
, https://www.mathworks.com.
A Method for the Assessment of the Coefficient of Friction of Articular Cartilage and a Replacement Biomaterial
A Multi‐Directional In Vitro Investigation into Friction, Damage and Wear of Innovative Chondroplasty Materials Against Articular Cartilage
Analysis of Friction Between Articular Cartilage and Polyvinyl Alcohol Hydrogel Artificial Cartilage
Articulation of An Alumina‐Zirconia Composite Ceramic Against Living Cartilage—An In Vitro Wear Test
, , , and  [date unknown]. Bio‐tribological behavior of articular cartilage based on biological morphology.
Brushing Up on Cartilage Lubrication: Polyelectrolyte‐Enhanced Tribological Rehydration
Cartilage Lamina Splendens Inspired Nanostructured Coating for Biomaterial Lubrication
Development of a Cartilage Shear‐Damage Model to Investigate the Impact of Surface Injury on Chondrocytes and Extracellular Matrix Wear
Effect of Phospholipidic Boundary Lubrication in Rigid and Compliant Hemiarthroplasty Models
Engineering Tribological Rehydration of Cartilage Interfaces: Assessment of Potential Polyelectrolyte Mechanisms
Establishing a Live Cartilage‐on‐Cartilage Interface for Tribological Testing
Evaluation of Articular Cartilage Wear Against Pyrolytic Carbon in the Context of Spherical Interposition Shoulder Arthroplasty
Experimental Investigation of the Dynamic Properties of Natural Cartilage under Reciprocating Sliding At Two Typical Rubbing Pairs
Friction and Wear Behaviors of HXLPE, PEEK and CoCrMo Against Articular Cartilage under Cross‐Shear Motion
Friction and Wear of Hemiarthroplasty Biomaterials in Reciprocating Sliding Contact With Articular Cartilage
Hemiarthroplasties: the Choice of Prosthetic Material Causes Different Levels of Damage in the Articular Cartilage
Highly Lubricious SPMK‐g‐PEEK Implant Surfaces to Facilitate Rehydration of Articular Cartilage
Improving the Mechanical Properties and Tribological Behavior of Sulfobetaine Polyurethane Based on Hydrophobic Chains to Be Applied as Artificial Meniscus
Influence of Dynamic Load on Friction Behavior of Human Articular Cartilage, Stainless Steel and Polyvinyl Alcohol Hydrogel as Artificial Cartilage
Investigation of the Friction and Surface Degradation of Innovative Chondroplasty Materials Against Articular Cartilage
Lubricity and Stability of poly(2‐methacryloyloxyethyl Phosphorylcholine) Polymer Layer on Co–Cr–Mo Surface for Hemi‐Arthroplasty to Prevent Degeneration of Articular Cartilage
Multi‐Scale Analysis of Cartilage Surface for Trapeziometacarpal Hemi‐Arthroplasty
Nanostructured Coating for Biomaterial Lubrication Through Biomacromolecular Recruitment
, , , et al. [date unknown]. Phospholipid Vesicles in Media for Tribological Studies against Live Cartilage.
Quantifying the Lubricity of Mechanically Tough Polyvinyl Alcohol Hydrogels for Cartilage Repair
The Effect of Contact Stress on Cartilage Friction, Deformation and Wear
Tribocorrosion of a CoCrMo Alloy Sliding Against Articular Cartilage and the Impact of Metal Ion Release on Chondrocytes
Tribological Characterization of Polyvinyl Alcohol Hydrogel as Substitute of Articular Cartilage
Tribological Evaluation of Biomedical Polycarbonate Urethanes Against Articular Cartilage
Tribological Evaluation of Oxidized Zirconium Using an Articular Cartilage Counterface: A Novel Material for Potential Use In Hemiarthroplasty
Tribological Properties of PVA/PVP Blend Hydrogels Against Articular Cartilage
Wear and Damage of Articular Cartilage With Friction Against Orthopedic Implant Materials
Adaptive Multimode Lubrication In Natural Synovial Joints and Artificial Joints
Capitellar Erosion After Radial Head Arthroplasty: A Comparative Biomechanical Study of Operated Radial Head Fractures on Cadaveric Specimens
An Experimental Simulation Model to Assess Wear of the Porcine Patellofemoral Joint
An In Vitro Simulation Method for the Tribological Assessment of Complete Natural Hip Joints
An Investigation of the Effect of Conformity of Knee Hemiarthroplasty Designs on Contact Stress, Friction and Degeneration of Articular Cartilage: A Tribological Study
Comparison of Wear on Articular Cartilage by Titanium Alloy, Ultra‐High‐Molecular‐Weight Polyethylene, and Carbon Fibre Reinforced Polyether‐Ether‐Ketone: A Pilot Study
Development of a Preclinical Natural Porcine Knee Simulation Model for the Tribological Assessment of Osteochondral Grafts In Vitro
Effect of Clearance on Cartilage Tribology in Hip Hemi‐Arthroplasty
Friction In Hip Hemiendoprostheses. Review of Literature and Own Model Using Cadaveric Acetabula
Hemiarthroplasty In Young Patients: Evaluation of Glenoid Wear on Ceramic and Metal Implants In Vitro
Polyurethane as a Potential Knee Hemiarthroplasty Biomaterial: An In‐Vitro Simulation of Its Tribological Performance
Tribological Testing of Articular Cartilage of the Medial Compartment of the Knee Using a Friction Simulator
An In‐Vitro Investigation of Sliding Friction Between Biomaterials for Cartilage Substitution and Articular Cartilage
Investigation of Articular Cartilage and Counterface Compliance in Multi‐Directional Sliding as in Orthopedic Implants
Experimental Verification of the Role of Interstitial Fluid Pressurization in Cartilage Lubrication
Molecular and Immune Toxicity of CoCr Nanoparticles in MoM Hip Arthroplasty
Systemic Toxicity Related to Metal Hip Prostheses
Hydrogels: Properties and Applications in Biomedicine
Materials for Hip Prostheses: A Review of Wear and Loading Considerations
Soft Layered Prostheses for Arthritic Hip Joints: A Study of Materials Degradation
Tribology of Human and Artificial Joints
Longevity Expectations for Polymers in Medical Devices Demand New Approaches to Evaluating Their Biostability
Understanding the Biodegradation of Polyurethanes: From Classical Implants to Tissue Engineering Materials
The Bovine Patella as a Model of Early Osteoarthritis
Viscoelastic Properties of Human and Bovine Articular Cartilage: A Comparison of Frequency‐Dependent Trends
Depth‐Dependent Shear Behavior of Bovine Articular Cartilage: Relationship to Structure
Age‐Related Changes in the Chemical Composition of Bovine Articular Cartilage. The Structure of High‐Density Proteoglycans
Tensile Mechanical Properties of Bovine Articular Cartilage: Variations With Growth and Relationships to Collagen Network Components
The Tribology of Cartilage: Mechanisms, Experimental Techniques, and Relevance to Translational Tissue Engineering
Tribology and Total Hip Joint Replacement: Current Concepts In Mechanical Simulation
. Standard Test Method for Wear Testing of Polymeric Materials Used in Total Joint Prostheses. ASTM International. [cited 2020 Apr 9], http://www.astm.org/cgi-bin/resolver.cgi?F732-17.
The Basic Science of Articular Cartilage: Structure, Composition, and Function
Loci of Movement of Selected Points on the Femoral Head During Normal Gait
Slide Track Analysis of the Relative Motion Between Femoral Head and Acetabular Cup In Walking and in Hip Simulators
Type of Motion and Lubricant in Wear Simulation of Polyethylene Acetabular Cup
Biotribology of Articular Cartilage—A Review of the Recent Advances
Biphasic Creep and Stress Relaxation of Articular Cartilage in Compression? Theory and Experiments
Mechanistic and Morphological Origins of Ultra‐High Molecular Weight Polyethylene Wear Debris in Total Joint Replacement Prostheses
Wear‐Lines and Split‐Lines of Human Patellar Cartilage: Relation to Tensile Biomechanical Properties
Collagen Alignments and Artificial Splits At the Surface of Human Articular Cartilage
How Do Cartilage Lubrication Mechanisms Fail In Osteoarthritis? A Comprehensive Review
Mechanical Conditioning of Articular Cartilage to Prevalent Stresses
Three‐Dimensional Dynamic Hip Contact Area and Pressure Distribution During Activities of Daily Living
Patellofemoral Joint Kinetics While Squatting With and Without an External Load
Contact Pressures In the Human Hip Joint Measured In Vivo
Effect of Load Variation on the Friction Properties of Articular Cartilage
Analysis of Friction in Total Knee Prosthesis During a Standard Gait Cycle
Articular Cartilage Friction, Strain, and Viability Under Physiological to Pathological Benchtop Sliding Conditions
Effects of Kinematic and Kinetic Variables on Articular Cartilage Mechanical and Biological Properties
Daily Steps and All‐Cause Mortality: A Meta‐Analysis of 15 International Cohorts
Quantitative Assessment of Walking Activity After Total Hip or Knee Replacement
Advances In Tribological Testing of Artificial Joint Biomaterials Using Multidirectional Pin‐On‐Disk Testers
Can Pin‐On‐Disk Testing Be Used to Assess the Wear Performance of Retrieved Uhmwpe Components for Total Joint Arthroplasty?
Effect of Contact Pressure on Wear and Friction of Ultra‐High Molecular Weight Polyethylene In Multidirectional Sliding
Type of Motion and Lubricant In Wear Simulation of Polyethylene Acetabular Cup
Comparative Wear Tests of Ultra‐High Molecular Weight Polyethylene and Cross‐Linked Polyethylene
Tensile Fatigue of Human Articular Cartilage
Standardized Loads Acting in Knee Implants
Functional Range of Motion of the Elbow
Shoulder Range of Movement In the General Population: Age and Gender Stratified Normative Data Using a Community‐Based Cohort
Analysis of Hip Range of Motion in Everyday Life: A Pilot Study
Normal Hip and Knee Active Range of Motion: The Relationship to Age
Range of Motion Measurements: Reference Values and a Database for Comparison Studies
Cartilage Wear Patterns in Severe Osteoarthritis of the Trapeziometacarpal Joint: A Quantitative Analysis
Normal Range of Joint Movements in Shoulder, Hip, Wrist and Thumb With Special Reference to Side: A Comparison Between Two Populations
Normal Range of Motion of the Hip, Knee and Ankle Joints in Male Subjects, 30‐40 Years of Age
The Influence of Wear Paths Produced by Hip Replacement Patients During Normal Walking on Wear Rates
Clinical Biomechanics of Wear in Total Hip Arthroplasty
The Pathophysiology of Osteoarthritis: A Mechanical Perspective on the Knee Joint
Rotational Motion of the Knee
Effects of Walking Speed on Gait Biomechanics in Healthy Participants: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Different Patterns of Cartilage Wear in Medial and Lateral Gonarthrosis
Sequential Wear Patterns of the Articular Cartilage of the Thumb Carpometacarpal Joint In Osteoarthritis
Effects of and Response to Mechanical Loading on the Knee
Effects of Different Combinations of Mechanical Loading Intensity, Duration, and Frequency on the Articular Cartilage in Mice
Patterns of Articular Wear In the Cadaveric Elbow Joint
The Effects of Glenoid Wear Patterns on Patients With Osteoarthritis in Total Shoulder Arthroplasty: An Assessment of Outcomes and Value
The Pattern of Acetabular Cartilage Wear Is Hip Morphology‐Dependent and Patient Demographic‐Dependent
Wear Patterns of Tibiofemoral Articulation In Osteoarthritic Knees: Analysis and Review of Literature
Wear Patterns on Tibial Plateaus From Varus and Valgus Osteoarthritic Knees
Patterns of Patellofemoral Articular Cartilage Wear in Cadavers
[Date unknown]. ASTM‐F732‐17.pdf. [cited 2024 Nov 7], https://cdn.standards.iteh.ai/samples/98238/165bb50625aa4bbea70ea89f8f20bbab/ASTM-F732-17.pdf.
[Date unknown]. ISO 21536:2023. ISO [cited 2024 Nov 25], https://www.iso.org/standard/77045.html.
Development of a Synthetic Synovial Fluid for Tribological Testing
The Influence of Continuous Sliding and Subsequent Surface Wear on the Friction of Articular Cartilage
Wear Properties of Articular Cartilage In Vitro
In Vitro Wear of Articular Cartilage
Boundary Lubrication of Articular Cartilage: Role of Synovial Fluid Constituents
Effect of Synovial Fluid on Boundary Lubrication of Articular Cartilage
The Influence of Loading Time and Lubricant on the Friction of Articular Cartilage
Exploring the Lubrication Mechanisms of Synovial Fluids for Joint Longevity – A Perspective
Toward Understanding the Role of Cartilage Particulates In Synovial Inflammation
Biochemical Analyses of Human Osteoarthritic and Periprosthetic Synovial Fluid
Nutrition, Osteoarthritis and Cartilage Metabolism
Bovine Articular Chondrocyte Function In Vitro Depends Upon Oxygen Tension
A Pathway for Nutrients From the Medullary Cavity to the Articular Cartilage of the Human Femoral Head
The Temporal Response of the Friction Coefficient of Articular Cartilage Depends on the Contact Area
The Frictional Properties of Animal Joints
Lubrication and Cartilage
Coefficients of Friction, Lubricin, and Cartilage Damage in the Anterior Cruciate Ligament‐Deficient Guinea Pig Knee
Effect OF Dynamic Loading on the Frictional Response OF Bovine Articular Cartilage
The Role of Interstitial Fluid Pressurization in Articular Cartilage Lubrication
The Biphasic Poroviscoelastic Behavior of Articular Cartilage: Role of the Surface Zone In Governing the Compressive Behavior
Advances in Imaging of Osteoarthritis and Cartilage
Weight‐Bearing Radiography in Osteoarthritis of the Knee
Summary and Recommendations of the OARSI FDA Osteoarthritis Assessment of Structural Change Working Group
Atlas of Individual Radiographic Features in Osteoarthritis, Revised
Diagnosis of Osteoarthritis: Imaging
Classification of Osteoarthritis Biomarkers: A Proposed Approach
Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis of the Reliability and Discriminative Validity of Cartilage Compositional MRI in Knee Osteoarthritis
Quantitative Radiologic Imaging Techniques for Articular Cartilage Composition: Toward Early Diagnosis and Development of Disease‐Modifying Therapeutics for Osteoarthritis
Delayed Gadolinium‐Enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Cartilage Values in Hips With Bone Marrow Lesions
Detection of Proteoglycan Loss From Articular Cartilage Using Brillouin Microscopy, With Applications to Osteoarthritis
Proteoglycans in Articular Cartilage and Their Contribution to Chondral Injury and Repair Mechanisms
Metabolism of Cartilage Proteoglycans In Health and Disease
Changes In Articular Cartilage and Subchondral Bone Histomorphometry In Osteoarthritic Knee Joints In Humans
Considerations In Measuring Cartilage Thickness Using Mri: Factors Influencing Reproducibility and Accuracy
Comparison and Reproducibility of Fast and Conventional Spoiled Gradient‐Echo Magnetic Resonance Sequences In the Determination of Knee Cartilage Volume
Double Echo Steady State Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Knee Articular Cartilage At 3 Tesla: A Pilot Study for the Osteoarthritis Initiative
Driven Equilibrium Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Articular Cartilage: Initial Clinical Experience
Articular Cartilage Defects Detected With 3D Water‐Excitation True FISP: Prospective Comparison With Sequences Commonly Used for Knee Imaging
Fluctuating Equilibrium MRI
Vastly Undersampled Isotropic Projection Steady‐State Free Precession Imaging of the Knee: Diagnostic Performance Compared With Conventional MR
High‐Resolution Cartilage Imaging of the Knee at 3T: Basic Evaluation of Modern Isotropic 3D MR‐Sequences
Ankle: Isotropic MR Imaging With 3D‐FSE‐Cube‐‐Initial Experience in Healthy Volunteers
Imaging of the Wrist at 1.5 Tesla Using Isotropic Three‐Dimensional Fast Spin Echo Cube
The Structure, Biochemistry, and Metabolism of Osteoarthritic Cartilage: A Review of the Literature
Spatial Variation in Cartilage T2 of the Knee
A Serial Multiparametric Quantitative Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study to Assess Proteoglycan Depletion of Human Articular Cartilage and Its Effects on Functionality
The Relation Between the Biochemical Composition of Knee Articular Cartilage and Quantitative MRI: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Accuracy of T2‐weighted Fast Spin‐Echo MR Imaging With Fat Saturation in Detecting Cartilage Defects in the Knee: Comparison With Arthroscopy in 130 Patients
Analysis of Hydration and Subchondral Bone Density on the Viscoelastic Properties of Bovine Articular Cartilage
Role of Uppermost Superficial Surface Layer of Articular Cartilage in the Lubrication Mechanism of Joints
Surface and Subsurface Morphology of Bovine Humeral Articular Cartilage as Assessed by Atomic Force and Transmission Electron Microscopy
Association Between Friction and Wear in Diarthrodial Joints Lacking Lubricin
Removal of the Superficial Zone of Bovine Articular Cartilage Does Not Increase Its Frictional Coefficient
Surface Topography as a Tool to Detect Early Changes in a Posttraumatic Equine Model of Osteoarthritis
Histological Examination of Collagen and Proteoglycan Changes in Osteoarthritic Menisci
Depth‐Wise Progression of Osteoarthritis in Human Articular Cartilage: Investigation of Composition, Structure and Biomechanics
Cartilage Constructs Engineered from Chondrocytes Overexpressing IGF‐I Improve the Repair OF Osteochondral Defects in a Rabbit Model
Histological and Immunohistochemical Analyses of Articular Cartilage During Onset and Progression of Pre‐ and Early‐Stage Osteoarthritis in a Rodent Model
Histological Analysis of Cartilage Defects Repaired With An Autologous Human Stem Cell Construct 48 Weeks Postimplantation Reveals Structural Details Not Detected by T2‐Mapping MRI
Early Detection of Cartilage Degeneration: A Comparison of Histology, Fiber Bragg Grating‐Based Micro‐Indentation, and Atomic Force Microscopy‐Based Nano‐Indentation
Histological Scoring System for Subchondral Bone Changes in Murine Models of Joint Aging and Osteoarthritis
Continuous Cyclic Load Reduces Proteoglycan Release From Articular Cartilage
, , , et al. [date unknown]. In Vitro Wear Testing of Living Cartilage Tissue.
Causes of Mechanically Induced Collagen Damage in Articular Cartilage
Surface Analysis Methods for Characterizing Polymeric Biomaterials
Profilometry and Atomic Force Microscopy for Surface Characterization
Surface Analysis of Early Retrieved Polyethylene Tibial Inserts for Both Knees In Total Knee Replacement
Bone and Cartilage Interfaces With Orthopedic Implants: A Literature Review
Articular and Artificial Cartilage, Characteristics, Properties and Testing Approaches—A Review