Evaluation of objective tools and artificial intelligence in robotic surgery technical skills assessment: a systematic review
Abstract
Background
There is a need to standardize training in robotic surgery, including objective assessment for accreditation. This systematic review aimed to identify objective tools for technical skills assessment, providing evaluation statuses to guide research and inform implementation into training curricula.
Methods
A systematic literature search was conducted in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines. Ovid Embase/Medline, PubMed and Web of Science were searched. Inclusion criterion: robotic surgery technical skills tools. Exclusion criteria: non-technical, laparoscopy or open skills only. Manual tools and automated performance metrics (APMs) were analysed using Messick's concept of validity and the Oxford Centre of Evidence-Based Medicine (OCEBM) Levels of Evidence and Recommendation (LoR). A bespoke tool analysed artificial intelligence (AI) studies. The Modified Downs–Black checklist was used to assess risk of bias.
Results
Two hundred and forty-seven studies were analysed, identifying: 8 global rating scales, 26 procedure-/task-specific tools, 3 main error-based methods, 10 simulators, 28 studies analysing APMs and 53 AI studies. Global Evaluative Assessment of Robotic Skills and the da Vinci Skills Simulator were the most evaluated tools at LoR 1 (OCEBM). Three procedure-specific tools, 3 error-based methods and 1 non-simulator APMs reached LoR 2. AI models estimated outcomes (skill or clinical), demonstrating superior accuracy rates in the laboratory with 60 per cent of methods reporting accuracies over 90 per cent, compared to real surgery ranging from 67 to 100 per cent.
Conclusions
Manual and automated assessment tools for robotic surgery are not well validated and require further evaluation before use in accreditation processes.
PROSPERO: registration ID CRD42022304901
This systematic review provides a comprehensive evaluation of current objective, manual, automated and artificial intelligence (AI) methods used in robotic technical skills assessment. Many lack full evaluation and AI is in its conceptual stages.

Introduction
Robotic surgery is increasingly being adopted due to improved vision, dexterity and surgical ergonomics. In selected procedures there is supportive evidence demonstrating non-inferiority and lower morbidity compared to laparoscopy. Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is complex, highly variable and requires technical skill with unfavourable error profiles compared to industrial data. Meanwhile, the addition of new technology into the operating room, with novel technical and non-technical considerations, increases the potential for human error, and therefore patient risk. Of surgical patients, 10–15 per cent in the UK experience adverse events, of which 50 per cent are preventable. Adverse events relating to robotic procedures (10 624) were reported in the USA between 2000 and 2013 while a global independent review on health technology hazards identified a lack of robotic surgical training as one of the top 10 risks to patients. This deficit is being addressed through development and standardization of basic and specialty curricula.
Robotic surgical procedures require high levels of experience. Evaluation of performance in surgery is shifting from time- and operative numbers-based assessment towards proficiency-based training and accreditation. To assist this, objective tools are frequently employed but must be fully evaluated if they are to be used as summative, high-stakes assessment instruments. Traditionally, proficiency in surgery was extrapolated from clinical outcomes such as histopathology, morbidity and mortality, yet these are subject to multifactorial influences. Intraoperative performance analysis has proved to be a fruitful area for assessment of performance and intervention delivery. This facilitates direct formative feedback to guide reduction in proficiency curves, as well as summative assessment. Objective assessments within MIS have demonstrated reliability and clinically relevant validities, leading to the development of tools to aid this. However, previous studies have highlighted the variability in reporting on the validity and reliability of manual tools, which risks undermining truly objective skills assessment. A full appraisal of the literature on objective assessment tools, therefore, is imperative to inform learning and accreditation processes in robotic surgery.
Prior systematic reviews have focused on one aspect of technical skills assessment or combinations of surgical approaches. Other reports provide an overview but lack scope and granularity of type of validity and reliability of assessment or fail to grade the evidence. Finally, given the rapid uptake of robotic techniques and development of artificial intelligence (AI) methods, many reports are now outdated, requiring up-to-date evaluation.
The aim of this systematic review is to provide an up-to-date and comprehensive evaluation of objective, technical skill assessment tools in robotic surgery.

Methods
This systematic review followed an a priori protocol (PROSPERO registration ID CRD42022304901). The Covidence® platform was used to screen studies, exclude duplications and extract data.

Search strategy
A systematic search of the literature was conducted in line with the PRISMA guidelines. Ovid Embase/Medline, PubMed and Web of Science databases were searched from conception to 22 February 2022. Table S1 outlines the full search strategy. Searches were performed independently by two authors using medical subject headings (MeSH) terms for ‘Objective’, ‘Assessment’, ‘Tool’, ‘Error’, ‘Skill’, ‘Robot’ and ‘Surgery’, which were combined with Boolean operators ‘AND’ and ‘OR’. Studies from knowledge of the field and references from relevant articles, including one literature and four systematic reviews, were additionally screened. Conference proceedings and journal supplement abstracts were considered relevant if meaningful data were available.

Selection of eligible studies
Four reviewers independently screened, reviewed and extracted data, with the primary investigator reviewing all articles. Disagreements were resolved through discussion with the corresponding author.
Included studies followed the PICO question:
Population—participants being assessed on robotic technical skill.
Intervention—an objective technical skill assessment tool or method is developed and/or implemented.
Comparison—to other tools or measurement of assessment.
Outcome—validity, reliability, accuracy, impact on the participant.
Exclusion criteria were solely laparoscopic and/or open assessment skills, or failures to retrieve the article or an English translation.

Data extraction

All studies
Study details including year, country, participant number, participant expertise level and evaluator type were extracted. Identified studies were grouped based on study and tool types into manual, automated performance metrics (APMs) and evaluation of statistical models or AI algorithms. These domains of technical skill assessment were devised using approaches employed by previous reviews and that reflect different assessment methods. The manual domain is human assessment with subgroups that are global rating scales, procedure-specific and error-based tools. APMs are metrics produced by computer software typically in virtual reality (VR) simulators. Finally, AI algorithms are mathematical models implemented to process input data and estimate skill or clinically related outputs, for example, using kinematic data to predict postoperative urinary incontinence or vision data to predict skill level (Fig. 1).
Artificial intelligence framework for surgical skill assessment

Manual and APM studies
Due to the heterogeneity in methods of technical skill assessment, different approaches were applied to facilitate evaluation. Manual tools and automated performance metrics (non-AI articles) were evaluated using Messick's validity concept and the Modified Educational Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (OCEBM) Levels of Evidence (LoE) and Levels of Recommendation (LoR). Messick's concept views validity as a continuous process and a combination of the classical views of face, content, construct and predictive validity, internal consistency, intra- and inter-rater reliability. Instead of viewing these as separate, five aspects that need to be considered for an assessment tool to be valid were assessed (Table 1). Strength of correlational analyses and significance was also extracted using standardized definitions.
Messick's validity framework adapted from
Source of validity	Evidence	Examples	 	Test content, that is face and content validity	The test's content and the construct it is intended to measure	Delphi methodology/expert consensus developmentQuestionnaires for realism and usefulness	 	Response process	Analysis of raters, that is how well they respond to the test and steps taken to improve the validity	Rater training/orientation/familiarizationRandomizationPowered studyAPMs eliminate rater bias	 	Internal structure, that is reliability	Degree to which domains and aspects of the tool fit the underlying construct	Intra- and inter-rater reliability, internal consistencyAPMs eliminated rater subjectivity	 	Relationship to other variables	Evaluating scores' associations/correlations, whether they are positive or negative, strong or weak, and with other variables including discriminative ability	Concurrent, construct and predictive validityGeneralizability of the evidenceLearning curves	 	Consequence	Impact of the assessment	Pass/fail/benchmarking of scoresImpact or consequences on participants future/learning

Artificial intelligence studies
AI specialists contributed to screening, data extraction and evaluation and a bespoke data extraction template was employed to standardize data capture.

Methodological quality assessment
Methodological quality assessment was evaluated using a modifiable Downs–Black checklist (Table S2). Due to study heterogeneity some aspects were not applicable; therefore, taking a pragmatic approach, we modified the score in these circumstances, with a maximum score of 10 available. For AI studies, it was not feasible to apply a relevant methodological quality tool such as the Downs–Black checklist or Medical Education Research Study Quality Instrument (MERSQI), as most study designs are conceptual.
Tables 2–4 summarize the main tools in each domain of technical skill assessment and Supplementary Tables (Tables S3 to S8) describe each study's analysis. Summaries of the remaining tools can be viewed in Table S9.
Summary of manual assessment tools
Global rating scale tools	 	Tool	Study type	Setting	Test content	Response process	Internal structure	Relationship to other variables	Consequences	LoE	LoR	 	GEARS	46 Observational12 RCTs	36 Lab17 OR5 Lab & OR	Experts developed based on GOALS	All studies (except one) demonstrated response process	Inter-rater reliabilityStrong/Very strong/Excellent/HighAcceptable/Good/ModerateLow/PoorIntra-rater reliabilityExcellentInternal consistencyExcellentLow	Concurrent validityOther GRS toolsTask-/procedure-specific toolsError toolsVirtual realityAPMsNon-technical skillsConstruct validityPredictive validity	80–100% = good to excellent (arbitrary definition)Benchmarked using expert scores	Level 1bLevel 2aLevel 2bLevel 3 Level 4	Level 1 recommendation	 	OSATS	20 Observational3 RCT	19 Lab3 OR1 Lab & OR		All but two studies demonstrated response process	Inter-rater reliabilityHigh/ExcellentGood/ModerateIntra-rater reliabilityStrongInternal consistencyExcellentNB OSATS/GEARS combo	Concurrent validityTask-/procedure-specific toolsError toolsVirtual realityAPMsCognitive loadConstruct validityPredictive validity	Hypothesized mean OSATS category scores 3.5 novice and 4.5 expert was in concordance with results of meanExpert benchmarking	Level 2aLevel 2bLevel 3	Level 2 recommendation(NB if combined with OSATS task-specific, it would still be LoR 2)	 	GOALS	4 Observational3 RCTs	5 Lab1 OR1 Lab & OR	Expert group added 2 domains to GOALS creating GOALS + 	All studies demonstrated response process	Internal consistencyHigh	Concurrent validityOther GRS toolsVirtual realityConstruct validity	Pass mark defined by contrasting groups method by experts	Level 1bLevel 2aLevel 2bLevel 4	Level 2 recommendation	 	R-OSATS	4 Observational	4 Lab	Developed from GOALS and OSATS	All studies demonstrated response process	Inter-rater reliabilityStrong/Very high/ExcellentAcceptable/Moderate/GoodIntra-rater reliabilityVery strongModerate/Good	Concurrent validity with VRConstruct validity	Modified Angoff method set threshold competency scores per drill	Level 2bLevel 3	Level 2 recommendation	 	Procedure- and Task-Specific Assessment Tools	 	OSATS Task-specificTools are for separate procedures/tasks	5 Observational2 RCTs	7 Lab	No studies	All demonstrated response process	Inter-rater reliabilityHigh	Concurrent validityNon-simulator APMsSimulator APMsConstruct validity	Pass mark based on experts	Level 2aLevel 2bLevel 3	Level 2 recommendation(NB if combined with OSATS GRS, would still be Level 2)	 	RACE	5 Observational1 RCT	3 Lab2 OR1 Delphi and OR	Delphi consensus	All demonstrated response process	Inter-rater reliabilityStrong/ExcellentGood/ModerateIntra-rater reliabilityGood	Concurrent validityGEARSUVA leak on modelEASE suturing toolConstruct validity		Level 1bLevel 2bLevel 3	Level 2 recommendation	 	Task-Perform-ance Metrics ToolsTools are for separate procedures/tasks	1 Observational2 Delphi and video rating OR videos2 Delphi and Lab	1 Delphi1 OR1 Delphi and OR2 Delphi and OR	All tools developed through Delphi consensus	All tools demonstrated response process	Inter-rater reliabilityPercentage agreement 0.85–0.96	Construct validity	Anastomotic leak test	Level 2bLevel 4	Level 2 recommendation	 	Error Assessment Tools	 	FLS Scoring System	8 Observational1 RCT 2	8 Lab1 OR and Lab	None	2 demonstrated response process	Inter-rater reliabilityExcellentIntra-rater reliabilityExcellentInternal consistencyGood	Construct validityConcurrent validity with GEARS	Expert defined proficiency/pass fail marks	Level 2aLevel 2bLevel 3	Level 2 recommendation	 	Task-Perform-ance Metrics ToolsTools are for separate procedures/tasks	1 Observational2 Delphi and video rating OR videos2 Delphi and Lab	1 Delphi1 OR1 Delphi and OR2 Delphi and OR	All tools developed through Delphi consensus	All tools demonstrated response process	Inter-rater reliabilityPercentage agreement 0.85–0.96	Construct validity	Anastomotic leak test	Level 2bLevel 4	Level 2 recommendation	 	Generic Error Rating Tool	2 Observational	2 OR	None	Both demonstrated response process		Concurrent validityGEARSClinical adverse events (presumed intra-op, unclear)Cognitive task load		Level 2bLevel 3	Level 3 recommendation
Summary of automated performance metrics
Simulator automated performance metrics	 	Tool	Study type	Setting	Test content	Response process	Internal structure	Relationship to other variables	Consequences	LoE	LoR	 	da Vinci (Surgical) Skills Simulator	28 Observational11 RCTs	30 Lab9 OR and Lab	14 studies showing face and content validityNote three studies stated dVSS more realistic/helpful than dV-T	Automated metrics inherently no rater bias11 RCTs (3 not powered)2 Powered non-randomized studiesOrientation/standardization of training	Automated metrics inherently consistent1 study measured consistency with consecutive attempts with excellent reliability	Concurrent validityGRS toolsOther VRError toolsOther training methodConstruct validityPredictive of console performance in the labPredictive of console performance in the OR	Pass mark defined 	Level 1bLevel 2aLevel 2bLevel 3Level 4	Level 1 recommendation	 	dV-Trainer	13 Observational4 RCTs	17 Lab	9 Face/contentNote lack of realism for needle driving	Automated metrics inherently no rater bias4 RCTs (2 not powered)Orientation/standardization of training	Automated metrics inherently consistent	Concurrent validityGRSOther VRConstruct validityPredictive of console performance in the lab	Novice proficiency criteria developedDefined by expert performanceVR index competency score (not benchmarked)	Level 1bLevel 2aLevel 2bLevel 3Level 4	Level 2 recommendation	 	RobotiX Mentor	9 Observational1 RCT	9 Lab1 Delphi	All studies showed face/content except twoNo difference between RXM and dVSS/dV-TNote limitation of realism of suture	Automated metrics inherently no rater biasOrientation/standardization of trainingRandomized groups	Automated metrics inherently consistentTest–retest reliabilityExcellentInternal consistency of metricsFairUnacceptable to goodUnacceptable to poor	Concurrent with FRS metrics dry labConstruct validityPredictive of console performance in the lab	Pass mark defined  based on competent surgeons, with contrasting groups method 	Level 2aLevel 2bLevel 2cLevel 4	Level of recommendation 2	 	PromisTM hybrid surgical simulator	3 Observational	3 Lab	Face and content	Standardized orientation	Internal consistencyGood	Construct validity		Level 2b	Level 2 recommendation	 	Robotic Surgery Simulator (RoSS)	3 Observational1 RCT	1 Lab1 Lab and Delphi	Face and content 	Automated metrics inherently no rater biasRandomized, powered	Automated metrics inherently reliable	Construct validityPredictive of console performance in the lab		Level 2aLevel 2bLevel 4	Level 2 recommendation	 	3D hydrogel models—clinically relevant objective/performance metrics (CROMS/CRPMS)	2 Observational	2 Lab	Face and content both studies	Objective metricsPilot testing		Concurrent validity with GEARSConstruct validity		Level 2b	Level 2 recommendation	 	da Vinci SimNow	1 RCT	Lab		Automated metrics inherently without rater bias	Automated metrics inherently reliable	Concurrent validity with da Vinci system event data recorderConstruct validity		Level 2a	Level of Recommendation 3	 	Versius Trainer	1 Observational	Lab		Automated metrics inherently without rater bias	Automated metrics inherently reliable	Learning curve demonstrated		Level 3	Level of Recommendation 4	 	Non-Simulator Automated Performance Metrics	 	da Vinci Kinematic and System Event RecordersNB different terms used that is da Vinci API, dVLogger or da Vinci Systems Events data recorder	15 Observational1 RCT	10 Lab6 OR		Automated metrics inherently without rater bias1 study randomized	Automated metrics inherently reliable	Concurrent validityGRSVRCognitive loadTask evoked pupillary responseR.E.N.A.L. nephrotomy score and intraop data for example EBLConstruct validityPredictive validity		Level 2aLevel 2bLevel 3	Level of Recommendation 2	 	Electromag-netic motion tracker sensor (TrakStar; Ascension Technologies, USA)	5 Observational	All Lab		Automated metrics inherently without rater biasStandardized orientationExperts reviewed metrics	Automated metrics inherently reliable	Construct validity		Level 2bLevel 3	Level 2 recommendation	 	SurgTrak™ Motion tracking	1 RCT	Lab		Automated metrics inherently without rater biasRandomized, powered		Construct validity		Level 2a	Level 2 recommendation
Summary of artificial intelligence studies
Study setting	Participant no.	Tasks/procedure	Data set	Data set size (trials)	Model input	Model output that is estimates/predictions | performance	 	Simulators (VR)	1–910–19 ≥ 20	Ring and railSuture spongeCamera targeting, peg board, dots and needles, tubesEndowrist manipulation, needle control and needle driving skills	All private	<5050–99	KinematicsSkill-related labelsEMG signalsEye-tracking and EEG signals	Skill level | accuracy 65–100%GEARS | accuracy 69–89%Skill-related labels | accuracy 48–99%	 	Dry lab	1–910–19 ≥ 20	SuturingNeedle passingKnot tyingTransection and dissectionPeg transferRing transfer	JIGSAWS	<5050–99100–149 ≥ 150	KinematicsForce dataSystem event dataVideos	Skill level | accuracy 46–100%Modified OSATS (JIGSAWS) | SCC 0.03–0.93GEARS | accuracy 52–75%	 	Operating room	1–910–19 ≥ 20	RARPUrethrovesical anastomosisNeedle handling/drivingLymph node dissectionLaparoscopic cholecystectomy	HeiChole	<5050–99100–149 ≥ 150	VideosKinematicsSystem event dataClinical parameters	Skill level | accuracy 67–100%PLACE score | accuracy 83.3%Modified GOALS | SCC 0.46–0.573-Month/6-month urinary continence after RARP | AUC 0.67–0.74)1-Year erectile function recovery | AUC 0.68–0.77

Results
Two thousand, nine hundred and forty-four studies were identified from searches with 85 identified from additional sources. Seven hundred and forty-nine duplicates were removed. Of 2280 studies that were screened and reviewed, 2033 were excluded with 247 studies undergoing data extraction (Fig. 2). Two hundred and twenty-seven studies were classified as observational, including Delphi meetings, experimental, cohort and randomized studies not defined as randomized control trials (RCTs), while a total of 20 RCTs were identified. Of the manual studies, 93 used global rating scales (GRS), 45 procedure- or task-specific tools, 43 error-based, 77 simulator automated performance metrics, 28 non-simulator automated performance metrics and 53 AI studies.
PRISMA flowchart

Global rating scale tools
Eight different GRS tools were identified (Table 2 and Table S3). Global Evaluative Assessment of Robotic Skills (GEARS) was the most utilized assessment method, assessed in 58 studies, including 12 RCTs giving a Level 1 recommendation based on 21 studies reporting excellent reliability and 3 low/poor. Interestingly, crowd-sourced GEARS ratings demonstrated excellent inter-rater reliability, good to strong/excellent inter-observer group reliability compared to experts, as well as construct and predictive validity. GEARS (all raters) demonstrated supportive evidence of ‘relationship to other variables’ including concurrent (17 studies), construct (25 studies) and predictive validity (3 studies).
Objective Structured Assessment of Technical Skills (OSATS), Global Operative Assessment of Laparoscopic Skills (GOALS) and Robotic-OSATS (R-OSATS) were used in a total of 34 studies and all received a Level 2 recommendation, despite only one of them being robotic-specific. GEARS has no robust data validating a benchmark for overall and domain scores, whereas GOALS and R-OSATS used the contrasting groups method and the modified Angoff method, setting competency at 80 per cent and 70 per cent, respectively. All other tools identified have not been thoroughly evaluated with LoR 3 or 4 (Table S9).

Procedure- and task-specific tools
Twenty-six different types of procedure- and task-specific tool were identified in 45 studies (Table 2, Tables S4, S9). Of these, 22 (48.9 per cent) studies containing 17 (37.8 per cent) different tools used full procedural data. With regards to specialty, 21 (46.7 per cent) studies assessed 15 urology tools, 9 (20 per cent) studies assessed 8 general surgery tools, 3 (6.7 per cent) gynaecology tools, 1 (2.2 per cent) ear, nose and throat, 1 (2.2 per cent) microsurgery, 8 (17.8 per cent) suturing, 2 (4.4 per cent) dissection, 1 (2.2 per cent) vessel dissection and ligation and 1 (2.2 per cent) other dry model tasks.
Robotic Anastomosis Competency Evaluation (RACE), Task-Performance Metrics tools and OSATS are the most evaluated tools with a Level 2 recommendation, demonstrating concurrent and construct validity, missing evaluation for predictive and in the consequence domain. One tool, A-OSATS, has been evaluated over all five of Messick's domains, but only in one study and lacking predictive validity. In summary, there are no full procedural tools that have been fully evaluated for robotic surgery.

Error tools
Three main tools underwent multiple study evaluations (Table 2): the Fundamental Laparoscopic Skills (FLS) scoring system, Generic Error Rating Tool (GERT) and Task-Performance Metrics. The most common error method was the cumulative number of errors, reported in 20 of 42 studies (46.5 per cent; Table S5). In 13 studies (69.7 per cent) a composite score was created, while a further study defined arbitrary task-specific time penalties. There is substantial variability in the definition and measurement of errors, often missing robust evaluation on validity and multiple tools were only present in single studies. The FLS scoring system gives a composite score and was used in 9 (20.9 per cent) studies. Task-Performance Metrics tools define errors and were used in 5 (11.6 per cent). The GERT tool assesses a surgical task group, error mode, number, description and mechanism of event and was analysed in 2 (4.6 per cent) studies. All three methods reached Level 2 recommendation. FLS and Task-Performance Metrics tools both had evidence of internal structure and relationship to other variables, with excellent reliability, concurrent and construct validity. There were no reports on predictive validity or benchmarking of these tools.

Simulator automated performance metrics
Ten different simulators were identified (Table S6, Table 3). Automated performance metrics in simulation environments have been thoroughly evaluated with 39 (50.6 per cent) studies on da Vinci Skills Simulator (dVSS), 17 on (22.1 per cent) dV-Trainer (dV-T) and 9 (11.7 per cent) on RobotiX Mentor. Sixteen (76.2 per cent) of the 20 RCTs in this review involved simulators. These three simulators have been validated in all five Messick domains exhibiting concurrent and construct validity. dVSS and dV-T training also predicted better performance on the console in operative and dry model performances. In addition, more comprehensive evaluation in the consequence domain has been carried out for all three when compared to other assessment tools. Current evidence favours dVSS at Level 1 recommendation. dV-T, RobotiX Mentor, Promis hybrid surgical simulator, Robotic Surgery Simulator (RoSS) and 3D hydrogel models with ‘Clinically Relevant Objective or Performance Metrics (CROMS/CRPMS)’ all receive Level 2 recommendation. The Versius trainer from CMR Surgical has currently been evaluated at Level 4 recommendation. Simulators unlikely to be in wide usage were identified and excluded from Table 3. Notably the vast majority of studies (70; 90.9 per cent) looked at basic skills, with only 6 (7.8 per cent) reviewing procedure-specific VR.

Non-simulator automated performance metrics
Of the 28 included studies (Table 3 and Table S7), 16 used da Vinci Application Programming Interface (API) kinematic and system event data, with 6 (21.4 per cent) from the operating room and all within urology. Kinematic and system event data from the da Vinci systems are the most evaluated APMs on the console achieving Level 2 recommendation. Despite two other APM tools having the same LoR, da Vinci API data evaluation is arguably more useful as concurrent, construct and predictive validity has been demonstrated. The only study looking at non-kinematic data, instrument vibration and forces, showed construct and concurrent validity, with a LoR 3. No study has yet fully validated non-simulator APM data, primarily missing evaluation in the consequence domain.

Artificial intelligence
Fifty-three AI studies were identified (Table 4 and Table S8). The range of participating surgeons across the AI studies varied from 1 to 77 (median = 8). Most studies employed the publicly available JHU-ISI Gesture and Skill Assessment Working Set (JIGSAWS), which features 139 trials from eight surgeons suturing, knot-tying, and needle-passing exercises with kinematic data.
The most common level grouping was between expert and novice surgeons; however, there was significant heterogeneity in how this was defined. In most cases, expertise was defined by a surgeon's caseload with wide variability, for example 50 to over 2500 cases. Other studies assigned assessment scores to group surgeons above a predefined threshold as experts and below as novices.
Forty-one (77.4 per cent) studies evaluated their AI models using data obtained from simulators or dry lab simulations, while 12 (22.6 per cent) studies used data collected from real surgical procedures. The most frequently used dry lab data set (24/41; 58.5 per cent) was JIGSAWS.
Studies that used real surgical data included procedures such as lymph node dissection, laparoscopic cholecystectomy, robotic assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP) urethrovesical anastomosis, and phases, gastrectomy and thyroid surgery. RARP procedures were the most common (7/12), with Chen et al. utilizing the largest data set.
The majority approached skill assessment as a classification task (28/53; 52.8 per cent), with the aim of predicting the participant skill level. Twenty (37.7 per cent) studies estimated an assessment score (numerical regression) that corresponds to an assessment tool. Notably, only three attempted to estimate the individual domains of the tool, with the remainder predicting the total score.
A few studies adopted a different approach to assess skill; ranking performance, estimating the operating field clearness, using stylistic behaviour labels and linking skill levels to clinical outcomes in RARP.
Of the 53 studies, 20 (37.7 per cent) utilized video data, 29 (54.7 per cent) used kinematics, 7 (13.2 per cent) employed system events and 3 (5.6 per cent) used force data. Furthermore, a few others utilized clinical parameters such as BMI and prostate -specific antigen (PSA), eye-tracking and electroencephalography (EEG) signals, electromyography data (EMG) and galvanic skin response (GSR), surgical gesture sequences and stylistic behaviour components. Among these studies, 33 (62.3 per cent) used a single input modality (for example, video only), while 20 (37.7 per cent) utilized two or more input modalities.
Twenty-six (49.1 per cent) studies used classic machine learning methods, with support vector machine (SVM) being the most common (13/26 (50 per cent)). Most used APMs as input. Twenty-seven (51 per cent) employed deep learning methods, with 19 (35.8 per cent) using convolutional neural networks (CNN). Video-based deep learning methods used a CNN to extract visual features, which are then either fed to a temporal model or to a simple classifier/regressor. Kinematic-based deep learning approaches use either temporal convolutional networks (TCN) or recurrent neural network (RNN) or a combination of the two. Notably, deep learning approaches have gained popularity in surgical skill assessment (Fig. S1).
To evaluate their developed methods, most studies utilized the accuracy metric and Spearman's correlation coefficient (SCC). The accuracy rates and SCC for the models tested on real surgical data ranged from 67 per cent to 100 per cent and 0.41 to 0.64, respectively, but were inferior to simulator/dry-lab data; nearly 60 per cent of classification methods reported accuracy above 90 per cent; while only one study out of 10 reported SCC over 0.90.

Discussion
This systematic review comprehensively analysed the current development and evaluation status of objective technical skills assessment tools in robotic surgery. Despite the plethora of publications, it is evident that full evaluation according to Messick's concept is sparse. This may explain the notable lack of reports showing their implementation within day-to-day practice or curricula. Many manual tools are lacking in scope and are arguably unsuitable to be used as summative tools at their current validation status. Emerging evidence in AI has reached the first in-human studies, but these are predominantly conceptual and require full validation. The current review suggests that research efforts should be focused on validating and implementing existing instruments rather than seeking any further robotic surgery assessment methods.
GEARS and VR simulators offer clear opportunities for formative and summative assessment within the basic skills curricula. Simulator studies demonstrated VR participants outperforming controls or an improvement in post-VR curriculum assessments in the operative and laboratory setting. GEARS has not been formally benchmarked and given that it is likely the best manual annotation GRS tool to use with AI models warrants further focused evaluation. Meanwhile, given that AI studies often use OSATS or modified GOALS, efforts are necessary to inform the computer science and surgical community to utilize GEARS instead for robotic global technical ratings. Chen et al. highlighted gaps in the assessment domains of generic robotic skills assessments for GEARS, which provides an opportunity for modification and re-evaluation. VR simulators allow safe transference of basic skills and have defined competency benchmarks before progression to console training, broadly speaking a score between 80 and 90 per cent.
Procedure-specific VR and 3D-printed hydrogel models provide high-fidelity simulation allowing an opportunity for standardized, safe progression to clinical training. These platforms avoid possible ethical, religious and moral issues that can prevent the use of cadaver or live animals. Only six studies were identified evaluating procedure-specific VR, confirming the need for further development and evaluation of different operative VR and 3D model tasks. However, additional issues including training access and the financial implications of these platforms remain unstudied.
Procedure-specific tools can potentially act as excellent formative and summative assessments often with higher reliability than GRS. Three tools (OSATS task-specific, RACE and Task-Performance Metrics) had the highest LoR; however, importantly there are no reports demonstrating predictive validity or benchmarking full procedural tools. Task-Performance Metrics were all developed through Delphi consensus as proficiency-based progression (PBP) assessment tools and had high reliability through trained expert raters undergoing reliability ‘checks’. The tools’ structure includes phases and subtasks for each procedure and can be commended for including operation-specific error metrics. Their intended application is within proficiency-based training, which aims to benchmark phases or modules before moving on to the next stage. However, these among other tools are not yet publicly available, precluding research including external validation efforts.
It is evident that there is a paucity of procedure-specific tools ready for implementation into robotic training curricula. They also lack scope, with the majority in urology, and so as a surgical community it is imperative to both develop tools missing for key operations and fully evaluate existing ones.
Error tools identified in this review typically used cumulative number of errors and have not been fully evaluated within clinical settings. A key aspect in a surgeon's learning curve is to understand the ‘what, where, when, how, why’ and corrective mechanisms of an error, which no current study has reported. Granular methods of surgeons’ technical performance and errors are necessary to train AI, combined with global rating scales and procedure-specific tools, to fully understand the complexities of any operation. Tools should combine each aspect with full comprehensive evaluation before implementation into training curricula. As demonstrated in this review, reliability can most likely be improved through expert, trained raters and quality assurance processes.
APMs and AI are emerging and promising tools to guide training and assessment in robotic surgery. APMs can be considered truly objective, yet need further focused evaluation to understand and benchmark important metrics for construct and predictive validity. While AI models performed well when analysing intraoperative surgical skill data, they generally perform better on simulator/dry lab.
A significant proportion of the AI models tested on simulated data achieved accuracy rates above 90 per cent, while some models tested on real surgical data demonstrated perfect classification performance of surgical skill levels. Despite this, AI-based skill assessment is still in its conceptual stage with four broad areas that need to be addressed: data sets, manual annotation, AI model evaluation and integration into clinical practice.
For the field of automated surgical skill assessment to advance, it is critical to assess models on real surgical data. Additionally, it is crucial to gather data from high-fidelity simulations tasks so AI models can be evaluated for benchmarking and comparison of different methods. Efforts must focus on collecting large, publicly available, diverse data sets, including surgeons with differing levels of expertise and different robotic platforms with matched clinical outcome data. Utilizing diverse data sets will ensure AI models are unbiased and can generalize effectively on unseen surgeons and tasks.
Identified AI studies used different ways to evaluate their methods making direct comparisons challenging and reducing external validity. Testing models on the JIGSAWS data set has highlighted the performance gap between cross-validation schemes such as Leave-One-User-Out (LOUO) and more relaxed schemes such as Leave-One-Super-Trial-Out (LOSO). However, before automated skill assessment can be used in clinical practice it must first be ensured the models can generalize to unseen surgeons. To achieve this, evaluation should be performed with cross-validation schemes (for small data sets), or with large external test sets containing trials from unseen surgeons from different hospitals to ensure generalizability. LOSO still remains useful in situations where the performance of a specific surgeon is tracked for proficiency curve analyses.
To achieve integration into clinical practice, it is essential that models can provide not only accurate predictions but also clear, understandable justifications for their decisions that clinicians can trust. As the role of AI in healthcare continues to expand there is increasing awareness of the potential pitfalls and the need for guidance to avoid them, including a recent statement from the World Health Organization.
Increasingly detailed and informative feedback beyond simple scores or skill level labels can help to personalize surgical training. Although there have been some efforts to develop explainable AI models and feedback mechanisms, more research is needed to fully address these issues, focusing on developing methods that are more transparent and interpretable, for example written reports and error-detection capabilities to provide more informative context-specific feedback. Indeed, research is needed investigating human factors with educational specialists to elucidate the best way for skill assessment to be presented and when.
To credential surgeons as competent for independent practice, blinded expert video rating is considered an essential part of accreditation. This requires fully evaluated objective summative assessment tools. Often, surgeons undergoing robotic training are already credentialed, adding additional challenges to standardizing pathways and ensuring patient safety. Undoubtedly, there are many routes to competency and now also emergent robotic systems to consider.
This review has highlighted many assessment domains, with their advantages, disadvantages and future research needs (Table 5). To achieve implementation of validated and reliable tools into curricula, collaboration between surgical societies is required. Through expert consensus and large, multicentre, international studies, single tools for each procedure should be developed and fully evaluated. Only then, should they be implemented within curricula as formative and summative tools, or in the evaluation of APMs and AI.
Summary of all assessment domains
Assessment domain	Advantages	Disadvantages	Further research	 	Global Rating Scales	Quick to fill in.GEARS is capable of strong validity and reliability.Likely good formative tools for generic technical skill.	Subjective, risk of low reliability.Miss granularity of operative steps; therefore, not to be used solely for summative assessment in procedural training.No evidence used in day-to-day formative/summative assessment or incorporated into curricula.	Benchmarking alongside procedure-specific tools.Incorporation into curricula.Expert consensus on tool to use for training AI, and a standardized method for example experts who are trained with reliability tests.	 	Procedure-specific	Valid and reliable often as it is easy to agree on what steps have been done that is binary.Useful formative and summative assessments.	Potential to miss how well the surgeon performs an operation.Currently only a few tools and predominantly within urology.No fully evaluated or benchmarked tools exist for robotics.	Benchmarking with GRS tools.Development and full evaluation of more tools within different specialties.Incorporation into training curricula.	 	Error methods	Evidence of validity and reliability.Important part of formative assessment for the surgeon to improve and summative to indicate competency.	Difficult to define certain aspects for example how and why it occurs.Detailed error analysis takes time consuming retrospective video analysis.	Combine with GRS and procedure-specific operative analysis including benchmarking.Further evaluation of existing tools within MIS.AI recognition of near-misses or pre-errors, errors, and critical errors, through manual annotation.	 	Automated performance metrics	Promising objective tools which have some validity evidence. No concerns re: reliability or bias.Simulators have been thoroughly evaluated and are a good tool for basic skills transfer to the console.	Simulator APMs for procedure-specific simulation are lacking development and evaluation.Non-simulator APMs—current understanding is limited as to their meaning for formative/summative assessment and patient outcome.Data are protected by industry.Requires expertise in computer science collaborating with industry and clinicians; therefore, used only in research currently.	Simulator evaluation on procedure-specific tasks.Evaluation of emerging robotic platforms VR and APMs.Evaluation of APM data in the clinical setting.Creation of more open data sets or perhaps registries should be considered.Availability of APM data sets depends on collaborating with industry to ensure it can be publicly available.	 	Artificial intelligence	Promising initial results, with the potential to transform formative and summative assessment, particularly if evaluated with APMs.	In its infancy.Ensuring AI is correctly assessing performance requires highly reliable, manually annotated videos, which is time-consuming, particularly given the numbers needed to train then test.Current results are from small data sets.More challenging to evaluate in the clinical setting with more variability, for example camera and patient movements.External validity of methods to surgeons outside of the research data set.Risk of blocking innovation in the future?	Open data sets/registries.Evaluation with manually annotated/rated videos to help train AI, alongside APMs.Development of more complex laboratory data sets to initially evaluate models, then transfer into multispecialty clinical setting.

Limitations
This comprehensive review standardized data extraction with Messick's concept and modified OCEBM guidelines. Nevertheless, due to marked study heterogeneity this was difficult at times, and was particularly evident when utilizing the OCEBM guidance, with previous systematic reviews disagreeing on studies’ LoE. Not only this, but some studies have a higher LoE, despite demonstrating less validity evidence than others. It is likely that guidelines require updating as surgical data science evolves. The application of methodological quality tools was found to be impractical for assessing AI studies, primarily as most are in their conceptual stage of development. Future research should focus on developing and piloting a new AI-specific study quality assessment tool.

Conclusion
A large number of manual, automated and artificial intelligence tools in robotic surgery exist. There is huge variability in approach to assessment and the level of evaluation among all domains of robotic technical skill assessment, with few having been well validated. In addition, there is a lack of scope and most tools are presently only used within the research setting, despite the unmet need for both objective formative and summative tools to inform learning and accreditation, respectively. Collaboration between surgical societies, AI scientists and industry, with large high-quality studies and open data sets, appears the most efficient way forward to aid diffusion and implementation of objective assessment tools in clinical practice to enhance training and patient safety.

Supplementary Material

Author contributions
Matthew Boal (Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing—original draft, Writing—review & editing), Dimitrios Anastasiou (Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing—original draft), Freweini Tesfai (Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing—review & editing), Walaa Ghamrawi (Investigation, Writing—review & editing), Evangelos Mazomenos (Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Writing—review & editing), Nathan Curtis (Conceptualization, Writing—review & editing), Justin Collins (Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Writing—review & editing), Ashwin Sridhar (Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing—review & editing), John Kelly (Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing—review & editing), Danail Stoyanov (Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Writing—review & editing), and Nader Francis (Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, Writing—review & editing)

Funding
The authors have no funding to declare.

Disclosure
Justin W. Collins is an associate medical director at CMR Surgical Ltd, UK. The other authors declare no conflict of interest.

Supplementary material
Supplementary material is available at BJS online.

Data availability
Data for this review can be reproduced on reasonable request to the corresponding author.

References
Outcomes of robot-assisted surgery in rectal cancer compared with open and laparoscopic surgery
Comparing pathologic outcomes for robotic versus laparoscopic surgery in rectal cancer resection: a propensity adjusted analysis of 7616 patients
Robotic vs. laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in morbidly obese patients: systematic review and pooled analysis
Robotic-assisted vs. standard laparoscopic surgery for rectal cancer resection: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 19,731 patients
Robotic versus conventional laparoscopic pancreaticoduodenectomy: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Clinical evaluation of intraoperative near misses in laparoscopic rectal cancer surgery
The importance of technical and non-technical skills in robotic surgery training
Adverse events in British hospitals: preliminary retrospective record review
Utilising the Delphi process to develop a proficiency-based progression train-the-trainer course for robotic surgery training
Construct validation of the key components of fundamental skills of robotic surgery (FSRS) curriculum—a multi-institution prospective study
Fundamental skills of robotic surgery: a multi-institutional randomized controlled trial for validation of a simulation-based curriculum
Fundamentals of robotic surgery: outcomes measures and curriculum development principle investigators
Multi-institutional validation of fundamental inanimate robotic skills tasks
Proving the effectiveness of the fundamentals of robotic surgery (FRS) skills curriculum: a single-blinded, multispecialty, multi-institutional randomized control trial
Developing a robotic general surgery training curriculum: identifying key elements through a Delphi process
Fundamentals of robotic surgery: a course of basic robotic surgery skills based upon a 14-society consensus template of outcomes measures and curriculum development
Outcomes from the Delphi process of the Thoracic Robotic Curriculum Development Committee
European Association of Endoscopic Surgeons (EAES) consensus statement on the use of robotics in general surgery
Orsi Consensus Meeting on European Robotic Training (OCERT): results from the first multispecialty consensus meeting on training in robot-assisted surgery
Expert consensus on a train-the-trainer curriculum for robotic colorectal surgery
The safety of urologic robotic surgery depends on the skills of the surgeon
Expert consensus recommendations for robotic surgery credentialing
Surgical skill and complication rates after bariatric surgery
Laparoscopic colorectal surgery outcomes improved after national training program (LAPCO) for specialists in England
Association of surgical skill assessment with clinical outcomes in cancer surgery
Objective assessment of robotic surgical technical skill: a systematic review
Current status of technical skills assessment tools in surgery: a systematic review
Automated methods of technical skill assessment in surgery: a systematic review
Machine learning for technical skill assessment in surgery: a systematic review
Objective assessment of robotic surgical skills: review of literature and future directions
Machine learning analyses of automated performance metrics during granular sub-stitch phases predict surgeon experience HHS public access
Automated performance metrics and machine learning algorithms to measure surgeon performance and anticipate clinical outcomes in robotic surgery
An objective assessment of performance during robotic partial nephrectomy: validation and correlation of automated performance metrics with intraoperative outcomes
Surgeon automated performance metrics as predictors of early urinary continence recovery after robotic radical prostatectomy—a prospective bi-institutional study
Effect of surgeon experience and bony pelvic dimensions on surgical performance and patient outcomes in robot-assisted radical prostatectomy
Current status of robotic simulators in acquisition of robotic surgical skills
A systematic review of virtual reality simulators for robot-assisted surgery
A comparative analysis and guide to virtual reality robotic surgical simulators
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement
Implementing assessments of robot-assisted technical skill in urological education: a systematic review and synthesis of the validity evidence
Foundations of validity: meaning and consequences in psychological assessment
Consensus guidelines for validation of virtual reality surgical simulators
The feasibility of creating a checklist for the assessment of the methodological quality both of randomised and non-randomised studies of health care interventions
Appraising the quality of medical education research methods: the medical education research study quality instrument and the Newcastle–Ottawa scale-education
Crowd-sourced assessment of technical skills: an adjunct to urology resident surgical simulation training
Crowd-sourced assessment of technical skills: differentiating animate surgical skill through the wisdom of crowds
Crowdsourcing assessment of surgeon dissection of renal artery and vein during robotic partial nephrectomy: a novel approach for quantitative assessment of surgical performance
Measuring to improve: peer and crowd-sourced assessments of technical skill with robot-assisted radical prostatectomy
C-SATS: assessing surgical skills among urology residency applicants
Multi-institutional validation of a perfused robot-assisted partial nephrectomy procedural simulation platform utilizing clinically relevant objective metrics of simulators (CROMS)
PNFBA-02 technical skill assessment of surgeons performing robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy: relationship between crowdsourced review and patient outcomes
Development and validation of a ureteral anastomosis simulation model for surgical training
Establishing benchmarks for minimum competence with dry lab robotic surgery drills
Development and validation of surgical training tool: cystectomy assessment and surgical evaluation (CASE) for robot-assisted radical cystectomy for men
PD07-09 Development and validation of an objective scoring tool for minimally invasive partial nephrectomy: scoring for partial nephrectomy (SPaN)
Developing a coaching mechanism for practicing surgeons
Structured training and competence assessment in colorectal robotic surgery. Results of a consensus experts round table
Implementation of robotic rectal surgery training programme: importance of standardisation and structured training
European consensus on essential steps of minimally invasive Ivor Lewis and McKeown esophagectomy through Delphi methodology
Implementation of a comprehensive competency-based transoral robotic surgery training curriculum with ex vivo dissection models
Robotic-assisted cholecystectomy is superior to laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the initial training for surgical novices in an ex vivo porcine model: a randomized crossover study
MP20-14 Variation in technical skill of surgeons performing robot-assisted prostatectomy
Surgical competency for robot-assisted hysterectomy: development and validation of a robotic hysterectomy assessment score (RHAS)
Development and validation of an objective scoring tool for robot-assisted radical prostatectomy: prostatectomy assessment and competency evaluation
Linking surgical skills to postoperative outcomes: a Delphi study on the robot-assisted radical prostatectomy
MP51-16 Development and content validation of a training and assessment tool for RAPN
Modular training for robot-assisted radical prostatectomy: where to begin?
Structured and modular training pathway for robot-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP): validation of the RARP assessment score and learning curve assessment
Ex vivo porcine model for robot-assisted partial nephrectomy simulation at a high-volume tertiary center: resident perception and validation assessment using the global evaluative assessment of robotic skills tool
Initial experience of teaching robot-assisted radical prostatectomy to surgeons-in-training: can training be evaluated and standardized?
Pilot validation study of the European Association of Urology Robotic Training Curriculum
Development and validation of an objective scoring tool for robot-assisted partial nephrectomy: scoring for partial nephrectomy
European expert consensus on a structured approach to training robotic-assisted low anterior resection using performance metrics
Objective assessment of intraoperative skills for robot-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP): results from the ERUS Scientific and Educational Working Groups Metrics Initiative
Intraoperative robotic-assisted low anterior rectal resection performance assessment using procedure-specific binary metrics and a global rating scale
Use of robotic anastomosis competency evaluation (RACE) tool for assessment of surgical competency during urethrovesical anastomosis
Development, validation and clinical application of pelvic lymphadenectomy assessment and completion evaluation: intraoperative assessment of lymph node dissection after robot-assisted radical cystectomy for bladder cancer
Structured learning for robotic surgery utilizing a proficiency score: a pilot study
Surgical competency for urethrovesical anastomosis during robot-assisted radical prostatectomy: development and validation of the robotic anastomosis competency evaluation
Augmented-reality-based skills training for robot-assisted urethrovesical anastomosis: a multi-institutional randomised controlled trial
A randomized comparison of 2 robotic virtual reality simulators and evaluation of trainees’ skills transfer to a simulated robotic urethrovesical anastomosis task
Incorporation and validation of clinically relevant performance metrics of simulation (CRPMS) into a novel full-immersion simulation platform for nerve-sparing robot-assisted radical prostatectomy (NS-RARP) utilizing three-dimensional printing and hydrogel casting technology professional innovation introduction
Development and validity evidence of an objective structured assessment of technical skills score for minimally invasive linear-stapled, hand-sewn intestinal anastomoses: the A-OSATS score
Grading of surgeon technical performance predicts postoperative pancreatic fistula for pancreaticoduodenectomy independent of patient-related variables
Development of a surgical competency assessment tool for sentinel lymph node dissection by minimally invasive surgery for endometrial cancer
A comparison of robotically assisted microsurgery versus manual microsurgery in challenging situations
Training program for fundamental surgical skill in robotic laparoscopic surgery
Face, content and concurrent validity of the Mimic® dV-trainer for robot-assisted endoscopic surgery: a prospective study
Laparoscopic versus robotic-assisted suturing performance among novice surgeons: a blinded, cross-over study
Robotic virtual reality simulation plus standard robotic orientation versus standard robotic orientation alone: a randomized controlled trial
Development and validation of the objective assessment of robotic suturing and knot tying skills for chicken anastomotic model
Robotic surgery: identifying the learning curve through objective measurement of skill
Robotic surgery improves technical performance and enhances prefrontal activation during high temporal demand
Development and validation of an objective scoring tool to evaluate surgical dissection: dissection assessment for robotic technique (DART)
Development and validation of the metric-based assessment of a robotic vessel dissection, vessel loop positioning, clip applying and bipolar coagulation task on an avian model
Tracking and assessment of technical skills acquisition among urology residents for open, laparoscopic, and robotic skills over 4 years: is there a trend?
Development and validation of a novel robotic procedure specific simulation platform: partial nephrectomy
Short-phase training on a virtual reality simulator improves technical performance in tele-robotic surgery
The SEP ‘Robot’TM: a valid virtual reality robotic simulator for the da Vinci surgical system?
Development and validation of non-guided bladder-neck and neurovascular-bundle dissection modules of the RobotiX-Mentor® full-procedure robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy virtual reality simulation
Validation of a novel simulation-based test in robot-assisted radical prostatectomy
Mapping the robotic hysterectomy learning curve and re-establishing surgical training metrics
Objective assessment of robotic surgical skill using instrument contact vibrations
A computer vision technique for automated assessment of surgical performance using surgeons’ console-feed videos
A model for predicting the GEARS score from virtual reality surgical simulator metrics
Automation of surgical skill assessment using a three-stage machine learning algorithm
A dataset and benchmarks for segmentation and recognition of gestures in robotic surgery
Towards unified surgical skill assessment
Surgical skill assessment via video semantic aggregation
Surgeon technical skill assessment using computer vision based analysis
Utilizing machine learning and automated performance metrics to evaluate robot-assisted radical prostatectomy performance and predict outcomes
Surgical gestures as a method to quantify surgical performance and predict patient outcomes
A deep-learning model using automated performance metrics and clinical features to predict urinary continence recovery after robot-assisted radical prostatectomy
Surgical skill assessment on in-vivo clinical data via the clearness of operating field
Evaluation of surgical skills during robotic surgery by deep learning-based multiple surgical instrument tracking in training and actual operations
Accurate and interpretable evaluation of surgical skills from kinematic data using fully convolutional neural networks
Deep neural network architecture for automated soft surgical skills evaluation using objective structured assessment of technical skills criteria
Automated surgical skill assessment in RMIS training
Who’s better? Who’s best? Pairwise deep ranking for skill determination
Automatic and near real-time stylistic behavior assessment in robotic surgery
Machine learning in the optimization of robotics in the operative field
Sensor-based indicators of performance changes between sessions during robotic surgery training
Meaningful assessment of robotic surgical style using the wisdom of crowds
Towards accurate and interpretable surgical skill assessment: a video-based method incorporating recognized surgical gestures and skill levels
Keep your eye on the best: contrastive regression transformer for skill assessment in robotic surgery
Surgical skill evaluation from robot-assisted surgery recordings
Learning to score Olympic events
S3D: Stacking segmental P3D for action quality assessment
Evaluating surgical skills from kinematic data using convolutional neural networks
Deep learning with convolutional neural network for objective skill evaluation in robot-assisted surgery
Towards near real-time assessment of surgical skills: a comparison of feature extraction techniques
Surgical skill levels: classification and analysis using deep neural network model and motion signals
A vision transformer for decoding surgeon activity from surgical videos
A multi-institutional study using artificial intelligence to provide reliable and fair feedback to surgeons
Human visual explanations mitigate bias in AI-based assessment of surgeon skills
Ethical implications of AI in robotic surgical training: a Delphi consensus statement
Design and validation of a cross-specialty simulation-based training course in basic robotic surgical skills
Validation of educational assessments: a primer for simulation and beyond
Global evaluative assessment of robotic skills: validation of a clinical assessment tool to measure robotic surgical skills
Performance of robotic simulated skills tasks is positively associated with clinical robotic surgical performance
Validation of a simulation-training model for robotic intracorporeal bowel anastomosis using a step-by-step technique
External validation of global evaluative assessment of robotic skills (GEARS)
Comparison of two simulation systems to support robotic-assisted surgical training: a pilot study (swine model)
Robotic surgery training: construct validity of global evaluative assessment of robotic skills (GEARS)
Evaluation of high-fidelity simulation as a training tool in transoral robotic surgery
Using contact forces and robot arm accelerations to automatically rate surgeon skill at peg transfer
Transferability of virtual reality, simulation-based, robotic suturing skills to a live porcine model in novice surgeons: a single-blind randomized controlled trial
Crowdsourced versus expert evaluations of the vesico-urethral anastomosis in the robotic radical prostatectomy: is one superior at discriminating differences in automated performance metrics?
Virtually competent: a comparative analysis of virtual reality and dry-lab robotic simulation training
The influence of reviewer’s occupation on the skill assessment of urethrovesical anastomosis in robot-assisted radical prostatectomy
Development and validation of objective performance metrics for robot-assisted radical prostatectomy: a pilot study
Quantifying the “assistant effect” in robotic-assisted radical prostatectomy (RARP): measures of technical performance
Virtual reality warm-up before robot-assisted surgery: a randomized controlled trial
Virtual reality robotic surgery simulation curriculum to teach robotic suturing: a randomized controlled trial
Development of a technical checklist for the assessment of suturing in robotic surgery
Surgeon performance predicts early continence after robot-assisted radical prostatectomy
Comparative assessment of three standardized robotic surgery training methods
Face, content, construct and concurrent validity of dry laboratory exercises for robotic training using a global assessment tool
A comparison of robotic simulation performance on basic virtual reality skills: simulator subjective versus objective assessment tools
Are basic robotic surgical skills transferable from the simulator to the operating room? A randomized, prospective, educational study
PD41-06 robot-assisted training—expert performance in full immersion simulation, setting the benchmark (concurrent validity)
Validation of a novel virtual reality training curriculum for robotic cardiac surgery a randomized trial
Evaluation of robotic cardiac surgery simulation training: a randomized controlled trial
Development and validity of a silicone renal tumor model for robotic partial nephrectomy training
Design and validation of a low-cost, high-fidelity model for robotic pyeloplasty simulation training
Assessment of the training program for Versius, a new innovative robotic system for use in minimal access surgery
Procedural virtual reality simulation training for robotic surgery: a randomised controlled trial
Validation of a simulation model for robotic sacrocolpopexy
MP34-07 Correlating crowd-sourced assessment of technical skills (CSATS) with post-operative complication rates in urological surgery
Training the next generation of robotic surgeons using guided mentorship: a randomized controlled trial
Video-based peer feedback through social networking for robotic surgery simulation: a multicenter randomized controlled trial
Robotic dismembered pyeloplasty surgical simulation using a 3D-printed silicone-based model: development, face validation and crowdsourced learning outcomes assessment
Crowd-sourced assessment of technical skills: a novel method to evaluate surgical performance
Feasibility of expert and crowd-sourced review of intraoperative video for quality improvement of intracorporeal urinary diversion during robotic radical cystectomy
Does robotic surgical simulator performance correlate with surgical skill?
Correlation between operative time and crowd-sourced skills assessment for robotic bariatric surgery
Robotic objective structured assessment of technical skills: a randomized multicenter dry laboratory training pilot study
Towards standardized robotic surgery in gastrointestinal oncology
Robotic pancreatoduodenectomy biotissue curriculum has validity and improves technical performance for surgical oncology fellows
Crowdsourced assessment of inanimate biotissue drills: a valid and cost-effective way to evaluate surgical trainees
Objective assessment in residency-based training for transoral robotic surgery
Validation of a novel, tissue-based simulator for robot-assisted radical prostatectomy
Qualitative and quantitative analysis of the learning curve of a simulated surgical task on the da Vinci system
Analysis of executional and procedural errors in dry-lab robotic surgery experiments
An evaluation of the utility of robotic virtual reality simulation in gynecologic resident surgical education
Surgical outcomes, technical performance and surgery burden of robotic total gastrectomy for locally advanced gastric cancer: a prospective study
Validating the use of the Mimic dV-trainer for robotic surgery skill acquisition among urology residents
Will it play in Peoria? A pilot study of a robotic skills curriculum for surgical oncology fellows
Performance with robotic surgery versus 3D- and 2D-laparoscopy during pancreatic and biliary anastomoses in a biotissue model: pooled analysis of two randomized trials
Transition effects from laparoscopic to robotic surgery skills in small cavities
Learning curve of robotic-assisted microvascular anastomosis in the rat
Task-level vs. Segment-level quantitative metrics for surgical skill assessment
Validation of a novel robotic-assisted partial nephrectomy surgical training model
Concurrent and predictive validation of a novel robotic surgery simulator: a prospective, randomized study
Predictive validity of a training protocol using a robotic surgery simulator
Validity and reliability of the robotic objective structured assessment of technical skills
Crowdsourcing: a valid alternative to expert evaluation of robotic surgery skills
Correlation of virtual reality simulation and dry lab robotic technical skills
An assessment tool to provide targeted feedback to robotic surgical trainees: development and validation of the end-to-end assessment of suturing expertise (EASE)
Objective assessment of the early stages of the learning curve for the Senhance surgical robotic system
Comprehensive proficiency-based inanimate training for robotic surgery: reliability, feasibility, and educational benefit
Proficiency-based training for robotic surgery: construct validity, workload, and expert levels for nine inanimate exercises
Developing a comprehensive, proficiency-based training program for robotic surgery
Proficiency training on a virtual reality robotic surgical skills curriculum
Evaluating robotic surgical skills performance under distractive environment using objective and subjective measures
Face, content and construct validity of a novel robotic surgery simulator
Face, content, and construct validation of the da Vinci skills simulator
Validation of the da Vinci surgical skill simulator across three surgical disciplines: a pilot study
Which skills really matter? Proving face, content, and construct validity for a commercial robotic simulator
Robotic surgery basic skills training: evaluation of a pilot multidisciplinary simulation-based curriculum
Examining validity evidence for a simulation-based assessment tool for basic robotic surgical skills
The virtual reality simulator dV-trainer is a valid assessment tool for robotic surgical skills
Validation, correlation, and comparison of the da Vinci TrainerTM and the da Vinci Surgical Skills SimulatorTM using the MimicTM software for urologic robotic surgical education
Head-to-head comparison of three virtual-reality robotic surgery simulators
Virtual reality robotic surgical simulation: an analysis of gynecology trainees
Validation of a virtual reality-based robotic surgical skills curriculum
Battle of the bots: a comparison of the standard da Vinci and the da Vinci Surgical Skills simulator in surgical skills acquisition
Da Vinci Skills simulator construct validation study: correlation of prior robotic experience with overall score and time score simulator performance
Virtual reality suturing task as an objective test for robotic experience assessment
Effect of postcall fatigue on surgical skills measured by a robotic simulator
Impact of a robotic simulation program on resident surgical performance
Da Vinci Skills Simulator for assessing learning curve and criterion-based training of robotic basic skills
Can fatigue affect acquisition of new surgical skills? A prospective trial of pre- and post-call general surgery residents using the da Vinci Surgical Skills simulator
Developing basic robotic skills using virtual reality simulation and automated assessment tools: a multidisciplinary robotic virtual reality-based curriculum using the da Vinci skills simulator and tracking progress with the intuitive learning platform
Face, content, and construct validity of dV-Trainer, a novel virtual reality simulator for robotic surgery
The tube 3 module designed for practicing vesicourethral anastomosis in a virtual reality robotic simulator: determination of face, content, and construct validity
Validation of a novel virtual reality simulator for robotic surgery
Virtual reality training improves da Vinci performance: a prospective trial
Virtual reality robotic surgery warm-up improves task performance in a dry laboratory environment: a prospective randomized controlled study
Assessment of virtual reality robotic simulation performance by urology resident trainees
Validation of a novel virtual reality robotic simulator
Concurrent and predictive validation of robotic simulator tube 3 module
Diffusion of robotic technology into urologic practice has led to improved resident physician robotic skills
Establishing objective benchmarks in robotic virtual reality simulation at the level of a competent surgeon using the RobotiX mentor simulator
Assessment of validity evidence for the RobotiX robot assisted surgery simulator on advanced suturing tasks
Validation of the RobotiX mentor robotic surgery simulator
Validity evidence for procedural competency in virtual reality robotic simulation, establishing a credible pass/fail standard for the vaginal cuff closure procedure
Concurrent, face, content, and construct validity of the RobotiX mentor simulator for robotic basic skills
Initial validation of the ProMIS surgical simulator as an objective measure of robotic task performance
PromisTM can serve as a da Vinci simulator—a construct validity study
A comparison of laparoscopic and robotic assisted suturing performance by experts and novices
Face validation of a novel robotic surgical simulator
Content validation of a novel robotic surgical simulator
Development and validation of a composite scoring system for robot-assisted surgical training—the robotic skills assessment score
Virtual reality vs dry laboratory models: comparing automated performance metrics and cognitive workload during robotic simulation training
Using objective robotic automated performance metrics and task-evoked pupillary response to distinguish surgeon expertise
Measurements of the level of surgical expertise using flight path analysis from da Vinci robotic surgical system
Objective assessment of proficiency with bimanual inanimate tasks in robotic laparoscopy
Objective evaluation of expert and novice performance during robotic surgical training tasks
Experts vs super-experts: differences in automated performance metrics and clinical outcomes for robot-assisted radical prostatectomy
Robotic surgery training and performance identifying objective variables for quantifying the extent of proficiency
Motion analysis of the JHU–ISI gesture and skill assessment working set II: learning curve analysis
Content and construct validation of a robotic surgery curriculum using an electromagnetic instrument tracker
Residents’ response to bleeding during a simulated robotic surgery task
Effects of robotic manipulators on movements of novices and surgeons
The effect of a robot-assisted surgical system on the kinematics of user movements
Towards integrating task information in skills assessment for dexterous tasks in surgery and simulation
Assessing system operation skills in robotic surgery trainees
Sparse hidden Markov models for surgical gesture classification and skill evaluation
Automated robot-assisted surgical skill evaluation: predictive analytics approach
Action assessment by joint relation graphs
Video-based surgical skill assessment using 3D convolutional neural networks
Uncertainty-aware score distribution learning for action quality assessment
An objective approach to evaluate novice robotic surgeons using a combination of kinematics and stepwise cumulative sum (CUSUM) analyses
Group-aware contrastive regression for action quality assessment
SD-Net: joint surgical gesture recognition and skill assessment
A domain-adapted machine learning approach for visual evaluation and interpretation of robot-assisted surgery skills
Machine learning based classification of local robotic surgical skills in a training tasks set
Objective measures for longitudinal assessment of robotic surgery training
String motif-based description of tool motion for detecting skill and gestures in robotic surgery
A study of crowdsourced segment-level surgical skill assessment using pairwise rankings
Endoscopic image-based skill assessment in robot-assisted minimally invasive surgery
Adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system for automated skill assessment in robot-assisted minimally invasive surgery
How to bring surgery to the next level: interpretable skills assessment in robotic-assisted surgery
A novel method of setting performance standards in surgery using patient outcomes
Face, content and construct validity of a virtual reality simulator for robotic surgery (SEP robot)