Consideration of ethnic differences in approvals for anti‐HIV medicines in Japan: Evaluation based on pharmacokinetic studies and post‐marketing data
More than 30 anti‐HIV drugs have been approved in Japan using data from dossiers submitted to the United States or European regulatory authorities since 1998. These drugs were approved with the same dosage and administration regimes as in the United States and Europe, using data from pivotal studies that rarely included any Japanese patients, whereas pharmacokinetics (PK) studies in Japanese subjects have been previously required by the Japanese authorities. There have not been any clinically meaningful ethnic differences observed in the PK data from Japanese studies, and no issues with efficacy or safety have been identified as these drugs were marketed. The absence of ethnic differences in PK, efficacy and safety data for over 30 anti‐HIV medicines has reached the state of ‘the need for bridging data will lessen with experience’ in ICH‐E5. It may not be necessary to consider biological ethnic differences in the approval of anti‐HIV drugs anymore.

INTRODUCTION
In globalized drug development, a promising medicine is often clinically developed in a different country to that in which approval is eventually sought. Although the International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) general rule is that there is no need to repeat the entire clinical development programme in a new region, the rule presupposes the existence of intrinsic and extrinsic ethnic factors that affect the efficacy and safety of a drug for a specific indication and dosage. In 2005, the US Food and Drug Administration approved the first drug to treat a specific ethnic population: BiDil® (isosorbide dinitrate and hydralazine hydrochloride) for congestive heart failure in African Americans only. However, BiDil® is not a new medicine but a combination of hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate, both of which have been used to treat heart failure in all populations. To date, there have been no new drugs approved with an indication or dosage differentiated depending on ethnicity. Ethnic differences in genotypes related to drug metabolism and susceptibility are known for some drugs, including warfarin and clopidogrel, but the labels address predicted differences and dose adjustments according to individual pharmacogenomics not ethnicity. Considering that no cases where there have been differences in the effectiveness of a drug depending on the ethnic group have been identified, it is realistic to consider using foreign clinical trial data as application material, especially when the potential patients in a country are limited. An epoch‐making review system was introduced for anti‐HIV drugs in Japan in 1998. This review system is based on the application documents from trial data submitted to the regulatory authorities of a country that is at the same review level as in Japan, such as the United States. This system was adopted because the number of HIV patients in Japan is extremely small, and conducting clinical trials is difficult. More than 25 years have passed since this review system was introduced, and anti‐HIV medicines approved under this system continue to be used without problems. These approvals can provide guidance for countries that want to effectively use global drug data for disease areas where clinical trials are difficult to conduct in that country. Here, we evaluated the issues and possibilities of this approval system by examining data that were required at the time of approval, the content and results of studies regarding ethnic differences before and after approval, and clinical evaluations after approval.

METHODS
To the end of March 2024, 39 new active ingredients or combination drugs indicated for HIV infection have been approved in Japan. The approval review process, re‐examination system and achievement of approval conditions were based on publicly available data from the Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency, the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare. All 39 approvals are shown in the Supporting Information (Table S1).
The approvals were classified according to the flowchart in Figure 1, first excluding those that did not use the 1998 Notification for approval [D], the second group was those that used the Notification only on approval [C], and the remaining approvals were divided according to whether Japanese subjects were included in the pivotal trials.
The flowchart for classifying anti‐HIV medicines' approval data in Japan.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Following the flowchart in Figure 1, out of the 39 approvals (Table S1), 6 approvals that were not based on the 1998 Notification were excluded from further detailed examination [D]. Out of the remaining 33 approvals, 4 approvals were for drugs with clinical development that started before the 1998 Notification issued in Japan [C]. The remaining 29 were for drugs that were planned to enter clinical development and have approval in Japan be applied for under the 1998 Notification.
The pivotal trials listed in the application materials consisted mainly of trials conducted outside of Japan and were classified into two categories: [A] 25 approvals, using only data from clinical trials that did not involve Japanese subjects and [B] 4 approvals that included data from multiregional clinical trials (MRCTs) involving Japanese subjects.
Regarding pharmacokinetics (PK) studies in Japanese subjects, the 1998 notice states that the review process can be used to determine whether studies are required pre‐approval or post‐approval. All 33 approvals required some form of Japanese PK data, which are summarized in Table 1. The approvals are arranged in reverse order to the approval date in Japan in each category.
Summary of Japanese PK data, approval conditions and re‐examination results for approved anti‐HIV drugs.
No.	Brand name	Pre‐approval PK studies	Post‐approval PK studies as approval conditions	Approval conditions regarding PK studies	Clinically meaningful ethnic PK differences	Re‐examination (category, date)	 	A: Pivotal trials consisted only of trials without Japanese subjects	 	1	Pifeltro		Healthy volunteers (N = 12, SD)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	2	Symtuza		Healthy volunteers (N = 8, SD)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	3	Biktarvy	Healthy Japanese volunteers (N = 25, SD, compared with non‐Japanese N = 25)		N/A	No	N/A	 	4	Juluca		Healthy volunteers (N = 16, SD)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	5	Odefsey		Healthy volunteers (N = 8, SD)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	6	Isentress*1		Healthy volunteers (N = 12, SD)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	7	Descovy		Healthy volunteers (N = 24, SD)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	8	Prezcobix		Healthy volunteers (N = 8, SD)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	9	Triumeq		Healthy volunteers (N = 12, SD)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	10	Complera		Healthy volunteers (N = 8, SD)	Cleared	No	Discontinued*2	 	11	Tivicay	Healthy volunteers (N = 10, SD)		N/A	No	N/A	 	12	Stribild		Healthy volunteers (N = 11, SD)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	13	Edurant		Healthy volunteers (N = 8, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2023/6/28	 	14	Intelence*3		Healthy volunteers (N = 10, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2020/9/9	 	15	Selzentry		Healthy volunteers (N = 12, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2020/9/9	 	16	Isentress		Healthy volunteers (N = 12, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2019/12/19	 	17	Prezista		Healthy volunteers (N = 8, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2019/12/11	 	18	Truvada		Healthy volunteers (N = 8, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2016/9/30	 	19	Emtriva		Healthy volunteers (N = 6, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2016/9/30	 	20	Lexiva		Healthy volunteers (N = 9, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2016/6/24	 	21	Viread		Healthy volunteers (N = 6, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2015/9/17	 	22	Reyataz		Healthy volunteers (N = 12, MD)	Cleared	No	1, 2018/3/29	 	23	Kaletra		Healthy volunteers (N = 18, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2013/4/4	 	24	Rescriptor		Healthy volunteers (N = 8, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2011/12/21	 	25	Stocrin		Healthy volunteers (N = 8, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2011/7/4	 	B: MRCTs involving Japanese subjects	 	26	Sunlenca	Patients (N = 2, PPK in MRCTs)	Healthy volunteers (N = 20, SD)	N/A	No results	N/A	 	27	Vocabria/Rekambys	Patients (N = 8, PPK in MRCTs)		N/A	No	N/A	 	28	Dovato		Patients (N = 5, PPK in MRCT)	Cleared	No	N/A	 	29	Genvoya	Healthy volunteers (N = 12, effect of meals)Healthy volunteers [compared with non‐Japanese, SD (N = 10, 10), MD (N = 9, 8)]		N/A	No	N/A	 	C: Japanese clinical development started prior to the 1998 notification	 	30	Epzicom		Patients (N = 9, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2012/3/26	 	31	Ziagen		Patients (N = 6, SD)	Cleared	No	1, 2011/12/21	 	32	Prozei	Healthy volunteers (N = 6, MD)		N/A	No	Discontinued*4	 	33	Combivir	Patients (N = 6, MD, zidovudine + lamivudine)		N/A	No	1, 2011/9/29
Note: Re‐examination Category 1: Quality, efficacy and safety of drug is confirmed. Decision on marketing authorization is maintained. A: Pivotal trials that consisted only of trials without Japanese subjects. B: MRCTs involving Japanese subjects. C: Japanese clinical development started prior to the 1998 notification. *1: 600 mg tablets. *2: switched to Odefsey. *3: 400 mg tablets. *4: switched to Lexiva.
Abbreviations: MD, multiple‐dose study; MRCTs, multiregional clinical trials; N/A, Not applicable; PK, pharmacokinetics; PPK, population pharmacokinetics; SD, single‐dose study.
Of the 25 [A] approvals, Japanese PK data for 22 drugs came from post‐approval single‐dose studies in healthy volunteers. Exceptions include Biktarvy® and Tivicay™, which submitted PK data at application, and Reyataz™, which had a post‐approval multiple‐dose study. These approvals varied in drug type, mechanism, development period and trial design.
Eight approvals were classified as [B] or [C] in Table 1, and the PK data collection methods for approvals classified as [B] or [C] were clearly different from those for approvals classified as [A].
Regarding the four approvals classified as type [B], the Japanese PK data were either collected from healthy volunteers before MRCTs were conducted or were collected during the conduction of MRCTs. Only one approval (Genvoya®) used the former method, and this was the oldest of the four approvals. At the time of the development of this drug, the prevailing view was that conducting a phase I trial in Japanese subjects was necessary before conducting a MRCT. The remaining three drugs were approved in Japan after 2020. The approvals for both Sunlenca® and Vocabria/Rekambys® included a population pharmacokinetics (PPK) analysis of Japanese patients in the MRCTs in the application documents, but the authorities' responses in the review processes were different. Additional Japanese PK data were not required for approval of Vocabria/Rekambys®, but a post‐approval PK study of 20 healthy volunteers was required for the approval of Sunlenca®. A MRCT for Dovato® was conducted during the review process, and the PPK data were reported after the approval to fulfil the approval conditions.
The clinical development processes for the four approvals categorized as type [C] were started in Japan before the 1998 Notification. Regarding Epzicom® and Ziagen®, which had already been investigated in some studies with Japanese subjects, Japanese PK studies were required as a condition for approval. Prozei® was approved in 1999 based on clinical trial data conducted outside of Japan, while a clinical trial in Japan was ongoing during the review. Combivir® is a combination drug of zidovudine and lamivudine, both of which had already been approved in Japan, and a trial of the combination was conducted in Japan.
Table 1 also summarizes the status of the approval conditions regarding PK studies, whether there were any ethnic PK differences, and the re‐examination category and date. If Japanese PK data had not been obtained prior to approval, PK studies in Japanese subjects were always required as an approval condition. The study results were reported to the Second Committee on Drugs Pharmaceutical Affairs Council to fulfil the approval conditions. No clinically meaningful ethnic PK differences were observed in any of these PK studies.
There have been no serious safety or efficacy issues with anti‐HIV drugs in Japan, and the re‐examination results have been reported to be Category 1 (quality, efficacy and safety of drug are confirmed). The decision on marketing authorization was maintained for 16 of the 33 medicines as of the end of 2023. Of the remaining 17, the sales of 2 were discontinued because they were substituted with another prodrug product before the end of the re‐examination period; the re‐examination period had not ended by the end of 2023 for 14 medicines, and 1 is awaiting a re‐examination report.
The necessity for Japanese PK studies was discussed in the Viread® (tenofovir disoproxil) approval review report. The applicant argued that a Japanese PK study was unnecessary since tenofovir disoproxil had a low serum protein binding rate (7%), was excreted unchanged in urine and showed no ethnic PK differences. However, Viread® was approved only with the condition of conducting a PK study.
It would have been difficult at the time when Viread® was approved in 2004 to make a risk‐based decision not to obtain PK data in Japanese subjects based on the characteristics of the drug. When the 1998 Notification was issued in October 1998, the approval system based on the ICH‐E5 was not available. Clinical trial data from outside Japan were handled under the No. 660 notification until it was replaced by ICH‐E5. The No. 660 notification stated that clinical trial data regarding absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion; dose‐finding; and comparative effectiveness from studies conducted in Japan were required for approval. Under these circumstances that prevented the evaluation of foreign clinical trial data for applicability in Japan, it was necessary to comply with the 1998 Notification for approval, especially when anti‐HIV drugs were reviewed using approval application materials from outside of Japan. The 1998 Notification states that if a clinical trial in HIV patients had not been conducted in Japan, PK data obtained from Japanese subjects would be required. Therefore, it was difficult to accept the omission of Japanese PK studies on the grounds of the inherent insensitivity of a drug to ethnic influences, as discussed for Viread®.
When accepting the results of clinical trials conducted in other regions or ethnic groups, the ICH‐E5 guideline emphasizes the importance of PK data, in statements such as ‘Characterization in a population relevant to the new region of the pharmacokinetics’, and ‘A bridging data package consists of: 1) selected information from the Complete Clinical Data Package that is relevant to the population of the new region, including pharmacokinetic data’. These statements may be interpreted as specifying that PK data must be obtained in the new region for the results of clinical trials in other regions to be accepted. The ICH‐E5 also states that ‘a lack of metabolism or active excretion, a wide therapeutic dose range, and a flat dose response curve will make ethnic differences less likely’, which is similar to the arguments presented for the approval of Viread®.
ICH‐E5 suggests that the evaluation in the review process will evolve as knowledge and experience are accumulated in the phrase ‘it is hoped that with experience, the need for bridging data will lessen’. No clinically meaningful differences because of ethnicity have been observed in the Japanese PK data for anti‐HIV drugs, and these drugs have been approved and continue to be used in the same dosage as in other countries. These particulars mean that the criteria for ‘the need for bridging data will lessen with experience’ has been reached and that there is no longer a need to conduct a new PK study in healthy volunteers in Japan for the approval of anti‐HIV drugs in Japan.
The approval review system has been progressing from evaluations according to rules and regulations to individual evaluations based on science and risk in response to the accumulation of scientific knowledge and experience. In some pharmaceutical fields, rule‐based reviews are appropriate to supply medicines for clinical use with appropriate costs and timings. The anti‐HIV drug approval system under the 1998 Notification was extreme, relying only on trials outside of Japan to assess efficacy at a time when dose‐finding and comparative studies conducted in Japan were typically required for approval. Thus, it seems essential to faithfully comply with the 1998 Notification requirements.
More than 25 years have passed since the 1998 Notification was issued, and clinical experience with anti‐HIV drugs has been accumulated and has contributed to the assessment of the sensitivity of a medicine to ethnic factors. Because of this progress, obtaining PK data from Japanese patients participating in MRCTs has come to be accepted as adequate PK data for Japanese subjects. The effect of ethnicity in biological responses to anti‐HIV drugs may no longer need to be considered, because in PK studies conducted in Japan, no clinically significant ethnic differences have been found and the drugs have been used without problems at the same dosage as in other countries. Further research is ongoing to clarify the requirements for the creation of an application package, which does not completely ignore ethnic differences but does not necessarily require data from citizens of a specific country. This application package can be used for drugs for diseases that would be difficult to evaluate clinically in a particular country.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
R.S. designed the study, the main conceptual ideas, and the proof outline. R.S. collected the data. M.I. aided in interpreting the results and worked on the manuscript. R.S. wrote the manuscript with support from M.I. All authors discussed the results and commented on the manuscript.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no conflicts of interest associated with this manuscript.

Supporting information

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data that support the findings of this study are openly available.

REFERENCES
When diversity goals meet multiregional trials
International oncology drug approvals for multiregional or single‐country clinical trials: a systematic review
Scientific considerations for global drug development
Race in a bottle: drugmakers are eager to develop medicines targeted at ethnic groups, but so far they have made poor choices based on unsound science
Precision medicine: does ethnicity information complement genotype‐based prescribing decisions?
Regarding the handling of applications for manufacturing or import approval of drugs for the treatment of HIV infection
The current status and trends of HIV infection in Japan
Basic principles on global clinical trials
Basic principles on global clinical trials (reference cases)
Basic principles for conducting phase I trials in the Japanese population prior to global clinical trials
PMDA post‐marketing safety requirements (Japan)
ICH E5(R1): ethnic factors in the acceptability of foreign clinical data
Notification by the Director‐General of the Pharmaceutical Affairs Bureau ‘Handling of clinical trial data of pharmaceuticals conducted abroad’ June 29, 1985