Minimum Core Data Elements for Evaluation of Thoracic Aortic Disease
Thoracic aortic aneurysms predisposing to aortic dissections are rare but potentially deadly conditions that can be inherited in families. Understanding the natural history and genetic causes of thoracic aortic disease (TAD) requires international collaboration. The aim of this project is to provide core data elements that can be assessed directly and summarized efficiently in research records while developing standards to harmonize data across registries and clinical trials. Ten contemporary TAD registries were analyzed to identify significant gaps in the amount and types of data that are needed for accurate, verifiable, and reproducible studies. The set of data elements recommended by this expert panel is intended to serve as a roadmap for future research combining precision clinical data with genetic and/or computational data to uncover new TAD phenotypes and risk factors. Standardization of data-acquisition protocols and definition of minimum requirements for computational modeling will be essential for future collaborative studies.
Central Illustration
Thoracic aortic aneurysms predisposing to aortic dissections are rare but potentially deadly conditions that can be inherited in families. Pathogenic variants (PVs) in many genes have been identified in families with thoracic aortic disease (TAD), including variants in the Fibrillin-1 gene that cause Marfan syndrome, and many additional genes are implicated based on less definitive data. In most TAD cases, however, the causative genetic variants remain unknown. Understanding the natural history and genetic causes of TAD requires international collaboration, but this effort has been hampered by variable definitions of TAD and systematic differences in sampling and data collection.
The objectives of this project are to identify a core TAD dataset by systematically reviewing contemporary research and data-collection forms for consensus identification of data elements and to define reproducible standards for data collection and reporting when no consensus standards exist. Whenever possible, we refer to published standards for measurement or interpretation, such as the 2022 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Aortic Disease Guidelines, the 2024 Scientific Statement on Pediatric Aortopathies, and the 2024 European Society of Cardiology guidelines for the management of peripheral arterial and aortic diseases. The scope of this effort is limited to TADs in pediatric and adult cohorts, reflecting the varied expertise of the panel. Abnormalities of the infrarenal abdominal aorta and branch arteries are included only as a descriptor of disease involvement. We excluded “big data,” such as genetic sequences or images, except for recommendations on how to catalog these types of ancillary data in repositories. We consistently attempted to balance the feasibility and burden of including data elements in TAD registries with potential benefits to researchers. We envision this publication as a roadmap for conducting TAD research studies to yield reproducible standardized data.

Contemporary TAD registries
Contemporary TAD Registries
Name	Population	Images or Samples	Site or Contact	Year Started and Enrollment (N)	 	CLARITY: Collaborative for Longitudinal Aortic Research In The Young	Children and young adults with any aortopathy	Images	clarityregistry.com	2021N = 1,700	 	Cornell Aortic Aneurysm Registry	Adult aortopathy patients evaluated at Weill Cornell Medical Center	Images	Weill Cornell Medicine	2008N = 700	 	GenTAC: National Registry of Genetically Triggered Aneurysms and Other Cardiovascular Conditions	Children and adults with familial TAD, HTAD with known PV, and other TAD diagnosis with onset before age 50	Images and samples	biolincc.org	2006N = 3,600	 	IRAD: International Registry of Aortic Dissection	Children and adults with acute aortic dissections	Images	iradonline.org	1996N = 11,400	 	MAC: Montalcino Aortic Consortium	Children and adults with HTAD due to known PV and their affected or unaffected relatives	None	montalcinoaorticconsortium.org	2013N = 1,400	 	STS: Society of Thoracic Surgeons Adult Cardiac Surgery Database	Adults undergoing cardiac and/or aortic surgeries	Images	sts.org	1989N = 8.3 million procedures	 	VASCERN: European Reference Network for Rare Multisystemic Vascular Diseases	Children and adults with HTAD	None	vascern.eu/group/registry/sub-registries/heritable-thoracic-aortic-diseases-registry/	2022N = 3,700	 	ROPAC III: Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease	Pregnant adults with prosthetic valves, aortic pathology, or genetic conditions known to be associated with aortic pathologies	None	escardio.org/Research/registries	2018N = 1,100	 	GEN-VEDSS: Genetic Aortopathy and VEDS Collaborative Natural History Study	Children and adults with genetically confirmed VEDS and VEDS-like conditions	None	vedscoll@ohsu.edu	2020N = 186	 	SVS VQI: Society for Vascular Surgery Vascular Quality Initiative (TEVAR and complex EVAR)	Adults undergoing endovascular aortic repair procedures in USA, Canada, and Singapore	None	pathwayssupport@fivoshealth.com	2011N = 40,000 procedures
HTAD = heritable thoracic aortic disease; PV = pathogenic variants; TAD = thoracic aortic disease; TEVAR = thoracic endovascular aortic repair; VEDS = Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Thoracic Aortic Disease Registry List
Existing thoracic aortic disease registries were queried to identify overlaps with core data elements in disease categories. IRAD = International Registry of Aortic Dissection; MAC = Montalcino Aortic Consortium; QoL = quality of life; MIABIS = Minimum Information About Biobank Data Sharing; GEN-VEDSS = Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Collaborative Natural History Study; ROPAC = Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease; STS = Society of Thoracic Surgeons Adult Cardiac Surgery Database; TAD = thoracic aortic disease; VASCERN = European Reference Network for Rare Multisystemic Vascular Diseases.
In preparation for this project, we surveyed 10 contemporary TAD registries to understand the scope of data that is currently available to TAD researchers. These registries reflect a broad range of research emphasis areas and demographic characteristics (Table 1, Central Illustration).

Data collection tiers
Core Data Elements for Evaluation of Thoracic Aortic Disease
Thoracic Aortic Segments	Thoracic Aortic Measurements	 	AnnulusSinuses of ValsalvaSino-tubular junctionAscendingArchAortic isthmusDescending	Timing of studyImaging modalityLocationPerpendicular landmarkEdgesSinus measurementsHeightWeight	 		 	Thoracic Aortic Pathologies	Blood Pressure Measurements	 		 	Timing of diagnosisDilationAneurysmDissectionPenetrating ulcer	Intramural hematomaRuptureCoarctationPatent ductus arteriosusAortic valve morphology	Timing of measurementClinic blood pressures (>2)Self-measured blood pressures (>2)Heart rateAmbulatory blood pressureNocturnal dipping	 		 	Mental Health and Quality of Life	Medication and Environmental Exposures	 		 	AnxietyDepressionPost-traumatic stressHealth-related QoL	Chronic stressSubjective social statusAdverse childhoodPerceived discriminationSocial isolation	Medication nameMedication doseMedication frequencyDuration of use	Low-density lipoproteinHbA1cINR	 		 	Reasons for Evaluation of Suspected TAD	Genetic Data	 		 	Age at initial presentationReason: relativeReason: aortic dissectionReason: incidentalReason: examinationReason: symptoms	Genetic diagnosis of individualGenetic test result of individualGenetic test results of relativesDNA variant and reference sequenceProtein variant and reference sequenceGenetic ancestry	 		 	Extra-Aortic Features Associated with HTAD	Autopsy Data	 		 	Pectus anomalySkeletal abnormalitiesLong limbsFoot deformitiesPremature osteoarthritisPneumothorax	Joint hypermobilityDural ectasiaSkin abnormalitiesEye abnormalitiesFacial dysmorphismMitral valve abnormalitiesBranch artery involvement	Timing of autopsyExternal examinationAortic dimensionsAortic pathologiesDissection characteristicsAortic valve	Cardiac featuresCongenital anomaliesPrevious interventionsExtra-aortic pathologies	 		 	Reproductive and Pregnancy Outcomes	Hormonal Influences and Reproductive Health	 		 	Maternal ageDiagnosisPregnancy informationDelivery informationPregnancy outcomes	Peripartum imagingAortic complicationsExtra-aortic complicationsNeonatal complications	Hormonal contraception or replacement therapiesMenstrual cyclesIntrauterine devicesGynecologic conditions	 		 	Repository Descriptions from the MIABIS Framework	Aortic Interventions	 		 	Contact informationSamples, cases, and tiersData availabilityDisease conditionsInclusion criteriaDataset types	Collection designUse and access conditionsSample typesStorage conditionsSample collection settingsKey publications	TimingProcedure typesAcuityIndicationsMax diameterMedical history	Anatomic sitesProcedural complicationsProcedural mortalityTEVAR considerationsAccess sitesMethods of perfusionMethods of brain protection	 		 	Social Determinants of Health	Follow-up Data	 		 	Demographic characteristics (sex, gender, age)Nonprescription drug useMarital statusEducation levelSocioeconomic statusHealthcare access	Aortic pathologiesTimingMethodSuccess of attemptBlood pressure	Aortic interventionsAorta-related deathReproductive outcomesMental health and QoLSocial determinants of healthMed & Enviro Exposures
Note that noncore (italicized) data elements in Table 1, Table 2, Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6, Table 7, Table 8, Table 9, Table 10, Table 11, Table 12, Table 13, Table 14, Table 15, Table 16, Table 17, Table 18, Table 19 were not included in this table. Tier 1 elements in red; tier 2 elements in green; tier 3 elements in blue; optional elements in orange.
HbA1c = hemoglobin A1c; HTAD = heritable thoracic aortic disease; INR = international normalized ratio; MIABIS = Minimum Information About Biobank Data Sharing; QoL = quality of control; TAD = thoracic aortic disease; TEVAR = thoracic endovascular aortic repair.
The expert panel defined a total of 143 core data elements (Table 2, Supplemental Table 1). To facilitate data entry when resources are limited, investigators can choose to collect a minimum dataset with only core aortic elements (tier 1, 29 elements, Supplemental Table 2) or a limited dataset (tier 2, 67 elements, Supplemental Table 3) rather than the entire core dataset (tier 3, 125 elements, Supplemental Table 4). We also defined an optional set of elements for investigators who wish to collect more precise data on key exposures and outcomes (Supplemental Table 5).

Aortic anatomy and pathology
There is substantial variability in the amount and type of imaging information that is included in different TAD registries. The Montalcino Aortic Consortium registry primarily records aortic diameter measurements. The Vascular European Reference Network registry includes additional information about aortic repair operations, details about the anatomic characteristics of aortic dissections, and medications. The Cornell Aortic Aneurysm, International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection, Genetically Triggered Thoracic Aortic Aneurysm and Cardiovascular Conditions (GenTAC), and Genetic Aortopathy and VEDS Natural History Study Collaborative Natural History Study registries include more specific dissection characteristics, such as the locations of entry and exit tears. The CLARITY (Collaborative for Longitudinal Aortic Research In The Young) registry goes even further by incorporating relatively new biomarkers, such as arterial tortuosity and aortic length, with a focus on longitudinal data collection.
Data Elements to Describe Thoracic Aortic Segments
Element	Anatomic Landmarksa	Specifiers	Zone	 	Annulus	Insertion point of the most apical aortic cusp	Virtual basal ring	x	 	Sinuses of Valsalva	Annulus to sinotubular junctionb	Sinus measurement techniquec	x	 	Sinotubular junction	Junction of sinuses and tubular aorta		x	 	Ascending	Between sinotubular junction and first arch vessel	Right pulmonary artery	0	 	Arch	Between first and last arch branch	Adjacent arch vessels	1-2	 	Aortic isthmus	Narrowest point distal to last arch vessel		3	 	Descending	Between last arch vessel and diaphragm	Centimeters from last arch vessel	4-5
Due to sinus asymmetry, the maximum sinus diameter may not be apparent in standard long-axis echocardiographic views. Specifiers: interposed landmarks to specify measurement location along a segment (eg, proximal or distal to right pulmonary artery in the ascending aorta); virtual basal ring: defined by Tretter et al.Suppl Ref 81
Largest measurement between these landmarks is reported as the aortic diameter.
Largest of 3 diastolic cusp-cusp or cusp-commissure distances is usually reported in CT or MR images.
See Table 3.
Data Elements to Describe Thoracic Aortic Measurements
Element	Description	 	Timing of study	Age when measurements were obtained or date of study	 	Imaging modality	TTE, TEE, gated CT, nongated CT, MR	 	Double oblique technique	Yes, no; positioning of measurement line perpendicular to the centerline using 2 orthogonal planes (CT or MR)	 	Location	Annulus, sinuses, sinotubular junction, ascending, arch, descending	 	Perpendicular landmark	Pulmonary artery, diaphragm	 	Timing of measurement	Systole, diastole	 	Edges	Inner-to-inner, leading-to-leading, outer-to-outera	 	Sinus measurementsb	Long axis, center to center, center to commissure, maximum sinus to sinus	 	Height	Centimeters or inches	 	Weight	Kilograms or pounds
CT = computed tomography; MR = magnetic resonance; TEE = transesophageal echocardiography; TTE = transthoracic echocardiography.
Outer-to-outer measurements are recommended when aortic pathology causes wall thickening. Blood pressure and heart rate at the time of the measurement should also be documented (see section on Blood pressure).
Long axis: echocardiographic parasternal long axis view; center to center: short-axis center of sinus to center of sinus, also known as “cusp to cusp;” center to commissure: short-axis center of sinus to opposite commissure, also known as “cusp to commissure;” maximum sinus to sinus: the widest straight-line distance between any 2 sinuses in short-axis view, as defined by Tretter et al.Suppl Ref 81 We recommend that all sinus diameters should be recorded whenever possible.
We support recommendations to standardize aortic landmarks and segments, as well as descriptions of measurement techniques and pathologies. Each aortic measurement should be distinguished by the time when the image was obtained and the specific measurement site. Current guidelines describe aortic zones for clinical purposes. For research databases, we recommend measuring at the level of specific anatomic landmarks to diminish variability and improve consistency between studies (Table 3). The term “aortic root” has been variously interpreted to refer to the aortic sinuses only, the sinuses and sinotubular junction, or the entire segment between the annulus and mid-ascending aorta. Similarly, the term “ascending aorta” may refer to any point between the sinotubular junction and the innominate artery. Measurement of the aortic sinuses is also controversial, with extensive variation in the selection of measurement sites and methods (Table 4). Even the terms “dilation” and “aneurysm” are variably defined in guideline documents. Therefore, additional specifiers are needed for precise comparisons.
Dilation and aneurysms of the thoracic aorta are problematic to define due to considerable population variation of aortic diameters based on age, sex, and height. The distinction between “dilation” and “aneurysm” varies according to the population being studied and the method used to index diameter to body size. Therefore, we advocate that researchers report unadjusted aortic diameters with age and body size data rather than dichotomous labels for dilation or aneurysm. Imaging measurements for research databases should include the absolute measurement, units of measure, imaging modality, and measurement location, as well as the height, body mass or weight, heart rate, and blood pressure (with method of measurement) at the time of data collection. Variations in measurement technique, including timing (systole or diastole), edges, the use of the double oblique technique (for computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)), and methods to measure the aortic sinuses, should also be described (Table 4). Measurements of the sinus dimensions can vary substantially depending on the measurement technique. Whenever possible, we recommend that all sinus-sinus or sinus-commissure diameters be recorded to capture potential sinus asymmetry, which may be particularly relevant to bicuspid aortic valve disease. We suggest that future studies adopt cusp-to-commissure sinus measurements for consistency with structural heart imaging where this technique is standard. These approaches will enable researchers to calculate indexed measurements that are relevant to a specific research question and study population while adjusting for potential bias resulting from systematic differences in the technique.
Data Elements to Describe Thoracic Aortic Pathologies
Pathology	Definition	 	Timing of diagnosis	Age or date when pathology was diagnoseda	 	Dilation	Diameter >4.0 cm or ≥25% greater than expected for sex, age, and body size	 	Aneurysm	Dilation of the aorta to a diameter that exceeds the upper range of normal diameters for the population of interestb	 	Dissection	Tear in the aortic or arterial intima that results in axial separation of the intimal and medial layersc	 	Intramural hematoma (IMH)	Thrombus in aortic media without detectable intimal tear	 	Penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer (PAU)	Focal ulceration of intima due to rupture of atherosclerotic plaque, typically with medial hematoma	 	Rupture	Complete tear through all layers of aorta with blood entering the thoracic cavity	 	Coarctation	Discrete narrowed segment of the aorta, usually around the isthmus, occasionally associated with hypoplasia of the arch	 	Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)	Persistent connection between the pulmonary artery and the thoracic aorta	 	Aortic valve morphologyd	Unicuspid, bicuspid, tricuspid, quadricuspid, or indeterminate
The affected aortic segment(s) or zone(s) should be listed along with the type of pathologies defined according to the 2022 ACC/AHA Aortic Disease Guideline.
Specific dates should only be collected if authorized and should be rounded to the nearest year or exported from the registry as ages to protect identifiable health information.
The expected upper range of normal aortic diameters can be estimated as ≥50% greater than expected for sex, age, and body size or by calculating the Z-score, the aortic height index, the aortic size index, or the ratio of aortic cross-sectional area to height.,Suppl Refs 82-84 If Z-scores are used, the exact calculation method should be provided.
For dissection nomenclature, see Table 5.
Based on the international consensus statement on nomenclature of the congenital bicuspid aortic valve.Suppl Ref 85
Aorta Zones, Segments
Relationship between named aortic segments and Ishimaru zones. LCC, LSC, SMA, SRA, IRA, IMA. IMA = inferior mesenteric artery; IRA = inferior renal artery; LCC = left common carotid artery; LSC = left subclavian artery; SMA = superior mesenteric artery; SRA = superior renal artery.
Documentation of aortic pathologies, such as dissection, should also be based on standardized definitions (Table 5). When describing aortic dissections, entry and exit tears can be documented with greater detail using Ishimaru Zone terminology than with the Stanford or DeBakey classifications. The Society for Vascular Surgery and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons developed a detailed classification system that segments the aorta into specific zones to standardize descriptions and guide treatment strategies. Zones can be used to describe the extent of aortic pathologies and can readily be transformed into the Stanford or DeBakey nomenclature (Supplemental Table 6, Figure 1). We support the primacy of zone terminology for research descriptions of aortic pathologies.

Aortic imaging
For optimal aortic measurements, we recommend that CT or MRI images are acquired with electrocardiographic gating in thin slices (at least ≤2 mm, ≤1.5 mm optimal) to minimize partial volume effects and allow for multiplanar reconstructions. The sinuses and proximal ascending aorta should be measured on bright-blood cine images that are acquired using double-oblique planning with appropriate compensation to minimize artifacts due to cardiac motion. Adult measurements are typically acquired in diastole, and pediatric measurements are typically acquired in systole. If the study population contains children and adults, the timing of measurements should also be recorded (see Aortic anatomy and pathology section).
Confident detection of a change in aortic diameters over time is frequently challenging due to manual measurement errors and variation in image-acquisition parameters or imaging modalities. We recommend these best practices to minimize systematic errors in longitudinal assessment of aortic trajectories (Supplemental Table 7): 1) avoid comparing images that are separated by <6 months; 2) compare the same imaging modalities whenever possible; 3) a single, experienced rater should directly remeasure images in a side-by-side fashion; 4) record diameters at consistent, prespecified anatomic locations using the same measurement methods (Table 3). If the maximum aortic diameter is not at a prespecified location, a specifier of the approximate location should be recorded. 5) For cross-sectional imaging, plan cine acquisitions (MRI) and perform postprocessing measurements on three-dimensional acquisitions (CT and MRI) by identifying both orthogonal planes to reduce measurement errors (double oblique technique).
We recommend that TAD registries provide access to image files because most analytic methods require unprocessed image data. Medical imaging data should be stored in Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine format to preserve important image geometry and scaling metadata fields. Of the registries we reviewed, only GenTAC and CLARITY contain archival image data. Creation and maintenance of image-inclusive databases present logistical and financial challenges for data storage and data sharing. Alternatively, images can be made available to researchers on request provided that they can establish explicit agreements for image deidentification and data sharing that conform to standard protections for research on human subjects. At a minimum, we recommend that all TAD registries list the number, modality, and format of images that are available for each registry participant, along with consent criteria defining the acceptable use of the images for research and contact information to request images (See Repository and Data Sharing). The Society of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance recently addressed obstacles and proposed solutions for cross-sectional image use in registries. The emergence of cloud-based imaging platforms has the potential to reduce some barriers to image sharing for multicenter studies.
In addition to aortic dimensions, several morphologic, hemodynamic, and biomechanical aortic parameters can predict disease severity, risk of dissection, or the need for surgical repair. Emerging biomarkers for TAD include the configuration of arch vessels, length, tortuosity, angulation, volume, distensibility, stiffness, wall shear stress, and pulse wave velocity (Supplemental Table 8). Anatomic, hemodynamic, and biomechanical properties derived from these data can be used to create dynamic, patient-specific models of the thoracic aorta. For example, computational fluid dynamics and finite element analyses of CT and MRI data have been used to simulate TAD progression and identify risk factors for future complications.

Blood pressure
Data Elements for Blood Pressure Measurements
Element	Definition	Details	 	Timing of blood pressure measurement	Date and time of measurementa		 	 Clinic blood pressureb	Measured in clinic, office, or at the time of procedures	Abstracted from notes or procedure reports	 	 Self-measured blood pressureb	Measured by patient	Usually submitted as a diary	 	Heart rate	Beats per minute		 	 Ambulatory blood pressure	Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM)	At least 27 readings in one 24-hour periodDay and night periods analyzed separatelyReported as mean and variabilityc	 	 Nocturnal dipping	Physiological drop in blood pressure during sleep	Only in ABPM dataPercentage of mean arterial pressure
Italicized items are optional but strongly encouraged. Clinic blood pressures, self-measured blood pressures, and the mean value of one ambulatory blood pressure monitoring period count toward the minimum of at least 3 blood pressure readings per participant or at least 1 blood pressure reading for every year that the participant is in the study.
ABPM = ambulatory blood pressure monitoring.
Specific dates should only be collected if authorized and should be rounded to the nearest year or exported from the registry as ages to protect identifiable health information.
Blood pressure should be reported after 3 consecutive measurements taken 1 minute apart. Drop the first reading and take the mean of the second and third readings.
Blood pressure variability can be calculated as the standard deviation, coefficient of variation, or average real variability.
Blood pressure is a major determinant of TAD outcomes, such as aortic dissection, aortic dilation rates, and reinterventions after aortic operations. Systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure are most strongly linked to adverse outcomes. Blood pressure readings fluctuate over time and are best assessed by calculating the mean of 2 or 3 consecutive measurements and by documenting circadian variation of blood pressures. Therefore, the systolic pressure, diastolic pressure, and heart rate should be extracted from at least 3 clinic visits or procedure reports for each research participant across the study period, along with the date and time of each measurement (Table 6). We propose that at least one set of blood pressure readings should be collected for each year that the participant is in a research study and as close as possible to the time of meaningful events, such as surveillance images or procedures. If self-measured blood pressures or 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) reports are available, the mean systolic and diastolic pressures, along with some measure of blood pressure variability, such as the standard deviation or average real variability, should be recorded separately for the daytime and nighttime. Nocturnal dipping as a percentage decrease of the mean arterial pressure is also usually available from ABPM data. Both hypertension and impaired or reversed nocturnal dipping are frequent in TAD cohorts and are independent predictors of cardiovascular outcomes. To enhance phenotypic characterization and risk stratification, ABPM data should be routinely acquired in prospective TAD research cohorts and clinical trials.

Mental health and quality of life
Data Elements to Describe Mental Health and Quality of Life
Element	Instrument(s) for Assessment	References	 	Anxiety	GAD-7	Suppl Refs 85,86	 	Depression	PHQ-2, PHQ-9	Suppl Refs 87,88	 	Post-traumatic stress	PTSD-5, PCL	Suppl Refs 89,90	 	Health-related quality of life	SF-36 or equivalenta	Suppl Refs 91,92	 	Chronic psychological stress	Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-4)	Suppl Ref 93	 	Subjective social status	MacArthur ladder	Suppl Ref 94	 	Adverse childhood experiences	Whitehall II ACE assessment	Suppl Ref 95	 	Perceived discrimination	Perceived Ethnic Discrimination Questionnaire (PED-Q)	Suppl Ref 96	 	Loneliness or social isolation	Social isolation index score	Suppl Ref 97
Italicized: optional data elements.
PedsQL is the most widely used pediatric equivalent.
ACE = adverse childhood experiences; GAD-7 = Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item questionnaire; PCL = PTSD Checklist; PedsQL = Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory; PHQ-2 = Patient Health Questionnaire-9; PHQ-9 = Patient Health Questionnaire-9; PTSD-5 = Post Traumatic Stress Disorder 5-item questionnaire; SF-36 = Short Form Health Survey 36-item questionnaire.
See Supplemental Table 9.
Health-related quality of life (HRQoL) describes physical, social, and psychological aspects of well-being that influence health status and functioning. Data about HRQoL are almost completely absent from current TAD registries, but there is evidence that TAD has negative impacts on HRQoL. Depression and/or anxiety affect up to one-third of dissection survivors. Post-traumatic stress is also common in this population. We recommend 4 widely validated screening instruments for anxiety (Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7-item questionnaire), depression (Patient Health Questionnaire-9), post-traumatic stress disorder (Post Traumatic Stress Disorder 5-item questionnaire), and HRQoL (the Medical Outcomes Study 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey for adults or the Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory for children and adolescents) that can be collected rapidly in most clinical settings, but other instruments are available (Table 7, Supplemental Table 9). Note that none of these instruments measure food insecurity, and only one instrument, the World Health Organization Quality of Life, measures perceived physical safety, a major component of well-being. In a GenTAC study of individuals with Marfan syndrome, 36-Item Short-Form Health Survey scores (n = 389, mean age 41 years; 51% men) were reduced compared to general population norms.
While it may not be possible to extract HRQoL data from retrospective or historical data, all prospective TAD registries should collect data on mental health and HRQoL at enrollment and ideally at each follow-up contact using one or more of these validated questionnaires or equivalent instruments. Due to the prevalence of mental health concerns in the TAD population, it may be reasonable to develop specific mental health assessment tools for TAD patients.

Social determinants of health
Data Elements to Describe Social Determinants of Health
Elements	Attributes	Options	 	Demographics		 	Current age or date of birtha	 	Sex at birth	Male, female, intersex	 	Gender	Male, female, nonbinary, transgender	 	Marital status	Married, single, divorced, widowed	 	Education level	International Standard Classification of Educationb	 	Nonprescription drugs	Cigars or cigarettes	Current and pack-years, former and pack-years, never	 		E-cigarettes or vapes	Current, former, never	 		Alcohol	Current and drinks per week, former and drinks per week, never	 		Cocaine	Current, former, never	 		Opioids or narcotics	Current, former, never	 		Amphetamines or stimulants	Current, former, never	 	Socioeconomic status	Public assistance	Food supplement, unemployment benefits, welfare or equivalent	 	Employment status	Permanent worker, temporary worker, unemployed	 	Healthcare accessc	Government insurance or universal health care	Yes, no	 	Personal or private health insurance	Yes, no
Italicized elements: optional but strongly recommended if feasible.
Specific dates should only be collected if authorized and should be rounded to the nearest year or exported from the registry as ages to protect identifiable health information.
Defined as by Dienhart et al.Suppl Ref 98
Perceived healthcare access can also be assessed using the Healthcare Access and Quality IndexSuppl Ref 99 or the Perceived Access to Healthcare Questionnaire.Suppl Ref 100
Social determinants of health (SDH) are nonmedical factors that affect access to health care, adherence to therapies, and supportive resources. SDH are strongly associated with measured cardiovascular risk factors, vascular inflammation, and incident cardiovascular disease. Therefore, disparities in SDH may be important confounders of aortic health outcomes, and we strongly recommend that all prospective TAD registries collect data on SDH at enrollment and at each follow-up contact (Table 8).

Medication and environmental exposures
Data Elements for Medication and Environmental Exposures
Elements	Description	 	Medication namea	Any cardiovascular medication	 	Medication dose	Milligrams per dose	 	Medication frequency	Number per day	 	Duration of medication use	If > 1 y, current age—age at start	 	 Low-density lipoprotein (LDL)	Proxy for hyperlipidemia	 	 Glycated hemoglobin (A1c) or blood glucoseb	Proxy for diabetes	 	 International Normalized Ratio (INR)c	Efficacy of anticoagulation	 	 Postal codesd	Beginning 10 y prior to enrollment	 	 US county subdivisions, EU NUTS 2-3 or LAU	Searchable in US county or EU data	 	 Census tracts or block groupse	Searchable in US census data
Italicized elements: optional but strongly recommended if feasible.
A searchable database of US census data is available at https://censusreporter.org. A searchable database of US county data is available at public.opendatasoft.com/explore/dataset/public-catalog/table. Searchable online EU NUTS data is available at https://data.europa.eu/data. Non-US/EU exposure data are available from other national or regional repositories. Note that postal codes and other geographic location data are considered to be protected health information and usually require explicit participant consent to be stored or shared.
EU = European Union; LAU = Local Administrative Units; NUTS = Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics; US = United States.
Use of all cardiovascular medications should be documented at each follow-up contact. We recommend that medication use and/or a measure of disease status or treatment efficacy (eg, LDL for hyperlipidemia or blood pressure for hypertension) should be used to confirm the diagnosis of a health condition when those measures are available.
Mean of at least 3 blood glucose measurements.
Document the closest value to each follow-up contact.
Record the last 3 residence locations.
The census block group is the smallest area unit in United States census data.
Beta blockers and angiotensin receptor blockers are mainstays of medical therapy for TAD. While a beneficial “class effect” of these medications on aortic dilation and dissection has been established, it is unclear if the choice of specific medications in each class affects aortic outcomes, and it is not certain that all medication effects are dose-dependent. Future studies should focus on comparisons of medications and doses for cumulative evidence of treatment effects over time. Some medications are reliable indicators of conditions that affect cardiovascular health, such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, or diabetes mellitus. Medication data can affirm and supplement the existence of a health condition by providing a quantifiable marker of health status. Therefore, we recommend that the specific medication, dose, frequency, start date, and duration of therapy, as well as some measure of disease status or treatment efficacy (when available), should be recorded for research purposes (Table 9). These measures should be updated at each follow-up contact to determine changes in medication use.
Exposure to medications can be calculated as the total daily dose, the assumed average maintenance dose, or the weighted cumulative exposure, which incorporates factors such as dose intensity, adherence, or duration into a single metric (Supplemental Table 10). Adjusting for the relative effectiveness of medications using dose equivalence tables may facilitate comparisons (Supplemental Table 11).
Confirming patient adherence to medical therapies is essential to understand the relationship between dose and treatment outcomes. Patient adherence can be measured by self-report (Morisky Medication Adherence Scale or Brief Medication Questionnaire) or pharmacy refill records, using measures such as the medication possession ratio, which is the ratio of the total dose that was dispensed to the number of days in a time interval. Measurement of drug levels other than the international normalized ratio is not routinely available and may be more relevant to early-phase clinical trials or animal studies. Subtherapeutic international normalized ratio levels, especially when longitudinal data are available, may be a useful proxy for medication nonadherence (Table 9). Similarly, fluctuations in low-density lipoprotein levels or the percentage of glycated hemoglobin (A1c) may indicate nonadherence to therapies. Heart rate data may be a useful proxy for the effectiveness of beta-blocker medications.
Data on environmental exposures to air pollution, green spaces, and sociodemographic factors, such as crime or food deserts, are increasingly available at neighborhood-level resolution. These exposures and other SDH are now recognized to be potent risk factors that modify cardiovascular health and mortality. It is possible that, similar to other cardiovascular conditions, environmental exposures may exacerbate and/or accelerate the clinical presentation and outcomes of TAD. To link participant-level data to cumulative environmental exposures, it is essential to record the residential history of study participants, balancing participant privacy with the necessity to obtain accurate geographic location data. Neighborhood data, such as county subdivisions, census tracts, or census block groups corresponding to home addresses, can be retrieved from searchable online databases (Table 9). When feasible, TAD registries should collect postal codes and/or data on localities where study participants resided beginning at least 10 years prior to study enrollment and updating this information at each subsequent study contact.
In many countries, some local geographic location data are designated as private health information and cannot be shared as individual-level data without the informed consent of registry participants. However, coded environmental exposure data are not generally subject to these restrictions and can be readily derived from geographic information systems data using an automated commercial software program. Therefore, it may be possible for researchers to receive geocoded data on environmental exposures from retrospective registries as appropriate for a specific research question. In our view, all prospective TAD registries should obtain informed consent for location data.

Reasons for evaluation of suspected TAD
Data Elements to Describe Reasons for Evaluation of Suspected TAD
Element	Description	 	Timing of initial presentationa	Age or date; first contact, not necessarily diagnosis	 	Reason: relative or genetic variant	Pathogenic variant, positive imaging, history of aortic disease, or exam finding	 	Reason: aortic dissection	May only be diagnosed at autopsy	 	Reason: incidental	Imaging for an unrelated reason identifies TAD	 	Reason: examination	Clinical features that raise clinical suspicion for HTAD	 	Reason: symptoms	Palpitations, pain, congestive heart failure
HTAD = heritable thoracic aortic disease; TAD = thoracic aortic disease.
Specific dates should only be collected if authorized and should be rounded to the nearest year or exported from the registry as ages to protect identifiable health information.
Patients may be referred for evaluation of suspected TAD due to a variety of circumstances and findings: a family history of sudden cardiac death, especially in a young (<60 years) person; being the relative of a patient with recognized aortic pathology; aortic dilation incidentally discovered during an evaluation for another reason, especially in a young person who does not have hypertension; aortic dissection or other arterial dissection; unexplained hypertension in a young, otherwise healthy person; or physical features, such as an ectopic lens, a chest deformity (excavatum, carinatum, scoliosis), spontaneous pneumothorax, or atrophic scars (see Genetic data section). Less common reasons for ascertainment include severe bruising in children or an incidental finding of a PV on exome sequencing for an unrelated etiology. The reason for referral defines many characteristics of the population being evaluated, which in turn can determine the severity of disease at presentation. For example, relatives who are identified due to cascade screening are usually less severely affected than probands, while patients who are identified due to aortic dissections, particularly at a young age, may have early-onset syndromic forms of TAD. Therefore, it is essential to document the age at initial presentation and the principal reason for ascertainment (Table 10).

Genetic data
Data Elements for Uniform Genetic Variant Information
Element	Description	 	Genetic diagnosis of individual	Clinical impression, even if no test result	 	Genetic test result of individual	Yes, no, age when tested, type of test, gene, VUS/LP/P	 	Genetic test results of relatives	Yes, no, relatives tested, type of test, gene, VUS/LP/P	 	DNA variant and reference sequence	Transcript isoform and nucleotide change	 	Protein variant and reference sequence	Protein isoform and amino acid change	 	Genetic ancestry	Race and ethnicitya
The current minimum categories are: American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Black or African American, Hispanic or Latino, Middle Eastern or North African, Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, and White.
LP = likely pathogenic; P = pathogenic; VUS = variant of uncertain significance.
Defined according to current minimum categories for data on race and ethnicity in federal statistics (https://spd15revision.gov/content/spd15revision/en/2024-spd15/categories-definitions.html).
Currently, up to one-third of individuals with TAD have a PV or likely PV in a single gene that is responsible for their condition. PVs of some genes (MYLK, PRKG1, SMAD3, TGFB2, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, COL3A1) are associated with early-onset dissections at relatively small aortic diameters (<5.0 cm). Identification of a heritable component has important implications for familial screening and the appropriate timing of surgical repair. Researchers should document if clinical genetic testing and/or familial segregation studies were performed and if a PV or Variant of Uncertain Significance was identified. To facilitate data sharing, uniform information about genetic variants should be documented using approved American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics nomenclature (Table 11). Due to historical changes in reference sequences, it is essential to document the DNA and protein annotations of a variant with the appropriate genome and transcript information. Notably, information about genetic variants is readily accessible from commercial laboratory test reports, even by investigators who have no formal training in genetics. Because the expected frequency of a variant may differ according to ancestry and geographic region, documentation of ethnic ancestry is important for contextual analysis of genetic data.
Data Elements for Extra-aortic Features Associated With HTAD
Element	Description	Important Details	 	Pectus anomaly	Excavatum, carinatum	Chest asymmetry	 	Skeletal abnormalities	Scoliosis, kyphosis, spondylolisthesis	Surgical correction, fractures	 	Disproportionately long limbs and digits	Arachnodactyly	Arm span to height ratioUpper to lower segment ratio	 	Foot deformities	Club foot, flat foot	Unilateral or bilateral, surgical correction	 	Premature osteoarthritis	Early onset (<40 y)	Characteristic of SMAD3 PV	 	Pneumothorax	Spontaneous	Recurrent or bilateral	 	Joint hypermobility	Wrist sign, thumb sign, nontraumatic joint dislocations	Recurrent or multiple joints	 	Dural ectasia	On CT or MR images	Tarlov cysts	 	Skin abnormalities	Thin translucent skin, easy bruising, stretch marks, atrophic scars	History of delayed wound healingTranslucent velvety skin specific for VEDS	 	Eye and vision abnormalities	Lens dislocation, severe myopia	Lens dislocation specific for FBN1 PV	 	Facial dysmorphism	Hypertelorism, retrognathia, malar hypoplasia, dolichocephaly, cleft palate, bifid uvula	Bifid uvula specific for LDS	 	Mitral valve abnormalities	Mitral valve prolapse, mitral annular disjunction	Mitral annular disjunction characteristic of LDS	 	Involvement of branch arteries	Specify location(s)	Cervical and iliac artery involvement characteristic of LDS and VEDS
Features were included if clearly visible on examination or likely to be documented on routine imaging reports. Features should be scored as present even if repaired. Mitral annular disjunction: defined as by Asokan et al.Suppl Ref 101
CT = computed tomography; HTAD = heritable thoracic aortic disease; LDS = Loeys-Dietz syndrome; MR = magnetic resonance; PV = pathogenic variants; VEDS = Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Some extra-aortic clinical features are relatively specific for heritable TAD (HTAD) (Table 12). These features, especially if prominent or severe, can potentially identify individuals who are at risk of earlier onset of TAD with a more rapid clinical course, and these specific features should be captured in aortic registries.

Autopsy data
Data Elements for Autopsy
Element	Description	 	Timing of autopsy	Age at death or date of deatha	 	External examinationb	Physical features	 	Aortic dimensionsc	Sinuses of ValsalvaAscending aortaMaximum external diameter and locationMaximum internal diameter and location	 	Aortic pathologiesd	DissectionIntramural hematomaPenetrating ulcerRuptureCystic medial degeneratione	 	Dissection characteristicsd	Number of flaps, acute or chronicEntry and exit tear location(s)	 	Aortic valve morphology	Bicuspid aortic valve and type of fusionCalcificationStenosis	 	Cardiac features	Ventricular wall thicknessImplantable cardiac devices	 	Congenital anomalies	Septal defectsMitral valve prolapseAortic coarctationSub or supravalvular stenosisArch anomalies	 	Previous interventions	Aortic stentsAortic graftsValve prostheses	 	Extra-aortic pathologies	Cardiac tamponadeThoracic hemorrhageArterial aneurysmsPneumothorax
Specific dates should only be collected if authorized and should be rounded to the nearest year or exported from the registry as ages to protect identifiable health information.
See the Genetic data section.
If data collected from postmortem images, see Thoracic aortic measurements section for reporting specifications.
See the Thoracic Aortic Pathologies section.
On histological analysis.
More than half of type A aortic dissections lead to sudden death. Yet data related to autopsies or death investigations are not routinely collected in TAD registries, and there are no standards for documentation of TAD in postmortem examinations. For sudden deaths that are attributed to aortic dissection, macroscopic and histological evaluation of the entire aorta is essential, particularly in subjects with HTAD. Data about demographic characteristics and cardiovascular history, including previous aortic interventions, should be documented. Specific pathological data about the location and extent of aortic dissections, the maximum aortic diameter, and congenital heart or vascular malformations should also be reported (Table 13). Postmortem CT or MRI imaging should be considered as a potential alternative when a conventional autopsy is not available.
As recommended in current guidelines, genetic tests of blood or tissue samples from autopsies should be reported for younger individuals (<60 years) with aortic dissections or adults with thoracic aortic aneurysms and clinical features suggestive of HTAD. Positive genetic tests should trigger gene-based management and cascade testing of at-risk relatives. When genetic tests are negative or identify variants of uncertain significance, first-degree relatives should be screened by aortic imaging. Ideally, familial screening results (when available) should be included with the genetic data of research participants (see Genetic data section).

Reproductive health
While pregnancy is a known risk factor for aortic dissection in the general population, individuals with TAD are at a much-heightened risk of aortic dissection, particularly during the third trimester and postpartum period. Potential triggers include hormonal changes and hemodynamic fluctuations associated with pregnancy. Lack of awareness of diagnosis and a potentially large underlying aortic aneurysm are known risks of aortic dissection in this population, especially type A dissection. Other known or possible risk factors include specific PVs, family history of aortic dissection, multiparity, and breastfeeding or lactation. Type B dissections associated with pregnancy may be as common as type A dissections and are largely unpredictable. Finally, pregnancy may promote aortic aneurysm growth and a subsequent need for elective aortic root replacement.
Research involving pregnant persons is challenging because this is a vulnerable population. In addition, small numbers of pregnancies at individual centers make it difficult to conduct large, prospective trials to understand better the physiologic impact of pregnancy on short- and long-term aortic health. Thus, standardized data collection regarding reproductive health and pregnancy in individuals with TAD is essential to enable future collaborations and advance knowledge of maternal and fetal outcomes in these conditions, and thereby minimize the risk of aortic dissection.
Data Elements for Reproductive Outcomes
Element	Attributes	Options	 	Maternal age	At termination, miscarriage, or birth	 	Diagnosis	TAD diagnosis before pregnancy	Yes, no	 		Preimplantation genetic testing	Yes, no	 	Pregnancy information	Pregnancy number	Yes, no	 		In vitro fertilization	Yes, no	 		Cardiovascular or anticoagulant medications	Total daily dose or equivalenta	 	Delivery information	Gestational age at birth	Weeks	 		Preterm birth (<37 weeks)	No, spontaneous, iatrogenic	 		Anesthesia for birth	None, IV, regional, general	 		Method of delivery	Vaginal, operative vaginal, cesarean	 	Pregnancy outcomes	Termination	Yes, no	 		Miscarriage	Yes, no	 		Stillbirth (>20 weeks)	Yes, no	 		Live birth, singleton	Yes, no	 		Live birth, twins	Yes, no	 		Fetus or child affected	Yes, no	 	Extra-aortic complications	Postpartum hemorrhage	Yes, no	 		Pre-eclampsia	Yes, no	 		Eclampsia	Yes, no	 		Uterine rupture	Yes, no	 		Uterine prolapse	Yes, no	 		3°or 4° laceration/OASIS injury	Yes, no	 		Arrhythmia	SVT, AF, NSVT, VT	 		Venous thrombosis	DVT, PE	 	Neonatal complications	Birthweight	%	 		Fetal anomalies	Specify	 		Breastfeeding or pumping (mo)	No, <1, 1-3, 3-6, 6-12, >12	 	Aortic imaging	Before pregnancy	Measurement and Modalityb	 		First trimester		 		Second trimester		 		Third trimester		 		Early postpartum (<6 mo)		 		Late postpartum (>6 mo)		 	Aortic complications	Type A dissectionType B dissectionElective aortic repair	Timing in relation to delivery, interventionsc
AF = atrial fibrillation; DVT = deep vein thrombosis; NSVT = non sustained ventricular tachycardia; PE = pulmonary embolism; SVT = supraventricular arrhythmia; TAD = thoracic aortic disease; VT = ventricular tachycardia.
Described in Medication and environmental exposures.
Described in Thoracic aortic measurements.
Described in Aortic interventions.
Several clinical studies have collected information about pregnancy outcomes in persons with TAD. Important variables include the status of aortic disease, PVs, medical treatment, surveillance imaging before and during pregnancy, and cardiovascular, obstetric, and neonatal pregnancy outcomes. We propose that future clinical trials and registries utilize the following framework to harmonize methods for reproductive data collection from all women of childbearing age (Table 14). We contend that the burden of including these elements is justified by enormous potential benefits to pregnant and peripartum women. A major goal is to refine clinical management based on more robust definitions of diameter thresholds for safe pregnancies within genotype categories, particularly among non-Marfan individuals. Aortic dissection associated with pregnancy should be defined as occurring during pregnancy and up to 12 weeks after pregnancy. Aortic dissection or the need for a surgery after 12 weeks postpartum should be recorded to evaluate the potential long-term burden associated with pregnancy.
Data Elements for Hormonal Influences and Reproductive Health
Element	Attributes	Options	 	Menstrual cycles	Age at menarche	Years	 		Age at menopause	Years	 	Hormonal contraception or hormone replacement therapies	Estrogen patch or pill	No, start date, stop date	 		Combination contraceptive pill	No, start date, stop date	 		Progesterone only pill	No, start date, stop date	 		Depot or intramuscular progesterone	No, start date, stop date	 	Intrauterine devices	Intrauterine device, progesterone	No, start date, stop date	 		Intrauterine device, copper	No, start date, stop date	 	Gynecologic problems	Menorrhagia	Yes, no	 		Endometriosis	Yes, no	 		Fibroids	Yes, no	 		Ovarian cysts	Yes, no
The prevalence and severity of gynecologic health issues, such as endometriosis, fibroids, or abnormal uterine bleeding, are largely unexplored in the TAD population. Dysregulation of the transforming growth factor-beta pathway has been implicated in the mechanism of these gynecologic problems. Organ cysts, including ovarian cysts, are more common in individuals with TAD. The prevalence and natural history of these cysts are unknown. In addition, there is a limited understanding of the effects of differential sex hormone exposures, including potential adverse effects of birth-control methods, through the lifetime and their influence on aortic health in women with TAD. Additional data elements may be collected to facilitate understanding of sex-specific hormonal impacts on aortic health in individuals with HTAD (Table 15).

Repository and data sharing
Data Elements for Repository Descriptions From the MIABIS Framework
Element	Description	 	Contact information	URL or individual contacts for repository	 	Dataset types	Data about sample donors or samples in the repository, ie, available to researchers	 	Sample types	Available biospecimens	 	Storage conditions	Liquid nitrogen, −80 °C, etc	 	Disease conditions	Disease names or categories of disease	 	Sample collection settings	The contexts in which the samples were collected (eg, clinical trial)	 	Collection designs	The overall design of the study (eg, disease-specific cohort)	 	Use and access conditions	Restrictions on use of samples or data for specific purposes, usually in consent documentationa	 	Samples or cases and tiers	Number of samples or cases and tier(s)b of recorded data	 	Data availability	Tiera of data (retrospective or prospective) potentially available on request	 	Inclusion criteria	Inclusion and exclusion criteria of studies that resulted in collection of the samples	 	Key publications	Publications that utilized samples or data from repository
Data elements in this table were adapted from Eklund et al.Suppl Ref 102
MIABIS = Minimum Information About Biobank Data Sharing.
The MIABIS governance model was specifically created to enhance interoperability among registries sharing data and samples worldwide (https://www.bbmri-eric.eu/howtomiabis/).
Data element tiers are defined as in Supplemental Tables 2 to 4. Registries should list the tier that most closely matches currently available data.
The Minimum Information About Biobank Data Sharing (MIABIS) project introduced standardized variables that researchers can use to query biorepositories for available samples and associated clinical data. MIABIS was created in 2012 and underwent 2 subsequent revisions to expand the repertoire of standardized terminology so that it now includes datasets as well as samples. The units of record in MIABIS are individual samples with related information about sample donors, clinical phenotypes, and sample repositories. The repository-level descriptors define potential restrictions on sample availability for commercial or disease-specific uses that have been adopted by the National Institutes of Health and the European Union. Currently, only 2 of the aortopathy repositories include extensive information about biological samples (GenTAC, Vascular European Reference Network), but neither repository contains all core MIABIS descriptors. We propose that aortopathy repositories utilize the MIABIS framework and make these data freely available to researchers (Table 16).

Aortic interventions
Data Elements to Describe Aortic Interventions
Element	Attributes	 	Open Repairs	Endovascular Repairs	 	Ascending/Arch	Descending/Thoracoabdominal	 	Timing of procedure	Age at or date of interventiona	 	Maximum diameter	Maximum aortic diameter on imaging study prior to intervention	 	Acuity of presentation	Emergency, urgent, elective	 	Indications for procedure	Heritable risk, symptoms, aneurysm, dissection (chronic, subacute, acute), rupture, infection, malperfusion, aortic valve regurgitation	 	Medical conditionsb	Hypertension, Hyperlipidemia, Diabetes, Smoking, Chronic pulmonary disease, Chronic renal disease, MI, Heart failure, Stroke, Previous interventions	 	Anatomic sites (Ishimaru Zones)	Zones 0-4	Zones 5-9	Zones 0-9	 	Procedure types	Sinuses (CVG, David, Yacoub)AscendingArch (hemi, total, ET)	DTA replacementTAAA replacement (Crawford extents)	AscendingArchTEVARF-BEVAR	 	TEVAR considerations	Does not apply	Does not apply	StagingLanding zone nativeExtent of coverageProximal and distal aorta and device diameters	 	Arterial cannulation or access sites	Direct aorticFemoralAxillary/innominate	FemoralAxillaryDirect aortic	FemoralIliacCarotidAxillary/brachial	 	Venous cannulation or access sites	Right atriumSVC/IVCFemoral	Left atriumPulmonary veinFemoral	Venous access if Zone 0	 	Methods of perfusion	Full CPBHypothermia (mild, moderate deep)	LA-FAECMOFull CPB	Does not apply	 	Methods of brain protection	DHCAAntegradeRetrograde	DHCACSF drainage	CSF drainage	 	Procedural complications	Neurologic complications (stroke, paraplegia), major bleeding, MI, congestive heart failure, respiratory failure, renal failure, graft or device infection	 	Re-explorationPseudoaneurysmValve dysfunction	Visceral ischemiaLimb ischemiaRe-explorationPseudoaneurysm	EndoleakRetrograde dissectionSINEAccess site complicationsDevice migration	 	Procedural mortality	Death within 30 d or any time during initial hospitalization, including transfers
We recognize that procedural data may be collected retrospectively and that some elements may not be available to researchers.
Italicized elements: optional for registries that are not surgically centered; heritable risk: decision for preventative procedure primarily guided by genetic information.
CPB = cardiopulmonary bypass; CSF = cerebrospinal fluid; CVG = composite valve graft with a mechanical or bioprosthetic prosthesis; DHCA = deep hypothermic circulatory arrest; DTA = descending thoracic aorta; ECMO = extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; ET = elephant trunk; F-BEVAR = fenestrated and/or branched endovascular aortic repair; IVC = inferior vena cava; LA-FA = left atrium to femoral artery or other arterial site; MI = myocardial infarction; SVC = superior vena cava; TEVAR = thoracic endovascular aortic repair; re-exploration: such as for bleeding, dehiscence, infection, or effusion; SINE = stent-induced new entry tear; TAAA = thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm.
Specific dates should only be collected if authorized and should be rounded to the nearest year or exported from the registry as ages to protect identifiable health information.
See Table 9, Table 10.
Aortic interventions are either the focus or a major endpoint of many studies. To permit unbiased comparisons between studies, it is important to document the indication for a procedure, the acuity of presentation, the maximum aortic diameter prior to intervention, procedure type and extent, and periprocedural complications in a standardized format (Table 17). We recommend using published standards to report technical details about aortic repairs. When interventions include concomitant aortic valve repair or replacement, reporting standards for valve interventions should also be followed.
Ishimaru Zone classifications should be used to describe the distal extent of aortic arch repair. The distal extent of “hemiarch” resections on the greater curvature of the arch is uniformly at the origin of the innominate artery in Zone 0. The distal extent of “hemiarch” resections on the lesser curvature may be highly variable and ranges from zone 0 to zone 3. Graft replacement of all native aortic sinus tissue with preservation and resuspension of the aortic valve inside the graft is known as a “valve-sparing aortic root replacement,” which has several technical variations. The most common technique is the “reimplantation” or “David procedure,” in which the aortic valve is resuspended fully inside a graft that is seated externally at the level of the virtual basal ring. A similar procedure, known as “aortic root remodeling” or “Yacoub procedure,” involves replacement of all sinus tissue using a scalloped graft, such that no part of the graft extends below the level of the aortic annulus with the possible addition of an external ring annuloplasty.
If endovascular approaches are used, many of the considerations for arterial access and complications are similar, but the risk of iatrogenic dissection may be increased, depending on the aortic segment being treated and the genetic diagnosis. Core data elements about endovascular interventions should ideally include: 1) concurrent or staged timing with respect to open repairs; 2) whether stent landing zones involve native aorta or prosthesis; 3) extent of aortic coverage (hemiarch, total arch, Crawford thoracoabdominal extent I-IV); and 4) aortic and device diameters at the proximal and distal landing zones. Elective or emergent indications for endovascular repair should also be documented (Table 17).

Follow-up of TAD
Minimum TAD Data Elements To Be Updated at Each Study Contact
Element	Table	 	Timing of follow-upa	-	 	Method of follow-up: in person, call or message, health or government record, family or friend	-	 	Success of follow-up: yes and living, yes and dead, no	-	 	Aorta-related death: yes and date or age, no	-	 	Aortic pathologies	5	 	Blood pressure measurements	6	 	Mental health and quality of life	7	 	Social determinants of health	8	 	Medication and environmental exposures	9	 	Reproductive outcomes	14	 	Aortic interventions	17
Specific dates should only be collected if authorized and should be rounded to the nearest year or exported from the registry as ages to protect identifiable health information. Aorta-related death: death that is clearly related to an aortic pathology or from further intervention performed for a new aortic event, or sudden death in the absence of confirmation or an alternate cause.Suppl Ref 103
Documentation of aortic outcomes is a central aspect of most TAD studies. Priority core data elements that should be updated at each follow-up contact include vital status, aortic interventions, aortic pathologies, and cardiovascular medications (Table 18). The methods that were used to investigate the status of study participants should also be recorded.

Conclusions
Representation of Consensus Thoracic Aortic Disease Data Elements in Contemporary TAD Research Registries
CLARITY = Collaborative for Longitudinal Aortic Research in the Young; GenTAC = National Registry of Genetically Triggered Aneurysms and Other Cardiovascular Conditions; IRAD = International Registry of Aortic Dissection; MAC = Montalcino Aortic Consortium; STS = Society of Thoracic Surgeons Adult Cardiac Surgery Database; VASCERN = European Reference Network for Rare Multisystemic Vascular Diseases; ROPAC = Registry of Pregnancy and Cardiac Disease; GEN-VEDSS = Vascular Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome Collaborative Natural History Study; SVS VQI = Society for Vascular Surgery Vascular Quality Initiative; HTAD = heritable thoracic aortic disease; SBP = systolic blood pressure; DBP = diastolic blood pressure; ABPM = ambulatory blood pressure monitoring; SMBP = self-measured blood pressure; MIABIS = Minimum Information About Biobank Data Sharing. Clear Circles: 0 or 1 core Element are Represented in each Category; Black circles: All data Elements in Category are Represented; Hashed Circles: 2 or More Elements in a Category but Does NOT Have all the Elements.
TAD is a rare disease with potentially devastating outcomes. Advances in diagnosis and management can be most effectively achieved through collaborative research. We surveyed 10 contemporary TAD registries and identified significant gaps in the amount and types of data that are needed for accurate, verifiable, and reproducible studies. In several categories, relatively little data (eg, Reproductive Health) or no data (eg, Autopsy) is being collected systematically on TAD cohorts (Table 19).
The focus of this project is to provide core data elements that can be assessed directly and summarized efficiently in research records to close these gaps while developing standards to harmonize data across registries and clinical trials. The complete set of 125 core data elements recommended by this expert panel is intended to serve as a roadmap for future research combining precision registry data with genetic and/or computational data to uncover new TAD phenotypes and identify new risk factors for TAD (Table 2, Supplemental Table 1). To promote effective collaborative studies, we suggest that all TAD registries and clinical trials collect and report these core data elements and harmonize their existing datasets to align with the core element definitions. Intersocietal collaboration with other medical specialists such as obstetricians, radiologists, and medical examiners to promote these standards is ongoing and will be essential for more uniform collection and wider availability of these data.
We acknowledge that it may not be feasible for many centers to extract all core data elements due to limitations in time, personnel, and resources. Therefore, we defined graduated tiers for data collection, beginning with a minimum dataset that contains <30 core aortic elements. Registries should indicate the tier(s) that most closely match their currently available data and the scope of data that could be obtained on request, along with other registry descriptors (Table 16). We anticipate that these features will lower barriers to participation in collaborative research while providing transparent information to potential collaborators about available data.
Future iterations of this project will need to consider data storage and transfer requirements for genetic analysis or computational modeling of the aorta, which is rapidly entering mainstream clinical practice for prognostication and interventional planning. Software and hardware specifications to extract these data are evolving. Standardization of data-acquisition protocols and definition of minimum requirements for computational modeling will be essential for future collaborative studies.

Funding support and author disclosures
Dr Prakash was supported in part by a gift from the Genetic Aortic Disorders Association Canada. All other authors have reported that they have no relationships relevant to the contents of this paper to disclose.

References
HTAD patient pathway: strategy for diagnostic work-up of patients and families with (suspected) heritable thoracic aortic diseases (HTAD). A statement from the HTAD working group of VASCERN
2022 ACC/AHA guideline for the diagnosis and management of aortic disease: a report of the American heart association/American college of cardiology joint committee on clinical practice guidelines
Cardiovascular management of aortopathy in children: a scientific statement from the American heart association
2024 ESC Guidelines for the management of peripheral arterial and aortic diseases
Aortic root measurement by cardiovascular magnetic resonance: specification of planes and lines of measurement and corresponding normal values
Proximal thoracic aortic diameters: transesophageal-echocardiography- versus computed-tomography-derived measurements
Eccentric enlargement of the aortic sinuses in pediatric and adult patients with bicuspid aortic valves: a cardiac MRI study
Leaflet fusion length is associated with aortic dilation and flow alterations in non-dysfunctional bicuspid aortic valve
Computed tomography imaging in the context of transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI)/transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR): an expert consensus document of the Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography
Ascending aorta diameters measured by echocardiography using both leading edge-to-leading edge and inner edge-to-inner edge conventions in healthy volunteers
Editor's choice - current options and recommendations for the treatment of thoracic aortic pathologies involving the aortic arch: an expert consensus document of the European association for cardio-thoracic surgery (EACTS) & the European society for vascular surgery (ESVS)
Reporting standards for thoracic endovascular aortic repair (TEVAR)
Society for vascular surgery (SVS) and society of thoracic surgeons (STS) reporting standards for type B aortic dissections
How to measure the aorta using MRI: a practical guide
The need for standardized methods for measuring the aorta: multimodality core lab experience from the GenTAC registry
Discrepancies in measurement of the thoracic aorta: JACC review topic of the week
Design and implementation of multicenter pediatric and congenital studies with cardiovascular magnetic resonance: big data in smaller bodies
Unraveling aortic hemodynamics using fluid structure interaction: biomechanical insights into bicuspid aortic valve dynamics with multiple aortic lesions
Investigating the role of thrombosis, fenestration, and false lumen orbital orientation in the hemodynamics of type B aortic dissection
2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: executive summary: a report of the American college of cardiology/American heart association task force on clinical practice guidelines
24-Hour blood pressure variability assessed by average real variability: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Associations of the nocturnal blood pressure fall and morning surge with cardiovascular events and mortality in individuals with resistant hypertension
Summarizing health-related quality of life (HRQOL): development and testing of a one-factor model
Marfan syndrome and quality of life in the GenTAC registry
From tear to fear: posttraumatic stress disorder in patients with Acute type A aortic dissection
Psychological distress in response to physical activity restrictions in patients with non-syndromic thoracic aortic aneurysm/dissection
Health-related quality of life in patients with aortic dissection: an unmet need
Health-related quality of life in children and adolescents with Marfan syndrome or related disorders: a controlled cross-sectional study
Social determinants of cardiovascular disease
An assessment of the current medical management of thoracic aortic disease: a patient-centered scoping literature review
Switching between β-blockers: an empiric tool for the cardiovascular practitioner
Adherence in hypertension
The weighted cumulative exposure method and its application to pharmacoepidemiology: a narrative review
Accuracy of a screening tool for medication adherence: a systematic review and meta-analysis of the Morisky Medication Adherence Scale-8
The Brief Medication Questionnaire: a tool for screening patient adherence and barriers to adherence
Prevalence of medication adherence and glycemic control among patients with type 2 diabetes and influencing factors: a cross-sectional study
Coming full circle in the measurement of medication adherence: opportunities and implications for health care
Air pollution exposure disparities across US population and income groups
Different types of greenspace within urban parks and depressive symptoms among older U.S. adults living in urban areas
Inequities in intimate partner homicide: social determinants of health mediate racial/ethnic disparities
Food swamps and food deserts impact on metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease mortality in U.S. Counties
The embodiment of the neighborhood socioeconomic environment in the architecture of the immune system
Accuracy of two geocoding methods for geographic information system-based exposure assessment in epidemiological studies
Area-based geocoding: an approach to exposure assessment incorporating positional uncertainty
Familial non-syndromal thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections - incidence and family screening outcomes
Characterization of syndromic, nonsyndromic familial, and sporadic type B aortic dissection
Genes associated with thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection: 2019 update and clinical implications
The genetics of thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissection: a clinical perspective
Genetics of aortic aneurysm disease: 10 key points for the practitioner
Familial clustering of aortic size, aneurysms, and dissections in the community
Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: a joint consensus recommendation of the American College of medical genetics and Genomics and the association for molecular pathology
Targeted genetic analysis in a large cohort of familial and sporadic cases of aneurysm or dissection of the thoracic aorta
Cardiogenetics: genetic testing in the diagnosis and management of patients with aortic disease
Early mortality in type A Acute aortic dissection: insights from the international registry of Acute aortic dissection
Consensus statement on surgical pathology of the aorta from the society for cardiovascular pathology and the association for European cardiovascular pathology: I. Inflammatory diseases
Consensus statement on surgical pathology of the aorta from the Society for Cardiovascular Pathology and the Association for European Cardiovascular Pathology: II. Noninflammatory degenerative diseases - nomenclature and diagnostic criteria
Reviewing hereditary connective tissue disorders: proposals of harmonic medicolegal assessments
Postmortem genetic testing should be recommended in sudden cardiac death cases due to thoracic aortic dissection
Pregnancy and the risk of aortic dissection or rupture: a cohort-crossover analysis
Clinical features and outcomes of pregnancy-related Acute aortic dissection
Pregnancy-related aortic complications in women with marfan syndrome
Association between genetic diagnosis and clinical outcomes in patients with heritable thoracic aortic disease
Histopathologic findings in human aortic media associated with pregnancy
Oestrogen binding sites in fresh human aortic tissue
Aortic complications associated with pregnancy in marfan syndrome: the NHLBI national registry of genetically triggered thoracic aortic aneurysms and cardiovascular conditions (GenTAC
Pregnancy-related deaths and complications in women with vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Positive family history of aortic dissection dramatically increases dissection risk in family members
The immediate and long-term impact of pregnancy on aortic growth rate and mortality in women with Marfan syndrome
Oxytocin antagonism prevents pregnancy-associated aortic dissection in a mouse model of Marfan syndrome
International registry of patients carrying TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 mutations: results of the MAC (Montalcino aortic Consortium
Pregnancy outcome in thoracic aortic disease data from the registry of pregnancy and cardiac disease
Role of betaglycan in TGF-β signaling and wound healing in human endometriotic epithelial cells and in endometriosis
Role of transforming growth factor β in uterine fibroid biology
Extending the minimum information about BIobank data sharing terminology to describe samples, sample donors, and events
EACTS Vascular Domain, EJCTS and ICVTS Editorial Committees. Standards of reporting in open and endovascular aortic surgery (STORAGE guidelines)
Reporting standards for endovascular aortic repair of aneurysms involving the renal-mesenteric arteries
STS; AATS; EACTS. Guidelines for reporting mortality and morbidity after cardiac valve interventions
Valve sparing root replacement: the remodeling technique with external ring annuloplasty
Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection: review and recommendations for evaluation

Supplementary data
The authors attest they are in compliance with human studies committees and animal welfare regulations of the authors’ institutions and Food and Drug Administration guidelines, including patient consent where appropriate. For more information, visit the Author Center.
Appendix
For supplemental tables, please see the online version of this paper.