Who is the Candidate? The Heart Transplant Evaluation Process
The evaluation for heart transplantation is a comprehensive endeavor requiring multidisciplinary collaboration. The goal of a heart transplant evaluation is to determine if (1) the patient’s cardiac status is limited enough, despite optimal medical therapy, to benefit from heart transplantation; (2) the patient does not have comorbidities that would preclude heart transplantation; and (3) the patient demonstrates compliance and possesses adequate social support. The most common indications for heart transplant are highly symptomatic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, uncontrolled ventricular arrhythmias, or intractable angina. Extracardiac contraindications require specific considerations regarding whether they will (1) confer mortality risk that will negate the expected improvement in survival after transplantation; (2) affect post-transplant quality of life and hamper rehabilitation efforts; and (3) progress with immunosuppression. With careful and appropriate selection, heart transplant recipients are best positioned to experience the improved quality of life and survival expected after transplantation.

Introduction
Despite advances in pharmacological and device treatment for heart failure (HF), morbidity and mortality remain high: the 5-year mortality rate for patients with symptomatic HF approaches 50% and up to 80% at 1 year for those with advanced disease. For those patients in whom optimization of HF management is unsuccessful, heart transplantation has emerged as an established standard for advanced HF.
The heart transplant evaluation process is a comprehensive endeavor requiring multidisciplinary collaboration due, in part, to the scarcity of available donor hearts. The goal of a heart transplant evaluation is to determine if (1) the patient’s cardiac status is limited enough, despite optimal medical therapy, to benefit from heart transplantation (ie, are they sick enough?); (2) the patient does not have comorbidities that would preclude heart transplantation (ie, are they well enough?); and (3) the patient demonstrates compliance and possesses adequate social support (ie, can they adapt to a transplant lifestyle?) (Figure 1).
Principles of the heart transplant evaluation.
Principles of the heart transplant evaluation
Appropriate candidates for heart transplantation should have severe functional limitations, limited life expectancy from their heart disease, and no absolute contraindications. Many of these factors are not absolute and need to be considered in the context of the severity of the patient’s heart disease and associated comorbidities. The degree to which they are interpreted and applied may vary considerably among transplant programs.

Indications for Heart Transplantation: Is the Patient Sick Enough?
Despite maximally tolerated guideline-directed medical and device therapies, a subset of patients with chronic HF will progress to advanced disease. The most common indications for heart transplant are severely symptomatic HF with reduced ejection fraction, uncontrolled ventricular arrhythmias, or intractable angina. Other less common indications for transplantation include restrictive cardiomyopathies such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and complex congenital heart disease after surgical palliation has failed.
The first step in the heart transplant evaluation is to determine if the patient’s clinical situation is limited enough to warrant consideration, which requires confirmation that all strategies to optimize cardiac function have been addressed (including optimal medical therapy and interventions such as cardiac resynchronization therapy and transcatheter mitral valve repair, as indicated). Measures to identify advanced HF include clinical indicators, objective functional capacity from cardiopulmonary exercise stress testing, hemodynamics from right heart catheterization, and insight from HF prognosis scores (Figure 2).
General approach to the transplant evaluation.
General approach to transplant evaluation.

Clinical Indicators
Useful clinical signs or symptoms of advanced HF are associated with worse prognosis, and thus recognition of these clinical indicators should prompt timely referral and subsequent evaluation for transplantation (Table 1). The mnemonic “I NEED HELP” describes clinical clues to advanced HF including persistent New York Heart Association Class III or IV symptoms, ≥ 2 HF hospitalizations in the last 12 months, intolerance to guideline-directed medical therapy, ejection fraction below 20% to 30%, need for inotropes, worsening end-organ function, defibrillator shocks for ventricular tachyarrhythmias, or persistence of fluid overload, hypotension, or elevations in natriuretic peptides.
Markers of advanced heart failure. NYHA: New York Heart Association; NT-pro-BNP: B-type natriuretic peptide; BP: blood pressure
PARAMETER	DESCRIPTION	 		 	I	Inotropes	Previous or ongoing requirement for dobutamine, milrinone, dopamine or levosimendan	 		 	N	NYHA class/Natriuretic peptides	Persisting NYHA Class III or IV and/or persistently high BNP or NT-pro-BNP	 		 	E	End-organ dysfunction	Worsening renal or liver dysfunction in the setting of heart failure	 		 	E	Ejection fraction	Very low ejection fraction (< 20%)	 		 	D	Defibrillator shocks	Recurrent appropriate defibrillator shocks	 		 	H	Hospitalizations	More than one hospitalization with heart failure in the last 12 months	 		 	E	Edema/Escalating diuretics	Persisting fluid overload and/or increasing diuretic requirement	 		 	L	Low blood pressure	Consistently low BP with systolic < 90 to 100 mm Hg	 		 	P	Prognostic medication	Inability to up-titrate (or need to decrease/cease) guideline-directed medical therapy
There are other definitions and indicators of advanced HF. Of note, patients with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction may have advanced HF from restrictive or valvular cardiomyopathy, right ventricular failure, or congenital heart disease. Early recognition of clinical clues will ensure timely evaluation, as late recognition risks development of absolute extracardiac contraindications.
Multiple prognosis scores are used to risk stratify patients with HF. The Heart Failure Survival Score, Seattle Heart Failure Model, Meta-Analysis Global Group in Chronic Heart Failure score, and Metabolic Exercise Test Data combined with Cardiac and Kidney Indexes scores were developed in chronic HF, while scores such as the Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in Hospitalized Patients with Heart Failure, Get With The Guidelines-Heart Failure, and Evaluation Study of Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery Catheterization Effectiveness are focused on acute HF. If there is ambiguity regarding appropriateness for listing based on other information, scores indicating an estimated 1-year survival < 85% may assist in decision-making. Of note, few scores have been developed or validated in a contemporary cohort, and most perform poorly when applied to individuals as opposed to populations. Thus, their output should not be the sole criterion for listing.

Cardiopulmonary Exercise Stress Testing
Parameters derived during cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) are prognostic in ambulatory HF patients being evaluated for heart transplant; a summary of CPET parameters supporting transplant listing is shown in Table 2. The results of CPET should be taken into context with other data collected during transplant evaluation and not the sole indication for listing.
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing parameters supporting transplant listing in different populations. Maximal CPET: respiratory exchange ratio (RER) > 1.05 and reaching anaerobic threshold; VO2: maximal oxygen consumption; VE/VCO2: the relationship between minute ventilation (VE) and carbon dioxide production
PATIENT POPULATION	PARAMETER SUPPORTING TRANSPLANT LISTING	 		 	On beta-blocker	Peak VO2 ≤ 13-14 mL/kg/min in men and ≤ 10-11 mL/kg/min in women	 		 	Off beta-blocker	Higher peak VO2 may be considered supportive of transplant listing, generally ≤ 13-14 mL/kg/min	 		 	Patients with obesity	Peak VO2 adjusted for lean body mass <19 mL/kg/min	 		 	All, especially if submaximal CPET	VE/VCO2 slope > 35	 		 	Women or patients ≤ 50 or ≥ 70 years	Peak VO2 ≤ 50% predicted	 		 	Patients with congenital heart disease or pediatric patients	Peak VO2 ≤ 50% predicted
In patients requiring urgent inpatient evaluation, there is no clear role for CPET except in select cases where sufficient clinical improvement occurs and hospital discharge is considered. CPET is challenging in the pediatric HF population due to wide variations in protocols and patients’ ages, sizes, and muscle mass. Patients with single-ventricle physiology have poor exercise performance with maximal oxygen consumption (peak VO2) often less than 65% predicted. Thus, in this population, a peak VO2 less than 50% predicted may be considered supportive of transplant listing.

Right Heart Catheterization
Invasive hemodynamics obtained during right heart catheterization (RHC) inform severity of HF, guide optimization, and assess for pulmonary hypertension that might contribute to post-transplant right HF. Elevations in pulmonary artery systolic pressure, transpulmonary gradient (TPG), and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) above certain thresholds have been proposed as contraindications to listing. However, the risk associated with each parameter is continuous, and absolute cutoffs do not exist.
While all patients should undergo RHC at least once prior to transplant listing, the frequency of RHC thereafter is at the discretion of the treating transplant team based on clinical stability, presence of a left ventricular assist device, degree of pulmonary hypertension on initial testing, and estimated right ventricular systolic pressure on echocardiogram. In pediatric patients, however, periodic RHC surveillance is generally not recommended.

Potential Contraindications to Heart Transplantation: Is the Patient Well Enough?
Eligibility for heart transplant evaluation requires a comprehensive survey of all comorbidities that may impact surgical risk as well as post-transplant quality of life and survival (Figure 2; Table 3). When considering extracardiac contraindications, one must review whether the condition will confer mortality risk such that patients will not achieve the expected improvement in post-transplant survival, affect post-transplant quality of life and hamper rehabilitation efforts, and progress with immunosuppression (Table 4).
Recommended tests for evaluation of heart transplant candidacy. CT: computed tomography; IgG: immunoglobulin G; IgM: immunoglobulin M
RECOMMENDED TESTS	 		 	Weight/body mass indexImmuno-compatibilityABO typingHuman leukocyte antigen tissue typingPanel reactive antibodies and flow cytometryAssessment of severity of heart failureCardiopulmonary exercise testEchocardiogramRight heart catheterizationEvaluation of multiorgan functionRoutine laboratory work (basic metabolic profile, complete blood count, liver function tests)Urinalysis with toxicology screen24-hour urine collection for protein and creatininePulmonary function testsAbdominal ultrasonographyCarotid Doppler (if > 50 years or with ischemic heart disease)Ankle-brachial indices (if > 50 years or with ischemic heart disease)Dental examinationOphthalmologic examination (if diabetic)Chest and abdomen/pelvic CT scansInfectious serology and vaccinationHepatitis B surface, core, envelope antigen, antibody (IgG/IgM)Hepatitis C AbHuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV)Rapid plasma reaginImmunoglobulin G for herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, Epstein-Barr virus, varicellaIf from Central/South America: T cruziImmunizations: influenza, SARS-CoV-2, Streptococcus pneumoniae, varicella zoster, Hepatitis BPreventive and malignancy (as indicated based on standard screening guidelines)Stool for occult blood x 3ColonoscopyMammographyPapanicolaou smear testProstate-specific antigen and digital rectal examinationGeneral consultationsSocial assessmentPsychiatryFinancialAs indicated: pulmonology, nephrology, infectious disease, endocrinology, hematology
Potential contraindications to heart transplantation. BMI: body mass index; TPG: transpulmonary gradient; PVR: pulmonary vascular resistance; HbA1c: glycosylated hemoglobin; mmol; millimoles; mol: moles; eGFR: estimated glomerular filtration rate; mg: milligrams; dl: deciliters; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus.
POTENTIAL CONTRAINDICATION	COMMENTS	 		 	Age	>70 years old is a relative contraindication depending on associated comorbidities	 		 	Obesity	BMI < 35 kg/m2 is recommended	 		 	Malignancy	Active or metastatic neoplasms are an absolute contraindication	 		 	Pulmonary hypertension	TPG > 15 mm Hg, PVR > 5 Wood units, or pulmonary artery pressure > 60 mm Hg with one of the above, or the inability to achieve PVR < 2.5 Wood units with vasodilator or inotropic therapy, are relative contraindications; such patients may benefit from long-term unloading with ventricular assist device followed by reassessment	 		 	Diabetes	Uncontrolled diabetes (HbA1c > 7.5% or 58 mmol/mol) or diabetes with significant end-organ damage is a relative contraindication	 		 	Kidney dysfunction	eGFR < 30 is a relative contraindication	 		 	Infection	Active infections except LVAD-related infections are contraindications; HIV, Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C are not contraindications if not active and well-controlled by treatment as defined by viral load/CD4 thresholds.Latent TB and Chagas are not contraindications.	 		 	Substance use	6 months of abstinence from smoking, alcohol, and illicit drugs is required; in critically ill patients, consultation with psychiatry and social work is essential. Marijuana is a controversial topic.	 		 	Psychosocial issues	Noncompliance, lack of caregiver/social support, and dementia are absolute contraindications; mental retardation may be a relative contraindication.

Age
As life expectancy increases, traditional heart transplantation age limits may be extended in select cases. Generally, patients are considered for heart transplantation if they are 70 years of age or younger since advances in post-transplant care have shown that survival in the older age group is comparable to that of younger recipients. However, older age confers greater risk for certain post-transplant complications; compared to recipients under 60 years of age, older recipients have more infections, kidney dysfunction, and malignancy, although less rejection. Increasing recipient age is associated with increased post-transplant mortality, particularly in patients 70 years of age or older at time of transplant. Thus, candidates over the age of 70 may have acceptable post-transplant outcomes, but comprehensive consideration of comorbidities is essential. Older patients at some centers are offered nonstandard donor hearts (ie, those with coronary artery disease, mildly decreased left ventricular ejection fraction, left ventricular hypertrophy, or donor age older than 55 years). This may allow older patients to receive transplants without denying this scarce resource to younger candidates. However, while older donors may be considered for older candidates, recipients with older donors have worse post-transplant survival both in young and old recipients, raising ethical questions.
Physiologic age may be more important than chronologic age with respect to survival and rehabilitation potential. As a result, many programs focus less on fixed upper age limits and instead assess the patient’s functional status, integrity of major organ systems, and the presence of comorbidities that might impact survival, rehabilitation potential, and quality of life.

Obesity
Obesity is becoming more common in the heart transplant population, and recipients have significant increases in body mass index (BMI) over time. BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2 incurs increased waitlist time, increased waitlist mortality, and increased post-transplant mortality. There is a graded association between increased BMI and worse survival in multiple transplant registries and meta-analyses, with optimal outcomes observed in those with normal BMI; survival is acceptable when BMI is between 30 to 35 kg/m2. Thus, achieving a BMI under 35 kg/m2 is preferred to optimize post-transplant quality of life and survival. This may require incretin-based therapies or bariatric surgery, depending on center expertise, resources, and patient stability.

Malignancy
Malignancy after heart transplantation confers significant morbidity and mortality. Candidates should be screened for breast, prostate, and colon cancer as recommended for the general population, as there is little data to support transplant candidate-specific malignancy screening. Skin cancer screening by full-body skin examination completed by a dermatologist can be useful given the high prevalence of skin cancer after heart transplantation.
For candidates with pre-transplant malignancies, collaboration with an oncologist is essential for individualized risk stratification. A period of observation prior to transplant listing may be recommended and will be unique to the given candidate’s cancer history. Arbitrary time intervals for observation may result in unwarranted delays in transplant listing.
Those candidates with low-risk pre-transplant malignancy (early-stage cancers with full resection and/or low-risk prostate adenocarcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, cervical cancer, and bladder cancer), may require minimal or no pre-transplant observation with deferred post-transplant intervention. However, active and/or metastatic neoplasms with the exception of non-melanomatous skin cancer are absolute contraindications to heart transplantation, as the course of the tumor may be accelerated with immunosuppression.
Further guidance is available in consensus statements from the International Society of Heart Transplantation and American Society of Transplantation with specific recommendations on transplant candidacy based on various pre-transplant malignancies.

Pulmonary Hypertension
Pulmonary hypertension (mean pulmonary artery pressure > 20 mm Hg), typically Group 2 due to left heart disease (pulmonary capillary wedge pressure > 15 mm Hg), is common in patients with heart failure, and an elevated PVR ≥ 2.5 Wood units is associated with increased early post-transplant mortality. Although prohibitive cutoffs for elevations in pulmonary artery systolic pressure, transpulmonary gradient, and PVR have been proposed, the associated risk is continuous and absolute thresholds do not exist.
Nonetheless, if pulmonary artery systolic pressure ≥ 50 mm Hg and either TPG ≥ 15 or PVR ≥ 3 Wood units, a vasodilator (eg, inhaled nitric oxide or nitroprusside if nitric oxide is not available) should be administered. An appropriate response to the vasodilator challenge would be: TPG ≤ 12 to 15 mm Hg and PVR to ≤ 2.5 to 3 Wood units. However, if the PVR falls but systolic blood pressure also falls below 85 mm Hg, then the risk of post-transplant right heart failure remains high.
When the response to the acute vasodilator challenge is not acceptable, continuous vasoactive therapies with hemodynamic monitoring would be the next step, followed by implantation of temporary mechanical circulatory support or a durable left ventricular assist device (LVAD) in eligible candidates.

Diabetes Mellitus
Uncomplicated post-transplant diabetes is not associated with worse survival. However, candidates with diabetes-related complications (obesity, kidney dysfunction, cerebrovascular disease, or peripheral vascular disease) have an increased risk of post-transplant infections and kidney failure and additional risks of late graft failure and mortality.
While diabetes per se is not considered a contraindication for heart transplant, careful assessment of diabetic control and end-organ damage (atherosclerotic vascular disease, nephropathy, proliferative retinopathy) is warranted. Calcineurin inhibitors and corticosteroids may worsen glycemic control, so pre-transplant optimization with a goal of glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) of 7% to 8% is ideal. There may be center-specific thresholds for HbA1c that are considered a relative contraindication to transplantation, especially in conjunction with diabetes-related complications, which portend worse post-transplant outcomes, and because poorly controlled diabetes also may be an indicator of suboptimal medical adherence in some cases.

Kidney Dysfunction
On September 28, 2023, the United Network for Organ Sharing implemented updated criteria for simultaneous heart-kidney transplantation allocation with a safety net policy for heart transplant recipients who later need a kidney transplant. The new criteria were created to improve equity in transplant for multiorgan and single-organ candidates. In the new policy, the donor kidney is only offered along with the donor heart to candidates who meet a specified level of kidney dysfunction.
Specifically, simultaneous heart-kidney allocation requires either evidence of chronic kidney disease or sustained acute kidney injury. To meet qualifications for chronic kidney disease, defined as estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2 for greater than 90 consecutive days, there must be documentation of need for dialysis or creatinine clearance less than 30 mL/min. For sustained acute kidney injury, need for dialysis at least once every 7 days or creatinine clearance < 25 mL/min at least once every 7 days must be documented for a period of 6 weeks.
For those who no longer meet criteria for simultaneous heart kidney transplantation, a safety net allows priority in kidney allocation if kidney transplantation criteria are met within the first post-heart transplant year. Specifically, heart transplant recipients qualify for kidney transplant allocation priority under the safety net policy if they have an estimated eGFR of 20 mL/min/1.73 m2 or less or are on dialysis anytime between 60 and 365 days after heart transplantation.

Infections
Heart transplantation is not recommended in the setting of certain infections, including active infections requiring ongoing antibiotic treatment (except for durable LVAD infection), and human immunodeficiency virus with opportunistic infections or associated malignancy, lack of stable antiretroviral regimen, detectable viral load, and/or low CD4 count. Hepatitis B and C are no longer absolute contraindications due to advances in the directed treatment.
Initiating or updating life-saving vaccines is essential. Updated detailed vaccination schedules are publicly available from the United States Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices. Pre-transplant vaccination is essential since immunosuppressed individuals are less likely to mount a more robust immune response; this has been observed with vaccination against SARS-CoV-2. Ideally, vaccination should be completed at least 2 weeks prior to transplantation in order to optimize immune response. If live-attenuated vaccines are utilized, transplant should be delayed for 4 weeks to reduce risk of active viral replication at transplant.

Psychosocial Considerations: Is the Patient Amenable to the Transplant Lifestyle?

Substance Use
Use of illicit drugs, alcohol, and tobacco prior to heart transplant can increase the risk for mortality. A thorough substance use history should be performed and include any past or current illicit drug use, alcohol use, and tobacco use. Specifically, the patient evaluation should obtain frequency, amount, duration of use, and length of abstinence as well as the level of impairment with detrimental effects to health, job, and relationships. Any current treatment for substance abuse and the patient’s willingness to seek treatment should be obtained. Substance abuse should be ascertained by patient reporting, questionnaires, and biochemical testing. Patients with active substance use disorders should be referred to addiction services.
In the critically ill patient who urgently needs transplantation, an accurate assessment of illicit substance use may be difficult, and a period of abstinence may not be medically feasible. In this setting, consultation with social work and psychiatric specialists would be essential to gauge the heart transplant candidate’s potential for abstinence and post-transplant adherence.
Active tobacco smoking portends a significant increase in malignancy, cardiac allograft vasculopathy, kidney dysfunction, and death associated with tobacco use in heart transplant recipients and is thus a contraindication to heart transplantation. Generally, 6-month abstinence is required to demonstrate candidacy, and abstinence can be monitored using serum or urine cotinine levels. Given the lack of information on the safety of e-cigarette use, avoidance of all nicotine products is preferred.
Excessive alcohol use is an absolute contraindication for heart transplantation because it incurs risk of poor medication adherence and adverse post-transplant outcomes, including increased mortality. There is international variation on acceptable alcohol intake, hence there may be center-specific standards to define excessive alcohol use. The recommended period for abstinence from alcohol is at least 6 months given the association of shorter time periods of abstinence with relapse post-transplant.
Although marijuana is now legal for medical and recreational use in many regions, inhaled or vaporized cannabis use post-transplant is associated with increased infection risks, specifically fungal lung infections. Cannabis may also alter the metabolism of immunosuppressive medications. Thus, programs may make center-specific decisions regarding marijuana use and transplant candidacy, although it would be safest to recommend avoidance of marijuana, regardless of legal status.

Psychosocial Evaluation
Heart transplantation requires significant engagement from patients and their caregivers, as post-transplant care necessitates regular clinic visits and testing, strict adherence to medications, and adoption of a healthy lifestyle. The purpose of the psychosocial evaluation is to identify those candidates at increased risk of poor post-transplant outcomes due to inadequate support, adherence, or optimal mental health. These problems are associated with poor post-transplant outcomes.
Psychosocial assessment includes determination of the patient’s ability to comprehend and follow care instructions with neurocognitive testing on an individual basis. Poor adherence with drug regimens is a risk factor for graft rejection and mortality, and thus patients who have demonstrated consistent and repeated inability to adhere with medical recommendations should not receive transplantation.
Social support with a dedicated caregiver after transplantation is an absolute requirement for transplant. Options for validated standardized assessments used across transplant programs include the Stanford Integrated Psychosocial Assessment for Transplant. The goal of the standardized assessment is to minimize inequity in candidate selection.
Psychiatric evaluation should also be incorporated into the evaluation process, including identification of active psychiatric disease that may negatively affect adherence to care regimens. Transplantation can be emotionally and psychologically taxing given significant challenges related to the evaluation, listing and waiting period for a suitable donor, and adjustment to life with a transplanted organ.

Financial Considerations
Heart transplantation is a covered expense for most insurance companies, but coverage varies on an individual basis. Accordingly, a financial coordinator or counselor should review all coverage benefits prior to transplant listing, including prescription drug coverage, co-pays and deductibles, and requirements for prior authorizations. Candidates should receive an estimate of out-of-pocket costs for the surgery and post-transplant care as well as an overview of fees associated with transplantation to ensure they have adequate resources to manage these financial responsibilities.

Conclusion
For those patients in whom optimization of HF management is unsuccessful, heart transplantation has emerged as an established standard for treatment of advanced HF. Evaluation for transplant candidacy is comprehensive and requires multidisciplinary collaboration. The goal of a heart transplant evaluation is to determine if (1) the patient’s cardiac status is limited enough, despite optimal medical therapy, to benefit from heart transplantation (ie, “sick enough”); (2) the patient does not have comorbidities that would preclude heart transplantation (ie, “well enough”); and (3) the patient demonstrates compliance and possesses adequate social support (“can adapt to a transplant lifestyle”). With careful and appropriate selection, heart transplant recipients are best positioned to experience the improved quality of life and survival expected after transplantation.

Key Points
The most common indications for heart transplant are highly symptomatic heart failure with reduced ejection fraction, uncontrolled ventricular arrhythmias, or intractable angina.
In evaluating extracardiac contraindications to heart transplantation, it is important to determine if the extracardiac condition will (1) confer mortality risk such that patients will not have the expected improvement in post-transplant survival; (2) affect post-transplant quality of life and hinder rehabilitation efforts; and (3) progress with immunosuppression.
Potential relative contraindications include age > 70 yrs, obesity (BMI > 35 kg/m2), pulmonary hypertension, poor diabetic control (HbA1c > 7.5% ), or diabetes with end-organ damage, severe kidney dysfunction (eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73m2), and any active infection excluding infections related to a left ventricular assist device.
Absolute contraindications include severe or multiple relative contraindications, active or metastatic malignancy, consistent and repeated evidence for adherence, and a lack of adequate social/caregiver support.
The decision to list a candidate for heart transplantation acknowledges multiple factors, including indicators for poor prognosis without transplant as well as potential contraindications that may confer excessive post-transplant risk.

CME Credit opportunity
Houston Methodist is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education (ACCME) to provide continuing medical education for physicians.
Houston Methodist designates this Journal-based CME activity for a maximum of 1 AMA PRA Category 1 Credit™. Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation in the activity.
Click to earn CME credit: learn.houstonmethodist.org/MDCVJ-21.3.

Competing Interests
The author has no competing interests to declare.
Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics-2022 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association
“I Need Help”-A mnemonic to aid timely referral in advanced heart failure
Advanced heart failure: a position statement of the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology
INTERMACS profiles and outcomes of ambulatory advanced heart failure patients: A report from the REVIVAL Registry
Guidance for Timely and Appropriate Referral of Patients With Advanced Heart Failure: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
Advanced Heart Failure in a Special Population: Heart Failure with Preserved Ejection Fraction
Right heart dysfunction and failure in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: mechanisms and management. Position statement on behalf of the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology
Increasing mortality burden among adults with complex congenital heart disease
Performance of existing risk scores around heart transplantation: validation study in a 4-year cohort
The Seattle Heart Failure Model: prediction of survival in heart failure
Predicting survival in heart failure: a risk score based on 39 372 patients from 30 studies
Metabolic exercise test data combined with cardiac and kidney indexes, the MECKI score: a multiparametric approach to heart failure prognosis
Predictors of mortality after discharge in patients hospitalized with heart failure: an analysis from the Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in Hospitalized Patients with Heart Failure (OPTIMIZE-HF)
Predictors of in-hospital mortality in patients hospitalized for heart failure: insights from the Organized Program to Initiate Lifesaving Treatment in Hospitalized Patients with Heart Failure (OPTIMIZE-HF)
A validated risk score for in-hospital mortality in patients with heart failure from the American Heart Association get with the guidelines program
Triage after hospitalization with advanced heart failure: the ESCAPE (Evaluation Study of Congestive Heart Failure and Pulmonary Artery Catheterization Effectiveness) risk model and discharge score
Comparison among different multiparametric scores for risk stratification in heart failure patients with reduced ejection fraction
Variables Measured During Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing as Predictors of Mortality in Chronic Systolic Heart Failure
Predicting survival in ambulatory patients with severe heart failure on beta-blocker therapy
Value of peak exercise oxygen consumption for optimal timing of cardiac transplantation in ambulatory patients with heart failure
Timing of cardiac transplantation in patients with heart failure receiving beta-adrenergic blockers
The incremental prognostic importance of body fat adjusted peak oxygen consumption in chronic heart failure
Ventilatory and heart rate responses to exercise : better predictors of heart failure mortality than peak oxygen consumption
Exercise anaerobic threshold and ventilatory efficiency identify heart failure patients for high risk of early death
Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure: Prognostic Comparison from Peak VO2 and VE/VCO2 Slope
Gender and age normalization and ventilation efficiency during exercise in heart failure with reduced ejection fraction
Role of cardiopulmonary exercise testing in clinical stratification in heart failure. A position paper from the Committee on Exercise Physiology and Training of the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology
Cardiopulmonary Exercise Testing: Basics of Methodology and Measurements
Indications for heart transplantation in pediatric heart disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; the Councils on Clinical Cardiology, Cardiovascular Nursing, and Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia; and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group
Transplantation and Mechanical Circulatory Support in Congenital Heart Disease: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association
Pulmonary Artery Hypertension as A Risk Factor for Long-Term Survival after Heart Transplantation
The International Thoracic Organ Transplant Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: Thirty-sixth adult heart transplantation report - 2019; focus theme: Donor and recipient size match
Association of recipient age and causes of heart transplant mortality: Implications for personalization of post-transplant management-An analysis of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Registry
Use of two recipient lists for adults requiring heart transplantation
Donor and recipient age matching in heart transplantation: analysis of the UNOS Registry
Philosophy of organ donation: Review of ethical facets
The International thoracic organ transplant registry of the international society for heart and lung transplantation: Thirty-ninth adult heart transplantation report-2022; focus on transplant for restrictive heart disease
Impact of Obesity on Heart Transplantation Outcomes
The effect of pre-heart transplant body mass index on posttransplant outcomes: An analysis of the ISHLT Registry Data
Outcomes of Heart Transplant Recipients with Class II Obesity: A United Network for Organ Sharing Database Analysis
Impact of pretransplant recipient body mass index on post heart transplant mortality: A systematic review and meta-analysis
The effect of body mass index on survival following heart transplantation: do outcomes support consensus guidelines?
Outcomes of Obese Patients Bridged to Heart Transplantation with a Left Ventricular Assist Device
Sleeve Gastrectomy in Patients with Continuous-Flow Left Ventricular Assist Devices: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Cancer screening in the United States, 2018: A review of current American Cancer Society guidelines and current issues in cancer screening
Pretransplant solid organ malignancy and organ transplant candidacy: A consensus expert opinion statement
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation Guidelines for the Evaluation and Care of Cardiac Transplant Candidates-2024
2022 ESC/ERS Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary pressures and death in heart failure: a community study
Determinants and prognostic value of pulmonary arterial pressure in patients with chronic heart failure
Impact of pre-transplant pulmonary hypertension on survival after heart transplantation: a UNOS registry analysis
Influence of preoperative pulmonary artery pressure on mortality after heart transplantation: testing of potential reversibility of pulmonary hypertension with nitroprusside is useful in defining a high risk group
Angiotensin Receptor-Neprilysin Inhibitor Therapy Reverses Pulmonary Hypertension in End-Stage Heart Failure Patients Awaiting Transplantation
Use of centrifugal left ventricular assist device as a bridge to candidacy in severe heart failure with secondary pulmonary hypertension
Long-term heart transplant outcomes after lowering fixed pulmonary hypertension using left ventricular assist devices
Survival after heart transplantation is not diminished among recipients with uncomplicated diabetes mellitus: an analysis of the United Network of Organ Sharing database
Pre-transplant Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Is Associated With Higher Graft Failure and Increased 5-Year Mortality After Heart Transplantation
Heart Transplant Outcomes in Patients With Pretransplant Diabetes Mellitus
Post-transplant diabetes mellitus following heart transplantation
Hemoglobin A1c Targets for Glycemic Control With Pharmacologic Therapy for Nonpregnant Adults With Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Guidance Statement Update From the American College of Physicians
Vaccination of solid organ transplant candidates and recipients: Guidelines from the American society of transplantation infectious diseases community of practice
BNT162b2 vaccination in heart transplant recipients: Clinical experience and antibody response
Antibody Response to 2-Dose SARS-CoV-2 mRNA Vaccine Series in Solid Organ Transplant Recipients
COVID-19 infection in solid organ transplant recipients after SARS-CoV-2 vaccination
Meta-analysis of risk for relapse to substance use after transplantation of the liver or other solid organs
Psychosocial Evaluation of Candidates for Heart Transplant and Ventricular Assist Devices: Beyond the Current Consensus
The 2018 ISHLT/APM/AST/ICCAC/STSW Recommendations for the Psychosocial Evaluation of Adult Cardiothoracic Transplant Candidates and Candidates for Long-term Mechanical Circulatory Support
Psychiatric evaluations of heart transplant candidates: predicting post-transplant hospitalizations, rejection episodes, and survival
Correlates and Outcomes of Posttransplant Smoking in Solid Organ Transplant Recipients: A Systematic Literature Review and Meta-Analysis
Smoking after cardiac transplantation
Overview of Cotinine Cutoff Values for Smoking Status Classification
Alcohol and substance abuse in solid-organ transplant recipients
Addictive behavior after solid organ transplantation: what do we know already and what do we need to know?
A microbiome assessment of medical marijuana
Marijuana and Listing for Heart Transplant: A Survey of Transplant Providers
The Stanford Integrated Psychosocial Assessment for Transplantation: A Prospective Study of Medical and Psychosocial Outcomes