It's Friday, 3 p.m., and the phone rings ... a practical approach to common nephrology consultations—Part 1
ABSTRACT
This practical approach highlights the importance of timely recognition and management of various nephrological emergencies. The featured conditions pose an extraordinary challenge, since their recognition, timely workup and immediate bedside management are often only roughly pictured in guidelines. This article provides case-based insights and highlights pitfalls with regards to current guidelines on the management of acute conditions frequently managed by nephrologists. The first case, acute allograft dysfunction, underscores the critical need to distinguish between various etiologies of acute kidney injury (AKI) to guide targeted interventions effectively. Case 2 explores the challenges of managing acute infections in kidney transplant recipients, highlighting the necessity of tailoring immunosuppressive therapy, conducting a thorough diagnostic workup, and ensuring timely and adequate treatment. Case 3 focuses on the recognition and management of pulmonary-renal syndrome, emphasizing the importance of initiating serological testing, planning for biopsy, and administering empirical immunosuppressive therapy. In Case 4, a structured and pragmatic approach to diagnosis and treatment of thrombotic microangiopathy, with an emphasis on identifying potential pitfalls to prevent delays in therapy is given. Case 5 focuses AKI in pregnancy, a high-stakes condition that requires prompt and comprehensive diagnostic evaluation to minimize risks to both mother and child. Finally, Case 6 presents a diagnostic and treatment framework for managing suspected infections of a tunneled hemodialysis catheter, aiming to optimize outcomes through early and effective interventions.

CASE 1: ACUTE ALLOGRAFT DYSFUNCTION
It's Friday 3 p.m. and you are consulted by the emergency department for a 30-year-old patient with a past medical history of immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy, who underwent deceased-donor kidney transplantation 3 months prior. He presents due to worsening peripheral edema, elevated blood pressure, tenderness in the allograft region and doubling of serum creatinine. You are now asked to evaluate and manage this case of suspected allograft failure.
Kidney allograft function is assessed by serum creatinine, serum creatinine–based glomerular filtration rate (GFR) estimation, urine output and proteinuria, both during the immediate postoperative setting as well as routine outpatient visits. Clinical signs of acute allograft failure include edema, hypertension, tenderness in the allograft region, fever, (micro)hematuria and oligo-anuria. Routine work-up of AKI should be conducted as in all patients with establishment of euvolemia and withdrawal of nephrotoxic agents. Causes of allograft dysfunction are numerous depend on the timing after kidney transplantation and necessitate a targeted workup to rapidly identify immediate threats to allograft survival (Table 1).
Acronym for causes of kidney allograft dysfunction
C—Calcineurin inhibitor (CNI) toxicity
R—Rejection, recurrence of primary kidney disease
A—Anatomy (vascular thrombosis/stenosis, obstruction)
B—BK nephropathy and other infections (CMV, pyelonephritis)
Etiologies of AKI in a patient with a kidney transplant.
Timing after transplant	Common causes	Diagnostic workup	Hints for diagnosis	Basics of management	 	Immediate post-transplant	Hyperacute rejection	• Doppler US• Laboratory work-up• Urine output• Obtain donor specific antibodies• Drug levels• Assessment of “mate kidney function”• Biopsy• Viral PCRs (for BK and CMV virus)	• History of high immunologic risk• Preformed antibodies• High levels of LDH• Absence of diastolic flow on US• Swollen, painful transplant	• TPE• Increase IS• Last resort: nephrectomy	 		Renal artery thrombosis		• Absence or abnormal flow on Doppler• High levels of LDH	• Anticoagulation• Embolectomy or Lysis	 		Ischemia–reperfusion injury		• Absence of specific findings	• Watch and wait	 	Early post-transplant (first week)	Acute rejection		• History of high immunologic risk• Preformed antibodies• High levels of LDH• Absence of diastolic flow on US• Swollen, painful transplant	• TPE• Increase IS• Last resort: nephrectomy	 		Acute tubular necrosis		• Intraoperative hypotension• Blood loss or hypovolemia• Poor donor quality	• Supportive therapy• Volume control	 		Renal vein thrombosis		• A sudden onset of anuria• Tenderness and pain over the allograft region• Thrombocytopenia• Absence of venous Doppler	• Thrombectomy• Anticoagulation for thrombosis	 		Hydronephrosis		• Hydronephrosis on US	• Urologic evaluation• JJ splint, urinary catheter• Surgical revision	 		Perirenal fluid collection		• Evidence of perirenal fluid collection	• Observation• Drainage (surgical or radiological)	 	Weeks to months post-transplant	Drug toxicity (e.g. CNIs)		• Gradual increase in creatinine• High drug levels	• Adjust or switch IS drugs	 		Chronic rejection		• Evidence of previous rejection• New onset of proteinuria	• Optimize IS	 		Recurrence of primary disease		• Underlying renal disease (IgAN, FSGS)• Recurrence of proteinuria and/or hematuria	• Treat underlying disease	 	Late post-transplant (months to years)	Chronic allograft nephropathy		• Progressive kidney dysfunction• Evidence of chronic damage on biopsy	• Reduce IS	 		BK virus nephropathy		• Evidence of increasing viral load	• Reduce IS• Consider alternative medication	 		CMV viremia		• Evidence of increasing viral load	• Reduce IS• Valganciclovir• Letermovir• Maribavir	 		Late acute rejection		• Progressive kidney dysfunction• Evidence of chronic damage on biopsy• DSA	• Optimize IS	 		Renal artery stenosis		• Stenotic and post-stenotic flow pattern• CT-angiography to confirm	• Percutaneous angioplasty• Surgical revision
US, ultrasound; IVIG, intravenous immune globulins; IgAN, IgA nephropathy; FSGS, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.

The diagnostic workup—first steps
A kidney transplant recipient presenting with a tender allograft and elevated serum creatinine should prompt immediate concern and immediate screening for urgent conditions should ensue. Besides consideration of current medication, trough levels of immunosuppressants and volume status, a focused ultrasound exam with attention towards obstruction, graft swelling, pathologic perfusion signals and perirenal fluid collections should be conducted.
There is a very low threshold to perform allograft biopsy in the setting of allograft failure; however, several conditions should be excluded before an allograft kidney biopsy is conducted (Pitfalls 1 and 2).
Pitfall 1 “Could it be an anatomical problem?”
Subcapsular hematoma can compress the allograft and seroma/lymphocele may cause postrenal obstruction
A stenotic ureteric anastomosis, JJ splint, foley catheter and dysfunctional voiding can cause postrenal obstruction
Large-volume fluid secretion with blood urea nitrogen fluid/serum ratio >1.2 is suspicious of urinoma or ureter leakage
Note: if ultrasound is inconclusive, a non-contrast CT-scan can help to rapidly identify surgical complications.

Rule out transplant arteriovenous thrombosis
Thrombotic complications of the allograft are most common during the first week but may also occur within the first months after kidney transplantation. A sudden onset of anuria, tenderness in the allograft region and thrombocytopenia should raise suspicion for allograft thrombosis. Duplex ultrasound should specifically check for the absence of arteriovenous perfusion signals and pathognomonic, diastolic flow reversal in the central to segmental renal arteries and veins. Immediate computed tomography (CT)-angiography should be performed in a suspected case of graft thrombosis. Intra-arterial injections of anti-fibrinolytic agents, percutaneous endoluminal thromboaspiration with full heparinization and surgical thrombectomy should be discussed with surgery and interventional radiology immediately, since risk of permanent graft loss are high.
Pitfall 2 “Do NOT immediately biopsy if…”
Allograft rupture is imminent: severely swollen and tender allograft, moderate CRP, hemolytic anemia, thrombopenia and fever.
Do NOT biopsy due to risk of bleeding and rupture
Immediately give steroid pulse and consult surgery for transplant nephrectomy
Provide antibiotic coverage
Note: graft intolerance syndrome may present similarly, if immunosuppression is abruptly stopped in the setting of chronic allograft failure requiring dialysis, especially when significant residual allograft function is present.

Rule out pyelonephritis and hydronephrosis
Kidney transplant recipients are at inherent risk of urinary tract infection (UTI) and pyelonephritis. This risk is highest among patients with a history of recurrent UTIs, reflux nephropathy, malformations of the urinary tract and polycystic kidney disease. Fever, markedly elevated inflammatory parameters [C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT)] as well as positive nitrite, leukocyturia and bacteriuria on urine analysis are typical. These warrant obtaining urine cultures before initiating empirical broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. Hydronephrosis can occur with or without concomitant infection and demands immediate urologic interventions, such as placement of a JJ stent and foley catheter. Urine output and serum creatinine usually improve rapidly once obstruction is alleviated.

Acute rejection—plan a kidney allograft biopsy
The clinical presentation of allograft rejection is diverse and still requires allograft biopsy for diagnosis and treatment decisions based on the acuity and chronicity of lesions and molecular evidence of rejection classified by the current BANFF 2019 criteria.
Considering the complexity of this issue, we think several things are of the essence early on: judge the risk and likelihood of rejection, which may have specific reasons, see Pitfall 3. Acute rejection with imminent allograft rupture should be recognized early due to the risk of fatal bleeding. Such patients usually present with painful allograft failure, progressive anemia, hemolysis, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), CRP and fever, see Pitfall 2 for its distinct management. If allograft hydronephrosis, thrombosis and UTI/pyelonephritis have been reasonably excluded, preparation for kidney biopsy should follow. However, when biopsy results are pending, biopsy is not immediately feasible or possible at all and allograft function is worsening, an empirical three-day course of high dose intravenous (IV) steroids (i.e. 250–500 mg prednisolone) may be considered after risk-benefit evaluation.
Pitfall 3 “What's the reason for rejection?”
Always evaluate whether there are reasons for rejection, especially if trough levels were not met:
Immunological high-risk (desensibilization, HLA mismatch, DSA)
Non-compliance? Wrong dose? Interaction with new medications?
Problems with oral intake or enteric absorption? Pill crushing?
Frequent interruptions due to infections, viremia or cytopenia?
Case resolution:
Our patient presented 3 months after kidney transplantation. Ultrasound did not show any evidence of hydronephrosis or acute vascular occlusion, but the allograft appeared swollen with low diastolic flow. LDH was normal, CRP was mildly elevated with leukocyturia and proteinuria. Antibiotic therapy was initiated after blood and urine cultures were obtained. The next day, CRP normalized but serum creatinine further increased with decline in urine output. A prednisone pulse of 250 mg IV was given and the patient was prepared for kidney biopsy on Monday morning. The biopsy report showed i2, t3, v1 lesions classifying as BANFF IIA acute T cell–mediated rejection. Cytomegalovirus (CMV)/Polyoma BK virus (BKV) PCR and cultures remained negative. Oral prednisone at 1 mg/kg body weight (BW) and rabbit-ATG 100 mg were given daily over 10 days. Allograft function recovered and the patient reported missing several CNI doses; the importance of timely dosing of immunosuppressive therapy was stressed.
It's Friday 3 p.m. Things to keep in mind and plan ahead
In addition to supportive measures and empirical therapy, prompt collection and proper handling of cultures, blood samples, and diagnostic tests are essential
Immediately draw CNI levels if incompliance is suspected
Send an HLA-screen to detect DSA
Send CMV and BKV PCR
Consider recurrence of prior kidney disease (e.g. focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, CM-TMA, IgA nephropathy); obtain urine protein studies and microscopy
Prepare for kidney biopsy: stop anticoagulants, order coagulation tests and obtain informed consent
Check for the need of antimicrobial prophylaxis before steroid pulse and lymphocyte depleting agents are administered
Suggested readings:
Handbook of Kidney Transplantation. Sixth Edition. G. M. Danovitch (Editor) Wolters Kluwar, 2017, 606pp. Kadambi PV, Brennan DC, Chon FJ. Kidney transplantation in adults: Evaluation and diagnosis of acute kidney allograft dysfunction [Internet]. uptodate.com2024; [cited 2024 Nov 28] Available from: https://www.uptodate.com/

CASE 2: ACUTE INFECTION IN THE KIDNEY TRANSPLANT RECIPIENT
It's Friday 3 pm and you are consulted by the intensive care unit (ICU) for a 43-year-old female patient who received a kidney allograft 3 years ago and is now admitted to the ICU due to bilateral pneumonia requiring oxygen supplementation and eventually, intubation. The patient is on stable immunosuppressive therapy, including tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil 2 × 720 mg, and a 5 mg prednisone equivalent. You are now asked to adjust the immunosuppressive regimen.
Acute infections pose a significant mortality risk in kidney transplant recipients on maintenance immunosuppression (IS). Clinical management commonly includes reduction of the immunosuppressive regimen, taking into account the time after transplantation, immunological risk, history of previous rejections and infections. However, evidence on how to adapt IS in this setting is still scarce with a lack of internationally accepted standardized approaches and inherent pitfalls at hand. Possible strategies for the adaptation of maintenance IS include the following.

Reduce the antimetabolite drug and maintain oral prescription
Therapeutic drug monitoring is either not available or of limited use in the case of mycophenolic acid and azathioprine. These antimetabolites may cause bone marrow suppression. Thus, one common approach to adjust CNI-based triple immunosuppression during acute infection is to reduce or stop the antimetabolite and restart or increase steroid dose to, e.g. 10–25 mg daily, but there are no specific guidelines on this recommendation. Recent studies on the management of immunosuppression with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), showed that this temporary de-escalation to a CNI + prednisone regime did not significantly increase the incidences of rejection and de novo DSA. Combinations of mTOR inhibitors with CNI compared with CNI monotherapy appears to be less prone to infections in a recent meta-analysis.
Pitfall 1 “Be aware of drug–CNI interactions”
Azole antimycotics → TAC ↑
Macrolides (except azithromycin) → TAC ↑
Letermovir, maribavir → TAC ↑
Rifampicin → TAC ↓
Aminoglycosides, vancomycin → oto-/nephrotoxicity ↑
TMP-SMX → risk for hyperkalemia ↑
Statins → check interactions with cyclosporin
Calcium channel blockers → TAC ↑

Switch to parenteral regimes if enteric absorption is hindered
Some IS agents can be given by nasogastric tube, but dosing and administration requirements should be verified beforehand, as has been summarized in a previous publication. In situations where oral intake is not feasible or enteric absorption is hindered, a transition to IV prednisone and tacrolimus may be considered. There are no specific guideline available and local practices vary as IV formulation of mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) are also commonly used. The required daily dose of IV tacrolimus (TAC) is roughly one-fourth of the oral dosing and is delivered via continuous venous infusion (e.g. reconstitute 1 mL of TAC 5 mg/mL in 250 mL of 5% glucose IV infusion solution and use 50 mL in a perfusor syringe; final concentration 1 mg/50 mL; initial infusion rate 0.02 mg/kg/h equals ≈1.5 mL/h for a 75 kg patient). It should be kept in mind that tacrolimus levels obtained during continuous infusion are not trough levels, thus target levels need to be adjusted higher in combination with IV prednisone (e.g. 25 mg once daily), again, depending on time elapsed since transplantation, the individual's risk of graft rejection and the current clinical situation. The dose conversion of oral MMF to IV MMF is 1:1.

Consider atypical pathogens
In the diagnostic workup, besides vaccination adherence, history of recent travel and/or exposure to certain animals or food, the timing of infection onset is helpful, as it makes certain pathogens more likely at different stages, allowing categorization into early post-transplant and late-onset infection. Depending on the source of infection and severity, consider targeted PCRs, early sampling such as bronchoalveolar lavage, and swabs or biopsies of (skin) lesions (see Pitfall 3). Early infections often involve nosocomial pathogens like Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus (including methicillin-resistant S. aureus), and Enterococcus species, frequently with drug-resistant profiles. Initial therapy typically includes anti-pseudomonal beta-lactams (e.g. piperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, carbapenems) and, e.g. linezolid. Testing for beta-d-glucan (BDG) and galactomannan (GM) may be used for ruling out invasive fungal infections, given their negative predictive value of over 90%.
Pitfall 2 “Has antimicrobial prophylaxis been adequate?”
TMP/SMX for Pneumocystis jirovecii prophylaxis
Age >60 years or patients with pulmonary disease, toxoplasmosis or long-term prednisone >20 mg
Alternative: atovaquone 750 mg twice daily
CMV prophylaxis
Most used agent is valganciclovir, initiated according to donor and recipient CMV status (not routinely used in D–/R–) and continued for at least 3 months depending on the local standard
Be aware of eGFR-based dose adaptation of valganciclovir with different dosing regimens in prophylaxis and treatment
Initiate resistance testing (PCR) with increasing or persistent CMV copy loads while on effective treatment over 2 weeks
Be aware of drug–drug interactions and use an interaction checker (e.g., UpToDate, drugs.com).
Humoral immunodeficiency (BCDT)
Check for hypogammaglobulinemia in immunosuppressed patients
IgG <3 g/L with recurrent or severe infection may benefit from Ig substitution
Particularly when atypical or bilateral infiltrates are shown on a chest X-ray, early administration of a macrolide (e.g. azithromycin 500 mg once daily) or a tetracycline (e.g. doxycycline 200 mg once daily) may be considered.

Check if prophylactic measures are appropriate
Antimicrobial prophylaxis in kidney transplant recipients targets Pneumocystis jirovecii and toxoplasmosis with trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) as well as CMV with valganciclovir or letermovir in case of myelotoxicity. Notably, maribavir is reserved for resistant infections and is not used for prophylaxis.
Case resolution:
Upon admission, our patient was treated with broad spectrum antibiotics, MMF was halted, prednisone increased to 10 mg once daily and tacrolimus trough level targets held at 5–7 ng/mL. The patient developed abdominal discomfort with severe nausea, vomiting and worsening acute respiratory distress syndrome prompting intubation. Due to suspected intestinal obstruction, immunosuppression was switched to a parenteral regime with prednisone 25 mg once daily and tacrolimus continuous infusion (1 mg/50 mL) started at 1.3 mL/h for a 60 kg patient. A CT scan ruled out intestinal obstruction but confirmed bilateral pulmonary infiltrate, yet without evidence for P. jirovecii or viral replication in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) aspirates. BDG was not elevated, and sputum cultures were positive for pneumococci, later also found in blood cultures. Antimicrobial therapy was adapted to high-dose ceftriaxone according to resistance testing. IgG level was 7 g/L. The patient was eventually extubated and recovered. After receiving vaccination for pneumococci in the outpatient setting, the patient was reintroduced to 2 × 360 mg MMF and prednisone tapered eventually.
It's Friday 3 p.m. Things to keep in mind and plan ahead
Atypical infection must always be considered in patients receiving immunosuppression and appropriate measures initiated if suspected. A low threshold for CT imaging, cultures and recognition of clinical red flags applies in these cases.
Draw blood and urine cultures before antibiotic therapy is started
Targeted diagnostics, such as viral PCR testing or biopsies when appropriate, should be obtained early and liberally
Bilateral pneumonia and increased LDH should prompt a CT scan, BDG and GM test. BAL for culture, viral PCR and Pneumocystis jirovecii should be considered in case of respiratory distress
Severe diarrhea and weight loss is suspicious of CMV enteritis/colitis or microsporidiosis: obtain CMV-PCR from blood/stool, and plan sigmoidoscopy for biopsy
Visual disturbance and neurological deficit: viral PCR, fundoscopy, cranial CT/MRT and neurology consult for lumbar puncture
Fever and abdominal pain should be met with a low threshold for abdominal CT scan
Suggested readings:
Windpessl M, Kostopoulou M, Conway R. et al. Preventing infections in immunocompromised patients with kidney diseases: vaccines and antimicrobial prophylaxis, Nephrol Dial Transplant 2023;38(Suppl 2):ii40–9. https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfad080.
KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline on the Evaluation and Management of Candidates for Kidney Transplantation. Transplantation 2020;104(4S1): S11–103. doi: 10.1097/TP.0000000000003136.

CASE 3: PULMONARY RENAL SYNDROME
It's Friday 3 p.m. and you are consulted for a 72-year-old man with shortness of breath, fever and recent onset of hemoptysis. The patient reports decreasing urine output and mild peripheral edema alongside increasing fatigue. Serum creatinine level is 7.2 mg/dL (636.5 µmol/L) and CRP is 170 mg/L. You are now asked to evaluate this patient's suspected AKI.
Pulmonary renal syndrome (PRS) is one of the true nephrological emergencies with high mortality rates unless treatment is initiated immediately. However, diagnosis can be delayed due to more common disease mimics (Pitfall 1).

Step 1: Consider PRS in your differential
PRS refers to a complex medical condition, which consists of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, presenting as dyspnea, respiratory impairment and hemoptysis, alongside rapid deterioration of kidney function with renal hematuria and proteinuria. PRS is caused by anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) disease or antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV) in up to 77% of cases but also rheumatic diseases [systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)], IgA vasculitis, cryoglobulinemia and infectious diseases such as legionella pneumonia, leptospirosis or hantavirus infection have been associated with PRS. Problematically, AKI and respiratory symptoms are frequently present in critically ill patients, where oligo-anuria with hypervolemia and pulmonary congestion can mimic PRS (Pitfall 1).
Pitfall 1 “Mimics of PRS”
The primary evaluation should aim at identifying diseases with different therapeutic approaches.
Cardiorenal syndrome: Acute heart failure with pulmonary congestion and kidney failure needs be evaluated by bedside POCUS and focused echocardiography
Pulmonary embolism can present with hemoptysis; testing for D-dimer, deep vein sonography, echocardiography and CT-angiography may be adequate
Perform sepsis screen as septic pneumonia (e.g., Streptococcus pneumoniae, Legionella, Staphylococci) frequently presents as unilateral pneumonia with confusion, fever and hypotension. Rapid antigen tests, and procalcitonin can help differentiate from PRS. Blood cultures should be obtained
Checklist for work-up
Urine sediment and proteinuria diagnostic
Chest CT scan, POCUS, echocardiography
Autoimmune serologies including anti-GBM, ANCA, ANA/ENA, APLS and complement
Cultures, Legionella/hantavirus antigen tests
Kidney ultrasound

Step 2: The initial workup

Obtain acute imaging—chest X-ray is not enough!
Suspected PRS should always prompt a CT scan of the lungs since diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) produces non-specific alveolar-filling patterns which are frequently missed on chest X-rays. In this context, a CT scan is more sensitive to reveal bilateral, diffuse ground-glass opacities and should therefore be preferred. Unilateral pulmonary infiltrates, wedge-shaped peripheral infiltrates and pleural effusion are atypical in DAH.

Laboratory workup
Evaluation for proteinuria and glomerular hematuria by urine microscopy, should be conducted to support the diagnosis of PRS.
Pitfall 2 “Interpreting inflammatory parameters—could it be sepsis?”
Combination of elevated CRP, AKI and evidence of bilateral pulmonary infiltrates requires a low threshold of suspicion for PRS
Sepsis criteria need to be weighed against SIRS in autoimmune diseases
Procalcitonin is a valuable additional parameter, with normal levels arguing against infection
Initiate an infectious workup including Legionella, Leptospira, hantavirus and blood/urine cultures
CRP levels, commonly elevated in bacterial infections are also often raised in patients with AAV and anti-GBM disease, more often than IgA nephropathy or lupus nephritis. Procalcitonin has been demonstrated to be superior for discrimination between infection and vasculitis with a recommended cut-off of 0.1 ng/mL in AAV although a negative value does not exclude an infection, thus a low threshold for initiation of empiric antibiotic therapy is warranted. Rapid antigen tests should be sent and possibly covered if not readily excluded.

Immunologic testing
A rapid immunological workup including tests for ANCA, anti-GBM and ANA should be sent immediately, and results be urged to minimize diagnostic delay. A negative ANCA screening does not rule out AAV, as some patients, particularly those with respiratory- or renal-limited vasculitis, may be ANCA-negative. In cases of elevated anti-GBM (with or without double-positivity for ANCA), steroids and therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) should be initiated immediately due to their high specificity. TPE should be continued until anti-GBM is negative and additional therapy added after kidney biopsy confirmed the diagnosis.
Pitfall 3 “Interpreting immunological results”
ANCA—combine indirect immunofluorescence and ELISA testing to improve positive predictive value for AAV:
ANCA (indirect immunofluorescence)—good sensitivity but NOT antigen specific
MPO/PR3 (ELISA)—good specificity for clinically active AAV
Be aware of atypical serology, such as positive ANCA with negative, low titer or double-positive MPO/PR3
Be aware of ANCA-negative vasculitis: renal-limited diseases and EGPA can be ANCA negative and require biopsy to establish the diagnosis
Anti-GBM:
Chemiluminescence assays have higher sensitivity than enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays, thus, a normal ELISA may be false negative
Anti-GBM titer guides treatment: continue TPE until anti-GBM is negative, also in case of ANCA/Anti-GBM double-positive disease

Step 3: Consider empirical therapy and plan a biopsy
Consider empirical glucocorticoid treatment if antibody testing and kidney biopsy report are pending but criteria for severe disease (creatinine >3.4 mg/dL or >300 µmol/L, impending dialysis and respiratory failure) are present, and alternative etiology is unlikely. The current KDIGO guideline offers prescription of 500–1000 mg steroid pulses over 3 days.
Regarding TPE, current KDIGO and EULAR guidelines recommend that TPE can be considered for patients with established proteinase 3 (PR3)- or myeloperoxidase (MPO)-positive AAV and active glomerulonephritis having a serum creatinine over 300 µmol/L (prior application of TPE, all necessary diagnostic work up should be completed!). By now, there is insufficient evidence to make a recommendation for or against TPE in isolated DAH in AAV. Empiric TPE may be appropriate in patients with life-threatening disease and delay in biopsy results. TPE is indicated in anti-GBM disease and should be started immediately in combination with immunosuppressive agents.
Case resolution:
The patient was clinically unwell and showed a low peripheral saO2 of 88%. CRP was 170 mg/L with normal PCT. Urine dipstick was positive for protein and erythrocytes. Chest X-ray did only show mild infiltrates and bedside echocardiography was normal. Pneumococcal and legionella antigen testing was negative. Broad spectrum antibiotic, fluids and oxygen were administered. The patient subsequently worsened and was transferred to the ICU. Acute CT-angiography showed bilateral patchy opacities and no pulmonary embolism. Urine microscopy revealed erythrocyte cylinders and acanthocytes with >1 g/g urine protein–creatinine ratio. The patient received a 3-day steroid pulse 1000 mg and empirical TPE once daily 1.5 PV for suspected PRS. A kidney biopsy was planned for Monday morning, which showed pauci-immune, crescentic glomerulonephritis. C-ANCA/PR3 serology returned positive the same day and cyclophosphamide was started while TPE was continued for a total of seven sessions.
It's Friday 3 p.m. Things to keep in mind and plan ahead
Antibody tests and biopsy results are often pending, warranting an empirical immunosuppressive therapy with glucocorticoids:
Send viral testing (hepatitis B/C and HIV), tuberculosis (e.g., QuantiFERON) as soon as PRS is suspected
Consider broad antibiotic coverage
Conclusive antibody testing or kidney biopsy report should be awaited before cyclophosphamide or rituximab are administered
Biopsy should ensue within 3–5 days after empirical IS: vasculitis, necrosis and crescents may show beginning resolution within this timeframe, however, will not be resolved completely
Consider diagnosis of EGPA in patients with eosinophilia, asthma bronchial and allergic rhinitis as this entity may provide specific treatment options. ANCA may be negative!
Suggested readings:
Kronbichler A, Bajema IM, Bruchfeld A. et al. Diagnosis and management of ANCA-associated vasculitis. Lancet 2024;403:683–98. 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01736-1.
Henderson SR, Salamam AD. Diagnostic and management challenges in Goodpasture's (anti-glomerular basement membrane) disease. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2018;33:196–202. https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfx057.

CASE 4: THROMBOTIC MICROANGIOPATHY
It's Friday 3 p.m. and you are consulted by the emergency department (ED) for a 65-year-old patient with no past medical history, presenting with headache and confusion. A creatinine of 2.3 mg/dL (normal baseline levels), mild anemia (Hb 11 g/dL) and severe thrombocytopenia of 20 G/L are found. You are asked to evaluate for AKI with possible thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA).
TMA is a rare clinical syndrome of thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA), organ dysfunction and is associated with high mortality rates. Laboratory findings that should raise suspicion for TMA include thrombocytopenia, anemia, elevated LDH, hyperbilirubinemia, reduced haptoglobin and hypertension, elevated serum creatinine or acute neurologic dysfunction. However, these findings commonly arise in a variety of entities and clinical circumstances and are often present in patients with concomitant conditions.

Step 1: How to rule in/rule out MAHA?
In suspected TMA, a thorough history and clinical examination should be completed by a blood smear. Current guidelines for the quantification and interpretation of schistocytes (fragmentocytes) suggest a schistocyte frequency of <1‰ is sensitive to rule out microangiopathic hemolysis. However, mildly elevated frequencies (typically 1–3‰) are challenging to interpret, as they are seen in a multitude of clinical pathologies (see Pitfall 1). True TMA is most likely with schistocytes >3‰, clinically significant thrombocytopenia (TTP typically severe and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) often mild, yet with a rapid >25% decrease), a previous history of TTP or aHUS and a negative Coombs test. Evaluation of end organ damage should include blood pressure, renal and cardiac markers as well as gastrointestinal, neurological and skin findings.
Pitfall 1 “TMA mimics”
Liver cirrhosis/alcoholism: check and correct vitamin deficiencies (B1, B12, folic acid). May manifest as Zieve syndrome with hemolytic anemia.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation/sepsis: inflammatory markers (PCT, interleukin-6) and coagulation tests are usually normal in true TMA, blood cultures should be obtained
Large vessel thrombosis/heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: perform sonography, check for heparin exposure, calculate HIT score and where applicable obtain PF4 antibodies
Bone marrow failure may aggravate with acute infections
Hantavirus disease, Leptospirosis: rapid testing should ensue for possible exposure, but false-positive results may emerge
Once TMA is confirmed, rapid preparations should be made including typing of blood group, installing a high-flow vascular access and storing blood samples for future diagnostic testing. In our clinical practice, we obtain a serum sample for ADAMTS13 testing (sodium-citrate anticoagulated tube) but also prospectively collect a serum and ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) sample for further genetic and biochemical testing in the setting of aHUS, now referred to as complement-induced TMA. Complement testing and genetic analysis should be sent to a certified laboratory.

Step 2: Is it TTP?—PLASMIC score ± ADAMTS13 and TPE
TTP warrants immediate treatment decision due to high mortality. The probability of severe ADAMTS13 deficiency can be assessed with scoring systems (either the French or PLASMIC score), where the first obtained lab value should be input. This information can aid in making informed decisions about specialized treatment, even before ADAMTS13 test results become available and are accessible as online calculators. These scoring systems do not replace but support clinical judgement and sensitivity may decrease in older individuals. If available, blood tests for ADAMTS13 activity and inhibitor titers should be sent immediately. Strong suspicion for TTP (PLASMIC score ≥6) should prompt a joint decision with a hematologist and intensive care specialist for either a caplacizumab-based regime (first 10 mg dose given IV prior to TPE and subsequent 10 mg doses given subcutaneously after TPE; daily caplacizumab for 21 days) and/or immediate TPE and steroids (e.g. methylprednisone 10 mg/kg BW/day for 3 days followed by 2.5 mg/kg BW/day).

How to prescribe TPE
Initiate TPE within 4 h to 8 h of presentation with an exchange volume of 1.5 times the patient's plasma (PV) volume. PV can be calculated using the formula: 0.065 × body weight (1 – hematocrit). TPE should be continued until clinical improvement.
Pitfall 2 “Managing TPE”
Obtain the blood group and prepare for a high-flow central venous access as early as possible
Exchange with 100% FFP or solvent/detergent-treated plasma; use of citrate anticoagulation may help to mitigate bleeding risk or coagulopathy
TPE sessions should be conducted daily until the platelet count is above 150 000/μL
In acquired TTP, initial therapy usually includes the administration of rituximab (375 mg/m2 once a week for a total of four doses) typically after TPE or with a 48- to 72-h gap before the next scheduled TPE treatment. Congenital ADAMTS13 deficiency (cTTP, repeatedly negative inhibitor and positive genetic results) is rare and responds to plasma infusions and recombinant ADAMTS13. Secondary drug-induced TMA and malignancy-associated TMA can present similar to TTP with high PLASMIC scores, but their management is less clear. Commonly in case of secondary TMA presenting as TTP, the offending agent is stopped and TPE is considered for severe or worsening disease.

Step 3: Do I need C5-inhibitor therapy?
If TTP is highly unlikely (PLASMIC score <4) or ruled out (ADAMTS13 >10%), signs for Shiga toxin–associated “typical” HUS should be assessed. The presence of bloody diarrhea within the last 4 weeks, travel abroad or an environmental history of occurrence of similar reports prompts high suspicion in adults. Conservative measures should be taken until Shiga toxin rapid test and stool PCR arrive to confirm the diagnosis. If both TTP and typical HUS are unlikely, or Shiga toxin is not readily available, primary aHUS (complement-induced TMA) should be considered due to its urgent need for C5-inhibition to mitigate high mortality and risk of progress to end-stage kidney disease. Before the administration of C5-inhibitor therapy, a native serum and EDTA sample should be collected for further genetic [e.g. complement factor H (CFH) mutation] and biochemical testing (e.g. CFH autoantibody).
Pitfall 4 “Meningococcal infections with C5-inhibitors”
Empirical use: meningococcal prophylaxis (i.e. ciprofloxacin 500 mg b.i.d. or penicillin V 500 mg b.i.d., adapted to kidney function) should be initiated as soon as eculizumab is started and continued until 4 weeks after the last infusion or 2 weeks after vaccination coverage for all strains is provided (check antibody titers if available)
Planned start: meningococcal vaccination must be completed 2 weeks before starting with complement inhibitor therapy using both MenACWY and MenB-4c or MenB-FHbp vaccines
Meningococcal antibody levels should be rechecked yearly during maintenance therapy; if antibody titers are below threshold give a booster and provide antibiotic prophylaxis!
Check meningococcal antibody levels after vaccination in patients with concomitant immunosuppression (e.g. after transplantation)
Importantly, causes of secondary aHUS are not a contraindication for empirical C5-inhibitor therapy but should always be evaluated in parallel (see box below), even if a C5-inhibitor is already administered. Concomitant viral infections [e.g. severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)] are possible triggers of primary aHUS and may therefore respond to C5-inhibitor therapy. De novo aHUS and transplant-associated TMA after recent hematopoietic stem-cell transplantation or solid organ transplantation may also respond to C5-inhibitor therapy. Additionally, cyclosporin A and tacrolimus may be switched in those cases to belatacept after kidney transplantation. Patients on C5-inhibitor therapy, e.g. eculizumab or ravulizumab, must receive pneumococcal and meningococcal prophylaxis until meningococcal vaccination is performed (Pitfall 4).
Case resolution:
Our patient showed 17‰ fragmentocytes without any findings suggesting TMA mimics. PLASMIC score was 6, deciding for empirical TPE without caplazizumab. ADAMTS13 activity returned 6 h later, showing 45%. TPE was stopped, eculizumab 900 mg IV was administered, with ciprofloxacin prophylaxis. Thrombocytopenia and LDH levels improved the next day. Complement analysis from a sample taken before TPE revealed positive anti-factor H antibodies, prompting the diagnosis of complement-mediated TMA (CM-TMA).
It's Friday 3 p.m. Things to keep in mind and plan ahead
As complement testing requires time, a final diagnosis of complement-mediated TMA cannot reliably be established on a Friday afternoon. However, it is crucial to always obtain blood samples BEFORE empirical TPE or eculizumab are administered to ensure adequate workup. Obtain a serum, sodium-citrate and EDTA vial, centrifuge and store aliquots at –80°C.
Secondary aHUS should be evaluated in parallel:
Metabolic causes (i.e. B12 deficiency)
Genetic (DGKE and thrombomodulin mutations, methylmalonic aciduria and homocysteinuria type C)
SARS-CoV-2, HIV, hepatitis
Drugs (i.e. quinine, cyclosporin A)
Autoimmune disease (i.e. SLE, scleroderma, APLS)
Pregnancy-related
Cancer (i.e. hematologic malignancy)
Transplant-associated (HSCT or SOT)
Suggested readings:
Connelly-Smith L, Alquist CR, Aqui NA. et al. Guidelines on the Use of Therapeutic Apheresis in Clinical Practice—Evidence-Based Approach from the Writing Committee of the American Society for Apheresis: The Ninth Special Issue. J Clin Apher 2023;38:77–278. 10.1002/jca.22043.
Brocklebank V, Wood KM, Kavanagh D. Thrombotic microangiopathy and the kidney. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2018;13:300–17. 10.2215/CJN.00620117.
Zheng XL, Vesely SK, Cataland SR. et al. ISTH guidelines for the diagnosis of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. J Thromb Haemost 2020;18: 2486–95. 10.1111/jth.15006.
Scully M, Rayment R, Clark A. et al. A British Society for Haematology Guideline: diagnosis and management of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and thrombotic microangiopathies. Br J Haematol 2023;203:546–63. 10.1111/bjh.19026.

CASE 5: AKI IN PREGNANCY
Its Friday 3 p.m. and a 39-year-old pregnant woman in the last trimester is admitted because of sudden onset of lower extremity peripheral edema and high blood pressure. Laboratory work-up showed an increase in serum creatinine to 1.5 mg/dL (133 μmol/L) and proteinuria on dipstick. The nephrologist was consulted for evaluation of possible AKI.
Over the past decade, there has been an increase in pregnancy-related AKI, which is associated with higher mortality rates than pregnancies without AKI. Pregnancy induces changes in renal hemodynamics, including hyperfiltration, intrarenal vasodilation, and an increase in effective plasma flow. As a result, serum creatinine levels during pregnancy typically decrease from pre-pregnancy baseline to 0.4–0.6 mg/dL (35-53 μmol/L), with GFR typically increasing by 40%–60%. Therefore, already minor changes of serum creatinine may be indicative of ongoing kidney disease. The underlying etiology depends on the timing of onset during pregnancy, narrowing down the initial differential diagnoses, as outlined in Table 2.
Etiologies of AKI during pregnancy, adapted from Taber-Hight et al..
Common etiologies of AKI during pregnancy	Timing of onset	Symptoms and diagnostic evaluation	Possible treatment options	 	Hyperemesis gravidarum	1st trimester	Nausea, vomiting, signs of volume depletion	Oral and/or IV re-hydration	 	Urinary tract infection	More common in the second half of pregnancy	Flank pain, dysuria, fever, chills	Antibiotics	 	Septic abortion	1st trimester	Fever, abdominal pain	Antibiotics, evacuation of retained products of conception	 	Preeclampsia/eclampsia	More common in the second half of pregnancy	New onset hypertension >140/90 mmHg AND new-onset proteinuria >300 mg/g	BP control, cormagnesine, Supportive care, delivery	 			High sFlt1/PlGF ratio >135, or increasing		 			Eclampsia: neurologic signs		 	HELLP syndrome	Late 2nd or 3rd trimester	Hemolytic anemia, elevated liver enzymes, low plateletsLDH <600, creatinine <1.9 mg/dL	Delivery	 	TMA	Late 2nd or 3rd trimester postpartum for aHUS	MAHA, thrombocytopenia, LDH >600, normal coagulation tests	Plasma exchange, glucocorticoids, eculizumab/ravulizumab	 			- TTP: ADAMTS13 <10%		 			- aHUS: creatinine >1.9 mg/dL		 	Placental hemorrhage	3rd trimester	Vaginal bleeding, abdominal pain, hypotension	Stop bleeding, supportive care, delivery	 			CT/MR: renal cortical necrosis		 	Acute fatty liver disease	3rd trimester	Swansea criteria: nausea/vomiting, abdominal pain, polydipsia/polyuria, hyperbilirubinemia, urate >5.7 mg/dL, hypoglycemia, elevated liver enzymes, ascites or bright liver on ultrasound, leukocytosis, creatinine >1.7 mg/dL, microvascular steatosis on biopsy	Supportive care, delivery	 	Lupus nephritis flare	More common postpartum	Low complement, ANA/double-stranded DNA antibodies, and increase in proteinuria	IS	 	Obstructive uropathy	2nd or 3rd trimester	Abdominal pain, reduction in urinary output	Analgesics, increase in fluid intake, stent or percutaneous nephrostomy tube rarely necessary

Step 1: The initial workup
The fundamental workup of AKI in pregnancy includes all diagnostic considerations applicable during routine AKI workup, however special focus should be put on the assessment of volume status, blood pressure, a kidney ultrasound and proteinuria (e.g. spot urine albumin and protein to creatinine ratio, ACR and PCR in g/g), liver enzyme levels, coagulation tests and the soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase-1/placental growth factor (sFlt1/PlGF) ratio, where available. While a sFlt-1/PlGF ratio below 38 has a high negative predictive value for preeclampsia, in patients with hypertension, elevated liver enzymes and high sFlt1/PlGF ratios a diagnosis of PE/eclampsia or HELLP (Hemolysis, Elevated Liver Enzyme Levels, Low Platelet Count) syndrome should be considered.

Step 2: Could it be TMA?
Late pregnancy and the post-partum period are particularly high-risk periods for the development of TMA, exhibiting laboratory features like those mentioned in Case 4. Differentiating TMA from typical gestosis is important because decisions for TPE or complement inhibition in addition to emergency delivery must be made immediately.
Adding to the complexity, ADAMTS13 activity decreases by 50% after week 12 of pregnancy until the puerperium, which may play a role in the increased incidence of TMA in this period. Also PE, HELLP syndrome and aHUS have been associated with decreased levels of ADAMTS13 activity. Notably, the threshold value, below which a diagnosis of TTP can be definitively considered during pregnancy, ranges between 5% and 20% in the literature, whereas <10% is the most reported value.
The French and PLASMIC score are not validated in pregnant patients, but inclusion of a higher LDH-to-AST ratio has been shown to improve the positive predictive value of the PLASMIC score. Other etiologies and differentials of TMA mentioned in Case 4 should be excluded. In most cases of suspected TMA, delivery is recommended. If there is suspected TMA accompanied by neurological or cardiac symptoms, TPE should be initiated until ADAMTS13 results become available and to be continued if activity is below 20%, which supports diagnosis of TTP. In case other typical causes (typical PE, eclampsia, HELLP syndrome, autoimmune disease, cortical necrosis—see Table 2) are excluded and ADAMTS13 activity is >20%, CM-TMA should be suspected and eculizumab should be administered, which appears to be safe during pregnancy. Also, serum samples should be acquired before empirical therapy is initiated for later diagnostic testing. Corticosteroids can be safely used in pregnancy while rituximab and caplacizumab only with caution and in a case-by-case decision.
Pitfall 1 “Prescribing dialysis during pregnancy”
Hemodialysis dose: 6 × 4.5–6 h weekly depending on RKF—urea goal <35 mg/dL predialysis midweek
Use LMWH for anticoagulation
Estimated “dry weight” increases by 0.3–0.5 kg/week during 2nd and 3rd trimester to guide ultrafiltration but ensure accurate volume assessment using ultrasound and physical examination
Unrestricted diet: protein intake 1.5–1.8 g/kg/day, folic acid 5 mg/day
Erythropoietin stimulating agents can and should be given if indicated; in the first trimester iron deficiency is typically treated with oral iron, reserving IV iron for after the 13th week; check prescribing information prior application
Dialysate composition: calcium 1.5 mmol/L, decreasing bicarbonate <30 mM is common
Be aware of increased risk of pulmonary edema in pregnant patients with CKD and preeclampsia
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatories should not be given postpartum

Preparing for the worst case: need of dialysis in pregnancy
Hemodialysis should be started during pregnancy when the maternal urea concentration exceeds 100–120 mg/dL (17–20 mmol/L, especially if the risks of preterm delivery are greater than those associated with initiating dialysis considering gestational age, renal function trajectory, fluid balance, biochemical parameters, blood pressure and uremic symptoms.
Case resolution:
Our patient had a history of preexistent arterial hypertension and Scl-70 positive systemic sclerosis with pulmonary disease. PCR was 800 mg/g, sFlt1/PIGF ratio 140 with a blood pressure of 210/100 mmHg and dyspnea due to pulmonary congestion. Blood count, liver function and coagulation tests were normal. Schistocytes were <1‰ with normal haptoglobin. The patient was admitted to the ICU and treated with continuous hydralazine infusion, nifedipine, magnesium, furosemide and temporary non-invasive ventilation for hypertensive pulmonary edema. After stabilization emergency C-section was performed (36 + 6) due to suspected scleroderma crisis or severe preeclampsia. Subsequently, the patient was started on amlodipine, lisinopril and advised not to breastfeed. Normal pulmonary function tests and CT scans and negative Scl-70 did not indicate progression or relapse of systemic sclerosis. Magnetic resonance (MR)-angiography ruled out renal artery stenosis. Blood pressure, serum creatinine and proteinuria gradually improved postpartum, indicating severe preeclampsia as the most likely diagnosis.
It's Friday 3 p.m. Things to keep in mind and plan ahead
The grey zone: sFlt1/PIGF ratios between 35 and 135 warrant a close follow-up and low threshold for admission and further evaluation in case of increasing proteinuria and hypertension
Congenital TTP is rare but typically manifests during pregnancy; send genetic tests early, consider plasma infusions and recombinant ADAMTS13 in such cases
Check “Swansea criteria” to diagnose acute fatty liver disease of pregnancy and consult hepatology; genetic testing of the newborn for LCAT deficiency is warranted in such cases
Consider flares of pre-existing or new onset kidney diseases such as podocytopathy or SLE; send immunologic testing, complement levels, and consider empiric steroids and kidney biopsy
Suggested readings:
Fakhouri F, Scully M, Provôt F. et al. Management of thrombotic microangiopathy in pregnancy and postpartum: report from an international working group. Blood 2020:136:2103–17. 10.1182/blood.2020005221.
Wiles K, Chappell L, Clark K. et al. Clinical practice guideline on pregnancy and renal disease. BMC Nephrol 2019;20:401. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-019-1560-2
Sheridan AM. et al. Pregnancy and kidney disease. NephSAP 2024;22.

CASE 6: MANAGEMENT OF A CENTRAL VENOUS CATHETER WITH SUSPECTED INFECTION
A 45-year-old male patient on chronic hemodialysis is sent by their treating dialysis physician to the emergency department due to suspected infection of a tunneled dialysis catheter. At presentation, the catheter's exit site exhibits little purulent discharge. The patient presented with mildly elevated body temperature 37.4°C and a blood pressure of 114/78 mmHg. The arterial blood gas analysis shows no acidosis but severe hyperkalemia (6.5 mmol/L). The nephrologist is contacted for subsequent patient and catheter management.
Infections are a common complication of intravascular foreign bodies, such as dialysis catheters. Exit-site infections (ESI) are distinct from catheter-related blood stream infections (CRBSI).
An ESI is characterized by culture-positive inflammation external to the cuff, typically manifesting as localized redness, crusting, and varying amounts of exudate, without spreading above the cuff. In contrast, a typical tunnel infection involves culture-positive inflammation within the tunnel above the cuff. Conversely, CRBSI refers to the presence of bacteremia originating from an IV catheter, with no alternative source accounting for the infection.. Only 4.6% of CRBSI show concomitant ESI, yet the presence of ESI and fever strongly suggests concurrent bloodstream infection. CRBSI definitions vary, according to different associations and guidelines.

Step 1: Establish a diagnosis
Currently, there is no gold standard for microbiological evaluation in patients suspected of having CRBSI. To determine if infection originates from the catheter, the differential time to positivity (dTTP) from simultaneously drawn central and peripheral blood samples can be assessed. A time difference of more than 2 h between the central and peripheral culture results may indicate that the catheter is the source of the infection. A positive acridine-orange leucocyte cytospin (AOLC) test as additional facultative measure, which is feasible, cost-efficient and readily available (within 30 min) may help with diagnosis.
Diagnosis check list
Two to three blood cultures sets from both arterial and venous central catheter lines PLUS one set from peripheral site simultaneously—order a differential time to positivity
Skin swab of the exit site and tunnel
Physical examination and ultrasound of the tunneled catheter: redness, pain, fluid collection along the catheter on ultrasound
Obtain EDTA blood and send for AOLC
The most common clinical presentation for CRSBI are fever and chills/rigors although patients are often oligosymptomatic. The most common organisms are gram-positive bacteria, but enterococci and gram-negative rods are also frequently detected. Additionally, though rare, polymicrobial infections and the even rarer yeast infections can occur, influenced by the clinical setting and the patient's medical history. A possible diagnostic and management flowchart is provided by a recent publication.
Pitfall 1 “Avoid falsely positive results via contamination”
Consider catheter contamination in case of typical skin microbials (Staphylococcus epidermidis) if there is no clinical signs of infection and swabs are taken from inconspicuous skin around the catheter
Skin swab is most valuable when there is prominent local purulent secretion in cases of local infection findings; otherwise, there is a high probability of detecting skin flora colonization

Step 2: Choose appropriate catheter management
Whenever feasible, removing the catheter is a reasonable approach in most cases of CRBSI. In dialysis patients however, the situation is more complex because ongoing dialysis treatment is necessary and catheter removal may require the use of temporary catheters, which requires multiple procedures, longer hospitalization, and increased costs. Moreover, catheter removal may result in loss of the central venous entry site.
Pitfall 2 “Specific drug management”
Empirical CRBSI treatment:
Gram-positive coverage vancomycin 20 mg/kg BW as loading dose, subsequent dosing according to therapeutic drug monitoring (AUC or trough levels 15–20 ng/mL); Slow infusion over 1 h to prevent infusion reaction. In case of significant residual renal function consider daptomycin (if no pulmonary involvement; 9 mg/kg BW
Gram-negative coverage: ceftazidime 1 g or cefepime 1 g post-hemodialysis. Be aware of neurotoxicity of cefepime—if suspected perform drug monitoring and evaluate extra dialysis session
Empirical ESI treatment:
Cefalexin or cefazolin (250–500 mg q12h–q24h)
Consider additional antibiotic lock solution:
2.5 mg/mL vancomycin, 2.5 mg/mL ceftazidime + 250 units/mL heparin

Option 1: Catheter removal
In patients with sepsis, hemodynamic instability, evidence of tunnel infection or severe ESI with persistent fever after 48–72 h of tailored antibiotics, difficult-to-treat pathogens or fungal organisms, catheter should be removed. The exact timing of catheter removal depends on the clinical setting, but in a stable patient, performing a short dialysis treatment to address severe hyperkalemia may be prudent.
If the catheter is removed in a patient in imminent need of dialysis, a common approach is to place a temporary catheter and then convert to a tunneled catheter, preferably at a different anatomical site. Some physicians prefer delaying the placement of a new tunneled catheter rather than using a temporary one. Keep in mind prospectively planned access strategies (e.g. shunts) to avoid venous stenosis on the planned site.

Option 2: Maintain the catheter
If above mentioned criteria are absent, catheter salvage can be attempted. Broad-spectrum IV antibiotics, see below, should be applied and if fever resolves within 2–3 days (by the next dialysis session), the infected catheter can be replaced as an elective outpatient procedure. Even in case of S. aureus, with appropriate treatment, with appropriate treatment, recent literature indicates that salvage rates are higher than previously assumed.

Step 3: Antibiotic management
Empirical treatment of uncomplicated ESI should cover gram-positive organisms for 7–14 days. Possible regimens include cefazolin or cefalexin. In case of complications or tunnel infection, the catheter should be removed and gram-positive and gram-negative coverage should be applied with systemic antibiotics, see regimen below.
In case of definite CRBSI, initial treatment should both cover gram-positive and gram-negative organisms. However, coagulase-negative staphylococci and S. aureus collectively represent 40%–80% of cases. A possible regimen may include vancomycin with ceftazidime or cefepime. Vancomycin should be continued with 1 g and ceftazidime with 1 g after the subsequent hemodialysis session, with adaptations according to trough levels or area under the curve (AUC) monitoring. In case of significant residual kidney function or vancomycin-resistant enterococci, daptomycin is a reasonable alternative. Antibiotics should always be adapted according to culture results.
Antibiotic locks can be used as adjunctive therapy, although there are no randomized controlled trails for comparison available. If catheter removal is not possible or catheter salvage is attempted, catheter lock solutions may be applied additionally. Of note, patients should be screened for metastatic infection (new bone pain, new murmur). Transthoracic echocardiography may be routinely considered in patients with CRBSI, but faces limited, observer- and patient dependent sensitivity and specificity. Transesophageal echocardiography remains the gold standard for diagnosing endocarditis and should be performed, in particular, in cases of bacteremia due to staphylococci, streptococci/enterococci or Candida spp. as well as in patients with new valve disease (especially aortic or atrio-ventricular valve regurgitations) and implantable cardiac devices.
Case resolution:
Our patient presented with severe hyperkalemia and hemodynamically stable, thus, initial treatment included IV calcium and a short course of urgent dialysis. On physical examination, redness was noted along the catheter site, and ultrasound revealed a small hypoechoic area around the catheter. Blood cultures (both peripheral and central), AOLC, and a skin swab were obtained before starting empirical antibiotics. Suspecting CRBSI, 1.5 g of vancomycin and 1 g of cefepime were administered, and the catheter was removed after dialysis. The following day, blood cultures returned positive for methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (dTTP >2 h), necessitating the placement of a temporary catheter until clearance of blood cultures, before a new permanent catheter can be placed. Transesophageal echocardiography and repeat cultures were conducted, and empirical antibiotics were switched to flucloxacillin and fosfomycin according to the antibiogram.
Suggested readings:
Farrington CA, Allon A. Management of the hemodialysis patient with catheter-related bloodstream infection. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2019;14:611–3. doi: https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.13171118.
Timsit J-F, Baleine J, Bernard L. et al. Expert consensus-based clinical practice guidelines management of intravascular catheters in the intensive care unit. Ann Intensive Care 2020;10:118. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13613-020-00713-4.

FUNDING
The authors received no external funding.

AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONS
M.K. and S.A. drafted the manuscript. A.H.K. revised first draft. All authors provided critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
No new data were generated or analysed in support of this research.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
All authors do report there is no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
Renal allograft thrombosis
The Banff 2019 Kidney Meeting report (I): updates on and clarification of criteria for T cell- and antibody-mediated rejection
Management of patients with a failed kidney transplant: what should we do?
Review: management of patients with kidney allograft failure
Risk factors of rejection in renal transplant recipients: a narrative review
Management of immunosuppressive therapy in kidney transplant recipients with COVID-19. A multicentre national study derived from the Spanish Society of Nephrology COVID registry
Infections after kidney transplantation: a comparison of mTOR-is and CNIs as basic immunosuppressants. A systematic review and meta-analysis
Danziger-Isakov L. Long-term infectious complications of kidney transplantation
Infection in organ transplantation
Diagnostic and therapeutic approach to infectious diseases in solid organ transplant recipients
Assessment of the role of 1,3-β-d-glucan testing for the diagnosis of invasive fungal infections in adults
Should prophylaxis for Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia in solid organ transplant recipients ever be discontinued?
Prophylaxis strategies for solid-organ transplantation
Cytomegalovirus in solid organ transplant recipients-guidelines of the American Society of Transplantation Infectious Diseases Community of Practice
Letermovir vs valganciclovir for prophylaxis of Cytomegalovirus in high-risk kidney transplant recipients: a randomized clinical trial
Maribavir for refractory Cytomegalovirus infections with or without resistance post-transplant: results from a phase 3 randomized clinical trial
Pulmonary-renal syndrome: a life threatening but treatable condition
Chest computed tomography and chest X-ray in the diagnosis of community-acquired pneumonia: a retrospective observational study
Radiological aspects of diffuse alveolar haemorrhage
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes Glomerular Diseases Work Group. KDIGO 2021 clinical practice guideline for the management of glomerular diseases
C-reactive protein levels are associated with complement C4 deposits and interstitial arteritis in ANCA-associated renal vasculitis
Diagnostic value of procalcitonin in ANCA-associated vasculitis (AAV) to differentiate between disease activity, infection and drug hypersensitivity
Position paper: revised 2017 international consensus on testing of ANCAs in granulomatosis with polyangiitis and microscopic polyangiitis
EULAR recommendations for the management of ANCA-associated vasculitis: 2022 update
The effects of plasma exchange in patients with ANCA-associated vasculitis: an updated systematic review and meta-analysis
EULAR recommendations for the management of ANCA-associated vasculitis: 2022 update
Alveolar hemorrhage in antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitis: results of an international randomized controlled trial (PEXIVAS)
Diagnostic and management challenges in Goodpasture's (anti-glomerular basement membrane) disease
2021 update of the 2012 ICSH Recommendations for identification, diagnostic value, and quantitation of schistocytes: impact and revisions
ISTH guidelines for the diagnosis of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
A British Society for Haematology Guideline: diagnosis and management of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and thrombotic microangiopathies
Management of immune thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura without therapeutic plasma exchange
Therapeutic plasma exchange: core curriculum 2023
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura: 2012 American Society for Apheresis (ASFA) consensus conference on classification, diagnosis, management, and future research
Comparison of the long-term remission of rituximab and conventional treatment for acquired thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Recombinant ADAMTS13 in congenital thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Drug-induced thrombotic microangiopathy: an updated review of causative drugs, pathophysiology, and management
Hemolytic uremic syndrome associated with Escherichia coli O157:H7 infection in older adults: a case report and review of the literature
Genetics and outcome of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome: a nationwide French series comparing children and adults
Thrombotic microangiopathy and human immunodeficiency virus in the era of eculizumab
Dobrava hantavirus and coinciding SARS-CoV-2 infection mimicking thrombotic microangiopathy and responding to a single dose of eculizumab
Sustained response to eculizumab in a patient with COVID-19-associated acute thrombotic microangiopathy of the allograft kidney: a case report
A prospective multi-institutional study of eculizumab to treat high-risk stem cell transplantation-associated TMA
Eculizumab first” in the management of posttransplant thrombotic microangiopathy
Preventing infectious complications when treating non-malignant immune-mediated hematologic disorders
Pregnancy-related acute kidney injury in the United States: clinical outcomes and health care utilization
Renal hemodynamics and tubular function normal human pregnancy
Renal physiology of pregnancy
Evaluation of sFlt-1/PlGF ratio for predicting and improving clinical management of pre-eclampsia: experience in a specialized perinatal care center
Predictive value of the sFlt-1:plGF ratio in women with suspected preeclampsia
von Willebrand factor-cleaving protease (ADAMTS13) activity in normal non-pregnant women, pregnant and post-delivery women
Pregnancy-associated hemolytic uremic syndrome revisited in the era of complement gene mutations
Von Willebrand factor and ADAMTS13: a candidate couple for preeclampsia pathophysiology
Mild to moderate reduction of a von Willebrand factor cleaving protease (ADAMTS-13) in pregnant women with HELLP microangiopathic syndrome
Molecular advances in preeclampsia and HELLP syndrome
Validation of the PLASMIC score, a clinical prediction tool for thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura diagnosis, in Chinese patients
Guidelines on the use of therapeutic apheresis in clinical practice—evidence-based approach from the Writing Committee of the American Society for Apheresis: the ninth special issue
Management of thrombotic microangiopathy in pregnancy and postpartum: report from an international working group
TTP and pregnancy
Clinical practice guideline on pregnancy and renal disease
Infection associated with tunneled hemodialysis catheters
Clinical management of dialysis catheter-related bacteremia with concurrent exit-site infection
Hemodialysis tunneled catheter-related infections
Differential time to positivity: a useful method for diagnosing catheter-related bloodstream infections
Diagnosis of catheter-related bacteraemia: a prospective comparison of the time to positivity of hub-blood versus peripheral-blood cultures
Detection of catheter-related bloodstream infections by the differential-time-to-positivity method and gram stain-acridine orange leukocyte cytospin test in neutropenic patients after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
The spectrum of infections in catheter-dependent hemodialysis patients
Catheter-related infections: does the spectrum of microbial causes change over time? A nationwide surveillance study
Management of the hemodialysis patient with catheter-related bloodstream infection
Treatment guidelines for dialysis catheter-related bacteremia: an update
High success rate in salvage of catheter-related bloodstream infections due to Staphylococcus aureus, on behalf of project group of Italian society of nephrology
2023 ESC guidelines for the management of endocarditis
Complications of kidney transplantation
Infections and the kidney
Acute kidney injury in transplant setting: differential diagnosis and impact on health and health care
Acute kidney injury in pregnancy