Causes and Outcomes of Medicolegal Proceedings Following Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography and Endoscopic Ultrasound in the United States
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) have become mainstays of gastrointestinal endoscopy, with collective annual volumes exceeding 350,000 in the United States. Although generally safe, these advanced endoscopic procedures can lead to adverse events (AEs) in 5%–10% of patients undergoing ERCP and over 2% of patients undergoing EUS/EUS-guided procedures. These AEs not only have the ability to cause significant morbidity, loss of quality of life, or even mortality but can also lead patients and/or families to pursue legal action against the endoscopist. This is especially true given that gastroenterology is recognized as having among the highest rates of medicolegal cases of all medical specialties.
Recently, the medicolegal impacts of colonoscopy and colorectal cancer screening were evaluated in the United States, demonstrating that among the key reasons for litigation were delays in diagnosis and/or treatment. Understanding these legal cases in terms of both causative factors and outcomes can help providers better appreciate patient expectations, identify areas for improvement, improve communication, and avoid complaints and/or litigation. To date, there have been no formal studies assessing medicolegal outcomes following ERCP and EUS in the United States. We aimed to quantify these outcomes and better understand the reasons for litigation and potential associated factors.
We searched the Westlaw (Thomson Reuters) database for all cases involving ERCP and EUS to identify any published jury verdicts. The search terms used were “endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography”, “ERCP”, “endoscopic ultrasound”, and “EUS”, with searches performed from database inception to December 31, 2020. Alleged reasons for litigation were identified from each analyzed case. Verdict amounts are reported as 2021 US dollars; conversion was done using the US Consumer Price Index. Further details about the search strategy, data extracted, and classification of themes are found in the Supplementary Materials.
A total of 356 cases were identified through the search strategy; after excluding irrelevant cases (238) and duplicates (16), a total of 102 cases were identified for full analysis. Ninety-six cases involved ERCP, while 7 involved EUS. Most plaintiffs were women with an average age of 53.4 years.
Characteristics of Evaluated Cases
Characteristics	ERCP (n = 96)	EUS (n = 7)	 	Number of female plaintiffs (%)	60 (62.5)	5 (71.4)	 	Mean age of plaintiff	53.1	54	 	Mean number of defendants	2.4	1.3	 	University affiliated (%)	16 (16.7)	0	 	Number of plaintiff awards (%)	20 (20.8)	1 (20)	 	Number of defense awards (%)	66 (68.8)	4 (80)	 	Settlements (%)a	10 (10.4)	0	 	Average plaintiff award (2021 USD)	$2,522,561	$3,431,183	 	Median plaintiff award (2021 USD)	$1,065,210	$3,431,183
ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound.
There were 3 cases where there was both a defense verdict and a settlement; the settlement category includes these 3 cases.
There was a mean of 2.4 defendants per ERCP case, with a total of 128 men, 16 women, and 76 organizations named across all cases. In 9 cases, the sex of defendants could not be ascertained. Of the identified specialists, there were 58 gastroenterologists, 16 surgeons, 6 anesthetists, and 5 internists named. For EUS cases, there was a mean of 1.3 defendants per case, with 5 of 7 cases involving male defendants. The plaintiff won 21% of ERCP cases with 10 settlements and an average award of $2.1 million. For EUS, there was 1 plaintiff verdict for $3.6 million with 3 gastroenterologists, 1 surgeon, 1 internist, and 1 radiologist named associated with pancreatic pseudocysts and loss of pancreatic function. Full details are provided in Table and Table A1.
(A) Alleged reasons for litigation in endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)- and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-related cases, grouped into broad themes. Identified cases are permitted to have more than 1 alleged reason for litigation per case. (B) Alleged reasons for litigation in endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) cases with plaintiff verdicts. Identified cases are permitted to have more than 1 alleged reason for litigation per case.
Alleged reasons for litigation, classified into broad themes, are presented in Figure. The most common alleged reasons for litigation were death, procedural error and/or negligence, and the performance of an unnecessary procedure.
Our analysis identified 96 ERCP-related and 7 EUS-related medicolegal cases with published verdicts, with most defendants being male gastroenterologists. The defendant won most cases, with the most common themes of the suits being death, procedural error and/or negligence, and performing an unnecessary procedure. It is particularly noteworthy that although AEs are common with EUS and particularly with ERCP, formal medicolegal proceedings following these procedures are relatively uncommon. The key alleged reasons for the lawsuits identified in our study highlight the fact that detailed discussion about the rationale and risks and benefits of a procedure in addition to careful consideration of its appropriate indication are critical aspects of practice for any endoscopist performing these advanced procedures. The legal standard in the United States for shared decision-making relies on the concept of the typical “reasonable patient” receiving an appropriate amount and level of information to participate in the consent process in an informed manner.
Two separate anecdotal series of ERCP lawsuits involving a single expert witness have previously been published. In these cases, some of which were settled out of court, the most common alleged primary reasons for litigation were lack of an appropriate procedural indication and negligence, with informed consent issues also commonly arising. First reported 15 years ago, these themes continue to be the major themes of ERCP- and now EUS-related litigation today.
Our study has some limitations. The Westlaw database is derived from cases from all jurisdictions submitted by lawyers voluntarily as well as cases that are obligatorily submitted by other jurisdictions. Thus, in a manner like any study analyzing an administrative or other publicly available data sets, our results are representative of only a sample of the overall population. Importantly, the inconsistent nature of legal reporting in the United States broadly limits the comprehensive nature of analyses such as ours. Only a minority of cases are published in official court reports for a variety of reasons. As such, it is likely that there are more cases than identified, and given that cases submitted are by nonmedical professionals, this may affect the granularity and/or accuracy of the case details. Furthermore, many legal cases are settled out of court, and details of these proceedings are not available with our methodology. Nevertheless, we contend that (1) our study likely captures the key themes of the jurisprudence of ERCP and EUS and (2) that a brief review of these themes is of crucial importance to endoscopists performing these procedures. Investigation of malpractice insurance databases may offer additional information.
In conclusion, ERCP and EUS are common procedures with associated risks of AEs. Overall, the risk of medicolegal action against providers remains low, but to mitigate this risk, critical attention should be paid to documenting an appropriate indication for any procedure as well as obtaining informed consent. Further medicolegal research is necessary to further understand potential endoscopist- and procedure-related risk factors for litigation as well as examining key components of high-quality informed consent to help improve patient care and communication and improve care for patients.

References

Supplementary materials
Conflicts of Interest: The authors disclose no conflicts.
Funding: The authors report no funding.
Ethical Statement: The corresponding author, on behalf of all authors, jointly and severally, certifies that their institution has approved the protocol for any investigation involving humans or animals and that all experimentation was conducted in conformity with ethical and humane principles of research.
Data Transparency Statement: Available on reasonable request to the corresponding author.
Reporting Guidelines: PRISMA.
Material associated with this article can be found in the online version at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gastha.2023.02.010.