A Multimodal Approach to Measuring Listening Effort: A Systematic Review on the Effects of Auditory Task Demand on Physiological Measures and Their Relationship
Objectives:
Listening effort involves the mental effort required to perceive an auditory stimulus, for example in noisy environments. Prolonged increased listening effort, for example due to impaired hearing ability, may increase risk of health complications. It is therefore important to identify valid and sensitive measures of listening effort. Physiological measures have been shown to be sensitive to auditory task demand manipulations and are considered to reflect changes in listening effort. Such measures include pupil dilation, alpha power, skin conductance level, and heart rate variability. The aim of the current systematic review was to provide an overview of studies to listening effort that used multiple physiological measures. The two main questions were: (1) what is the effect of changes in auditory task demand on simultaneously acquired physiological measures from various modalities? and (2) what is the relationship between the responses in these physiological measures?
Design:
Following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, relevant articles were sought in PubMed, PsycInfo, and Web of Science and by examining the references of included articles. Search iterations with different combinations of psychophysiological measures were performed in conjunction with listening effort-related search terms. Quality was assessed using the Appraisal Tool for Cross-Sectional Studies.
Results:
A total of 297 articles were identified from three databases, of which 27 were included. One additional article was identified from reference lists. Of the total 28 included articles, 16 included an analysis regarding the relationship between the physiological measures. The overall quality of the included studies was reasonable.
Conclusions:
The included studies showed that most of the physiological measures either show no effect to auditory task demand manipulations or a consistent effect in the expected direction. For example, pupil dilation increased, pre-ejection period decreased, and skin conductance level increased with increasing auditory task demand. Most of the relationships between the responses of these physiological measures were nonsignificant or weak. The physiological measures varied in their sensitivity to auditory task demand manipulations. One of the identified knowledge gaps was that the included studies mostly used tasks with high-performance levels, resulting in an underrepresentation of the physiological changes at lower performance levels. This makes it difficult to capture how the physiological responses behave across the full psychometric curve. Our results support the Framework for Understanding Effortful Listening and the need for a multimodal approach to listening effort. We furthermore discuss focus points for future studies.

INTRODUCTION
Since 2011, research related to hearing and audiology has increasingly focused on the application of multiple physiological measures as markers of effortful listening. Mental effort is defined as “the deliberate allocation of mental resources to overcome obstacles in goal pursuit when carrying out a task” and listening effort as “a specific form of mental effort that occurs when a task involves listening”. When listening becomes more difficult, for example, due to loud background noise or impaired hearing ability, more mental resources and effort are required to perceive the relevant auditory stimuli, such as speech. Individuals who are hard-of-hearing may need to allocate increased effort to function normally in everyday life due to their hearing loss and/or due to unwanted background sounds. If such increased effort is expended frequently and over a long time, it can lead to higher levels of fatigue and stress. This in turn increases the risk of developing physical and/or mental complications, such as cardiovascular disease and depression. In addition, hearing loss can lead to decreased social participation and isolation, also lowering quality of life. Reducing listening effort in daily life may aid rehabilitation or prevent such complications. It is therefore important to better understand the complexity of effortful listening and critically assess which physiological measures reliably reflect listening effort.
There are many factors that affect listening effort such as task difficulty, available mental resources, and motivation of the person to perform well. A common strategy to manipulate listening effort is to vary the auditory task demand by changing characteristics of the auditory signals. Examples of changes to the target signal include vocoded or accented speech. In addition, the ratio between the sound levels of simultaneously presented target speech and background noise can be adapted (signal to noise ratio [SNR]). Listening effort generally shows a non-monotonic relationship with task demand: first, effort will increase with increasing task demand, but the person will be inclined to invest less effort when the task becomes very hard, and ultimately give up when it becomes impossible. It is important to note that this relationship is influenced by many factors, such as mental resources, fatigue, motivation, reward, task context, or the presence of another individual. The Framework for Understanding Effortful Listening (FUEL) illustrates how effort varies as a function of demand and motivation (; Figure 2, pp. 16S), where effort is highest when both motivation and listening demand are high (but not impossible). In addition, the motivational intensity theory on the mobilization of effort in goal pursuit explains how various factors moderate the relationship between effort and task demand. For example, when motivation and success importance are high, the amount of effort a person is willing to invest will be higher or more sustained. When the task is too difficult or not worth the effort, the exerted effort will drop. As opposed to this saw tooth shape,) proposed an inverted-U shaped function, where listening effort gradually declines after maximum effort is reached. The exact shape of the relationship between demand and effort is unknown, and will therefore be referred to as non-monotonic for the purpose of this review.
Changes in auditory task demand, by manipulating characteristics of the auditory signals, can influence physiological measures that are widely assumed to reflect the resulting changes in listening effort. Such physiological measures include cardiovascular measures (heart rate variability [HRV], blood pressure), pupillometry, and brain activity (electroencephalography, functional magnetic resonance imaging) (for overviews, see e.g.,). Later, we will summarize relevant physiological measures that have been applied to assess the effect of auditory task demand on listening effort (Table 1).
Physiological measures and the expected direction of effect with increased effort
Technique	Measure	Physiology	Unit	Expected Direction of Effect With Increased Effort	 	Cardiovascular (electro-/impedance cardiography)	Heart rate	ANS	bpm	↑	 	Heart rate variability	PNS	msec	↓	 	Pre-ejection period	SNS	msec	↓	 	Electrodermal activity	Skin conductance level	SNS	µS	↑	 	Skin conductance responses	SNS	ppm	↑	 	Pupillometry	Pupil dilation	ANS	mm	↑	 	Endocrine factors	Cortisol	NES	nmol/L	↑	 	Chromogranin A	NES	ng/mL	↑	 	Alpha-amylase	NES	U/mL	↑	 	Electroencephalography	Alpha power	CNS	μV	↑/↓	 	Beta power	CNS	μV	↑/↓	 	Delta power	CNS	μV	↑	 	Theta power	CNS	μV	↑	 	Event-related potential response: P3 and N100	CNS	µV	↑	 		Event-related potential response: N400	CNS	µV	↓	 	Functional magnetic resonance imaging	Blood oxygenation level-dependent response	CNS	A.U.s	↑	 	Functional near-infrared spectroscopy	Cerebral oxygenation	CNS	µmol	↑	 	Electromyography	Facial EMG activity	SoNS	μV	↑
ANS, autonomic nervous system; A.U.s, arbitrary units; bpm, beats per minute; CNS, central nervous system; µS, micro Siemens; µV, micro volt; NES, neuroendocrine system; PNS, parasympathetic nervous system; ppm, peaks per minute; SNS, sympathetic nervous system; SoNS, somatic nervous system.

Physiological Measures
Physiological measures include those reflecting changes in, for example, the autonomic, somatic, and central nervous systems (CNS) and the neuroendocrine system. The somatic nervous system is part of the peripheral nervous system involved in muscular activities. Measures from the CNS mostly involve cortical brain activity. The neuroendocrine system includes the set of organs or cells involved with hormone secretion, such as the hypothalamus and pituitary gland. The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is the part of the peripheral nervous system that regulates involuntary physiological activity and can be divided in the sympathetic, parasympathetic, and enteric branches. For this review, only the sympathetic and parasympathetic branches of the ANS were considered. Increases in sympathetic nervous system (SNS) activity are associated with the “fight or flight” response and increases in activity of the parasympathetic nervous system (PNS) with “rest and digest”. These responses predominantly refer to physical activity, for which activity of the two branches is often reciprocal: SNS activity increases and PNS activity decreases with increased physical activity and vice versa. However, under conditions of mental load and psychological stress, more complex patterns can appear next to the classical reciprocal activation. Provided the person is motivated to perform well, increased demands of mentally challenging tasks cause changes in SNS and PNS activity that may follow the reciprocal pattern: sympathetic outflow to the organs is increased and PNS activity is decreased. The relevant physiological measures will be discussed in more detail.

Measures of Combined PNS and SNS Activity
Measures reflecting a mixture of both SNS and PNS activity include heart rate (HR) and pupil dilation. HR is the number of heart beats per minute, but can also be reflected by the average inter-beat-intervals (IBI) per minute, both as derived from the electrocardiogram (ECG). Increased SNS and decreased PNS activity result in an increase in HR and a decrease in IBI, and vice versa. Generally, HR is expected to increase with increasing effort. HR has been shown to slightly increase with effortful listening. However, some studies have found no effect of effortful listening on HR.
Changes in task-induced pupil dilation can reflect the amount of effort that is put into completing that task, given that other factors such as luminance are kept constant. Pupil dilation is also sensitive to changes in the participant’s attention and engagement in the task, as well as to the emotional content of stimuli. The pupil response is the change in pupil diameter evoked by a stimulus, calculated relative to a baseline pupil size determined prior stimulus presentation. Pupil dilation is one of the most widely used physiological markers of listening effort (for an overview, see) and follows the hypothesized non-monotonic relationship with task demand levels. Specific measures of task-induced pupil dilation in the time-domain include the (absolute) pupil size, mean pupil dilation (MPD), and peak pupil dilation (PPD). The PPD is the maximum pupil dilation compared with baseline within a specified time interval. Furthermore, analysis on the pupil time course can be performed using principal component analysis and growth curve analysis. Principal component analysis divides the pupil response into separate components and extracts features from each component, whereas growth curve analysis assesses change over time using multilevel polynomial regression. Pupil dilation reflects an unknown and multidimensional mixture of activity in both PNS and SNS circuits, influenced by complex patterns of activity in several neuromodulatory systems. An important route by which the CNS affects pupil dilation is the norepinephrine system of the locus coeruleus. Increased activity of this system has been associated with cognitive performance and pupil size changes. However, note that most models of the neural underpinnings of the pupillary response attribute the cognition-related responses and other complex attention-related processes. This makes it unlikely that the pupillary response simply reflects a general measure of effort but rather one important aspect of the complex effort response.
In an attempt to disentangle the contribution of the PNS and SNS to the pupil response, ambient light manipulations have been used. In darkness, the pupillary sphincter muscles are relaxed, so the influence of PNS inhibitory activity on the pupil size is considered negligible.) suggested that the pupil dilation response to an arithmetic task was predominantly mediated by inhibition of PNS activity at the oculomotor nucleus. In addition,) showed smaller pupil responses in light for hard-of-hearing subjects compared with normal-hearing listeners, but similar responses in dark, suggesting reduced PNS inhibition for the hard-of-hearing subjects.

Measures Sensitive to SNS Activity
Two measures that exclusively reflect SNS activity include pre-ejection period (PEP) and electrodermal activity (EDA). PEP reflects SNS effects on cardiac contractility, and is not influenced by PNS activity. PEP can be derived from the combination of ECG and impedance cardiogram, which is a measure of resistance against an alternating electrical current across the thorax. PEP represents the time between the electrical systole (Q-wave on the ECG signal) and the opening of the aortic valve (B-point on the impedance cardiogram signal). An increase in cardiac SNS activity results in a decrease in PEP, which shortens as contractility increases. So, as SNS activity is expected to increase with listening effort, PEP is expected to decrease. In a few studies, PEP has been shown to follow a non-monotonic relationship with task demand in the expected direction.
EDA is the electrical conductivity of the skin and represents the amount of sweat that is produced by eccrine glands, which are innervated exclusively by the sympathetic branch of the ANS. SCL is a tonic measure of sweat gland activity and fluctuations in SCL reflect general changes in alertness, but can also be influenced by unintended effects from environmental temperature changes. In addition, skin conductance responses (SCRs) are rapid phasic changes in the low-pass filtered SCL signal, generally with an amplitude of at least 0.01 microSiemens. These rapid SCL increases can be induced by task-relevant or emotionally salient external stimuli. An increase in SCL and SCRs reflect an increase in SNS activity. Consequently, EDA measures are expected to increase with increasing listening effort, which has been confirmed in multiple studies. However, it is important to note that due to the aforementioned unintended effects and inter-individual differences, it is difficult to quantify a meaningful change in SCL (for details, see e.g.,).

Measures Sensitive to PNS Activity
A widely used measure that reflects PNS activity is HRV, which is the beat-to-beat variability in IBIs over a certain period of time. The variability is mainly affected by respiration and slow blood pressure oscillations. HRV due to blood pressure fluctuations reflects both PNS and SNS activity, but HRV associated with cardiorespiratory coupling, also known as respiratory sinus arrhythmia (RSA), largely reflects PNS activity. This is because SNS signaling at the heart, in contrast to PNS signaling from the vagus nerve, is not fast enough to affect changes in HR on a breath-to-breath level in the typical frequency band of respiration. RSA can be obtained through time- or frequency-domain methods. The peak-to-valley method is one example in the time-domain and calculates the mean difference between the longest IBI during expiration and the shortest IBI during inspiration for each respiratory cycle. Another time-domain measure, that does not require co-registration of respiration, is the root mean square of successive differences (RMSSD). In the frequency domain, the high frequency (HF) HRV is obtained from the spectral density spectrum of the equidistant resampled IBI times series, most often computed with discrete Fourier transformation. Note that measures such as the low-frequency power and the low-frequency/HF ratio in the frequency domain are also considered HRV, but not exclusively indicative of PNS activity. For the purpose of this review, we will refer to HRV as HRV measures of the PNS (RSA, HF-HRV, RMSSD). As PNS activity is expected to decrease with increasing listening effort, (pv)RSA, RMSSD, and HF-HRV are all expected to decrease. Although some studies did show a decrease of these HRV measures during effortful listening, several others have not found any effects.

Neuroendocrine System
Two important neuroendocrine systems that are involved in the stress response are the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis and the sympathetic adrenal medullary axis. Acute stress induces elevated hypothalamic pituitary adrenal activity and leads to an increase in cortisol secretion from the adrenal cortex. Similarly, increased sympathetic adrenal medullary reactivity is followed by an increase in adrenaline from the adrenal medulla. In addition, sympathetic activity increases alpha-amylase and chromogranin A (CgA) secretion. These three endocrine factors can be obtained through saliva. Secretion of these endocrine factors is expected to increase with increasing effort. Currently, only two studies have used endocrine factors as biomarker for listening effort, but these did not yield promising results.

Somatic Nervous System
Muscle tension is a measure of the somatic nervous system and tends to increase with effort, which can be detected through electromyography by surface electrodes placed over a muscle. Facial electromyography (fEMG) measures the tension of the face muscles and is widely used to investigate emotional expressions and valence. In particular, the corrugator and frontalis muscles are sensitive to fatigue and mental effort. Facial EMG activity is expected to increase with increasing listening effort, as shown by) in the frontalis muscle. However,) did not replicate this effect for the corrugator supercilii.

Central Nervous System
Listening effort can also be assessed by investigating the effect of auditory task demand manipulation on cortical brain activity. A frequently used electroencephalography (EEG) measure is alpha power, that is, the oscillations in the alpha frequency band (8 to 13 Hz). Alpha power in the parietal cortical areas has been studied most frequently in the context of listening effort as it is associated with relevant factors such as attention, working memory, and inhibition of task-irrelevant information. Inconsistent results have been reported: for example,) found increased alpha power with decreasing intelligibility, whereas) found the opposite pattern of results. In addition, frontal theta power (4 to 8 Hz) is associated with working memory during effortful listening, delta power (1 to 3 Hz) has been associated with the processing of linguistic properties and the comprehension of speech, and beta power (16 to 30 Hz) has been associated with sentence processing. Theta and delta power increase with increasing listening effort, but no association has been found for beta power. Furthermore, the event-related potential response has been associated with several functions related to auditory and language processing, such as auditory attention and semantic memory access. For example, the P3 and N100 amplitude components increase with auditory task demand, whereas N400 amplitude decreases. Last, neural tracking of speech (the cross-correlation of EEG and the temporal envelope of speech) is sensitive to speech intelligibility. In addition, poorer hearing acuity is associated with a smaller difference in neural tracking between interfering speech and target speech, negatively affecting the ability to filter the interfering speech signal.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is commonly used to investigate task-evoked changes in brain activity. It measures the blood oxygenation level-dependent response: when neuronal activity increases, blood vessels provide an excess supply of oxygenated blood resulting in changes in the relative concentration of oxygenated hemoglobin. This induces variations in the magnetic field around the blood vessels. Similarly, functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) measures the concentration of hemoglobin in the blood vessels in extracerebral and cerebral brain tissues using near-infrared light. An advantage of fNIRS over fMRI is that it is much quieter and not limited by any magnetic items or implants of patients. In contrast, verbally answering during a task is not possible, as it disturbs the measurement of task-evoked responses. fMRI studies have observed increased activation with increasing listening effort in the bilateral superior temporal gyrus and frontal brain regions. Using fNIRS, the activation in the left inferior frontal cortex was found to peak around 25 to 50% intelligibility level, reflecting the expected non-monotonic relationship between listening effort and auditory task demand.

Current Review
Previous research on listening effort has used a wide variety of physiological measures, but these do not allow a uniform “best measure” for listening effort to be defined. It is also unclear how these different physiological measures relate to each other and whether they all demonstrate a comparable non-monotonic relationship with auditory task demand. An added complexity is that there is a lot of variety in how auditory task demand was manipulated in the listening tasks and what type of stimuli was used (such as sentences, words, or clips). In this review, we deliberately focused on studies simultaneously assessing multiple physiological measures during effortful listening tasks. This provides the opportunity to test the relationships between the different measures. To the authors’ knowledge, a systematic review including studies on listening effort exclusively using multiple physiological measures has not been performed thus far.
The aim of the current study was to perform a systematic review of the extant research using multiple physiological measures during auditory tasks. We had two main questions: (1) what is the effect of changes in auditory task demand on simultaneously acquired physiological measures? and (2) what is the relationship between the responses in these physiological measures? In addition, in the included articles, the relationship between physiological and subjective measures was also explored, if applicable. With this review, we aimed to shed light on the current understanding of the physiological measurements of listening effort and highlight the current knowledge gaps and necessary focus points for future studies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
The current systematic review was performed according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. English peer-reviewed articles were identified by using relevant search terms (see Appendix in Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/EANDH/B381, which lists the search terms) in PubMed, PsycInfo, and Web of Science and by examining the references of included articles. Final identification was performed in May 2023. Articles were included if they investigated the effect of auditory task demand manipulations on changes in at least two different physiological (including neuroimaging) measures in adult humans, either normal hearing and/or hard-of-hearing. Case reports or reviews were excluded. Papers were excluded if the participants were children (<18 years old) or if only one physiological measure was applied. Articles were also excluded if the main focus of the study was not to investigate whether the physiological measures (dependent variables) were sensitive to changes in auditory task demand (independent variable). In addition, articles were excluded if they were published before the year 2000, as the field using physiological parameters as a measure of listening effort is relatively young. A review protocol was not prepared before identification.
The physiological measures in the search query included cardiovascular measures (HR, blood pressure, PEP, HRV), EDA (SCL, SCR), endocrine measures (cortisol, alpha-amylase, CgA), pupillometry-based measures (pupil dilation), muscle tension (fEMG), and brain activity (EEG, magnetoencephalography, fMRI, fNIRS) (see Appendix in Supplemental Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/EANDH/B381). To limit the output in the databases to research articles including at least two measures, iterations of all different combinations were performed in conjunction with listening effort-related search terms. Articles were first selected based on the title and abstract. A final inclusion decision was made based on the full text. The main selection of articles was done by one reviewer. If they were unsure about the inclusion of an article, independent evaluation of the articles was performed by two other reviewers, and the inclusion of the article was discussed until consensus was reached.
For each included article, the main characteristics of the (in)dependent variables and participants were summarized in a table by one reviewer. This included the sample size and details of sex and age, as well as hearing status (normal hearing or hard-of-hearing). In addition, the psychophysiological measures of interest and task manipulations were listed. Lastly, relevant outcomes were listed: the performance levels on the tasks (if applicable), the effect of auditory task demand manipulations on the physiological measures, the correlations between these measures, and the test statistics, p values, and effect sizes. If details were missing, it was stated or not included in the table.
To assess the quality of the included articles, the Appraisal tool for Cross-Sectional Studies was used. It provides a guideline to rate the quality of studies and assess the risk of bias across multiple disciplines. The tool consists of 20 yes/no questions. The included articles were independently assessed by two reviewers. Any discrepancies were discussed afterward until consensus was reached.
Although subjective measurements were not the focus of this review, these will be briefly discussed as well. These include (rating) questions following a condition or task, for example regarding the perceived difficulty or effort. Although subjective measurements are weakly correlated with physiological measures, they are nevertheless relevant as they provide a measure of the perceived exerted effort or difficulty of the task. We discussed the results of subjective measurement tools if applied in the included articles and their relationships with the physiological measures.

RESULTS
The query in the three databases identified 297 articles (Fig. 1): 122 articles in PubMed, 105 articles in Web of Science, and 70 articles in PsycInfo. In addition, one article was retrieved from reference lists of included articles. Before selection, duplicate articles were removed, which resulted in the omission of 160 articles. On the basis of title and abstract, full texts of 40 articles were checked for eligibility, of which fifteen were evaluated by the two other reviewers independently in addition to the first reviewer. As a result, 28 articles were included. Twelve articles were excluded: four studies did not have (relevant) auditory task demand manipulations, five did not have relevant research questions and analyses, and three did not have relevant methods. Supplementary Table 1 (see Table in Supplemental Digital Content 2, http://links.lww.com/EANDH/B382, which provides a detailed overview of the included articles) summarizes the relevant methods and results from the included articles in detail, in alphabetical order of the first author.
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flowchart of assessment process for identification, screening, and inclusion of records.
In the included studies, auditory task demand was manipulated using different methods and tasks. Most studies used sentences presented in background noise (13) and/or distorted sentences (6), such as vocoded speech. Other studies used audio clips in noise (four) or digits in noise (two). Remaining methods that were only used once were words in noise, communication between participant pairs in noise, tone frequency discrimination, digit sequences from a single or multiple talkers, dichotic digit task, and diotic-dichotic digits task. The most frequently applied tasks involved repetition of the target stimulus or answering comprehension questions about its content. Auditory task demand was mostly manipulated by varying the SNR, type of background noise, stimulus complexity/structure, speech rate, or the level of distortion. Details for each study can be found in Supplementary Table 1 (see Table in Supplemental Digital Content 2, http://links.lww.com/EANDH/B382, which provides a detailed overview of the included articles). Furthermore, Table 2 shows an overview of the performance levels on the task. Six studies used an adaptive procedure such that the performance level was fixed for each participant (as independent variable). Three studies did not report (relevant) performance levels and were therefore not included in the table. Most of the included studies used tasks with a performance level of 70% or higher.
Performance levels as independent variable or outcome in included articles
Although changes in auditory task demand are often related to changes in task performance, please note that this was not the case for several studies. For example,) did not find a main effect of hearing aid noise reduction or SNR (+3 dB versus +8 dB SNR) on performance, but there was an unintentional effect of talker, where performance was higher for the female talker compared with a male talker.) found a main effect of condition on performance, but none of the post-hoc tests were significant.) and) also did not find any difference in performance between conditions. However, the subjective ratings in both studies indicated a difference in perceived difficulty between the conditions.),),), and) intentionally matched performance between conditions.
Pupillometry has been used most in the included studies (17 studies), next to EEG (12) and EDA (10). Of the EEG studies, alpha power was the most frequently investigated measure (nine). The combination of measures most frequently used among the articles was EEG with pupillometry (12 articles). Other combinations included EDA and HRV (five articles), EDA and HR (four), HRV and HR (three), PEP and HR (three), EDA and EMG (two), EDA and pupillometry (two), EMG and HR (two), pupillometry and endocrine factors (two), pupillometry and fMRI (one), pupillometry and fNIRS (one), HRV and PEP (one), and EDA and EEG (one).

Effect of Auditory Task Demand
Table 3 provides an overview of the physiological responses to increases in auditory task demand. In case the study task included multiple conditions, this study was included in one of the effect columns if there was a significant effect for at least one condition (either a significant difference from baseline or between two conditions).) and the SCL results of) were not included in the table due to missing formal analyses between the task (consisting of one condition) and baseline. In general, if an effect of auditory task demand on the physiological measure was found, the direction of this effect was consistent between studies. However, this was not the case for EEG alpha power, which has been shown to increase as well as decrease with increasing auditory task demand (Table 3).
Overview of directions of effect with increasing auditory task demand per physiological measure
Affected by Increasing Auditory Task Demand?	 		Measure	Increase in Outcome Measure	No Effect on Outcome Measure	Decrease in Outcome Measure	 	Cardiovascular (ECG/ICG)	HR	))) (experiment 1)*) (experiment 2).	)*)*)).		 	HRV†		)) (for NH))).	)*)) (for HH)) (experiment 1)*) (experiment 2).	 	PEP‡		).	)).	 	Electrodermal activity	SCL	)))*)*)) (experiment 1; raw SCL)*.	) (experiment 1: reactivity)*) (experiment 2).		 	SCR amplitude	)*) (response window).	) (speech presentation)).		 	SCR frequency	).	)).		 	Pupillometry	Pupil dilation/size	)§) (noise reduction*; Δtalker)))*¶) (cubic relationship)))))).	)* (ΔSNR))*).		 	Peak pupil dilation	)))).	)*.		 	NES	Cortisol		).	).	 	CgA		).		 	Alpha-amylase	).			 	EEG	Alpha power	)§) (ΔSNR, 16-channel vocoding).	)*∥)* (ΔSNR and noise reduction))*) (encoding)) (ΔSNR, 6-channel vocoding).	) (Δtalker))*¶) (memory retention))).	 	Beta power		)*∥.		 	Delta power	)*∥.			 	Theta power	)*∥.	)*).		 	N400 ERP			).	 	P3 ERP	).			 	Neural tracking			).	 	fMRI	BOLD response	) (degradation).	) (intelligibility).		 	fNIRS	Cerebral oxygenation			).	 	EMG	Facial EMG activity	)*.	).
Performance was not sensitive to task demand manipulations.
HRV decreases when PNS activity decreases, that is, when effort and/or stress increase.
PEP decreases when SNS activity increases, that is, when effort and/or stress increase.
Compared with baseline only.
Auditory task demand was not manipulated, but auditory attention was.
Difficulty was determined post-hoc based on the clarity ratings of noise-vocoded vs. sine-wave synthesized sentences.
BOLD, blood oxygen level dependent; CgA, chromogranin A; EEG, electroencephalography; ERP, event-related potential; fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; fNIRS, functional near-infrared spectroscopy; HH, hard-of-hearing; HR, heart rate; HRV, heart rate variability; ICG, impedance cardiogram; NES, neuroendocrine system; NH, normal hearing; PEP, pre-ejection period; SCL, skin conductance level; SCR, skin conductance response; SNR, signal-to-noise ratio.

Relationship Between Physiological Measures
Of the 28 included articles, 16 included analyses of the relationship between two different physiological outcome measures. The results are listed in Supplementary Table 1 (see Table in Supplemental Digital Content 2, http://links.lww.com/EANDH/B382, which provides a detailed overview of included articles) and summarized in Table 4, which provides an overview of results. In Table 4, all associations are between reactivity scores, except for). The relationships between measures can be classified into three types: (1) a relationship between the measures averaged over all conditions; (2) a relationship tested separately for each condition; (3) a relationship between the differences in the measures between conditions. The latter category is informative about how the changes between conditions in each of the measures are related to each other. This analysis may be less sensitive to individual differences in how the task manipulations translate to changes in each of the measures. Specifically, physiological measures depend on characteristics like age, BMI, fitness level, health, personality. In general, these individual differences were partially accounted for by applying a baseline correction. Such baselines relate to periods of resting, watching a neutral video, or very easy task conditions (e.g., listening to speech in quiet). Another important distinction to make is whether the association analyses were performed on inter-individual or intra-individual level. Two studies reported averaging the individual correlations between measures, whereas all other (14) studies assessed the correlations at the inter-individual level.
Matrix of relationships between physiological measures reported in the included studies
Cardiovascular (ECG/ICG)	EDA	Pupillometry	NES	EEG	fMRI	fNIRS	 	BVPA	HRV (RMSSD)	HRV (HF)	PEP	SCL	SCR Ampl	SCR Freq	MPD	PPD	Cortisol	CgA	Alpha-Amylase	Alpha Power	N400 ERP	P3 ERP	Neural Tracking	BOLD	Oxygenation	 	Cardiovascular	HR		r = 0.26, r = −0.02, r = 0.01, r = 0.12, r = 0.101AB	r = −0.07, r = −0.26, r = 0.19, r = −0.18, r = −0.081AB	r = −0.16, r = 0.19, r = −0.42, r = −0.32, r = −0.191AB		N.S.2B	N.S.2B												 	BVPA	—				r = −0.053A		r = 0.043A												 	HRV (RMSSD)	—	—	r =0.33, r = −0.06, r = 0.06, r = −0.10, r = 0.061AB	r = −0.16, r = −0.27, r = 0.16, r = 0.12, r = −0.041AB															 	HRV (HF)	—	—	—	r = 0.08, r = −0.43, r = −0.27, r = −0.27, r = −0.271AB	r = −0.414A														 	PEP	—	—	—	—															 	EDA	SCL	—	—	—	—	—		r = 0.303A	r = 0.175B	r = 0.215B				r = 0.01, r = −0.044, r = −0.255B						 	SCR ampl	—	—	—	—	—	—	N.S.2B												 	SCR freq	—	—	—	—	—	—	—												 	Pupillometry	MPD	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—					r = −0.08, r = 0.11, r = −0.155B; β = −0.005, SE = 0.004 and β = –2.8, SE = 2.456A; r = 0.05, r = −0.27 7C; M r = −0.10, M r = 0.058B; r = 0.02, r = 0.08, r = −0.04, r = −0.01, M r = 0.019AB; r = −0.1710C	SSE: 0.69, −1.27, 0.30, SSCDE: 1.40, 0.39, −1.0111B	r = 0.07, r = −0.247C				 	PPD	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	r = 0.04, r = 0.09, r = −0.06, r = −0.01, r = 0.13, r = 0.0212B		r = −0.15; r = −0.11; r = −0.18; r = −0.26; r = −0.17; r = −0.2512B	r = −0.015, r = 0.041, r = −0.1045B			r = 0.2913C	14A	r = −0.05, r = −0.1015A	 	NES	Cortisol	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	ρ= 0.4816B								 	CgA	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—								 	Alpha-amylase	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—							 	EEG	Alpha power	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—	—		r = −0.42, r = −0.097C
Significant results in bold (p < 0.05). Correlations between variables that are not shown, were not tested in any of the studies.
Types of associations: (A) relationship between collapsed measures across conditions, (B) relationship separately for each condition, and (C) relationship between changes in measures between conditions. (1)). Order: alone and difficult, alone and easy, observed and difficult, observed and easy, overall average. (2)). (3)). (4)). HRV at baseline, SCL reactivity: z-scores compared with baseline. (5)). Alpha power correlations order: baseline, retention, and speech period. (6)). (7)). Order: 500-msec, 0-msec interval conditions. (8)). Order: 6-channel, 16-channel vocoding. (9)). Order: 6-channel vocoding, 50% intelligibility, 16-channel and 50%, 6-channel and 80%, and 16-channel and 80%, mean correlation. (10)). (11)). Simple slopes estimates order: HighExp, HighUnexp, and LowUnexp conditions. Simple slope contrasts order: HighExp vs. HighUnexp, HighExp vs. LowUnexp, and HighUnexp vs. LowUnexp. (12)). Order: baseline, during testing and after testing for the 50% and 71% conditions. (13)). (14)). Positive associations in frontal and temporal brain areas. (15)). Order: left LFC and left AC. (16)). Note that) and) assessed the relationship on intraindividual level (r represents the mean coefficient), all other studies on inter-individual level.
AC, auditory cortex; Ampl, amplitude; BOLD, blood oxygen level dependent; BVPA, blood volume pulse amplitude; CgA, chromogranin A; EEG, electroencephalography; ERP, event-related potential; fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; fNIRS, functional near-infrared spectroscopy; Freq, frequency; HF, high frequency; HR, heart rate; HRV, heart rate variability; ICG, impedance cardiogram; LFC, lateral frontal cortex; M, mean; MPD, mean pupil dilation; NES, neuroendocrine system; N.S., none significant; PEP, pre-ejection period; PPD, peak pupil dilation; RMSSD, root mean square of successive differences; SCL, skin conductance level; SCR, skin conductance response; SSE, simple slope estimate; SSCDE, simple slope contrast difference estimate.
If correlations were found between physiological outcome measures, these were moderate at best (Table 4). The strongest correlation coefficients were a negative correlation between PEP and HF-HRV (r = −0.43) and a positive correlation between CgA and cortisol (ρ = 0.48) in a specific condition. It is important to note that these measures were from the same modality: the cardiovascular and neuroendocrine system, respectively. The highest correlation between measures from different modalities was between SCL and baseline HF-HRV (r = −0.41) followed by alpha-amylase and PPD (r = −0.26). Notably, together with the negative relationship between MPD and N400 amplitude found by), these were the only significant correlations found between measures from different modalities among the included studies.

Subjective Ratings
Fifteen of the 28 articles included subjective measurements, such as subjective effort or subjective performance. Results on subjective performance and subjective difficulty were also included, because these can bias the subjective reporting on listening effort. The most frequently used scale was the NASA Task Load Index (TLX), a six-item instrument covering mental demand, physical demand, temporal demand, perceived performance, effort, and frustration. This tool was used in seven studies, usually applying the abbreviated version. Other subjective measurements included the Visual Analog Scale of Fatigue (VAS-F) and Rating Scale for Mental Effort, both applied once. Other studies (seven) either used a categorical scale (for example, effort scale categorical units) or a standard numerical scale from 0 to 10 or 100 asking participants to rate effort, difficulty, and/or performance. Two studies also included questions regarding the participant’s tendency to give up. Lastly, 10 of the 15 studies also included correlation analyses between the subjective and physiological measures. Of these, only four studies reported significant correlations, which were weak to moderate.) found negative correlations between the VAS-F (on fatigue and energy) and MPD (r = −0.25), VAS-F and PPD (r = −0.23), and VAS-F and alpha power during the retention phase (r = −0.20) of the digits in noise task. These physiological measures did not correlate with the NASA-TLX subscales.) found, among others, a positive correlation between PPD and subjective performance (ρ = 0.60) and a negative correlation between PPD and the tendency to give up (ρ = −0.67) for the 50% intelligibility condition. The remaining two studies found a positive correlation between perceived effort (from the NASA-TLX) and SCL (r = 0.67), a positive correlation between self-reported difficulty and PPD (r = 0.60), and negative correlations between self-reported difficulty and cerebral oxygenation in the left auditory cortex (r = −0.23) and lateral frontal cortex (r = −0.32). The other six studies did not report any significant correlations between the physiological and subjective measures.

Quality Assessment
Results from the quality assessment using the Appraisal tool for Cross-Sectional Studies can be found in Table 5. Questions regarding non-responders were all answered negatively or unknown, as there were either no non-responders or they were not discussed. Sample size was justified with a power analyses or based on previous studies in 11 studies and a sample size justification was not applicable in two studies, as these were pilot studies. Target population was clearly defined in most studies (25), but only half of the studies (14) reported recruitment details, including the populations where participants were recruited from. The latter was again not applicable to the two pilot studies. Six studies failed to provide sufficient information regarding the methods and statistical analyses to enable replication of the study and 13 studies did not report details regarding the threshold used to determine statistical significance. Three studies failed to provide sufficiently detailed descriptive results. Five studies did not include detailed description of data analyses or did not report on all analyses that were described in the methods section. Most studies (24) described the limitations of the study, and the conclusions were not considered justified by the results in one study. Five studies did not include a statement regarding potential (funding) conflicts and one reported a potential conflict of interest. Lastly, five studies did not report obtaining ethical approval and/or participant’s informed consent.
Quality assessment
)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	)	 	1. Were the aims/objectives of the study clear?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	2. Was the study design appropriate for the stated aim(s)?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	3. Was the sample size justified?	Y	N	N	N	N	N	Y	N	N	NA	N	N	Y	NA	Y	N	N	N	Y	N	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	 	4. Was the target/reference population clearly defined?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	5. Was the sample frame taken from an appropriate population base so that it closely represented the target/reference population under investigation?	Y	U	Y	Y	U	Y	U	U	U	NA	Y	U	U	NA	U	U	U	U	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	U	Y	Y	Y	 	6. Was the selection process likely to select participants that were representative of the target population under investigation?	Y	U	Y	Y	U	Y	Y	U	U	NA	Y	U	U	NA	U	U	U	U	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	U	Y	Y	Y	 	7. Were measures undertaken to address and categorize non-responders?	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	 	8. Were the risk factor and outcome variables measured appropriate to the aims of the study?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	9. Were the risk factor and outcome variables measured correctly using measurements that had been trialed, piloted or published previously?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	10. Is it clear what was used to determined statistical significance and/or precision estimates?	Y	N	Y	N	N	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	 	11. Were the methods sufficiently described to enable them to be repeated?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	 	12. Were the basic data adequately described?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	13. Does the response rate raise concerns about non-response bias?	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	U	 	14. If appropriate, was information about non-responders described?	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	NA	 	15. Were the results internally consistent?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	16. Were the results presented for all the analyses described in the methods?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	U	U	U	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	U	Y	 	17. Were the authors’ discussions and conclusions justified by the results?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	18. Were the limitations of the study discussed?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	 	19. Were there any funding sources or conflicts of interest that may affect the authors’ interpretation of the results?	N	N	U	Y	U	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	U	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	U	N	U	N	N	 	20. Was ethical approval or consent of participants attained?	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y
N, no; NA, not applicable; U, unknown; Y, yes.

DISCUSSION
In this systematic review, we aimed to identify studies on listening effort that simultaneously measured multiple physiological responses to task demand, as this allowed for comparisons between these measures within the same study. The two main research questions were: (1) what is the effect of changes in auditory task demand on simultaneously acquired physiological measures? and (2) what is the relationship between the responses in these physiological measures? Later, we will discuss results pertaining to each question in more detail as well as other considerations and future directions.

Effect of Auditory Task Demand Manipulation on Physiological Measures
Overall, most of the physiological measures either show a consistent effect of auditory task demand manipulations in the expected direction or show no effect at all (Table 3). MPD, PPD, and SCL are quite consistently affected by auditory task demand, as compared with the EEG and endocrine measures that were collected in the same studies. In addition, the studies that applied SNS or PNS-specific measures consistently indicate an increase of SNS activity and a decrease of PNS activity with increasing auditory task demand. For example, if an effect was found, PEP tended to decrease and EDA measures generally tended to increase with increasing auditory task demand, both indicating an increase in SNS activity. Conversely, in other studies, HRV tended to decrease with increasing auditory task demand, indicating a decrease in PNS activity. The CNS measures indicated a generally similar pattern of increased effort as a result of an increase in auditory task demand. However, Table 3 indicates that there is an apparent inconsistency in the effect of auditory task demand changes on EEG alpha power, especially in contrast to the simultaneously measured pupil dilation. Alpha power changes are thought to reflect active inhibition of irrelevant information (such as interfering noise), which would result in an increase in alpha power with increasing masker levels. On the other hand, alpha power has also been found to decrease with task demand. Specifically, alpha power decreases in brain regions that are activated during the task, whereas alpha power increases in brain regions associated with irrelevant processes. These discrepancies in alpha power reactivity could be due to differences in factors such as selection of EEG channels or stimulus type. Other research investigating alpha power and listening effort that were not included in the current review also show inconsistent effects of auditory task demand. Lastly, although endocrine factors and fEMG were only applied in a few of the included studies, these methods do not appear to be sufficiently sensitive to capture effects of auditory task demand manipulations. Endocrine factors are dependent on many factors, such as the circadian rhythm, timing of the peak response after stimulus onset, and quality of the measurements. In addition, these factors provide a single measurement per time point, as opposed to the continuous recordings during stimulus presentations for the majority of the other physiological measures. Facial EMG activity depends on which muscle is recorded, is relatively difficult to measure as the electrodes need very precise placement, and may also capture facial expressions unrelated to effort. Only) found an increase in frontalis fEMG activity from medium to high task demand. However, they also stated that an effect of task demand was not found within subjects, due to high variability.

Relationship Between Physiological Measures
The reviewed studies indicated mostly nonsignificant and weak relationships between the physiological measures, and moderate at best. Weak relationships between measurements related to listening effort have been reported as well by). They identified eight studies that included correlation analyses between distinct physiological measures, which are included in the current review as well. They concluded that only 16.3% of the correlation analyses resulted in a significant relationship between the physiological measures. In the current review, the strongest reported association was between measures within the same modality (SCR frequency and amplitude) and the strongest (significant) association across modalities was between SCL and PPD. However, the notion that physiological measures (from different modalities) relate to listening effort and should therefore correlate would suggest that changes in listening effort uniformly affect different organs of the body. The weak and lack of correlations could indicate that this is not the case and that effort changes are reflected differently between various modalities. However, it is also important to consider possible alternative reasons for the weak relationships, such as differences in sensitivity and latencies of the measures to changes in task demand.
The most frequently assessed relationship is that between EEG alpha power and pupillometry measures (in seven of the included studies), but none of these relationships were significant. This might also be explained by their physiological and methodological differences. Pupil dilation has been thought to reflect the effort evoked by listening to the target stimulus, while alpha power has been hypothesized to reflect inhibition of irrelevant stimuli or noise. In addition, alpha power and pupil dilation effects may be on different timescales or have different effect latencies.) attempted to take the timescales into account, but still found no significant relationship. As discussed previously, alpha power is relatively sensitive to changes in auditory task demand (Table 3), but does not show the same consistency as pupil dilation results, supporting a different influence of changes in task demand and/or the resulting effort.

Relationship Between Physiological and Subjective Measurements
Similar to the relationships between physiological measures, the relationships between subjective and physiological measures were generally weak or absent, consistent with previous studies. It is difficult to subjectively rate listening effort, especially at very high difficulty levels. At these levels, the task becomes impossible, and the tendency to give up increases as well. This is often reflected by physiological reactivity which decreases at these levels. In contrast, subjective effort ratings are often still high at these levels. In addition, when participants report their subjective effort, they tend to be influenced by their subjective levels of performance and difficulty.) found that mental effort ratings are biased by performance when performance differs between conditions, but when performance is comparable between conditions, the ratings coincided with the expected mental effort. How a person rates their subjective effort can also be influenced by factors such as hearing acuity. Considering the lack of strong associations between subjective and physiological measures of listening effort, the physiological measures may not represent how a person subjectively experienced listening effort during the listening task, depending on the (wording of the) questions and experimental design. These issues should be taken into account when interpreting subjective ratings collected in a listening task.

Knowledge Gaps and Recommendations for Future Studies
The majority of the included studies used tasks and/or conditions that are on the high end of the performance scale (>70% performance, Table 2). In addition, the studies that used adaptive tests included conditions with a narrow performance range, for example around 50% correct. The reason for the unequal distribution of previously applied conditions might be that higher intelligibility levels better reflect daily life conditions. Also, at high intelligibility levels, performance might be at ceiling, which makes the addition of another measure valuable as this provides a means to demonstrate the effect of factors still affecting listening effort. Tables 2 and 3 together indicate that conditions with relatively high performances were predominantly used in studies that showed no effect of auditory task demand on the physiological measures of interest. When comparing task conditions with high performance and relatively low effort levels, the physiological measure may not be sensitive enough to show a significant effect. To get a better understanding of the (differential) sensitivity of physiological responses to changes across the full range of auditory task demand, it is important to also include very difficult and/or even (almost) impossible tasks, as well as moderate difficulties. Moreover, to further support the FUEL, it is necessary to explore the physiological responses across a wider range of the psychometric curve. Considering the non-monotonic relationship between task demand and effort, the physiological reactivity may be similar when comparing conditions with low and high-performance levels, so it is recommended to include a variety of performance levels. Furthermore, physiological measures may differ in their sensitivity to changes in either the low, mid, or high-performance range, or the shape of the non-monotonic relationship may differ between measures. For example,) showed that alpha power peaked between 60% and 80% intelligibility. Using fNIRS,) found the activation in the left inferior frontal cortex to peak around 25 to 50% intelligibility and decrease again as the intelligibility further increased. Lastly, pupil dilation has been shown to peak around 50% intelligibility. In addition, it is also possible that for some of the studies, absent effects might be influenced by small sample sizes and low power. As shown from the quality assessment (Table 5), more than half of the included studies did not justify their sample size based on a priori power analyses and their sample sizes were relatively small. Therefore, more studies are necessary to explore the full relationship of auditory task demand and the physiological measures using sufficiently large sample sizes.
Physiological measures of listening effort have been applied simultaneously in a considerable number of studies, but several combinations have not been used yet. For example, EEG alpha power has not been combined with HRV, PEP or cortisol. In addition, pupil dilation has been used most frequently as a measure of listening effort, but has rarely been applied in combination with an SNS or PNS measure. Although) and) measured pupil response in combination with EDA, the analyses performed in those studies do not allow conclusions about the relationship between the two measures in response to changes in auditory task demand. The first study did not include SCL in the correlation analyses due to poor reliability and the latter did not test for any associations. Therefore, it also remains unclear whether changes in pupil dilation with auditory task demand are associated with (increased) SNS activation, PNS withdrawal, or a combination of both and to what extent.
The study results could not be directly compared with each other in a meta-analysis. Among the included studies, there was a great variety of types of physiological measures applied. Even if the same measures were used, the studies often differed in measurement methods and tools, signal cutoffs, pre-processing strategies, type of baseline, or different parameters were analyzed. Furthermore, the studies widely differed in the manipulations of auditory task demand and stimulus types. One of the advantages of measures like PEP, HRV, and SCL is that they consistently show the same direction of effect with increasing effort and they provide a specific indication of either SNS or PNS activity. However, these measures do not seem sensitive enough to capture differences in listening effort when differences in auditory task demand are small. Pupil dilation is also consistent and more sensitive, but does not yield information on the specific contribution of the PNS and SNS. Therefore, based on the current literature, it is not yet possible to identify a physiological index or a particular combination that best captures changes in listening effort.
The quality assessment (Table 5) indicated that the overall quality of the included studies was reasonable. A significant number of the included studies lacked details regarding justification of the sample size, selection procedure of participants, or did not report a sufficient description of the participants, all adversely affecting the ability to interpret the potential generalizability of the results. To increase the ability to detect and interpret the results, it is recommended to include adequate sample sizes based on power analyses and/or previous studies and to provide sufficient details regarding the participants and inclusion procedure. In addition, many studies included young age groups, such as university students (see Supplementary Table 1 in Supplemental Digital Content 2, http://links.lww.com/EANDH/B382). Considering age is one of the strongest predictors of hearing loss and also influences the physiological measures, it is important to also represent older participants in future studies. Moreover, in a considerable number of the studies, details of the methods or statistical analyses were missing, potentially resulting in difficulties with replicating these studies. For example, several studies did not define the sound level of the auditory stimuli. In addition, in most cases, a critical alpha level of 0.05 was assumed, but not stated explicitly. In summary, for replicability and interpretability of the results, it is important to include the relevant details on the methods and analyses.
In the current review, we showed that the physiological measures vary in their sensitivity to auditory task demand manipulations and that relationships between the measures are generally weak. Furthermore, the physiological measures display different “peaks” with auditory task demand. These results should be taken into account when choosing which measures to apply and combine, also depending on which auditory task manipulations are used to induce listening effort. Our results support) who concluded that measures of listening effort are multidimensional and should not be used interchangeably. In addition, it supports FUEL, which states that multiple mechanisms underpin listening effort, such as working memory, attention, and speed of processing in the cognitive domain.) also stated that it is necessary to investigate the relationship between measures of listening effort and “whether or not it would be advantageous to combine tests.” The current review shows that the correlations between measures are weak and that it is advantageous to combine measures, depending on the research questions and study design. Also, the current review indicates that there is not yet a gold standard procedure of measuring effort, and developing such a standard might not even be feasible for all cases as the current measures might be differentially sensitive to different processes or manipulations of interest. Therefore, we want to highlight the need for standardized methods for each measure and clear justification of the chosen physiological measures. Last, an additional important consideration regarding the physiological responses and their relationships is the application of intra-individual or inter-individual analyses, as this can considerably affect results. For an overview of recommendations regarding the use of multiple physiological measures, see also).

LIMITATIONS
A limitation of the current review is that the summary of the effects of increasing auditory task demand on the physiological measures (Table 3) does not take into account that the non-monotonic relationship may differ between measures. As the details of these functions for each measure are currently partly unknown, it was not yet possible to illustrate the physiological responses over the full range of the hypothesized non-monotonic relationships. It is therefore advised to take into account the performance levels in each study (Table 2) in addition to the summary provided by Table 3. One of the caveats posed by some of the included studies is that the physiological measures were not tested simultaneously. For example,) were unable to use pupillometry and fNIRS simultaneously due to limitations of using fNIRS (participants were not allowed to speak during the task). Similarly, saliva samples (for example to measure CgA or cortisol) are usually retrieved once before, during, and after a task, which may affect its comparability with a continuously assessed measure, such as pupil dilation. Second, only a few of the studies tested participants who were hard-of-hearing. Therefore, we did not summarize these studies separately, although hearing loss can influence the physiological responses to auditory task demand manipulations. For example,) found a smaller PPD increase in the hard-of-hearing group compared with normal hearing participants for decreasing SNR, but no effect of group on CgA or cortisol was found.) found a decreased HRV in participants with hearing impairment but not in participants with normal hearing for the difficult conditions, as well as a higher SCL reactivity for hard-of-hearing participants (see Supplementary Table 1 in Supplemental Digital Content 2, http://links.lww.com/EANDH/B382, which provides a detailed overview of included the articles). Last, and as described earlier, the included studies varied greatly in procedures to manipulate auditory task demand, several measures have not yet been combined in the same studies, and the lack of consistent relations between measures limit the ability to make clear comparisons.

CONCLUSIONS
The current review assessed the effect of auditory task demand manipulations on simultaneously measured physiological responses and the relationship between these measures. Auditory task demand was mostly manipulated by changing the auditory quality of the stimuli. Most of the studies included conditions with relatively high-performance levels and normally hearing participants. Except for alpha power, all physiological measures either showed a consistent effect in the expected direction or no effect to auditory task demand manipulations. Within the included studies, most measures were not equally sensitive to task demand. In addition, the associations between the physiological measures were mostly non-significant or weak. These findings support the argument that these measures differ in their sensitivity to changes in listening effort and/or tap into different aspects of listening effort. Therefore, this review supports the FUEL and highlights the need for taking into account a multimodal approach when applying physiological measures in research to listening effort. Moreover, we highlighted a number of considerations for future studies, such as the need for better standardized methods and the use of a wider range of intelligibility levels.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by funding from ZonMw (grant number 09120011910029).

Supplementary Material
Abbreviations:
A.U.s
arbitrary units
ANS
autonomic nervous system
BOLD
blood oxygenation level dependent
BVPA
blood volume pulse amplitude
CgA
chromogranin A
CNS
central nervous system
DBP
diastolic blood pressure
ECG
electrocardiogram
EDA
electrodermal activity
EEG
electroencephalography
EMG
electromyography;
ERP
event-related potentials
ERSP
event-related spectral perturbation
fEMG
facial electromyography
fMRI
functional magnetic resonance imaging
fNIRS
functional near-infrared spectroscopy
HF
high frequency;
HH
hard-of-hearing
HR
heart rate
HRV
heart rate variability
IBI
inter-beat-intervals
ICG
impedance cardiogram
LFC
lateral frontal cortex
MPD
mean pupil dilation
NES
neuroendocrine system
NH
normal hearing
PEP
pre-ejection period
PNS
parasympathetic nervous system
PPD
peak pupil dilation
RMSSD
root mean square of successive differences
RSA
respiratory sinus arrhythmia
SCL
skin conductance level
SCR
skin conductance response
SNR
signal-to-noise ratio
SNS
sympathetic nervous system
SoNS
somatic nervous system
Supplemental digital content is available for this article. Direct URL citations appear in the printed text and are provided in the HTML and text of this article on the journal’s Web site (www.ear-hearing.com).
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
S.E.K, E.J.C.d.G. and A.A.Z. secured funding for this project. All authors were involved in conceptualization, design, and discussion of the results. L.K.H. performed the identification and evaluation of articles, quality assessment of all included articles and writing of the manuscript with input from all other authors. A.A.Z. and S.E.K. were involved in the quality assessment and evaluation of a selection of articles for inclusion. A.A.Z., S.E.K., and E.J.C.d.G. contributed to the writing of the manuscript drafts.

REFERENCES
Alpha oscillations during effortful continuous speech: From scalp EEG to Ear-EEG.
Self-reported listening-related effort and fatigue in hearing-impaired adults.
Measures of listening effort are multidimensional.
Effects of acoustic distortion and semantic context on event-related potentials to spoken words.
Pupillary changes in two memory tasks.
Successful performance and cardiovascular markers of challenge and threat: A meta-analysis.
Novel sounds as a psychophysiological measure of listening effort in older listeners with and without hearing loss.
Effects of age and task difficulty on ERP responses to novel sounds presented during a speech-perception-in-noise test.
A guide for analysing electrodermal activity (EDA) & skin conductance responses (SCRs) for psychological experiments.
The intensity of motivation.
Individual differences in the autonomic origins of heart rate reactivity: The psychometrics of respiratory sinus arrhythmia and preejection period.
Methods of assessing vagus nerve activity and reflexes.
Expectations boost the reconstruction of auditory features from electrophysiological responses to noisy speech.
Effects of noise on arousal in a speech communication setting.
The electrodermal system.
Relationships between short-term blood-pressure fluctuations and heart-rate variability in resting subjects I: A spectral analysis approach.
Should heart rate variability be “corrected” for heart rate? Biological, quantitative, and interpretive considerations.
Top-down modulation of neural envelope tracking: The interplay with behavioral, self-report and neural measures of listening effort.
Levels of awakening salivary CgA in response to stress in healthy subjects.
Neural indices of listening effort in noisy environments.
Development of a critical appraisal tool to assess the quality of cross-sectional studies (AXIS).
The human respiratory gate.
Neural speech tracking in the theta and in the delta frequency band differentially encode clarity and comprehension of speech in noise.
Hearing aid noise reduction lowers the sustained listening effort during continuous speech in noise—A combined pupillometry and EEG study.
Listener characteristics differentially affect self-reported and physiological measures of effort associated with two challenging listening conditions.
Listening effort: Are we measuring cognition or affect, or both?
Autonomic nervous system responses during perception of masked speech may reflect constructs other than subjective listening effort.
Basics of autonomic nervous system function.
Comparisons of the sensitivity and reliability of multiple measures of listening effort.
Respiratory sinus arrhythmia, cardiac vagal tone, and respiration: Within- and between-individual relations.
EEG alpha and pupil diameter reflect endogenous auditory attention switching and listening effort.
Effects of adrenergic receptor activation and blockade on the systolic preejection period, heart rate, and arterial pressure in man.
Development of NASA-TLX (Task Load Index): Results of empirical and theoretical research.
Improving science by overcoming laboratory pitfalls with hormone measurements.
Cortical oscillations and entrainment in speech processing during working memory load.
Declining prevalence of hearing loss in US adults aged 20 to 69 years.
Subjective listening effort and electrodermal activity in listening situations with reverberation and noise.
Oscillations in the alpha band (9–12 Hz) increase with memory load during retention in a short-term memory task.
A methodology to compensate for individual differences in psychophysiological assessment.
Pupil size as a window on neural substrates of cognition.
Relationships between pupil diameter and neuronal activity in the locus coeruleus, colliculi, and cingulate cortex.
Pupil diameter and load on memory.
Salivary chromogranin—A as a marker of psychological stress during a cognitive test battery in humans.
Salivary cortisol in psychobiological research: An overview.
EEG-alpha rhythms and memory processes.
Alpha-band oscillations, attention, and controlled access to stored information.
The effect of reward on listening effort as reflected by the pupil dilation response.
Cortisol, chromogranin A, and pupillary responses evoked by speech recognition tasks in normally hearing and hard-of-hearing listeners: A pilot study.
Emotional signals from faces, bodies and scenes influence observers’ face expressions, fixations and pupil-size.
Development of an adaptive scaling method for subjective listening effort.
Aging, hearing loss, and listening effort: Imaging studies of the aging listener.
Facial EMG responses to emotional expressions are related to emotion perception ability.
Neural activity during sentence processing as reflected in theta, alpha, beta, and gamma oscillations.
Effects of positive and negative affect on electromyographic activity over zygomaticus major and corrugator supercilii.
Effect of auditory task type on physiological and subjective measures of listening effort in individuals with normal hearing.
Cortical correlates of speech intelligibility measured using functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS).
Validity and reliability of a scale to assess fatigue.
Investigating feed-forward neural regulation of circulation from analysis of spontaneous arterial pressure and heart rate fluctuations.
Cortical processing of location changes in a “cocktail-party” situation: Spatial oddball effects on electrophysiological correlates of auditory selective attention.
Sympathetic skin nerve discharges in relation to amplitude of skin resistance responses.
Talker discontinuity disrupts attention to speech: Evidence from EEG and pupillometry.
Sudden sensorineural hearing loss increases the risk of stroke: A 5-year follow-up study.
Modeling the hemodynamic response function in fMRI: Efficiency, bias and mis-modeling.
Inter- and intra-individual coupling between pupillary, electrophysiological, and behavioral responses in a visual oddball task.
Autonomic nervous system reactivity during speech repetition tasks: Heart rate variability and skin conductance.
Subjective and psychophysiological indexes of listening effort in a competing-talker task.
Autonomic nervous system responses to hearing-related demand and evaluative threat.
Effects of hearing loss on heart rate variability and skin conductance measured during sentence recognition in noise.
A curvilinear effect of mental workload on mental effort and behavioral adaptability: An approach with the pre-ejection period.
Heart rate variability (HRV) analysis: A methodology for organizational neuroscience.
Physiology of the autonomic nervous system.
Listening effort and fatigue: What exactly are we measuring? A British Society of Audiology Cognition in Hearing Special Interest Group “white paper.”
Monitoring alpha oscillations and pupil dilation across a performance-intensity function.
Assessing autonomic nervous system activity.
The association between hearing loss and social isolation in older adults.
Objective assessment of listening effort: Coregistration of pupillometry and EEG.
Statistical and computational models of the visual world paradigm: Growth curves and individual differences.
A potential bias in subjective ratings of mental effort.
Effect of speech rate on neural tracking of speech.
Stress-induced changes in human salivary alpha-amylase activity—Associations with adrenergic activity.
Multiple brain signatures of integration in the comprehension of degraded speech.
Suppressed alpha oscillations predict intelligibility of speech and its acoustic details.
Adverse listening conditions and memory load drive a common alpha oscillatory network.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging with contrast dependent on blood oxygenation.
Functional brain mapping by blood oxygenation level-dependent contrast magnetic resonance imaging. A comparison of signal characteristics with a biophysical model.
Impact of SNR, masker type and noise reduction processing on sentence recognition performance and listening effort as indicated by the pupil dilation response.
Impact of stimulus-related factors and hearing impairment on listening effort as indicated by pupil dilation.
PRISMA 2020 explanation and elaboration: Updated guidance and exemplars for reporting systematic reviews.
Listening effort: How the cognitive consequences of acoustic challenge are reflected in brain and behavior.
Neural tracking of attended versus ignored speech is differentially affected by hearing loss.
Hearing loss impacts neural alpha oscillations under adverse listening conditions.
Processing speed and timing in aging adults: Psychoacoustics, speech perception, and comprehension.
Hearing impairment and cognitive energy: The Framework for Understanding Effortful Listening (FUEL).
Hearing, cognition, and healthy aging: Social and public health implications of the links between age-related declines in hearing and cognition.
The presence of another individual influences listening effort, but not performance.
The hidden effect of hearing acuity on speech recall, and compensatory effects of self-paced listening.
Social observation increases the cardiovascular response of hearing-impaired listeners during a speech reception task.
Investigating the influences of task demand and reward on cardiac pre-ejection period reactivity during a speech-in-noise task.
Prospective effects of hearing status on loneliness and depression in older persons: Identification of subgroups.
Parsing inter- and intra-individual variability in key nervous system mechanisms of stress responsivity and across functional domains.
Pay attention to your manipulation checks! Reward impact on cardiac reactivity is moderated by task context.
The moderating effect of success importance on the relationship between listening demand and listening effort.
Combining multiple psychophysiological measures of listening effort: Challenges and recommendations.
Task difficulty effects on cardiac activity.
The heart contracts to reward: Monetary incentives and preejection period.
Three Decades of Research on Motivational Intensity Theory: What we have learned about effort and what we still don’t know.
Correlation coefficients: Appropriate use and interpretation.
Comparison of psychophysiological and dual-task measures of listening effort.
Challenge or threat? Cardiovascular indexes of resilience and vulnerability to potential stress in humans.
An exploratory Study of EEG alpha oscillation and pupil dilation in hearing-aid users during effortful listening to continuous speech.
An exploratory study of the effect of tinnitus on listening effort using EEG and pupillometry.
Exploring the correlations between measures of listening effort in adults and children: A systematic review with narrative synthesis.
The costs (and benefits) of effortful listening on context processing: A simultaneous electrophysiology, pupillometry, and behavioral study.
Effortful listening: Sympathetic activity varies as a function of listening demand but parasympathetic activity does not.
Estimation of signal-to-noise ratios in realistic sound scenarios.
The pupillary response in cognitive psychophysiology and schizophrenia.
Sympathetic and parasympathetic innervation of pupillary dilation during sustained processing.
Personality, emotion, and individual differences in physiological responses.
Understanding speech amid the jingle and jangle: Recommendations for improving measurement practices in listening effort research.
Cortical alpha oscillations as a tool for auditory selective inhibition.
Pupillometry as an integrated readout of distinct attentional networks.
Amplitude and bilateral coherency of facial and jaw-elevator EMG activity as an index of effort during a two-choice serial reaction task.
Evaluation of the preliminary auditory profile test battery in an international multi-centre study.
The influence of mental fatigue on facial EMG activity during a simulated workday.
The influence of performance feedback on goal-setting and mental effort regulation.
Pupillary responses on the visual backward masking task reflect general cognitive ability.
The pupil dilation response during speech perception in dark and light: The involvement of the parasympathetic nervous system in listening effort.
Facial and jaw-elevator EMG activity in relation to changes in performance level during a sustained information processing task.
Toward a more comprehensive understanding of the impact of masker type and signal-to-noise ratio on the pupillary response while performing a speech-in-noise test.
Effortful listening: The processing of degraded speech depends critically on attention.
Effects of adult aging and hearing loss on comprehension of rapid speech varying in syntactic complexity.
Regaining lost time: Adult aging and the effect of time restoration on recall of time-compressed speech.
Best practices and advice for using pupillometry to measure listening effort: An introduction for those who want to get started.
Sustained frontal midline theta enhancements during effortful listening track working memory demands.
Frontal midline theta power as an index of listening effort.
Neural alpha dynamics in younger and older listeners reflect acoustic challenges and predictive benefits.
The relation of strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation.
The eye as a window to the listening brain: Neural correlates of pupil size as a measure of cognitive listening load.
The pupil dilation response to auditory stimuli: Current state of knowledge.
Cognitive processing load across a wide range of listening conditions: Insights from pupillometry.
Pupil response as an indication of effortful listening: The influence of sentence intelligibility.
Please try harder! The influence of hearing status and evaluative feedback during listening on the pupil dilation response, saliva-cortisol and saliva alpha-amylase levels.
Investigating effortful speech perception using fNIRS and pupillometry measures.