Screening and in silico evaluation of candidate late-stage antigens for incorporation into multi-stage and post-exposure vaccines against tuberculosis
A quarter of the world’s population harbours latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis, yet current vaccines, including BCG, offer limited protection against latency or reactivation. Multi-stage or post-exposure vaccines targeting antigens expressed during these phases may mitigate TB burden. This review screens late-stage Mtb antigens, evaluating their antigenicity, immunogenicity, and protective efficacy, summarizes in silico analyses, and discusses challenges and examples of vaccine design, highlighting candidates for incorporation into next-generation TB vaccines.

Introduction
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), the main cause of tuberculosis (TB) in humans, remains a serious global health threat. Mathematical modelling estimated that one-quarter of the world’s population in 2014 was latently infected with Mtb. Reactivation of this clinically latent infection is responsible for a large proportion of active TB cases each year. This contributed to an estimated 10.7 million new cases of active TB disease and 1.2 million deaths worldwide in 2024 alone.
With the hope of decreasing the high incidence and mortality of TB, the past two decades have witnessed considerable efforts to develop improved drugs and vaccines against this infection. Given the continuing spread of multi-drug-resistant Mtb strains and insufficiency of treatment to interrupt transmission in highly TB-burdened populations, the development of more effective vaccines seems to be a method of choice for controlling the spread of TB.
The only licensed vaccine against TB available today is the live attenuated bacterium Mycobacterium bovis Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG). BCG is a prophylactic vaccine; it protects children against pulmonary, meningeal, and miliary TB for up to 10 years, but its efficacy declines with each subsequent year. Accordingly, BCG offers variable protective efficacy (0–78%) against pulmonary TB in adults. Indeed, BCG does not confer protection against post-exposure active and latent TB, nor does it prevent TB reactivation later in life. As a consequence, BCG and leading prophylactic TB vaccines currently in clinical trials (https://tbtrialtrack.who.int/#/) may necessitate several decades to result in the eradication of TB, as they are unlikely to be effective in individuals already latently infected with Mtb. Thus, an ideal vaccine should prevent the progression to TB disease following primary infection, reinfection and reactivation of latent infection.
Given the substantial reservoir of latent TB in humans which has the potential of reactivation at any point in an individual’s life; the inefficiency of BCG against latent TB and its reactivation; the failure of anti-TB medications due to the continuing spread of multidrug-resistant, extensively drug-resistant strains and the emergence of totally drug-resistant Mtb strains; as well as the escalation of co-infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) which has contributed to further reactivation of dormant TB; there is a crucial need for novel TB vaccines that incorporate antigens from all the three stages of Mtb infection: early infection, latency/dormancy and reactivation. These antigens can be used for the design of multi-stage vaccines exploiting the advantage of immune protection against all the stages of the infection or in post-exposure vaccines aiming at elimination/containment of latent TB and prevention of its reactivation.

Late-stage antigens encoded by Mtb
Tuberculosis phases (early, latency/dormancy, resuscitation, and reactivation).
Mtb infection exists on a continuum, ranging from elimination to active, contagious TB disease, and the Mtb antigenic repertoire varies across these stages. Mtb is transmitted via aerosol and primarily infects the lungs. Following exposure, only a minority of individuals develop primary TB disease. Early-phase antigens, including major vaccine candidates such as Ag85A−C, ESAT-6, and CFP-10, are expressed during this stage. Most individuals, however, control infection in a clinically asymptomatic state termed latent TB. Latency/dormancy is characterized by the formation of a solid granuloma in the lung, composed of immune cells, such as macrophages, dendritic cells, and T cells. Within these granulomas, Mtb persists in a dormant state with reduced replication and metabolism, expressing antigens of the DosR regulon, the EHR, and starvation antigens. Resuscitation occurs when immune control weakens, allowing dormant bacilli to be reawakened by resuscitation-promoting factors (RpfA–E). Reactivation is marked by caseous or necrotic granulomas. The reactivated bacilli downregulate DosR antigens while upregulating genes involved in metal transport, RNA, DNA, and cell wall synthesis. The reactivated infection may remain confined to the lung, leading to pulmonary TB, or disseminate to other organs. Secondary TB may also result from re-infection, instead of reactivation of latent infection. Mtb Mycobacterium tuberculosis, ESAT-6 early secreted antigenic target 6 kDa, CFP-10: culture filtrate protein 10 kDa, EHR enduring hypoxic response.
Tuberculosis progresses through four distinct phases: 1. Exposure: usually through inhaling airborne droplets of Mtb from a patient with active TB; 2. Primary infection: Mtb colonizes in the lung, and the immune system attempts to contain the infection by forming multi-layer structures of immune cells named granulomas; 3. Latent TB: the immune system succeeds in containing the infection, the bacilli remain dormant without causing symptoms, and are not transmissible; 4. Reactivation: the immune system might weaken due to factors such as aging, HIV infection, malnutrition, diabetes, or immunosuppressive medications, allowing the bacteria to begin multiplication and release from necrotic granulomas. This leads to the onset of active TB disease. Active TB, either from recent infection or reactivation, results in contagious spread of the pathogen. The antigenic repertoire of Mtb undergoes dynamic changes as the bacteria transition from primary infection to latency/dormancy and, ultimately, reactivation (Fig. 1).
Late-stage antigens of Mtb are expressed during the two phases of latency/dormancy and reactivation. In the latent phase, the highly expressed Mtb genes primarily belong to three groups: (i) The 48-gene dormancy regulon controlled by DosR (Rv3133c), which exhibits upregulation at the beginning of exposure to hypoxic conditions, low-dose nitric oxide, carbon monoxide exposure, and during infection in gamma interferon (IFN)-γ-activated macrophages. (ii) The enduring hypoxic response (EHR) system, comprising nearly 230 genes that are activated later during hypoxia, shows a substantial overlap with Mtb genes induced by nutrient deprivation, includes many genes of the DosR regulon, and may contain the machinery used to enter into and survive latency. (iii) Genes encoding starvation antigens that are upregulated by Mtb upon nutrient depletion and possibly contribute to long-term survival within the host.
Under conditions where the host’s immune protection is suppressed, the latent phase transitions towards reactivation. Induced by five resuscitation-promoting factors (Rv0867c, Rv1009, Rv1884c, Rv2389c and Rv2450c, named RpfA–E), resuscitation is characterized by the upregulation of a set of 174 genes. The five Rpfs are probably secreted or membrane-anchored, making them prospective targets for recognition by the host immune system. Consequently, they may be involved in inducing (protective) immune responses against TB reactivation.
During the reactivation phase, the recovery of cellular physiological and metabolic functions leads to the resumption of cell replication. The reactivation phase involves the downregulation of latency-associated genes, including DosR. On the contrary, genes involved in metal transport and remobilization, second messenger-mediated responses, DNA repair and recombination, and synthesis of major cell wall components are upregulated.
This review focuses on antigens associated with latency, resuscitation, and reactivation in Mtb, hereafter referred to as late-stage antigens. Figure 1 and Table 1 represent antigens that belong to each of these three stages.

The inefficiency of BCG in eliciting immune responses against late-stage antigens of Mtb
BCG is derived from an attenuated M. bovis strain, generated through repeated passaging of a virulent parent strain. During the attenuation period (1908–1966), the genome of various BCG strains underwent up to 25 regions of deletion (RD) compared to parental M. bovis. Despite its attenuated virulence, BCG retains several immune-evasion-associated constituents that may confer decoy immune reactions. This has been proposed as a potential contributor to BCG’s limited efficacy in preventing reactivation of latent infection and may even condition the host for reactivation.
As a result of attenuation, BCG strains have also lost several immunologically essential components, including key T cell epitopes present in natural Mtb strains. For instance, early secreted antigenic target 6 kDa (ESAT-6) and culture filtrate protein 10 kDa (CFP-10), antigens included in some new TB vaccines, are encoded by RD1 and are absent in BCG. While certain regions have been lost, the DosR regulon retains over 97% amino acid sequence homology between BCG and Mtb, indicating 85.4% identicalness. Furthermore, RNA microarray analysis of 14 distinct BCG strains, following in vitro stimulation with hypoxia and exposure to nitric oxide, revealed a functional DosR regulon with an expression profile similar to that of Mtb. Despite these similarities, various studies have reported the failure of BCG vaccination to induce substantial immune responses to latency antigens. Vekemans et al. showed that neonatal BCG vaccination induced IFN-γ responses to several non-DosR encoded antigens from Mtb, but not the DosR antigen HspX (Rv2031c). Lin et al. assessed immune responses to a series of TB latency antigens following vaccination with BCG, and reported that BCG vaccination did not increase the responses to these antigens, either in adolescent humans or in BALB/c mice. In contrast, responses to the latency antigens were observed in the mice vaccinated with plasmid DNAs encoding these proteins. Geluk et al. reported IFN-γ responses to HspX were significantly higher in Mtb-exposed individuals compared to Mtb-unexposed BCG vaccinees. These results were further corroborated in HLA-DR3 and HLA-A2 transgenic mice, leading to the identification of two novel HspX-specific T cell epitopes. T cell responses against these HspX-derived epitopes were absent after BCG vaccination, whereas non-latency antigens were efficiently recognized.
Several other studies have substantiated the immunogenicity of both latency and resuscitation-associated antigens of Mtb (discussed in detail below). Therefore, the poor immune response to these antigens following BCG vaccination can largely be attributed to BCG’s inability to express them. Indeed, BCG strains are unlikely to persist for prolonged periods in immunocompetent individuals, as they are rapidly controlled by the host immune response following vaccination. Thus, the late-stage gene products are unlikely to be induced after BCG vaccination. As a result, BCG fails to generate adequate immune responses to Mtb late-stage antigens and does not protect against the establishment of latent TB and its subsequent reactivation. That being the case, the immune responses to these antigens can be harnessed to complement BCG, boost immunity when administered after BCG priming, or enhance next-generation vaccines intended to replace BCG. To this aim, a more thorough understanding of immune responses to late-stage Mtb antigens will aid in identifying specific antigens contributing to protection against TB.

Impact of environmental mycobacteria sensitization on BCG efficacy
BCG efficacy against TB can be influenced by prior exposure to environmental mycobacteria. Studies have indicated that excluding infants and children already sensitized to mycobacteria was associated with a higher efficiency of BCG vaccination. In other words, BCG vaccination is more effective in infants and children who have not been previously sensitized to mycobacteria. Two main hypotheses explain this phenomenon. The masking hypothesis proposes that prior exposure to environmental mycobacteria provides baseline immunity that masks the additional protective effect of BCG. In contrast, the blocking hypothesis suggests that pre-existing exposure to environmental mycobacteria blocks BCG replication, preventing the vaccine from eliciting a strong protective immune response. These two hypotheses are not mutually exclusive and may occur simultaneously (for further discussion on these hypotheses, please refer to ref. ). Taken together, these observations support the development of vaccines as alternatives to BCG, specifically designed for administration to individuals with prior mycobacterial sensitization.

Heterologous protective benefits of BCG against non-TB infections
Among various vaccine approaches against TB (as reviewed by Zhuang et al. ), BCG presents a unique advantage. It has been suggested that BCG vaccination provides nonspecific (heterologous) protection in children, reducing morbidity and mortality caused by unrelated infections. A study conducted in Spain compared non-BCG-vaccinated children to those vaccinated at birth, and revealed that BCG vaccination was correlated with lower hospitalization rates due to non-TB-related respiratory infection and sepsis. Similarly, a study in Uganda compared infants vaccinated with BCG at birth or at 6 weeks of age, and found that within the first 6 weeks of life (before the latter group received BCG), infants who received BCG at birth showed a lower incidence of non-TB infections. A meta-analysis of 16 randomized controlled trials found that BCG vaccination offers an estimated 44% decrease in risk for non-TB respiratory infections and lowers all-cause mortality by 22% within one year of vaccination.
The heterologous protection conferred by BCG is linked to trained innate immunity, which involves epigenetic reprogramming of innate immune cells. Studies in mouse and human have shown that BCG vaccination trains bone marrow progenitors, circulating monocytes, macrophages and natural killer (NK) cells, and induces emergency granulopoiesis. Mechanistically, parenteral BCG can disseminate to gut-associated sites, inducing intestinal permeability leading to metabolomic changes in the gut, circulation and lungs. Specific metabolites, such as deoxycarnitine and butyrate, released into circulation following vaccination, modulate alveolar macrophages and enhance their protective response against subsequent Mtb infection. It is further shown that increased lactate levels in BCG vaccinated individuals lead to histone lactylation in monocytes and macrophages, contributing to trained immunity. BCG-induced trained innate immunity has shown beneficial effects across various diseases, including cancer, viral infections, and autoimmune diseases (please refer to ref. ). Whether prior Mtb infection or sensitization to environmental mycobacteria interferes with these heterologous benefits of BCG appears to be an interesting question for further investigation.
Given the heterologous protection offered by BCG, genetically modified BCG vaccines capable of inducing enhanced immune responses to antigens of latency and reactivation phases of TB represent promising candidates for multi-stage or post-exposure vaccines. Notably, significant protection against sustained, de novo Mtb infection was observed in South African adolescents after BCG revaccination. This being so, the overexpression of late-stage Mtb antigens by recombinant BCG (rBCG) vaccines can enhance the antigenic repertoire of the parental vaccine. Such modifications can extend beyond Mtb antigens and include antigens from co-infecting pathogens such as HIV, thereby contributing to the development of polyvalent multi-purpose rBCG vaccines.

Screening Mtb antigens for TB vaccine development based on infected human immune repertoires
Healthy individuals with a positive tuberculin skin test (TST), which uses purified protein derivative (PPD), or a positive interferon-gamma release assay (IGRA), such as QuantiFERON-TB Gold (QFT), which is based on Mtb-specific antigens ESAT-6 and CFP10, are classified as having latent TB infection and are referred to as latently Mtb-infected individuals (LTBI). Interpretation of these tests, however, must consider prior BCG vaccination and exposure to non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM), both of which can cause false-positive TST results, with IGRA cross-reactivity reported in rare cases of NTM infection.
Healthy latently Mtb-infected individuals (H-LTBI) without active disease, such as healthy household contacts (HHC) of active pulmonary TB patients (PTB), are recognized to harbour protective immunity against TB. These subjects are extensively studied for identifying mycobacterial components suitable for vaccine development. Not only H-LTBI but also TB patients serve as reference populations for antigen screening. Indeed, models describing latent TB as a graded spectrum of infection suggest that even in individuals with active TB, immune responses capable of sterilizing at least some granulomas may exist. Consequently, the recognition of late-stage antigens by cells from TB patients is not unexpected. While such recognition can potentially reflect involvement of these antigens in TB pathogenesis, it may indicate a specific immune response directed against them.
Correlates of protection against TB.
IFN-γ produced by Th1 cells stimulates infected macrophages to generate reactive nitrogen intermediates (RNI), promoting intracellular killing of bacteria (IKB). It also restricts the accumulation of terminally differentiated Th1 cells with poor parenchymal migration and enhances CD8+ T cells functions, including IFN-γ and TNF production and lysis of infected macrophages. TNF-α is essential for macrophage RNI production. Th17 cells facilitate Th1 cells recruitment to the lung. IL-17 promotes T cells localization within lung lymphoid follicles (thereby activating macrophages), granuloma formation, IgA responses, and neutrophil recruitment. Neutrophils contribute antimicrobial peptides but can also drive immunopathology. Humoral immunity, including IgA against α-crystallin as well as anti-arabinomannan IgG and lipoarabinomannan-specific IgM, further enhances macrophage-mediated IKB. Collectively, balanced Th1/Th17 responses, together with antibody-mediated mechanisms, support effective innate immune activation and protection against TB. RNI reactive nitrogen intermediates, IKB intracellular killing of bacteria, TB tuberculosis, CTL cytotoxic T lymphocyte.
When screening sets of antigens for inclusion in TB vaccines, it is essential to compare the magnitude of positive responses between H-LTBI and TB patients to assess the protective value of each antigen. A higher frequency of cells recognizing an antigen in H-LTBI compared to TB patients indicates a greater likelihood that the immune response against this antigen contributes to infection control. Accordingly, several studies have reported a preferential recognition of Mtb late-stage antigens by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from H-LTBI, and to a lesser extent, from TB patients. This suggests that the immune responses to these antigens may play protective roles against TB, potentially contributing to the control of latent Mtb infection and its subsequent reactivation. It should be further noted that this is a comparative approach used to prioritize antigens. The absolute immune response in TB patients may be influenced by the frequency, phenotype, and function of circulating T cells (discussed in detail below), which in turn affects their representation in PBMCs. Factors such as sequestration of T cells into infected tissues, lymphopenia, reduced proliferative capacity of T cells, and the progressive differentiation state of T cells in TB patients can modulate PBMCs' response in this population.

Correlates of protection against TB (Fig. 2)
While a complete understanding of protective immunity to Mtb is still lacking, research indicates that CD8+ and CD4+ lymphocytes, particularly CD4+ T-helper (Th)1 cells, play a key role in protection against TB. IFN-γ produced by Th1 cells stimulates infected macrophages to generate reactive nitrogen intermediates, thereby restricting the growth of the intracellular Mtb. It is required for an effective CD8+ T cell response. These CD8+ T cells differentiate to cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) which in turn contribute to TB protection by producing IFN-γ and TNF and by lysing infected macrophages. Th1 cell-derived IFN-γ also limits the accumulation of terminally differentiated Th1 cells in the lung vasculature, which are unable to effectively migrate into the lung parenchyma. TNF-α is essential for reactive nitrogen production by macrophages. Research also points to the protective role of IL-17-producing CD4+ T cells (i.e., Th17 cells) and IL-17 in TB. Th17 cells mediate recruitment of IFN-γ-producing CD4+ T cells to the lung to restrict Mtb growth. IL-17 mediates localization of T cells within lung lymphoid follicles, thereby activating macrophages and limiting Mtb growth. It also induces granuloma formation, and is required for the induction of immunoglobulin A (IgA) responses in the lung, which serve as a correlate of local protection. IL-17 and its receptor signalling are essential for neutrophil recruitment to the lungs, which contributes to innate resistance against TB via antimicrobial peptides. However, an excessive neutrophil response can cause immunopathology, highlighting the need for a regulated Th17 response.
Concerning humoral responses, in addition to IgA (e.g., against α-crystallin), monoclonal IgG against Mtb surface molecules such as arabinomannan, as well as lipoarabinomannan-specific IgM, have been shown to contribute to and correlate with protection, respectively. These antibodies can enhance the macrophage-mediated killing of intracellular Mtb, among other functions. Collectively, a balanced Th1/Th17 response that controls bacterial growth while limiting immunopathology appears to be a key correlate of protective immunity against TB, as observed in asymptomatic LTBI macaques, with antibody responses potentially contributing as well (Fig. 2). For an extended overview of the cells and mediators associated with TB protection, please refer to this book chapter (by Peralta Alvarez et al.).

Promiscuous antigens and safety of vaccines incorporating Mtb late-stage antigens
Given the broad heterogeneity in major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and II alleles, selecting antigens for inclusion in a new TB vaccine necessitates epitopes that bind to a wide range of human leucocyte antigens (HLA), referred to as promiscuous epitopes. Indeed, to develop a vaccine that effectively protects genetically diverse human populations, promiscuous recognition of the candidate antigens by individuals of various ethnic backgrounds is vital. Certain Mtb antigens have been shown to elicit population-dependent responses due to genetic variations in host immune responses, variations in circulating Mtb strains, and differences in assays employed. However, numerous latency and resuscitation-associated antigens have consistently demonstrated recognition across diverse populations. These antigens emerge as promising candidates for incorporation into new TB vaccines (further discussed below).
Alongside the required promiscuous nature, late-stage antigens of Mtb must meet safety criteria for inclusion in multi-stage and particularly post-exposure TB vaccines. A post-exposure vaccine should induce protective immunity in individuals with pre-existing T cell responses to mycobacterial antigens that are persistent (in H-LTBI and HHC), waning (in household contacts with incipient disease), or absent (in patients successfully treated for TB). To ensure the success of this vaccination, the pre-existing immunity in the host and the vaccine-induced immunity must interact synergistically. If the vaccine-induced immunity counteracts the pre-existing immunity, it may trigger severe Koch-like reactions. The Koch reaction refers to the necrotic inflammation that occurs at the site of challenge in Mtb-infected guinea pigs following exposure to either live mycobacteria or mycobacterial antigens. Accordingly, Koch-like reactions in LTBI or cured patients can lead to tissue-destructive reactions, necrosis and bacterial dissemination.
Furthermore, there remains scepticism surrounding the incorporation of Rpfs into post-exposure vaccines, primarily due to the lack of conclusive evidence on whether such vaccines can sterilize latent lesions without reawakening the disease process. Thus, it is imperative to ensure the safety of a candidate vaccine harbouring Mtb late-stage antigens, particularly when intended for use in a post-exposure setting. Safety tests must be conducted in animal models of latent TB to confirm that the disease does not reactivate, nor is it exacerbated. Severe weight loss, an increased bacterial CFU in the lungs, or bacterial dissemination to other tissues are key indicators of disease progression and potential safety concerns in experimental models. For this purpose, macaques serve as a more suitable animal model, as small-animal models fail to reproduce key aspects of human latent infection.
When administering protein or subunit vaccines to animals for safety testing, the choice of adjuvant can significantly affect immunological outcomes. A study compared five different adjuvant—Alum, MF59®, GLA-SE, IC31® and CAF01—each formulated with a fusion of three Mtb antigens (Ag85B, ESAT-6 and Rv2660c), to assess immunogenicity and protective efficacy in mice. Each adjuvant induced a distinct immunological signature, characterized by varying levels of humoral (IgG1/IgG2a) and cellular (Th1/Th2/Th17) responses, highlighting the role of adjuvants in shaping immune responses. Similarly, formulation of mycobacterial antigen PPE15 with five different adjuvants produced differential IgG and T helper cells responses. These findings suggest that, when evaluating the safety of a candidate late-stage Mtb antigen in animal models, it is advisable to test the antigen in combination with different adjuvants.
While essential for safety testing, animal models have limitations due to species-specific differences in TB pathogenesis. Studying cytokine profiles after ex vivo stimulation of PBMCs from H-LTBI and TB patients can further help anticipate the safety of a candidate antigen. As discussed, immunity to Mtb infection requires a predominant Th1 response, with contributions from Th17 cells. If a candidate antigen stimulates Th2 cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-4, in preference to Th1 types, such as IFN-γ and TNF-α, it is less likely to enforce post-exposure protection in LTBI. Instead, such a response may potentially compromise the existing immunity.
Schematic outlining recommended steps for selecting late-stage Mtb antigens for incorporation into novel multi-stage and post-exposure TB vaccines.
Candidate antigens should be broadly recognized across diverse human populations to ensure effectiveness across different HLA backgrounds (i.e., promiscuity). Safety evaluations, especially for post-exposure vaccines, are essential to minimize the risk of reactivation of latent TB infection and excessive reactogenicity in LTBI. For immunobiological studies, selected antigens should be evaluated for antigenicity in PBMCs or whole-blood cultures from LTBI and, to a lesser extent, active TB patients. Immunogenicity and protective efficacy should then be evaluated in relevant animal models and challenge studies. In silico analyses and computational tools should be used to further evaluate and prioritize antigens. Alignment with existing datasets and published studies can strengthen confidence in antigen selection. These steps may be carried out before or after immunobiological evaluations. Clinical trials remain the gold standard for confirming the safety, immunogenicity, and protective efficacy of TB vaccines incorporating selected late-stage antigens. Across phases I, II, and III, clinical trials establish optimal dosing, safety, immunogenicity, and efficacy in preventing IGRA/QFT conversion or infection in uninfected individuals, as well as progression to bacteriologically confirmed pulmonary TB disease in LTBI. Mtb Mycobacterium tuberculosis, PBMCs peripheral blood mononuclear cells, LTBI latently Mtb-infected individuals, H-LTBI healthy-latently Mtb-infected individuals, TB tuberculosis, IGRA/QFT interferon-gamma release assay/quantiFERON-TB Gold.
Upon passing the promiscuousness and safety consideration steps, candidate antigens can undergo further screening (discussed below) to ascertain their suitability as pertinent vaccine candidates (Fig. 3).

Antigenicity versus immunogenicity and protective efficacy of the candidate antigens
Identifying, isolating, and immunobiologically characterizing the mycobacterial components involved in eliciting protective immune responses are critical steps in screening vaccine candidates against TB. However, due to the absence of validated correlates of protection and the unavailability of a human challenge model, selecting antigens depends on their ability to be recognized by T cells from H-LTBI and subsequently induce IFN-γ in ex vivo assays (referred to as antigenicity).
To establish a causal link between the observed T cell responses in LTBI and their protection against TB, it is essential to conduct follow-up studies on untreated H-LTBI who continue to control Mtb infection over the long term and remain healthy. Specifically, monitoring the association between IFN-γ responses to late-stage antigens in H-LTBI and long-term protection against TB disease is crucial. Of interest, higher IFN-γ/IL-10 ratios were shown to correlate with protection after natural TB exposure; HHC showed elevated IFN-γ/IL-10 ratios compared to the household contacts who contracted TB. These factors should be considered when evaluating the antigenicity of candidate antigens.
In addition to, or as an alternative to, antigenicity, assessing the immunogenicity of a vaccine candidate is crucial. This involves evaluating the antigens’ in vivo activity in immunized animal models, followed by ex vivo stimulation of the T cells to study cytokine profiles.
A vaccine candidate, demonstrating antigenicity and immunogenicity, may warrant evaluation for protective efficacy in animal models challenged with Mtb. An antigen is considered protective if vaccinated animals exhibit a reduction of more than 0.3 log₁₀ in pathogen load following the challenge, compared to unvaccinated controls. Protection against experimentally induced reactivation of latent infection should also be tested, although such studies have been rarely conducted to date.
Notably, certain antigens have shown antigenicity and immunogenicity with protective activity in animal models, but these results did not consistently translate to significant immune responses and/or protection in humans, as discussed later. Hence, there is no certainty in extrapolating results from animal models to humans, with one possible reason being the differences observed in disease progression. This highlights the importance of clinical trials. Clinical trials serve as the gold standard for assessing the protective value of a vaccine candidate (Fig. 3).
In the upcoming section, an overview of existing studies investigating Mtb late-stage antigens is provided. These studies delve into the antigenicity of these antigens across diverse ethnic groups, explore their immunogenicity, and address their protective potential using animal models. A list of the top 10 antigens is extracted from each of these studies and is presented in Table 1.

Overview of studies assessing antigenicity, immunogenicity, and protective efficacy of Mtb late-stage antigens
In a study conducted by Leyten et al., 25 DosR regulon-encoded proteins underwent evaluation. The study utilized proliferation assays and measurement of IFN-γ responses in 12 Mtb-specific T cell lines and PBMCs. PBMCs were collected from TB patients, H-LTBI who had not developed active TB over a mean period of 5.5 years, and healthy controls (HC), predominantly of Dutch origin. The results indicated that all of the 25 latency antigens induced the production of IFN-γ in at least one T cell line, and 18 were also recognized by PBMCs from at least 10% of either TB patients or H-LTBI. Notably, several of the DosR-encoded antigens, such as Rv1733c, Rv2029c, Rv2627c and Rv2628, elicited stronger IFN-γ responses in H-LTBI compared to individuals with active TB. Interestingly, the magnitude of these responses was even higher than the TB patients’ responses to the major early-phase antigen CFP-10. As discussed earlier, H-LTBI remained healthy for 5.5 years, and the stronger responses observed in H-LTBI compared to TB patients to these antigens suggest potential involvement in controlling the infection and indicate the possible protective value of these antigens.
In a subsequent study conducted by Roupie et al., plasmid DNA vaccination was administered to BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice. The study aimed to analyse the immunogenicity of eight DosR regulon-encoded antigens previously identified by Leyten et al. as strong stimulators of T cell responses in H-LTBI. Among these antigens, DNA encoding Rv2626c induced the highest level of IFN-γ and IL-2 in splenocytes of both mouse strains, followed by Rv2031c, Rv2032, Rv2627c, Rv2628, Rv1733c, Rv1738 and Rv2029c, respectively. Stimulation of splenocytes from the DNA-vaccinated mice with overlapping peptide sets led to mapping several immunodominant epitopes for Rv2029c, Rv2031c, Rv2626c, Rv2627c, and Rv2628, yet none were identified for Rv1733c. BALB/c mice persistently infected with Mtb demonstrated significantly increased IFN-γ levels in response to Rv2031c (33-fold), Rv1733c, and Rv2626c (fourfold), and Rv2029c (twofold) compared to acutely infected mice. This implies the potential of these antigens to be incorporated into post-exposure vaccines.
Lin and colleagues investigated the immune responses elicited by seven Mtb latency antigens in BCG-vaccinated adults, predominantly of Dutch origin. They categorized the subjects into two groups based on their likely exposure to Mtb, using IFN-γ levels in response to major early-phase antigens ESAT-6 and/or CFP-10. Notably, Mtb-exposed vaccinees exhibited stronger IFN-γ responses in PBMCs and a higher proportion of responders compared to the unexposed group for the seven studied antigens. Furthermore, vaccination of BALB/c mice with plasmids encoding these seven DosR antigens, along with the latency antigen Rv1738, induced robust T cell responses to six of these eight antigens. Among these antigens, Rv2626c elicited the highest IFN-γ production upon ex vivo stimulation of splenocytes from the immunized mice, followed by Rv1733c, Rv2032, and Rv2031c, respectively.
Bertholet et al. employed computational analyses and selection criteria, including gene induction during growth in macrophages, up- or down-regulation under hypoxia and carbon limitation, involvement in encoding secreted/membrane-associated proteins, and/or being a member of the pathogenicity-associated membrane protein families PE/PPE or EsX. Their selection yielded 94 Mtb genes, with 49 proteins, including 10 hypoxia-associated proteins, that induced the highest IFN-γ levels and the highest percentage of positive responders when tested with PBMCs from healthy PPD-positive individuals suspected of TB exposure. Notably, these 49 proteins did not stimulate responses in PBMCs from PPD-negative donors. This points to a TB-specific immune response by these antigens. These proteins were adjuvanted with CpG oligodeoxynucleotides and assessed for protective efficacy in C57BL/6 mice challenged with a low dose of Mtb H37Rv or Erdman strain. Among these, 12 proteins, exemplified by Rv1813c, induced decreases in lung CFU between 0.1 and 0.3 log10, while six antigens, such as Rv3044, elicited over 0.3 log10 reduction. It was further shown that protection in mice vaccinated with the highly protective antigens was associated with a Th1 immune response.
Another study involving German participants assessed 29 antigens related to latency, resuscitation, and reactivation of Mtb. Schuck and colleagues analysed the frequencies of IFN-γ-expressing T cells and the levels of IFN-γ production by PBMCs from H-LTBI, active PTB, and TST-negative donors. Through a 7-day ex vivo restimulation, these antigens were found to induce IFN-γ in T cells from the majority of H-LTBI. Low to no responses were observed in TST-negative donors. Among these antigens, eleven elicited strong responses in the H-LTBI, with seven of them - including two reactivation antigens (Rv3407 and Rv0140), three DosR regulon-encoded antigens (Rv1733c, Rv2003c and Rv2005c), and two Rpfs (Rv1009 and Rv2450c)-induced significantly higher T cell responses in H-LTBI compared to PTB.
Black et al. conducted a screening involving seven classical Mtb antigens and 51 candidate antigens spanning the entire DosR regulon. They assessed the induction of IFN-γ responses in seven-day whole blood cultures. Samples were obtained from HHC of PTB in three high-burden countries in Africa, including South Africa, The Gambia, and Uganda. The results indicated population-specific responses to some of the DosR regulon-encoded antigens. However, seven of these antigens were among the 10 most frequently recognized antigens in two or three countries. This points to the promiscuous potential of these seven antigens. These included Rv0081, Rv1733c, Rv1735c, Rv1736c-C terminal part, Rv1737c, Rv1997-C terminal part and Rv2006. Notably, Rv1733c was the most commonly recognized antigen in both South Africa and Uganda, and it ranked third in The Gambia. In contrast, HspX (Rv2031c) did not rank among the top antigens in any of these three countries.
Chegou et al. investigated 118 diverse Mtb infection-phase-dependent antigens, which included eight well-characterized TB antigens, 51 DosR-induced, 23 reactivation, six starvation, five Rpfs, and 24 stress-associated antigens. The antigens were evaluated for their ability to induce IFN-γ in a 7-day whole blood culture from PTB and HHC of PTB in a high TB burden setting in South Africa. The results showed that the DosR regulon-encoded antigens were more frequently recognized by HHC than PTB, and the differences in IFN-γ responses were significant for 14 out of the 51 studied antigens. Interestingly, all five Rpfs induced significantly higher IFN-γ responses in HHC than in PTB. This points to the likely involvement of these antigens in protection against TB. However, the IFN-γ levels elicited by most of the TB reactivation antigens, starvation, and stress-associated antigens were generally low in both PTB and HHC groups, with no significant difference observed.
Riano and colleagues screened a panel comprising five Rpfs, 18 DosR-encoded, and five stress-induced antigens using 7-day ex vivo restimulation of PBMCs. The study participants included HHC latently infected with Mtb (LTBI-HHC) of Colombian origin who had remained healthy for over 3 years. The study identified three DosR-encoded antigens (Rv1737c, Rv2029c and Rv2628c) and two Rpfs (Rv0867c and Rv2389c) as the most potent IFN-γ-inducing antigens in these LTBI-HHC. The findings indicated significant increases in the frequency of CD4+IFN-γ+ T cells in response to the three selected DosR antigens and to Rv2389c, but not Rv0867c, in LTBI-HHC compared to PTB. Distinctive patterns of cytokine and chemokine induction by the selected DosR antigens and Rpfs were observed in PBMCs from LTBI-HHC and PTB. For instance, higher levels of IL-2 were induced by Rv2029c and Rv1737c in LTBI-HHC compared to PTB; Rv2628c induced higher levels of IL-10 in LTBI-HHC; while Rv2389c induced higher IL-10 levels in PTB.
Kassa et al. evaluated IFN-γ responses using a 7-day whole blood assay among Ethiopian PTB. The study focused on screening a panel consisting of five classical and 64 non-classical antigens (39 DosR regulon-encoded, four Rpfs, and 21 reactivation antigens). Among the 64 non-classical antigens, 23 were identified as inducers of IFN-γ responses. Notably, eight of these antigens were strong inducers of IFN-γ, and 10 were recognized by most of the study participants. The Rpfs elicited the highest levels of IFN-γ with the highest percentage of positive respondents compared to the latency and reactivation antigens. The study also reported distinct cytokine expression profiles in response to 29 antigens that were selected. Interestingly, the IL-10 response to most of the strong IFN-γ inducers was low, indicating a high IFN-γ to IL-10 ratio and likely involvement in protection. In contrast, the IL-10 response to Rv1009, Rv2389c and Rv2629 was high, indicating their possible involvement in the pathogenesis of TB.
In a study conducted by Derrick and colleagues, 16 recombinant TB proteins, including four DosR-encoded antigens previously identified as immunogenic in animal models, were tested. These purified proteins were formulated in dimethyl dioctadecyl ammonium bromide with trehalose 6,6 dibenenate adjuvant for evaluation of their protective efficacy. The study used C57BL/6 mice challenged with a low dose of Mtb Erdman. Vaccinated mice exhibited a reduction in lung CFU compared to non-vaccinated controls, with 0.3-0.5 log10 reductions for Rv1735c and Rv2032. However, the remaining two DosR antigens (Rv1733c and Rv2626c) did not induce significant pulmonary protection (<0.3 log10 reduction).
Sierra-Vidal and colleagues conducted a study using 18-hour and 7-day whole blood cultures to evaluate a panel of 60 antigens. These included six DosR regulon-encoded, 12 reactivation, one Rpf (Rv2389c), one starvation, six stress-associated, and 34 in vivo-expressed Mtb antigens. The participants included individuals without TB infection, LTBI, and subjects with active TB. The findings revealed the induction of IFN-γ responses to two latency antigens (Rv1733c and Rv2627) and Rv2389c in cultures from LTBI. Notably, Rv1733c elicited the highest response in LTBI in both the 18-hour and 7-day assays. This heightened response in LTBI surpassed the responses observed in both non-infected individuals and TB patients, enabling differentiation among the three study groups. In contrast, the response induced by Rv2389c in LTBI was similar to that of the non-infected group but remained higher compared to TB patients.
Top 10 antigens in each of the reviewed studies
Ref.	Ranking criterion	Rank of antigens	 			1st	2nd	3rd	4th	5th	6th	7th	8th	9th	10th	 		Median IFN-γa production of Mtbb-specific T cell lines responding to DosR antigens. In parentheses: Number of the responding lines with IFN-γ response ≥50 pg/ml.	2031c (9)	1996 (7)	2627c (5)	2030c (4)	1733c (7)	1813c (8)	2626c (6)	0079 (8)	3132c (6)	3133c (6)	 		Percentage of H-LTBIc with IFN-γ response ≥100 pg/ml and a lower number of HCd responding to DosR antigens. *Significantly higher number of responders among H-LTBI compared to TBe patients, p < 0.05	2029c*	1733c	2627c	2628	3129	2626c	2032	3133c	3126c	0079	 		Percentage of TB patients with IFN-γ response ≥100 pg/ml and a lower number of HC responding to DosR antigens.	1733c	2627c	2029c	3129	2031c	2032	2628	2030c	3132c	1738	 		Mean IFN-γ production from splenocytes of mice vaccinated with plasmids encoding DosR antigens.	2626c	2031c	2628	2627c	2032	2029c	1738	1733c	–	–	 		Median IFN-γ responses to DosR antigens from BCG vaccinees with previous Mtb exposure. *Significantly stronger IFN-γ responses by Mtb-exposed vaccinees compared to vaccinees without Mtb exposure, *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01	1733c**	2627c**	2029c**	2032*	2626c**	2031c*	2628	–	–	–	 		Level of IFN-γ production from splenocytes of mice vaccinated with plasmids encoding DosR antigens.	2626c	1733c	2032	2031c	2627c	2628	2029c	1738	–	–	 		Level of IFN-γ production from PPD+g individuals responding to latency antigens. In parentheses: Percentage of positive responders among PPD+ individuals. The class of antigen is also mentioned.	1813c (97) DosR	1738 (97) DosR	2866 (100) hypox	3133c (100) DosR	2801c (100)	2032 (75) DosR	2626c (75) DosR	1240 (100) hypox	3810 (75) hypox	2623 (60) DosR	 		Mean of antigen-specific IFN-γ-secreting cells in splenocytes of vaccinated mice responding to latency antigens. In parentheses: Class of antigen.	1813c (DosR)	3044 (hypox)	2866 (hypox)	2626c (DosR)	3810 (starv)	2032 (DosR)	1738 (DosR)	3133c (DosR)	2623 (DosR)	–	 		Mean of IFN-γ expressing T cells from H-LTBI after restimulation of PBMCsf. In parentheses: Class of antigen.	0569 (DosR)	3407 (reactiv)	1733c (DosR)	1734c (DosR)	2450c (Rpf)	2625c (DosR) 	1998c (DosR)	2003c (DosR)	0573c (DosR)	1884c (Rpf) 1736c (DosR)	 		Mean of IFN-γ responses by H-LTBI after restimulation of PBMCs. In parentheses: Class of antigen.	0569 (DosR)	1733c (DosR)	1736c (DosR)	1009 (Rpf)	1997-Ch (DosR)	0573c (DosR)	2450c (Rpf)	1997-Ni (DosR)	1735c (DosR)	1884c (Rpf)	 		Significantly higher T cell responses by H-LTBI than PTBj after restimulation of PBMCs. In parentheses: Class of antigen.	3407 (reactiv)	0140 (reactiv)	1733c (DosR)	2005c (DosR)	2003c (DosR)	1009 (Rpf)	2450c (Rpf)	2006 (DosR)	1734c (DosR)	0569 (DosR)	 		Mean IFN-γ responses by HHCk to DosR antigens in South Africa. In parentheses: Rank based on percentage of the responding HHC.	1733c (1)	1735c (2)	1737c (3)	2625c (4)	3129 (5)	2006 (6)	1736c-C (5)	0081 (5)	1997-C (7)	2629 (8)	 		Mean IFN-γ responses by HHC to DosR antigens in Uganda. In parentheses: Rank based on percentage of the responding HHC.	1733c (1)	0081 (2)	1735c (3)	1737c (4)	0569 (6)	2032 (5)	1736c-C (7)	1997-C (8)	2006 (9)	0573c (7)	 		Mean IFN-γ responses by HHC to DosR antigens in Gambia. In parentheses: Rank based on percentage of the responding HHC.	3131 (1)	2029c (3)	1733c (2)	0081 (5)	2028c (4)	2626c (4)	1998c (4)	2628 (−)	2006 (6)	1735c (5)	 		Median IFN-γ responses by HHC. *Significantly stronger IFN-γ responses by HHC than PTB, *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01. In parentheses: Class of antigen.	0867c** (Rpf)	1131* (reactiv)	2450c** (Rpf)	1009** (Rpf)	2389c** (Rpf)	3129 (DosR)	2032** (DosR)	2625c** (DosR)	1733c (DosR)	2006** (DosR)	 		Mean IFN-γ production after restimulation of PBMCs from LTBI-HHCl*Significantly increased frequency of CD4+IFN-γ+ T cells from LTBI-HHC than PTB, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,***p < 0.001. In parentheses: Class of antigen.	2029c*** (DosR)	1737c*** (DosR)	2628** (DosR)	2389c* (Rpf)	1736c (DosR)	0867c (Rpf)	1997 (DosR)	2660c (starv)	2031c (DosR)	2626c (DosR)	 		Mean IFN-γ responses from PTB. In parentheses: Rank based on percentage of respondents eliciting IFN-γ response >62 pg/ml. Class of antigen is also mentioned.	0867c (1) Rpf	2389c (3) Rpf	1009 (2) Rpf	1884c (1) Rpf	3223c (4) reactiv	2629 (2) DosR	2630 (3) DosR	2627c (3) DosR	0574c (4) DosR	3132c (4) DosR
For brevity, the prefix “Rv” is omitted from the name of the antigens. The values in italic indicate antigens with the same rank. Late-stage antigens from Mtb are categorized into five classes of DosR (DosR regulon-encoded), Rpf (resuscitation promoting factor), reactiv (reactivation), starv (starvation), and hypox (hypoxia).
aGamma interferon.
bMycobacterium tuberculosis.
chealthy-latently Mtb-infected individuals.
dhealthy controls.
eTuberculosis.
fPeripheral blood mononuclear cells.
gPurified protein derivative-positive.
hC-terminal part of the protein.
iN-terminal part of the protein.
jPulmonary tuberculosis patients.
kHealthy household contacts.
lHealthy household contacts latently infected with Mtb.
In a study conducted by Yeremeev and colleagues, subunit vaccines of Rpf from Micrococcus luteus and the five mycobacterial Rpfs were administered to C57BL/6 mice. Lymph node cells from the immunized mice showed T cell proliferation, with the highest response observed after ex vivo stimulation with RpfB, followed by RpfA, RpfE, RpfD, and the micrococcal Rpf, respectively. RpfC induced the least proliferative response. Except for RpfC and RpfB, all studied Rpfs exhibited weak mitogen properties and cross-reactivity in T cell responses. Notably, RpfB, despite eliciting a high level of antigen-specific T cell response, showed neither mitogenicity nor cross-reactivity. When RpfA, RpfB, and RpfD were tested for cytokine production, higher levels of antigen-specific IFN-γ were elicited, and low (RpfD) to moderate (RpfA and B) levels of IL-10 were observed compared to the micrococcal Rpf. Vaccination of mice with either RpfE or micrococcal Rpf conferred significant protection against high-dose Mtb H37Rv challenge, as demonstrated by log₁₀ reductions of 2 and 1 in mycobacterial loads in lung and spleen, respectively, along with extended post-infection survival.

In silico analyses of the top candidate antigens
Although the evaluation of immunobiological properties (antigenicity, immunogenicity, and protective efficacy) of mycobacterial components has been instrumental in the identification of potential vaccine candidates, in silico analyses can serve as an effective tool for initial screening or, conversely, for reinforcing the selection of specific antigens as viable vaccine candidates. In this section, an overview of several publicly available databases suitable for computational characterization of Mtb antigens is provided. Based on the ranking derived from Table 1, key characteristics of the top 10 latency antigens (all DosR regulon-encoded) along with the four selected Rpfs are delineated (Table 2).
Various computational characteristics of top 10 latency antigens and top four resuscitation-promoting factors
Rank based on the position and repetition of each antigen in Table 1	Top 10 latency antigens	Top four resuscitation-promoting factors	 	1st	2nd	3rd	4th	5th	6th	7th	8th	9th	10th	1st	2nd	3rd	4th	 	Gene name	rv1733c	hrp1 (rv2626c)	hspX (rv2031c)	rv2627c	Acg (rv2032)	rv2628	rv0569	rv1813c	rv1738	otsB1 (rv2006)	rpfB (rv1009)	rpfA (rv0867c)	rpfD (rv2389c)	rpfE (rv2450c)	 	Gene product	Probable conserved transmembrane protein	Hypoxic response protein 1 (Hrp1)	Heat shock protein X (HspX)	Conserved protein	Conserved protein Acg	Hypothetical protein	Conserved protein	Hypothetical conserved protein	Hypothetical conserved protein	Probable trehalose-6-phosphate phosphatase OtsB1	Probable resuscitation-promoting factor RpfB	Probable resuscitation-promoting factor RpfA	Probable resuscitation-promoting factor RpfD	Probable resuscitation-promoting factor RpfE	 	Gene length (bp)	633	432	435	1242	996	363	267	432	285	3984	1089	1224	465	519	 	Protein length (aa)	210	143	144	413	331	120	88	143	94	1327	362	407	154	172	 	Rank based on number of continuous B-cell epitopes (BepiPred–ABCpred)	8–6	14–9	9–8	4–3	5–5	10–11	12–13	11–9	13–12	1–1	3–4	2–2	7–10	6–7	 	Rank based on number of MHCa-II epitopes (ProPred)	4	6	8	2	5	12	11	7	13	1	3	14	10	9	 	Rank based on number of 15-mer MHC-II epitopes with score >20 (SYFPEITHI)	6	10	8	2	4	12	13	8	11	1	5	3	7	9	 	Rank based on number of HLAb-II epitopes (HLAPred)	4	6	8	2	5	12	11	7	13	1	3	14	10	9	 	Rank based on number of HLA-I epitopes (HLAPred)	6	7	8	2	4	9	13	8	10	1	3	5	11	12	 	Rank based on number of MHC-I epitopes (NetCTL)	5	9	8	2	4	10	13	7	13	1	3	6	11	12	 	Antigenicity (VaxiJen)	Antigen	Non-antigen	Antigen	Non-antigen	Non-antigen	Antigen	Antigen	Antigen	Antigen	Antigen	Antigen	Antigen	Antigen	Antigen	 	Allergenic potential (AlgPred)	Non-allergen	Non-allergen	Non-allergen	Allergen	Non-allergen	Non-allergen	Non-allergen	Non-allergen	Non-allergen	Non-allergen	Non-allergen	Non-allergen	Potential allergen	Non-allergen	 	Signal peptide cleavage site (SignalP)	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	Yes	NO	NO	Yes	Yes	NO	Yes	 	Tatc signal peptide (TATfind)	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	Yes	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	NO	 	Subcellular localization (TBpred)	Integral-membrane	Cytoplasmic	Cytoplasmic	Integral-membrane	Cytoplasmic	Integral-membrane	Cytoplasmic	Integral-membrane	Cytoplasmic	Cytoplasmic	Cytoplasmic	Secretory	Membrane-attached	Secretory	 	The most probable cellular location using Hidden Markov Models	Inside, transmembrane, outside	Outside	Outside	Outside	Outside	Outside	Outside	Inside, transmembrane, outside	Outside	Outside	Inside, transmembrane, outside	Inside, transmembrane, outside	Inside, transmembrane, outside	Outside	 	Number of predicted TMHsd (Hidden Markov Models)	2	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	0	0	1	1	1	0	 	Orthologs	M. bovisM. marinumM. smegmatis	M. bovis	M. bovisM marinumM. smegmatis	M. bovisM. marinum	M. bovisM. smegmatis	M. bovis	M. bovisM. leprae	M. bovisM. marinum	M. bovis	M. bovisM. marinumM. smegmatis	M. bovisM. lepraeM. marinumM. smegmatis	M. bovisM. lepraeM. marinumM. smegmatis	M. bovis	M. bovisM. marinum	 	Rank in the study of Zvi et al.	14	10	6	31	9	18	-	28	1	29	4	5	16	2	 	Selected candidate by Nguyen Thi et al.	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	NO	NO	NO	NO	Yes	NO	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
aMajor histocompatibility complex.
bHuman leucocyte antigen.
cTwin-arginine translocation.
dTransmembrane helices.
B-cell activation and differentiation into plasma cells are essential for generating a humoral immune response against an antigen. Continuous B-cell epitopes were predicted using BepiPred 2.0 (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/BepiPred-2.0/) and ABCpred servers (http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/abcpred/) using default threshold and parameters.
Antigenic epitopes presented onto MHC I and MHC II molecules can, respectively, activate CD8+ and CD4+ T cells, leading to cytotoxic and helper T cell responses. ProPred (http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/propred/) was used to predict MHC class II binding regions. The analysis was carried out with a threshold of 1% (high stringency) for all 51 HLA-DR alleles available on the server. 15-mer CD4+ T cell epitopes with scores higher than 20 were determined for all the default types of MHC class II molecules on the SYFPEITHI server (http://www.syfpeithi.de/bin/MHCServer.dll/EpitopePrediction.htm). HLA class II and class I binding regions were predicted using the HLAPred server (http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/hlapred/). All the alleles from the list of 54 HLA class I and 51 HLA class II were selected for the prediction of T cell epitopes using a threshold of 1% (the highest stringency). Interestingly, there was a complete agreement between the results obtained from ProPred and HLAPred regarding the number of MHC-II epitopes identified within the sequence of each antigen. Prediction of T cell epitopes restricted to 10 MHC class I supertypes was carried out by the use of NetCTL integrative approach (NetCTL-1.2) (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/NetCTL-1.2/), applying the default threshold and parameters. Antigenicity (the ability of an antigen to be recognized by the immune system) and allergenic potential (the ability of a substance to trigger an allergic immune response in susceptible individuals) were determined for each protein by the VaxiJen V.2 server (https://www.ddg-pharmfac.net/vaxijen3/home/) and AlgPred server (http://crdd.osdd.net/raghava/algpred/), respectively.
Membrane-associated and secreted antigens are considered superior candidates for eliciting T cell responses due to their enhanced accessibility to the immune system. To identify these candidate antigens, SignalP (https://services.healthtech.dtu.dk/services/SignalP-5.0/) was utilized to predict secretion via the SecA pathway, while TATfind (http://signalfind.org/tatfind.html) was employed to search for the twin-arginine translocation (Tat) motif associated with the TAT pathway. Additionally, the TBpred server (https://webs.iiitd.edu.in/raghava/tbpred/submission.html) was used to predict subcellular localization of the candidate antigens.
Other information extracted from MycoBrowser portal includes the most probable cellular location of each antigen, and the number of predicted transmembrane helices using Hidden Markov Models. Among the highest-ranking antigens, one (Rv1997) was predicted to harbour 10 transmembrane domains. Consequently, this antigen was excluded from Table 2 due to the anticipated technical challenges associated with cloning and producing a recombinant protein of this nature.
Comparative genomic analyses indicate that late-stage antigens are not exclusively expressed by Mtb, and many species of NTM exhibit moderate to high degrees of sequence homology in genes encoding these antigens. Such homology can result in cross-reactivity between Mtb and NTM antigens, posing a challenge for inclusion into live vaccines; As discussed previously, prior exposure to environmental mycobacteria has been documented to reduce the efficacy of BCG. Orthologs to each of our candidate antigens have been identified in various NTM species listed in Table 2. Careful considerations should be given to incorporating highly cross-reactive antigens into live vaccines, as they might diminish the vaccine efficacy, particularly in highly endemic populations.
Further to considering cross-reactivity, an antigen’s suitability for incorporation into live or post-exposure vaccines may come into question if it is involved in immune evasion, pathogenesis, or virulence of Mtb. Notably, among our candidates, Rv2031c is predicted to have such functions.
Several bioinformatics-based studies have investigated the screening of mycobacterial components for incorporation into new TB vaccines. It is therefore beneficial to compare the antigens selected here with those identified in existing analyses. Accordingly, the final two rows of Table 2 present the rankings of each vaccine candidate based on the study by Zvi et al.. Additionally, the table represents antigens that were deemed pertinent vaccine candidates by Nguyen Thi and colleagues. The recurrence of specific antigens across these independent studies suggests their potential as strong vaccine candidates.

Challenges of incorporating late-stage antigens into multi-stage and post-exposure TB vaccines
As discussed earlier, multi-stage and post-exposure vaccines represent a promising approach in the fight against TB. Multi-stage vaccines target various infection phases (early, latent, and reactivation), providing comprehensive protection. Post-exposure vaccines aim to protect those already exposed to Mtb, particularly individuals with latent TB, by boosting immune responses to control or eliminate latent bacteria before they cause symptomatic disease. Developing effective post-exposure vaccines is crucial to curb transmission and prevent outbreaks in high-burden regions where latent TB is prevalent. Accordingly, compared with prophylactic and therapeutic approaches, post-exposure TB vaccines hold the greatest potential for rapid global health impact.
Incorporating Mtb late-stage antigens into multi-stage or post-exposure vaccines is conceptually appealing but introduces several challenges. A major concern is antigen stability to maintain vaccine effectiveness during thermal fluctuation, storage and transportation in low-resource settings. Notably, a lyophilized formulation of the adjuvanted subunit vaccine, ID93 + GLA-SE, has demonstrated enhanced thermal stability for at least three months when stored at 37 °C and up to 24 months when stored at 5 °C, while maintaining safety and immunogenicity.
Combining multiple antigens in a single vaccine can further complicate formulation and potentially dilute the immunogenicity of individual antigens; Antigenic interference may occur, whereby a highly immunogenic antigen suppresses immune responses to less immunogenic ones. This issue is particularly relevant for polyvalent multi-purpose vaccines targeting TB alongside co-infecting pathogens such as HIV. Such interference can diminish overall vaccine effectiveness by preventing balanced immune responses across all antigens. To address this, potent adjuvants and/or optimized delivery systems are needed to elicit robust and coordinated immunity.

Role and selection of adjuvants in TB vaccine development
In general, protein or peptide antigens in subunit vaccines are insufficiently immunogenic on their own and require adjuvants to elicit protective immunity. The term adjuvant is often used broadly to refer to both immune-stimulating agents and delivery systems. Selecting an appropriate adjuvant is crucial, as different adjuvants stimulate the immune system in distinct ways, and some may not induce adequate protective responses. Adjuvants enhance the efficiency and specificity of vaccine-induced immune responses through improving vaccine stability, prolonged retention and sustained release of antigen, lymph node targeting, acting as carriers to deliver antigens to antigen-presenting cells, prolonging antigen exposure, enhancing antigen presentation, and regulating innate immune cell activation. To effectively stimulate protection against TB, an adjuvant should elicit a strong cellular immune response, favouring Th1/Th17 pathways over Th2. Inducing humoral responses is beneficial but secondary.
Alum (aluminium hydroxide) is one of the most widely used adjuvants due to the profile of safety, stability and cost-effectivity. While it enhances the antibody response, it is associated with a major Th2-bias to the immune response. Indeed, a study in mice showed that alum failed to confer protection when used as an adjuvant in a subunit TB vaccine.
Lipid-based adjuvants, such as emulsions and liposomes, act as both adjuvants and delivery systems. Oil-in-water emulsions containing squalene oil, such as AS03 and MF59, are known to elicit antibody responses. They also induce a mixed Th1/Th2 response. Liposomes, such as liposome-based AS01, are effective adjuvant-delivery systems due to their high loading capacity, targetability, biocompatibility, ability to enhance antigen presentation, and tuneable features such as size and charge.
Most adjuvants currently in TB clinical trials are formulated to combine an immunomodulator that activates immune cells through pathogen-recognition receptors (PRRs), such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs), with a delivery system that enhances antigen targeting. Optimizing the ratio of these components is essential to maximize synergistic immunological benefits. An example of this two-component system is the TB adjuvant GLA-SE, which contains a synthetic TLR4 agonist, glucopyranosyl lipid A (GLA) formulated in an oil-in-water squalene emulsion. Another is AS01, which combines monophosphoryl lipid A (MPL, a TLR4 agonist) with QS-21, a highly purified saponin, co-formulated in liposomes. Two promising post-exposure TB vaccine candidates utilizing these adjuvants, ID93 + GLA-SE and M72/AS01_E, will be discussed in detail in the next section.
Dextran/CpG, the adjuvant used in GamTBvac, combines dextran 500 kDa and diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)-dextran 500 kDa with CpG oligodeoxynucleotides (TLR9 agonist). GamTBvac induced antigen-specific IFN-γ and IgG responses in mice and conferred significant protection in Mtb-challenged mice and guinea pigs when administered as a BCG booster vaccine. In a phase II trial in BCG-vaccinated, uninfected healthy adults, GamTBvac was well tolerated and elicited Th1 cells producing various combinations of IFN-γ, IL-2, and TNF-α, along with antigen-specific IgG responses. A phase III clinical trial is currently recruiting adults to evaluate the protective efficacy of the vaccine in preventing pulmonary TB (NCT04975737).
IC31® is the combination of the single-stranded DNA-phosphodiester oligo-d(IC)13 (ODN1a) and the antimicrobial peptide KLKL5KLK. It signals through TLR9 with induction of Th1/Th2, CTL and antibody responses in mice. IC31® has been tested with three different fusion proteins (H1, H4, H56) in various clinical trials. H56:IC31 will be discussed in detail in the following section.
Trehalose 6,6-dibehenate (TDB) is a synthetic analogue of the mycobacterial cord factor located in the bacterium cell wall. It activates murine macrophages via a C-type lectin receptor called Mincle, eliciting a Th1/Th17 response. TDB also engages human Mincle and stimulates monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells to produce a variety of cytokines. TDB, incorporated into dimethyldioctadecyl-ammonium (DDA) liposomes at a 1:5 weight ratio, forms CAF01. In a phase I clinical trial, escalating doses of CAF01 formulated with fusion protein H1 induced long-lived Th1 responses, persisting for 150 weeks. For a more detailed discussion on adjuvants in TB vaccines, please refer to the review by Zhang and colleagues.
In clinical trials, adjuvanted TB vaccines have demonstrated immunogenicity but are often reactogenic. For instance, in LTBI (IGRA-positive), the adjuvanted subunit vaccine M72/AS01_E was associated with a higher rate of unsolicited adverse events (~67% vs. ~45% with placebo). This was primarily due to injection site reactions and flu-like symptoms, although the incidence of serious adverse events was comparable between groups. ID93 + GLA-SE caused injection site erythema in 2 of 48 participants, and injection site pain was more frequent in ID93 + GLA-SE regimens than with ID93 alone. Additionally, mild injection site reactions and flu-like symptoms were more common in LTBI (QFT-positive) than in uninfected individuals. Notably, a higher antigen dose (5 µg ID93 vs. 2 µg) was associated with a greater incidence of adverse events (63.9% vs. 40.0%). H56:IC31 elicited strong T cell responses but was associated with transient cardiovascular events in 36% of vaccinees. Similarly, injection site reactions were more frequent in participants receiving the CAF01-adjuvanted H1 vaccine than in those given H1 alone. These findings illustrate that boosting immunity with adjuvants, particularly in LTBI – the primary target population for post-exposure vaccines, can involve safety trade-offs. Nonetheless, adjuvanted TB vaccines may still be less reactogenic than BCG revaccination, which has been associated with comparatively more adverse effects than two doses of H4:IC31 and H56:IC31.

Evaluation of Novel TB vaccines in clinical trials and regulatory barriers to implementation
Beyond biological and immunological challenges, demonstrating the safety and efficacy of multi-stage and post-exposure vaccines incorporating Mtb late-stage antigens is a demanding process. According to the FDA’s vaccine development framework, phase I trials typically enrol 20–100 healthy Mtb-uninfected adults to assess escalating doses, safety, tolerability, and preliminary immunogenicity. Phase I trials may also enrol LTBI. While there is no requirement for participants to be BCG-vaccinated, if the trial is conducted in a country with a national BCG vaccination programme, all participants will likely have received BCG. Some of these trials include extended follow-up periods, such as 150 weeks for CAF01.
Phase II trials typically include hundreds of participants—including adults, adolescents, or LTBI—in randomized-controlled studies to refine dose and schedule, confirm safety, and evaluate immune responses. Phase II and IIb trials may also assess vaccine efficacy through prevention of conversion, prevention of infection or prevention of disease endpoints. In prevention of conversion and prevention of infection studies, IGRA/QFT-negative individuals are randomized to receive vaccine or placebo and monitored for IGRA/QFT conversion or sustained conversion as a surrogate of Mtb infection. In prevention of disease studies, LTBI (IGRA/QFT-positive) individuals are randomized and followed for progression to bacteriologically confirmed active pulmonary TB.
Phase III trials are large-scale, typically involving thousands of participants across multiple high-burden countries, and are double-blinded, randomised, and placebo-controlled. They assess protection against bacteriologically confirmed TB by comparing incidence rates between vaccine and placebo groups, while also identifying less common adverse events. A current phase III trial of M72/AS01_E recruits adolescents and adults, including HIV-positive individuals, in Indonesia, Kenya, Malawi, South Africa, and Zambia (NCT06062238). These trials require extended follow-ups (up to 49 months in NCT06062238), and must meet stringent efficacy benchmarks, with WHO recommending at least ~50% prevention of pulmonary TB in adults before a vaccine can be licensed (Fig. 3).
Regulatory requirements also pose major barriers to vaccine implementation. Under the FDA’s vaccine development framework, manufacturers must demonstrate and secure approval for production processes, facilities, product characterization, and lot-to-lot consistency. Even when a vaccine is proven safe, effective, and licenced, post-exposure vaccination means targeting the vast population of nearly one-quarter of the global population with latent TB. The feasibility and affordability of rolling out such vaccines, therefore, need careful consideration, particularly in TB-endemic regions with limited resources and budgets.
Post-exposure TB vaccines undergoing clinical trials
Vaccine	Antigen composition	Adjuvant	Key immunogenicity findings	Clinical progress	Notes (advantages or disadvantages)	 	H56:IC31	Ag85B, ESAT-6, Rv2660c (latency antigen)	IC31® (ODN1aa + antimicrobial peptide KLKL5KLK)	- In LTBIb vs. uninfected participants:- Higher and faster-peaking IFN-γ, TNF-α, and IL-2 producing CD4⁺ T cells.- Stronger ESAT-6-specific responses.- Rv2660c poorly immunogenic in both QFTc– and QFT+ groups.- ESAT-6 and Rv2660c responses were not consistently maintained to Day 292.	- Phase I and I/IIa (South Africa): immunogenic but mixed antigen response and durability.- Phase IIb (South Africa, Tanzania): negative efficacy–73.8% higher recurrence risk vs. placebo in cured patients.	Negative efficiency highlights the need for non-antagonistic interaction between pre-existing and vaccine-induced immune responses to avoid exacerbation in post-exposure settings.	 	ID93 + GLA-SE	Rv3619, Rv3620, Rv2608, Rv1813 (latency antigen)	GLA-SE (TLR4 agonist in an oil-in-water squalene emulsion)	- Preferential IgG1 and IgG3 responses durable ≥ 6 months.- Antibodies mediated ADCCd (NK degranulation) and monocyte-driven phagocytosis.- CD4⁺ T cells largely recognized Rv2608, with minimal responses to other antigens.- CD4⁺ T cells produced IL-2, TNF, CD154 ± IFN-γ.- Minimal CD8⁺ T cell responses.	- Phase I (South Africa): strong IgG and Th1 responses; LTBI boosted earlier and more strongly than uninfected.- Phase II (South Korea): robust IgG, IFN-γ⁺ T cells, IL-2⁺TNF⁺CD154⁺IFN-γ⁺/− CD4⁺ T cell; responses maintained for 12 months.- Ongoing evaluation in an aerosol BCG-controlled human infection model (NCT06670755)	Shows consistent immunogenicity, but it is unclear whether it prevents reactivation in LTBI. Dominant recognition of Rv2608 may limit the breadth of response.	 	M72/AS01_E	Mtb32A, Mtb39A (does not include late-stage antigens but key post-exposure success)	AS01_E (MPLe + QS-21 in liposomes; reduced-dose version)	- High frequencies of CD4⁺ T cells producing various combinations of IFN-γ, TNF-α, and IL-2.- Strong NK cell IFN-γ responses.- Induction of CD8⁺ T cells and IgG.- Stronger immune responses in LTBI than in uninfected individuals.- IgG and CD4⁺ T cells remained elevated for ≥ 3 years.	- Phase IIb (Kenya, South Africa, Zambia): 49.7% efficacy over 3 years in preventing active TB in LTBI.- Ongoing evaluation in a phase III (Indonesia, Kenya, Malawi, South Africa, and Zambia; NCT06062238)	Represents the most successful subunit vaccine tested in LTBI.May function as a booster following natural infection.Mechanisms underlying efficacy remain elusive.
aOligodeoxynucleotide 1a.
bLatently Mtb-infected individuals.
cQuantiFERON-TB Gold.
dAntibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity.
eMonophosphoryl lipid A.
Together, while new TB vaccines can, in principle, incorporate late-stage antigens, their stability issues, formulation complexity, increased reactogenicity, the demanding clinical approvals, and the multifaceted regulatory and implementation pathways make multi-stage and post-exposure TB vaccines difficult to realize in practice. Addressing these challenges will require diversifying the TB vaccine discovery pipeline, accelerating clinical development, and demonstrating public health impact through epidemiological studies. Funding, open science, and stakeholder engagement should be further strengthened to expedite vaccine development, approval, and distribution.

Examples of TB vaccines incorporating Mtb late-stage antigens, and the success story of M72/AS01_E as a post-exposure vaccine (Table 3)
Multi-stage subunit candidates, such as H56:IC31 and ID93 + GLA-SE, combine classical secreted proteins with latency-associated antigens. H56:IC31 consists of a recombinant fusion of Ag85B, ESAT-6, and the latency antigen Rv2660c, formulated with the IC31® adjuvant. ID93 + GLA-SE comprises a recombinant fusion of four Mtb antigens − the EsX family of virulence factors (Rv3619, Rv3620), the PE/PPE (Rv2608), and the latency antigen (Rv1813) − combined with the GLA-SE adjuvant. Both vaccines have demonstrated promising results in animal models and phase I clinical trials, with ID93 + GLA-SE also showing encouraging results in a phase II trial. However, it remains unclear whether either candidate can reliably prevent reactivation of latent infection and progression to active TB.
Thrice-administered H56:IC31 vaccination induced higher and faster-peaking frequencies of H56-specific IFN-γ+TNF-α+IL-2+, IFN-γ+TNF-α+, and IFN-γ+ CD4⁺ T cells, as well as increased ESAT-6-specific cytokine⁺ CD4⁺ T cell responses in LTBI compared with uninfected vaccinees. However, Rv2660c showed poor immunogenicity in both QFT-negative and QFT-positive participants. Also, ESAT-6- and Rv2660c-specific CD4+ T cell responses were not consistently maintained through Day 292. A recently completed phase IIb trial in South Africa and Tanzania recruited HIV-negative adults who had successfully completed treatment for drug-susceptible pulmonary TB to evaluate whether H56:IC31 vaccination could reduce recurrence. Unexpectedly, the vaccine showed negative efficacy, with a 73.8% higher risk of recurrence compared to placebo. The majority of recurrences were due to relapse with the same strain. This underscores the importance of safety considerations for post-exposure vaccines and the need for synergistic, or at a minimum non-antagonistic, interactions between pre-existing and vaccine-induced immune responses to prevent severe Koch-like reactions, as discussed earlier.
Three doses of ID93 + GLA-SE in BCG-naïve, healthy, QFT-negative participants preferentially induced IgG1 and IgG3 subclasses compared with ID93 alone, with these responses maintained for at least 6 months after the final dose. These antibodies mediated NK cell degranulation/activation in an antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity assay, as well as THP1 monocyte–driven antibody-dependent phagocytosis. Studied by day 70, the majority of vaccine-specific CD4⁺ T cells recognized Rv2608, with minimal responses detected against the other three antigens. This pattern is reminiscent of antigenic interference described earlier. ID93-specific CD4⁺ T cells produced various combinations of IL-2, TNF, and the activation marker CD154. In a phase I trial in healthy, BCG-vaccinated South Africans (both QFT-negative and QFT-positive), vaccination induced antigen-specific IgG and Th1 responses that peaked after two administrations. Notably, LTBI exhibited earlier boosting and stronger T cell responses compared with uninfected vaccinees. In a phase II trial in healthy, BCG-vaccinated, QFT-negative South Koreans, vaccination (versus placebo) elicited higher antigen-specific IgG levels, IFN-γ-producing T cells, and IL-2⁺TNF⁺CD154⁺IFN-γ⁺/− CD4⁺ T cell responses. These responses peaked after the first dose and were sustained for 12 months following the third vaccination. Overall, ID93 + GLA-SE demonstrated minimal capacity to induce CD8⁺ T cell responses across studies. A trial is currently recruiting both BCG-naïve and BCG-vaccinated volunteers to evaluate the efficacy of ID93 + GLA-SE within an aerosol BCG-controlled human infection model (NCT06670755).
Although it does not include late-stage antigens, the subunit vaccine M72/AS01_E has shown promise as a post-exposure TB vaccine. In a Phase IIb trial of 3575 adults in Kenya, South Africa, and Zambia, it demonstrated 49.7% efficacy over 3 years in preventing active TB among LTBI. M72 is a recombinant fusion protein comprising two early-stage Mtb antigens: Mtb32A (Rv0125), a probable serine protease, and Mtb39A (Rv1196, PPE18), a member of the PPE family. The AS01E adjuvant combines MPL and QS-21 in liposomes, with the “E” denoting a reduced dose suitable for paediatric use. M72/AS01_E elicited a high frequency of M72-specific CD4+ T cells producing various combinations of IFN-γ, TNF-α, and IL-2, with minimal IL-17 expression. It also activated NK cells to produce antigen-specific IFN-γ, and stimulated CD8+ T cell and IgG responses. CD4+ T cell and NK cell responses were stronger in LTBI than in those uninfected with Mtb, suggesting that the vaccine may act as a booster following natural infection. Furthermore, M72-specific IgG levels and CD4+ T cell frequencies increased after the first dose and remained elevated over the three-year follow-up period. Further studies are warranted to determine whether these immune features underlie the observed efficacy.

Concluding remark
As new TB vaccines progress through discovery stages toward clinical evaluations, an underlying challenge becomes increasingly apparent: the vast reservoir of individuals harbouring latent TB infection worldwide. This represents a major barrier to achieving global TB control and underscores the potential importance of including late-stage Mtb antigens in next-generation TB vaccines. These antigens, preferentially expressed during the latent, resuscitation, and reactivation phases of TB infection, hold promise for incorporation into multi-stage and post-exposure TB vaccines. Select candidate antigens should be HLA-promiscuous. At the same time, the development of post-exposure vaccines raises pertinent safety considerations, given the potential risk of reactivating the infection in latently infected individuals or triggering recurrence in cured patients.
This review compiled 10 latency-associated and four resuscitation-associated Mtb antigens that have demonstrated strong antigenicity in PBMCs and whole blood cultures from H-LTBI, and to a lesser extent, from active TB patients. These antigens also exhibited robust immunogenicity and protective efficacy in animal models and challenge studies. In silico analyses were subsequently performed to prioritize these candidates, and the shortlisted antigens were aligned with existing studies (Fig. 3). Finally, the challenges of incorporating late-stage antigens into multi-stage and post-exposure TB vaccines were discussed, alongside examples of post-exposure vaccine candidates currently undergoing clinical evaluation.
Collectively, this review highlights the significant contribution of late-stage Mtb antigens to immune responses against TB and their potential value in future vaccine design. Nevertheless, immunity to Mtb is complex, and validated correlates of protection remain elusive. Consequently, strong antigen-specific immune responses do not necessarily translate into protective efficacy, and protective immune responses observed in animal models may not fully reflect responses in humans. Ultimately, well-designed clinical trials remain definitive for determining the relevance, safety, and efficacy of novel TB vaccines incorporating late-stage antigens. Including LTBI – the main target group for post-exposure vaccines – in these trials is essential.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
M.A. performed the literature review, in silico analyses, wrote, revised the manuscript, prepared figures and tables.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Competing interests
The author declares no competing interests.

References
The global burden of latent tuberculosis infection: a re-estimation using mathematical modelling
Quantifying the rates of late reactivation tuberculosis: a systematic review
World Health Organization. Global Tuberculosis Report 2025. Licence: CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO (World Health Organization, 2025).
Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis and extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis
Multidrug-resistant and extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis: a threat to global control of tuberculosis
The tuberculosis cascade of care in India’s public sector: a systematic review and meta-analysis
BCG vaccine: WHO position paper, February 2018— recommendations
Protection by BCG vaccine against tuberculosis: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials
Abubakar, I. et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the current evidence on the duration of protection by bacillus Calmette-Guerin vaccination against tuberculosis. Health Technol. Assess.17, 1–372, v-vi (2013).
Vaccine strategies against latent tuberculosis infection
WHO preferred product characteristics for new vaccines against tuberculosis
Variation in protection by BCG: implications of and for heterologous immunity
Emergence of new forms of totally drug-resistant tuberculosis bacilli: super extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis or totally drug-resistant strains in Iran
Tuberculosis and HIV co-infection
Tuberculosis
Inhibition of respiration by nitric oxide induces a Mycobacterium tuberculosis dormancy program
Transcriptional adaptation of Mycobacterium tuberculosis within macrophages: insights into the phagosomal environment
The enduring hypoxic response of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Evaluation of a nutrient starvation model of Mycobacterium tuberculosis persistence by gene and protein expression profiling
A family of autocrine growth factors in Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mycobacterial bacilli are metabolically active during chronic tuberculosis in murine lungs: insights from genome-wide transcriptional profiling
Transcriptional and physiological changes during Mycobacterium tuberculosis reactivation from non-replicating persistence
Genome sequencing and analysis of BCG vaccine strains
Tuberculosis vaccination needs to avoid ‘decoy’ immune reactions
Loss of RD1 contributed to the attenuation of the live tuberculosis vaccines Mycobacterium bovis BCG and Mycobacterium microti
Lack of immune responses to Mycobacterium tuberculosis DosR regulon proteins following Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccination
Immune responses to mycobacterial antigens in the Gambian population: implications for vaccines and immunodiagnostic test design
T-cell recognition of the HspX protein of Mycobacterium tuberculosis correlates with latent M. tuberculosis infection but not with M. bovis BCG vaccination
The influence of remaining live BCG organisms in vaccinated mice on the maintenance of immunity to tuberculosis
In vivo persistence and protective efficacy of the bacille Calmette Guerin vaccine overexpressing the HspX latency antigen
Effects of infection with atypical mycobacteria on BCG vaccination and tuberculosis
Failure of the Mycobacterium bovis BCG vaccine: some species of environmental mycobacteria block multiplication of BCG and induction of protective immunity to tuberculosis
On the impact of masking and blocking hypotheses for measuring the efficacy of new tuberculosis vaccines
Next-Generation TB Vaccines: progress, challenges, and prospects
Nonspecific (heterologous) protection of neonatal BCG vaccination against hospitalization due to respiratory infection and sepsis
BCG-induced non-specific effects on heterologous infectious disease in Ugandan neonates: an investigator-blind randomised controlled trial
Trunk, G., Davidovic, M., and Bohlius, J. Non-specific effects of bacillus calmette-guerin: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Vaccines (Basel)11, 10.3390/vaccines11010121 (2023).
BCG educates hematopoietic stem cells to generate protective innate immunity against tuberculosis
BCG vaccination in humans elicits trained immunity via the hematopoietic progenitor compartment
Bacille Calmette-Guerin induces NOD2-dependent nonspecific protection from reinfection via epigenetic reprogramming of monocytes
Long-lasting effects of BCG vaccination on both heterologous Th1/Th17 responses and innate trained immunity
Long-term histone lactylation connects metabolic and epigenetic rewiring in innate immune memory
Parenteral BCG vaccine induces lung-resident memory macrophages and trained immunity via the gut-lung axis
BCG-induced trained immunity in NK cells: Role for non-specific protection to infection
Brook, B. et al. BCG vaccination-induced emergency granulopoiesis provides rapid protection from neonatal sepsis. Sci. Transl. Med.12, 10.1126/scitranslmed.aax4517 (2020).
BCG-induced trained immunity: history, mechanisms and potential applications
Enhanced immunogenicity in mouse by recombinant BCG prime and protein boost based on latency antigen Rv1733c and/or reactivation antigen RpfE
Recombinant BCG: innovations on an old vaccine. Scope of BCG strains and strategies to improve long-lasting memory
Prevention of M. tuberculosis Infection with H4:IC31 Vaccine or BCG Revaccination
Engineering new mycobacterial vaccine design for HIV-TB pediatric vaccine vectored by lysine auxotroph of BCG
Priming with recombinant BCG expressing novel HIV-1 conserved mosaic immunogens and boosting with recombinant ChAdOx1 is safe, stable, and elicits HIV-1-specific T-cell responses in BALB/c mice
Evidence-based comparison of commercial interferon-γ release assays for detecting active TB: a metaanalysis
Recognition of stage-specific mycobacterial antigens differentiates between acute and latent infections with Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Sterilization of granulomas is common in active and latent tuberculosis despite within-host variability in bacterial killing
Human T-cell responses to 25 novel antigens encoded by genes of the dormancy regulon of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Identification of T-cell antigens specific for latent Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
Immunogenicity of novel DosR regulon-encoded candidate antigens of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in three high-burden populations in Africa
Potential of novel Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection phase-dependent antigens in the diagnosis of TB disease in a high burden setting
T cell responses to DosR and Rpf proteins in actively and latently infected individuals from Colombia
Immunogenicity of 60 novel latency-related antigens of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Cutting edge: control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection by a subset of lung parenchyma-homing CD4 T cells
Li, F., Chen, D., Zeng, Q. & Du, Y. Possible mechanisms of lymphopenia in severe tuberculosis. Microorganisms11, 10.3390/microorganisms11112640 (2023).
Functional capacity of Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific T cell responses in humans is associated with mycobacterial load
T-cell immunophenotyping distinguishes active from latent tuberculosis
Gamma interferon-producing CD4+ T lymphocytes in the lung correlate with resistance to infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mice deficient in CD4 T cells have only transiently diminished levels of IFN-gamma, yet succumb to tuberculosis
An essential role for interferon gamma in resistance to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
IFN-gamma from CD4 T cells is essential for host survival and enhances CD8 T cell function during Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
A critical role for CD8 T cells in a nonhuman primate model of tuberculosis
CD8+ CTL from lungs of Mycobacterium tuberculosis-infected mice express perforin in vivo and lyse infected macrophages
Th1 differentiation drives the accumulation of intravascular, non-protective CD4 T cells during tuberculosis
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha is required in the protective immune response against Mycobacterium tuberculosis in mice
Distinct, specific IL-17- and IL-22-producing CD4+ T cell subsets contribute to the human anti-mycobacterial immune response
Unexpected role for IL-17 in protective immunity against hypervirulent Mycobacterium tuberculosis HN878 infection
Prevention of tuberculosis infection and disease by local BCG in repeatedly exposed rhesus macaques
IL-23 and IL-17 in the establishment of protective pulmonary CD4+ T cell responses after vaccination and during Mycobacterium tuberculosis challenge
Essential role of IL-17A in the formation of a mycobacterial infection-induced granuloma in the lung
Pulmonary but not subcutaneous delivery of BCG vaccine confers protection to tuberculosis-susceptible mice by an interleukin 17-dependent mechanism
Vaccine-induced Th17 cells are established as resident memory cells in the lung and promote local IgA responses
Role of IgA in the defense against respiratory infections IgA deficient mice exhibited increased susceptibility to intranasal infection with Mycobacterium bovis BCG
Mice genetically inactivated in interleukin-17A receptor are defective in long-term control of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection
Neutrophil-mediated innate immune resistance to mycobacteria
IL-17 and Th17 cells in tuberculosis
A novel human IgA monoclonal antibody protects against tuberculosis
A mAb recognizing a surface antigen of Mycobacterium tuberculosis enhances host survival
Robust IgM responses following intravenous vaccination with Bacille Calmette-Guerin associate with prevention of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in macaques
A functional role for antibodies in tuberculosis
Shanmugasundaram, U. et al. Pulmonary Mycobacterium tuberculosis control associates with CXCR3- and CCR6-expressing antigen-specific Th1 and Th17 cell recruitment. JCI Insight5, 10.1172/jci.insight.137858 (2020).
Peralta Alvarez, M.P., Marshall, J.L. & Tanner, R. Correlates of protection from tuberculosis. In Vaccines for Neglected Pathogens: Strategies, Achievements and Challenges (ed. Christodoulides, M.) (Springer, 2023).
Identification of human T cell antigens for the development of vaccines against Mycobacterium tuberculosis
The influence of host and bacterial genotype on the development of disseminated disease with Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Functional genetic diversity among Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex clinical isolates: delineation of conserved core and lineage-specific transcriptomes during intracellular survival
A further communication on a remedy for tuberculosis
Proteins of the Rpf family: immune cell reactivity and vaccination efficacy against tuberculosis in mice
Experimental Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection of cynomolgus macaques closely resembles the various manifestations of human M. tuberculosis infection
Different human vaccine adjuvants promote distinct antigen-independent immunological signatures tailored to different pathogens
Strong immune responses and robust protection following a novel protein in adjuvant tuberculosis vaccine candidate
Tuberculosis subunit vaccine design: the conflict of antigenicity and immunogenicity
Longitudinal tracking of cytokines after acute exposure to tuberculosis: association of distinct cytokine patterns with protection and disease development
Reactivation of latent tuberculosis: variations on the Cornell murine model
The pathogenesis of tuberculosis: the early infiltrate of post-primary (adult pulmonary) tuberculosis: a distinct disease entity
Immunogenicity of eight dormancy regulon-encoded proteins of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in DNA-vaccinated and tuberculosis-infected mice
Analysis of immune responses against a wide range of Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigens in patients with active pulmonary tuberculosis
Immunogenicity and protective efficacy of novel Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigens
Improved method for predicting linear B-cell epitopes
Prediction of continuous B-cell epitopes in an antigen using recurrent neural network
ProPred: prediction of HLA-DR binding sites
SYFPEITHI: database for MHC ligands and peptide motifs
Defining promiscuous MHC class II helper T-cell epitopes for the HER2/neu tumor antigen
Large-scale validation of methods for cytotoxic T-lymphocyte epitope prediction
VaxiJen: a server for prediction of protective antigens, tumour antigens and subunit vaccines
AlgPred: prediction of allergenic proteins and mapping of IgE epitopes
SignalP 4.0: discriminating signal peptides from transmembrane regions
Adaptation of protein secretion to extremely high-salt conditions by extensive use of the twin-arginine translocation pathway
Support Vector Machine-based method for predicting subcellular localization of mycobacterial proteins using evolutionary information and motifs
The MycoBrowser portal: a comprehensive and manually annotated resource for mycobacterial genomes
Whole genome identification of Mycobacterium tuberculosis vaccine candidates by comprehensive data mining and bioinformatic analyses
Immunoinformatics study on highly expressed Mycobacterium tuberculosis genes during infection
Lyophilization process engineering and thermostability of ID93+ GLA-SE, a single-vial adjuvanted subunit tuberculosis vaccine candidate for use in clinical studies
Safety and immunogenicity of a thermostable ID93+ GLA-SE tuberculosis vaccine candidate in healthy adults
The nature and consequences of intra- and inter-vaccine interference
Alum adjuvanticity: unraveling a century old mystery
World in motion”—emulsion adjuvants rising to meet the pandemic challenges
Liposomes used as a vaccine adjuvant-delivery system: from basics to clinical immunization
Characterization of cationic liposomes based on dimethyldioctadecylammonium and synthetic cord factor from M. tuberculosis (trehalose 6, 6′-dibehenate)—a novel adjuvant inducing both strong CMI and antibody responses
Multi-subunit BCG booster vaccine GamTBvac: assessment of immunogenicity and protective efficacy in murine and guinea pig TB models
Safety and immunogenicity of the GamTBvac, the recombinant subunit tuberculosis vaccine candidate: a phase II, multi-center, double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study
IC31, a novel adjuvant signaling via TLR9, induces potent cellular and humoral immune responses
H1: IC31 vaccination is safe and induces long-lived TNF-α+ IL-2+ CD4 T cell responses in M. tuberculosis infected and uninfected adolescents: a randomized trial
First-in-human trial of the post-exposure tuberculosis vaccine H56: IC31 in Mycobacterium tuberculosis infected and non-infected healthy adults
Dose optimization of H56: IC31 vaccine for tuberculosis-endemic populations. A double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-selection trial
Bekker, L.G. et al. A phase 1b randomized study of the safety and immunological responses to vaccination with H4: IC31, H56: IC31, and BCG revaccination in Mycobacterium tuberculosis-uninfected adolescents in Cape Town, South Africa. EClinicalMedicine21, 10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100313 (2020).
Cutting edge: mincle is essential for recognition and adjuvanticity of the mycobacterial cord factor and its synthetic analog trehalose-dibehenate
Contribution of MINCLE–SYK signaling to activation of primary human APCs by mycobacterial cord factor and the novel adjuvant TDB
A novel liposomal adjuvant system, CAF01, promotes long-lived Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific T-cell responses in human
Advances in protein subunit vaccines against tuberculosis
Phase 2b placebo-controlled trial of M72/AS01 E candidate vaccine to prevent active tuberculosis in adults
The TLR-4 agonist adjuvant, GLA-SE, improves magnitude and quality of immune responses elicited by the ID93 tuberculosis vaccine: first-in-human trial
Safety and immunogenicity of the novel tuberculosis vaccine ID93 + GLA-SE in BCG-vaccinated healthy adults in South Africa: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 1 trial
Safety and immunogenicity of the ID93+ GLA-SE tuberculosis vaccine in BCG-vaccinated healthy adults: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 2 trial
Final analysis of a trial of M72/AS01(E) vaccine to prevent tuberculosis
The critical role of new tuberculosis vaccines in achieving the WHO 2035 End TB target
Feasibility of novel adult tuberculosis vaccination in South Africa: a cost-effectiveness and budget impact analysis
Accelerating research and development of new vaccines against tuberculosis: a global roadmap
A multistage tuberculosis vaccine that confers efficient protection before and after exposure
A defined tuberculosis vaccine candidate boosts BCG and protects against multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Immunogenicity, safety, and efficacy of the vaccine H56: IC31 in reducing the rate of tuberculosis disease recurrence in HIV-negative adults successfully treated for drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis: a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 2b trial
Safety and immunogenicity of candidate vaccine M72/AS01E in adolescents in a TB endemic setting