Outcome metrics in recommended performance measurement tools for emergency department performance evaluation: a systematic review
Background
There is no established protocol for measuring the overall performance of an emergency department (ED). This study sought to evaluate in terms of outcome measures the existing measurement tools created for ED use.
Design
A comprehensive systematic literature review was conducted following the PRISMA guidelines. A systematic literature search was performed in databases of Medline and Scopus using the following eligibility criteria: (1) article context is the hospital ED; (2) the purpose is to develop or use a measurement tool concerning either quality or value; (3) the measurement tool evaluates the overall ED performance; (4) the measurement tool consists of more than two single performance indicators; and (5) the article is published in English.
Main results
Fifteen unique articles met the eligibility criteria and were included in the systematic review. The Delphi method was the most popular method for identifying the recommended performance indicators for ED use. Ten articles defined outcome metrics as a separate category of indicators. The indicators perceived as outcome metrics differed widely among the studies. The outcome metrics recommended can be divided into the following five dimensions: reattendances, mortality, diagnostic and procedural errors and complications, diagnosis-specific survival rates, and patient experience. Forty-six single outcome metrics were identified. Reattendances were the most frequently recommended outcome metrics, with 20 single indicators falling into this category.
Conclusions
The lack of consensus on applicable outcome metrics makes it difficult to evaluate ED performance reliably. This study highlights the need to define and classify more specifically suitable outcome metrics for ED use to justify improvement actions and investigate the effect of healthcare reforms on ED operations.
Registration
PROSPERO CRD42023470855.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13049-025-01442-y.

Background
There is a growing interest in improving the quality of emergency care services and in developing and researching more established performance indicators. In particular, the Emergency Department (ED) crowding phenomenon has attracted considerable attention worldwide and aroused concern and discussion about the quality of ED care. A significant widescale attempt to measure ED performance and to control ED overcrowding has been to measure the total length of stay (LOS) and to set a national 4-hour target in the UK. However, a single process measure did not adequately represent the overall ED performance, which led to attempts to create more comprehensive sets of performance indicators.
Despite the limited scientific validation and evidence, certain thematic areas (such as reattendances and length of stay) have, for practical reasons, become relatively established in the measurement of ED performance. Some specific indicators, such as unplanned reattendances within 72 h, have also gained relatively widespread use. Similarly, diagnosis-specific indicators (such as door-to-trombolysis time) are commonly employed as performance metrics. However, measurement tools that rely exclusively on diagnosis-specific indicators may offer a limited perspective on overall ED performance. This emphasis is reflected in the substantial number of search results related to these indicators in scientific databases.
Nevertheless, the selection of indicators in specific contexts is often arbitrary, and the definitions and constructs being measured can vary considerably depending on how the indicators are formulated. Such variability complicates both the comprehensive assessment of ED performance and meaningful benchmarking across institutions. Furthermore, some ED-specific features guide measuring performance and cause challenges in creating a suitable set of performance indicators in this context. These are, among others, symptom-based presentations, lack of confirmed diagnosis in the ED, short clinical follow up, a broad spectrum of illnesses and injuries, and close relations with other providers in the integrated care pathway.
In the 2000s, the focus of healthcare was increasingly on patient-relevant outcomes, as value-based healthcare has been adopted in many countries. One widely accepted definition of healthcare outcomes is based on the Donabedian model, which divides healthcare performance indicators into the following three key areas: structure (the setting where care is provided, including physical and financial resources and competent staff), process (the care provided to the patient, such as diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, care coordination, and adherence to medical guidelines), and outcome (the effect of the provided care to the patient, such as survival, quality of life, and patient satisfaction).
Numerous implementation studies conducted in the ED setting have focused on measuring performance improvement regarding patient subpopulations, diagnostic procedures, or interventions or on measuring a specific part of the entire process. These studies usually use one or several performance indicators, often randomly selected without any selection process or argumentation. Therefore, the literature on ED performance concerns a narrow spectrum of ED functions, with low evidence of the considered performance indicators. No consensus exists on which indicators adequately measure and represent the overall ED performance within the limits of data available on the hospital information systems.
Previously, only one systematic literature review of the indicators measuring the overall ED performance has been published. Sørup et al. found that the most emphasized ED performance indicators were time- and patient-related. However, the investigated articles differed considerably in their approach. The included publications were heterogeneous and concerned, for example, the crowding phenomenon, procedure implementation, ED comparison, and diagnosis-specific indicators. Drawing conclusions based on the selected articles is difficult because the need to measure performance arises from different bases. For example, measuring the crowding phenomenon is different than measuring the overall ED performance by emphasizing time-related indicators and the access block. A research gap exists in measuring overall ED performance, especially outcomes of the provided care. This systematic review sought to study measurement tools developed to evaluate the overall ED performance, particularly from the outcomes perspective.

Methods

Literature search strategy
This systematic review sought to gather information about ED performance measurement tools that evaluate overall ED performance. A comprehensive systematic literature search was conducted following the PRISMA guidelines. The protocol of this systematic review is published in the PROSPERO database under registration number CRD42023470855.

Selection criteria
Articles were included in the systematic review if they met all the inclusion criteria and were excluded if they met at least one of the exclusion criteria (Fig. 1).
Inclusion and exclusion criteria

Search
The initial systematic literature search was performed in October 2023 in the databases of Medline and Scopus. The search terms were “emergency medicine,” “emergency service, hospital,” or “emergency department,” and “performance indicators,” “performance evaluation,” “performance measures,” “quality improvement,” or “quality indicators,” or any inflected forms of these. MeSH terms were used when possible in Medline. In Scopus, the phrase “AND NOT INDEX (medline)” was added to exclude those articles already included in the Medline search.
An additional and most recent search was performed in April 2024 when the search term “benchmarking” was added. Otherwise, the search terms were identical to those used in the initial search. More detailed search strings are available in the Additional file 1.

Data collection and analysis
The articles were selected independently by two authors (TT and RM), first based on the title, then at the abstract level, and finally at the full-text level. In any phase, discrepancies were resolved with a third research group member (PT). References in selected full-text articles were reviewed. The articles were sorted using the reference management software Zotero.
After study selection, two authors (TT and RM) independently extracted the data to an Excel spreadsheet. The outcome metrics were sorted and listed according to the Quadruple Aim framework (patient experience, population health, reducing costs, and provider experience). Discrepancies between reviewers were resolved with the other group members (PT and MC). No automation tools were used in any phase of the process.
In this systematic review, structure-, process-, and outcome-related performance indicators are called structure, process, and outcome metrics, respectively. The performance indicator subgroups in the selected articles are called categories. The performance indicator subgroups defined by the authors reflecting the focus of this systematic review are called dimensions.

Results
The initial search from the applied databases produced 5309 articles; the additional search yielded 5979 articles, of which 710 were unique compared with the initial search (Fig. 2). According to the selection process, articles that did not seem relevant to the subject first by the title and then by the abstract were excluded by the authors. After evaluation against the eligibility criteria, 15 articles were included for further analysis. The hand search found no relevant articles.
PRISMA Flow Diagram of article selection
Of the 42 excluded articles, 12 did not use any measurement tool, and seven used a non-structured measurement tool that did not have a selection process or any justification for the selected performance measures. 14 excluded articles had the wrong perspective (for example, emergency medical systems). Four outdated versions of the consensus reports were excluded. The latest versions were also included in the original database search, thus adding the latest versions by hand was unnecessary. Three review articles were also excluded.
The results formed a relatively homogenous set of articles that aimed to create a measurement tool rather than using one (Table 1). Two articles used the measurement tool they created. This two-fold approach resulted in limited focus and reliability of the indicator selection process. The articles used various methods to select the recommended performance indicators. The Delphi process and its different variations used in eight studies were the most popular concepts for creating a measurement tool. Moreover, two articles preferred brainstorming methods in selecting the recommended performance indicators. Two articles did not perform any selection process.
Presentation of included literature
Authorand year	Geographical location	Aim of the study	Selection process	Panel	Recommended indicators			 	International level									 		Hansen2020 	International	To develop a consensus to suggest quality indicators for EDs	Iterative email circulations	IFEM Quality and Safety Special Interest Group	44*			 		Hruska2019 	International	To develop a template for uniform reporting of standardized measuring and describing of care provided in the ED	Relevant literature uploaded by all participants + Utstein consensus process	An international group of experts in emergency medicine (12 delegates)	21			 	National level									 		Beattie2004 	UK	To identify performance indicators that reflect the quality of ED care	Indicators proposed by panelists + three-round Delphi study	33 experts (emergency medicine, emergency nursing, professional service users, and patients)	36			 		Heyworth2011 	UK	To describe ED quality indicators designed to replace the 4-hour target to provide a greater breadth of ED measurement	N/A	The College of Emergency Medicine, Royal College of Nursing, and the Department of Health	8			 		Madsen2016 	Denmark	Selection of quality indicators for a new national quality of care database of hospital-based emergency care in Denmark	Literature review + modified Delphi process (two rounds) + steering group selection of indicators	54 experts (senior clinicians, researchers, and administrators from emergency area and collaborating specialties) + steering group	9			 		Maritz2010 	South Africa	To develop a broad-based consensus document detailing quality measures for ED use in South Africa	Proposed by panelists + three-round modified Delphi process	30 experts in the first round, 43 in the second round, and 24 in the third round (emergency physicians, trauma surgeons, senior nurses)	77			 		Núñez2018 	Chile	To propose a set of KPIs for EDs in Chile and to implement and validate the framework in two EDs	Literature review + on-site visits + interviews + process flow description; finally, indicators selected by the authors	N/A	75			 		Safdari2014 	Iran	To develop KPIs from BSC perspectives for use in ED dashboards and prioritize higher-ranked measures by using the AHP framework	Literature review + refinement by the expert panel + Delphi process	15 experts (ED directors within the emergency medicine specialty)	22			 		Schull2011 	Canada	To develop a set of quality-of-care indicators for EDs and perform a gap analysis to identify areas where future indicator development is needed and perform a feasibility study based on existing administrative databases	Literature review + modified Delphi process (two rounds) + steering group selection of indicators	Expert panel (n = 21) and national steering committee (n = 24) (hospital administration, emergency medicine, health information, government, and provincial quality councils)	48			 		Wakai2013 	Ireland	To develop a consensus for ED KPIs among emergency medicine specialists working in Ireland	Systematic literature review + indicators proposed by panelists + three-round modified Delphi process + panelists’ suggestions for KPIs	All registered EM specialists in Ireland (48 in the first round, 57 in the second round, 59 in the third round)	97			 	Organizational level							Number of EDs	ED types	 		Khalifa2016 	Saudi Arabia	To develop a comprehensive set of KPIs to monitor, evaluate, and improve ED performance	Literature review + semi-structured interviews + quantitative data analysis from hospital data warehouse system; finally, KPIs were selected by the author	N/A	34	1	N/A	 		Nik Hisamuddin2021 	Malaysia	To develop a suitable framework of KPIs for EDs of tertiary teaching centers in Malaysia and to demonstrate the feasibility of FDM in this context	Literature search + FDM	10 ED experts from the National Specialist Registry for Emergency Medicine	9	3	EDs of tertiary teaching centers	 		Nik Hisamuddin2022 	Malaysia	To create an acceptable framework of KPIs both for service and academic activities for EM teaching hospitals in Malaysia and to demonstrate the feasibility of the combination of FDM and NGT in this context	Literature search + investigator’s opinion + NGT and FDM	24 participants for NGT (emergency physicians, senior EM residents, senior ED nursing staff, senior ambulance paramedics), 10 experts within the field of EM for FDM	15	3	Teaching hospitals	 		Sibbritt2006 	Australia	To provide a list of PIs that measure more adequately ED performance compared with usually recommended PIs in Australia and to investigate the proposed PIs in a large tertiary ED	N/A	N/A	12	1	Large tertiary ED	 		Soldatenkova2023 	Italy	To develop a framework using administrative health data to analyse patient flow through EDs and to support ED stakeholder’s decision-making	Literature review + indicators selected by the authors	N/A	224	N/A	Teaching university hospital
*Defined by researchers
ED Emergency Department, IFEM The International Federation for Emergency Medicine, KPI Key Performance Indicator, BSC Balanced Scorecard, AHP Analytic Hierarchy Process, EM Emergency Medicine, FDM Fuzzy Delphi Method, NGT Nominal Group Technique, PI Performance Indicator
The geographical locations have a contextual consideration because measuring performance is context-dependent. ED functions differ between countries depending on the healthcare system and financing model. Furthermore, for example, rural versus urban locations and academic versus non-academic settings set different needs for measuring performance in EDs. Most articles sought to develop a recommended set of performance indicators for a local healthcare system to measure ED performance (Table 1). Five articles sought to create an organization-level measurement tool. Considering these articles, the perspectives of smaller, rural, and non-academic hospital EDs were lacking. Two articles addressed the international level of measurement tools. More detailed information on the selected articles is available in the Additional file 2.
The recommended indicators, defined as outcome metrics in the selected studies and related to the same topics, were grouped into broader entities under suitable subheadings to decrease the total number of indicators (Table 2). The most commonly used template to categorize the performance indicators was the Donabedian structure, process, and outcome model, which was used in seven studies. Otherwise, established means to categorize performance indicators were rare, and many included studies created customized categorizations for the recommended indicators. These customized categorizations were divided into two groups depending on whether outcomes were listed as a separate category or not. According to the existing literature, the authors described and listed suitable indicators as outcome metrics for articles that did not determine outcomes as a separate category. The following five broader dimensions of outcome metrics could be identified in the selected studies: reattendances, mortality, diagnostic and procedural errors and complications, diagnosis-specific survival rates, and patient experience. 46 single performance indicators were defined as outcome metrics and included in these dimensions. Reattendances were the most frequently recommended outcome metrics, with 20 single indicators falling in this category. The single metrics with different wording but measuring the same things were combined. Quality of life (usually measured by quality-adjusted life years, QALYs) was not a recommended outcome metric in any selected studies despite its established status in measuring health economics, also in the ED setting. Measuring QALYs in the ED is problematic because of the acute nature of the illnesses, the short stay in the ED, and the lack of an established follow-up schedule. More detailed information about the single outcome metrics is available in the Additional file 3.
Recommended outcome metrics in the included literature
Donabedian (structure, process, outcome)	Customized categorization, including outcome metric category	Customized categorization without outcome metric category	No categorization	 			Beattie 2004	Hansen2020	Madsen 2016	Maritz 2010	Nik Hisamuddin 2021	Nik Hisamuddin 2022	Wakai 2013	Hruska2019	Núñez2018	Soldatenkova2023	Khalifa2016	Safdari 2014	Schull 2011	Sibbritt 2006	Heyworth2011	 	Reducing costs	Incident rates		x			x	x										 		LOS		x														 		Reattendances*		x	x				x	x		x	x	x	x	x	x	 	Population health	Mortality*		x	x					x	x	x		x		x		 		Diagnostic and procedural errors and complications*	x	x		x			x			x		x	x			 		Diagnosis-specific survival rates*	x											x	x			 	Patient experience	Patient experience*		x							x			x	x		x	 		Fail to wait		x					x	x		x						 	Provider experience	Educational measures						x										 		Communication		x														 		Quality audit		x														 	Other	Patient disposition		x						x	x	x						 		Time to first dose of analgesic		x
* dimensions that include indicators defined as outcome metrics by the authors
LOS Length Of Stay
The definition of outcome metrics varied widely among the studies that defined outcomes as a separate category. In the articles using the Donabedian model to define and categorize the outcome metrics, there were no true outcome metrics in other indicator categories. Instead, in these studies, structure and process metrics (for example, LOS and patient disposition) were widely defined as outcome metrics. In articles using customized categorization of indicators defining outcome metrics separately, defining true outcome metrics in other categories was more common. For example, Núñez et al. did not define readmission rate and medical complications as outcomes and Soldatenkova et al. did not define missed diagnosis as outcomes.
Defined outcome metric dimensions fell into the following three aspects of the Quadruple Aim (Table 2): population health (mortality and diagnostic and procedural errors and complications), patient experience (patient experience), and reducing costs (unplanned reattendances). The Other indicators category was created for the metrics that did not fit into the Quadruple Aim concept.
The lists of recommended outcome metrics in the selected studies varied in the extent of measuring the performance (Table 3). Only three articles covered four or five of the determined dimensions of the outcome measures (reattendances, mortality, diagnostic and procedural errors and complications, diagnosis-specific survival rates, and patient experience). Thus, the reliability of the selection processes and the quality of the articles were variable. Most articles covered only two out of the five outcome dimensions.
The evaluation of the outcome metric templates’ appropriateness
AuthorYear	Number of outcome metrics	Dimensions of the outcome metrics considered	Reliability of the selection process*	Quality assessment	 	Safdari2014	6	5/5	++	4/9	 	Schull2011	9	4/5	++	7/9	 	Hruska2019	2	2/5	++	5/6	 	Wakai2013	3	2/5	++	7/9	 	Madsen2016	2	2/5	++	7/9	 	Beattie2004	2	2/5	++	6/9	 	Maritz2010	4	1/5	++	6/9	 	Hansen2020	6	4/5	+	4/6	 	Soldatenkova2023	17	3/5	+	5/10	 	Núñez2018	2	2/5	+	5/10	 	Khalifa2016	2	1/5	+	2/6	 	Sibbritt2006	2	2/5	-	4/10	 	Heyworth2011	2	2/5	-	2/6	 	Nik Hisamuddin2021	-	-	++	9/10	 	Nik Hisamuddin2022	-	-	++	8/10
* - = no selection process, + = selection process mentioned (a non-established template for expert opinion used), ++ = reliable selection process (an established template for expert opinion used)

Discussion
The investigated articles shared a common approach to developing a performance measurement tool for ED use. Nevertheless, the means to achieve this common goal were heterogeneous. The Delphi method was the most popular concept for reaching consensus on performance indicators suitable for the ED setting. The same conclusion was made by Sørup et al. in their systematic review. The perspective of this systematic review differs from previous literature by focusing primarily on outcome metrics. This perspective will likely be critical in future research because it is associated with measuring cost-effectiveness and increasing value in the ED setting. By definition, value means outcomes achieved by money spent, and the same definition also fits into the construct of cost-effectiveness. Little is known about the cost-effectiveness of the ED, and a research gap exists on this topic. The increase in cost-effectiveness research in the ED requires at first to define and establish the outcome metrics used.
Some investigated studies have defined process metrics as outcome metrics. This is because of the obscurity in determining the categorization of the metrics. The relationship and difference between outcome and process metrics are not always clear. Outcome metrics describe the effect of healthcare services on health. Instead of outcome metrics, ED performance is often evaluated by process metrics because process data are usually more easily accessible (for example from hospital information systems). Evaluating ED outcomes also requires determining the most suitable time after an ED visit to measure the outcomes. However, ED care often represents a single episode in the patient’s care pathway, and evaluating this independently is challenging.
The Delphi process is widely accepted as a reliable method for reaching expert consensus in qualitative research questions in healthcare. The panel’s composition is essential in forming the consensus reached, as the relevance of the outcomes varies depending on the stakeholder’s perspective. The panel size and composition in the selected studies may not be optimal because of the small number and homogeneity of the experts (Table 1). Panel sizes varied between 10 and 59 and consisted mainly of clinical emergency specialists (physicians, nurses, paramedics) and rarely policymakers (administrators, government, researchers) or other stakeholders.
The discussion on measuring outcomes in the ED setting has been ongoing for decades. The lack of uniform definitions for outcome metrics in the ED complicates interpreting and comparing publications in the research field. Outcome metrics should reflect the patient’s condition after visiting the ED and compare it with the condition before the visit. Five broader dimensions of outcome metrics can be identified, namely reattendances, mortality, diagnostic and procedural errors and complications, diagnosis-specific survival rates, and patient experience. Single outcome metrics in different dimensions can reflect different aspects of the same phenomenon. They can also be overlapping or related, measuring the same events from various perspectives. Some outcome metrics differ only slightly in meaning. The articles investigated in this systematic review offered a comprehensive overview of which aspects should be considered when measuring outcomes in the ED, even though a more established consensus about precise single outcome metrics is needed in the future. Schull et al., Safdari et al., and Hansen et al. provided the most versatile recommended outcome metrics lists. Their approach to composing a list of performance indicators varied in how specific or general the single metrics are and in which context they are developed (Fig. 3). Nevertheless, similarities exist among these lists, and a shared opinion in measuring outcomes includes reattendaces, diagnostic and procedural errors and complications, and patient experience. This can provide a basis for future development of an outcome metrics tool for ED use.
The most appropriate outcome metric templates for measuring ED performance
There are some limitations of the current study including the bias of the included articles. The selected search terms and databases may result in a limited set of publications. Furthermore, excluding measurement tools that focus solely on disease-specific indicators may omit perspectives that could be relevant to a broader assessment of ED performance. The lack of research on the non-english and grey literature can also cause bias in the analysis. There may have been suitable excluded publications that were unsuccessful in describing the aim, context, or patient population in the title or abstract. The scope of this review article may also cause bias by focusing solely on outcome metrics instead of performance indicators in general, which was the topic of all publications included in the review. The authors considered it their right to determine the recommended performance indicators as outcome metrics according to the existing literature. This may differ from the categorization of indicators in the selected articles, which may cause bias in the metrics analysis.

Conclusions
No consensus exists on measuring ED performance, and established measurement tools have not been created. This systematic review addressed the varying determinations of single performance indicators as outcome metrics and the lack of consensus on applicable outcome metrics for ED use. This systematic review addressed that the recommended outcome metrics can be classified into five broader dimensions, but the single metrics included are not established. Further research is needed to define the most suitable outcome metrics for ED use. Our findings serve as a basis to create the most appropriate measurement tool for measuring ED performance.

Electronic supplementary material
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
T.T., P.T., and M.C. created the search strategy, including keywords and search strings, and selected the databases used. T.T. and R.M. conducted the search, independently selected the articles, and extracted the data from selected articles to the Excel spreadsheets (Additional files). All the discrepancies were resolved with P.T. and M.C. T.T. wrote the main manuscript and prepared figures and tables. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript, figures, and tables.

Funding
Open access funded by Helsinki University Library. T.T. has received personal funding from the Department of Emergency Medicine and Services, Helsinki University and Helsinki University Hospital (TYH2021306, State funding for university-level health research). For the remaining authors none were declared.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Abbreviations
ED
Emergency department
LOS
Length of stay
IFEM
The International Federation for Emergency Medicine
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
BSC
Balanced Scorecard
AHP
Analytic Hierarchy Process
EM
Emergency Medicine
FDM
Fuzzy Delphi Method
NGT
Nominal Group Technique
PI
Performance Indicator
QALY
Quality of life

References
Measuring and improving quality in emergency medicine
International perspectives on emergency department crowding
Department of Health. The NHS Plan: a plan for investment a plan for reform. https://pns.dgs.pt/files/2010/03/pnsuk1.pdf (2000).
Emergency medicine-quality indicators: the united Kingdom perspective
A framework for measuring quality in the emergency department
What is value in health care??
Evaluating the quality of medical care
The development of indicators to measure the quality of clinical care in emergency departments following a modified-delphi approach
Strategies to measure and improve emergency department performance: a scoping review
The level of evidence for emergency department performance indicators: systematic review
Evaluation of emergency department performance - a systematic review on recommended performance and quality-in-care measures
Emergency department crowding: an overview of reviews describing measures causes, and harms
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
The triple aim: care, health, and cost
From triple to quadruple aim: care of the patient requires care of the provider
Emergency departments key performance indicators: A unified framework and its practice
Emergency department performance indicators that encompass the patient journey
A Delphi study to identify performance indicators for emergency medicine
Selection of quality indicators for hospital-based emergency care in denmark, informed by a modified-Delphi process
Identification of performance indicators for emergency centres in South africa: results of a Delphi study
Development of balanced key performance indicators for emergency departments strategic dashboards following analytic hierarchical process
Prioritizing performance measurement for emergency department care: consensus on evidence-based quality of care indicators
Development of key performance indicators for emergency departments in Ireland using an electronic modified-Delphi consensus approach
Determination of service key performance indicators for emergency departments of teaching hospitals in malaysia: A fuzzy Delphi method
Developing key performance indicators for emergency department of teaching hospitals: A mixed fuzzy Delphi and nominal group technique approach
Template for uniform reporting of emergency department measures, consensus according to the Utstein method
Updated framework on quality and safety in emergency medicine
Emergency department quality and safety indicators in resource-limited settings: an environmental survey
Clinical operations of academic versus non-academic emergency departments: a descriptive comparison of two large emergency department operations surveys
Developing emergency room key performance indicators: what to measure and why should we measure it??
Emergency department performance assessment using administrative data: A managerial framework
Development of new methods to assess the outcomes of emergency care
Review article: A primer for clinical researchers in the emergency department: part X. Understanding economic evaluation alongside emergency medicine research
Dritsaki M, Achana F, Mason J, Petrou S. Methodological issues surrounding the use of baseline health‑related quality of life data to inform trial‑based economic evaluations of interventions within emergency and critical care settings: a systematic literature review. PharmacoEconomics. 2017;35(5):501–15
Process versus outcome indicators in the assessment of quality of health care
The Delphi technique: making sense of consensus
Using and reporting the Delphi method for selecting healthcare quality indicators: A systematic review
Understanding the value of emergency care: A framework incorporating stakeholder perspectives