Incorporating individually defined brain health priorities in clinical trial outcomes: the electronic Person‐Specific Outcome Measure approach in the United States
Abstract
INTRODUCTION
While a limited number of disease‐modifying treatments for Alzheimer's disease (AD) have been approved in the United States, there is caution in adopting these treatments in clinical use. The electronic Person‐Specific Outcome Measure (ePSOM) tool was recently developed to establish whether, besides modifying underlying AD pathology, new treatments exerted sufficient beneficial effects in areas that matter the most to an individual.
METHODS
We conducted a study to understand how findings from the ePSOM UK study applied in the United States. The ePSOM US survey (May 2023 to January 2024) collected primarily free‐text responses in personally defined brain health priorities, alongside self‐reported confidence in managing these priorities. We used natural language processing (k‐means clustering of GloVe vectors) and chi‐squared tests to examine differences between the US and UK populations' answers. We used a Mann–Whitney U test to compare the confidence ratings between participants with and without a self‐reported diagnosis of neurodegenerative disease.
RESULTS
Our analysis included 764 participants in the United States (68.8% female; 74.2% high educational attainment) with a total of 9010 free‐text responses, of whom 53 individuals (6.90%) reported neurodegenerative disease diagnosis. The comparable sample from the UK survey included 4529 participants with a total of 38,056 responses. There were statistically significant differences in the proportion of responses between the US and UK populations. The diagnosis group showed a significant difference in average total scores of self‐reported confidence compared with those without a diagnosis (median score 21, interquartile range [IQR] = 17 to 23 vs median score 24, IQR = 22 to 25, U = 8908, p < .01).
DISCUSSION
Our study demonstrates heterogeneity in individual‐level brain health priorities in the US and differences between the US and UK populations. The diagnosis group was significantly less confident in managing personally meaningful priorities. These findings support our hypothesis that what constitutes meaningful treatment benefits should be determined at an individual rather than group level, and cultural context needs to be considered.
Highlights
The study captured individually defined treatment priorities.
A self‐reported confidence rating was used to assess how people manage their most meaningful areas of life
The study found differences between US and UK participants’ priorities.
Neurodegenerative disease is associated with lower confidence in managing priorities.
The ePSOM tool offers a method to assess meaningful treatment benefits.

BACKGROUND
As the population ages across the globe, the number of people diagnosed with dementia due to Alzheimer's disease (AD) is expected to rise. While a small number of medications are available for relatively short‐term symptomatic relief, it is only recently that new disease‐modifying treatments have been approved after decades of drug discovery. Excluding the discontinued aducanumab treatment, there are currently two monoclonal antibody treatments for mild cognitive impairment or mild dementia due to AD approved by the US FDA and seeking global approvals – lecanemab and donanemab – marking the first AD drug approvals since the approval of reference drug donepezil in the mid‐1990s. With 127 drugs currently being tested for AD treatment and an increasing number of lifestyle‐based interventions aiming to prevent cognitive decline and dementia, it is critical that study outcomes incorporate the person's voice to establish meaningful treatment effects and understand which treatments or combinations of treatments ultimately offer value.
However, despite the recent regulatory approvals in the United States, providers are moving with appropriate caution in adopting these new treatments in clinical use due to uncertainty around clinically meaningful benefits, risk of side effects, and costs associated with delivering these treatments. Treatment effect is expected to be most pronounced in the early stages of neurodegenerative diseases, and regulatory bodies’ recommend incorporating person‐centered outcomes in AD clinical trials. Thus, capturing change in priorities perceived as beneficial at an individual level has become a central consideration in drug development.
There are a number of approaches to establishing treatment effects considered personally meaningful. One recently developed solution is the electronic Person‐Specific Outcome Measure (ePSOM) tool. The ePSOM tool has been developed to capture and monitor longitudinally individual‐level brain health priorities that are unique to each participant. In research use, the tool can be used to establish evidence of meaningful treatment benefits, if present. In healthcare settings, the tool can incorporate individually defined treatment priorities into clinical care to guide treatment decisions.
The ePSOM approach was developed in a stepwise program where an initial focus group study yielded five overarching domains of brain health priorities. These domains were used in a nationwide study in the UK exploring the heterogeneity of treatment priorities and focusing specifically on individuals with a self‐reported neurodegenerative disease diagnosis. In this paper, we report findings from the ePSOM US study, which replicated and extended data collection from the UK study. We note that because the ePSOM study in the United Kingdom did not include self‐reported ratings of confidence in managing priority outcomes, analysis of confidence in personally defined priorities only includes the US sample. We sought to understand (1) how findings from the ePSOM program in the UK applied in the US population; (2) whether individuals were able to report their level of confidence in personally defined brain health priorities; (3) whether there were differences in confidence levels between individuals with a self‐reported neurodegenerative disease diagnosis and those without; and (4) whether the rates of answers per domain are similar between countries. We hypothesize that there would be differences in themes between countries, but that domains would be similarly applicable.

METHODS
We conducted an online nationwide study to understand what matters to people aged 50 and older about their brain health in the United States. The ePSOM US study obtained ethics approvals from the Advarra Center for IRB Intelligence (CIRBI) Platform. The ePSOM US study ran from May 2023 to January 2024 and collected primarily free‐text responses in personally defined brain health priorities, alongside self‐reported confidence in managing these priorities, sociodemographic information, and self‐reported neurodegenerative disease diagnosis. Participants were recruited from academic centers of aging, professional Alzheimer's and related dementias’ associations advertising the ePSOM US survey in their newsletters and communication channels, and chronic care management companies. All study‐related procedures were conducted online by the participants.

Outcome measure
The ePSOM US study was an extension of the ePSOM UK study (Saunders et al., 2021), with minor modifications in question phrasing, but remained in English. Participants were asked to use their own words to describe the things that mattered to them in five domains, presented in the following order: (1) daily tasks, (2) enjoying life, (3) relationships and social connections, (4) thinking skills, and (5) sense of who you are as a person. These domains were derived from focus groups in the United Kingdom. After writing an unrestricted number of free‐text responses regarding personal brain health priorities, participants were shown a randomized list of all the answers they gave across domains and asked to choose five of the most important answers (“top five”). Unlike in the ePSOM UK study, the ePSOM US study then asked participants to rate how confident they felt in their ability to manage these personally defined priorities (e.g., “Maybe you said ‘Ability to use public transport’ matters to you. If you feel you are able to use public transport confidently, rate your confidence as high. If you feel you are not able to use public transport confidently, rate your confidence as low”). Each of the “top five” answers was rated on a five‐point scale (1: Not at all; 2: Slightly; 3: Somewhat; 4: Fairly; 5: Completely), which yielded a total score between 5 and 25, with lower scores indicating lower confidence level.

RESEARCH IN CONTEXT
Systematic review: We reviewed the literature using PubMed and conference abstracts. With emerging treatments in AD and related dementias, it is critical to establish which treatments or combinations of treatments provide meaningful benefits. This manuscript presents findings from the ePSOM US study, evaluating the ePSOM approach to capturing person‐specific treatment priorities in the United States.
Interpretation: Our findings suggest there is heterogeneity in individual‐level brain health priorities in the United States, and there are significant differences between the US and UK populations. Clinical trials should incorporate treatment priorities that are considered meaningful within specific cultures to prevent misinterpretation of treatment outcomes.
Future directions: Future research should validate the ePSOM tool longitudinally and in diverse populations and cultures. Objective study outcomes should be corroborated with person‐centered measures to establish meaningful treatment effects that incorporate individual treatment priorities.

Analysis of free‐text data
Our analysis of the free‐text data followed our previous work. In brief, we used natural language processing (NLP) to analyze the free‐text data. We removed “stop words” (e.g., “etc.,” “and,” “if”) and punctuation from the individual free‐text answers and embedded the free‐text data using Global Vectors (GloVe) to cluster the individual responses into semantically similar themes (or meaning). Prior to obtaining word vectorization, we preprocessed the text, which included removing punctuation and trailing or leading spaces, translating the data set into long format, and examining word statistics for outliers, and clustered the responses using a k‐means approach. We estimated the appropriate cluster size using the elbow method (we chose a consistent number of clusters beyond the elbow point to increase the granularity available for manual annotation; Appendix 1). After automatic clustering, all themes were manually annotated (given names or labeled) by each of two of the researchers (St.S. and A.J.), with a third moderating (Sh.S.). Automatic clustering was performed twice, once before and once after the themes were manually defined. The second iteration of this clustering was used to confirm that the themes were consistent. The final clusters were then labeled based on the agreed‐upon set of clusters. This approach is commonly known as semi‐supervised clustering in machine learning. These final clusters are what we henceforth refer to as themes.
To compare brain health priorities between the United States and United Kingdom, the final step in the data annotation was to create combined US and UK clusters by clustering the UK data along with the US data. To include a comparable data set from the United Kingdom, we only included participants aged 50 and older. Using the combined US and UK clusters, we moderated and finalized the annotation of the combined cluster labels. Using the combined clusters, we compared the responses and their associated themes between the US and UK samples.

Statistical analyses
We report the percentages of total answers that were clustered under each theme. We used chi‐squared statistical tests to analyze whether the differences in percentages between the US and UK sample answers within each theme were statistically significant (α = 0.01). Specifically, we examined (1) the frequency of answers occurring within themes and (2) themes that had the most answers chosen as particularly important (“top five”).
To analyze self‐reported confidence in managing personally defined priorities, we report the median total confidence score and the median confidence rating per theme in the US sample. We used a Mann–Whitney U test to examine the differences in confidence scores within the US sample between individuals with a self‐reported neurodegenerative disease diagnosis (diagnosis group) and those without. The diagnosis groups were individuals who reported one or a combination of diagnoses in our predefined neurodegenerative disease list. We identified themes where the median confidence rating was lower compared to the overall median confidence score of the diagnosis group; however, we did not perform statistical comparisons due to the low number of impaired individuals and the low number of observations in some themes.
To investigate the rates of answers per domain between the United States and the United Kingdom, we examined whether people in the United Kingdom and the United States gave a comparable number of answers to the five domains we prompted them with.

RESULTS
A total of 764 participants took part in the ePSOM US survey (Table 1). Most were female (68.8%), married (63.4%), had higher education (64.1%), and did not report a neurodegenerative disease diagnosis (93%); mean age was 63.17 (SD = 8.47). Our clusters captured 9010 free‐text responses from the US sample. The comparable sample (age 50 and older) from the UK survey included 4529 participants. In the UK sample, most were female (75%), were married (66.59%), had higher education (60.63%), and did not report a neurodegenerative disease diagnosis (96%); mean age was 64.5 (SD = 9.06). Our analysis included 38,056 free‐text answers from the UK sample. These US and UK participants’ individual free‐text responses clustered into 102 unique themes of brain health priorities.
ePSOM US survey characteristics and comparable ePSOM UK survey respondent characteristics.
ePSOM US sample characteristics and comparable sample from UK study	 		US	UK	 	N	764	4529	 	Male	238 (31.2%)	1135 (25%)	 	Female	526 (68.8%)	3387 (75%)+ 7 (0.15%) other, prefer not to say	 	Age	Mean: 63.1 (SD = 8.47)	Mean: 64.5 (SD = 9.06)	 	Work status	 	Retired or not workingFull‐time paid work or Part‐time paid work or Self‐employed or Volunteer	376 (49.21%)388 (50.79%)	2297 (50.72%)2272 (50.72%)	 	Educationa	 	HigherLower	567 (74.2%)187 (24.48%)+ 10 (0.15%) prefer not to say	2746 (60.63%)1667 (36.81%)+ 25 (0.15%) prefer not to say	 	Marital status	 	MarriedDivorced or separated or widowed or never married	484 (63.39%)273 (35.74%)	3016 (66.59%)1435 (31.68%)+ 78 (1.72%) prefer not to say	 	Diagnosisb	 	NoYes	711 (93.10%)53 (6.90%)MCI n = 21AD n = 5Combination n = 23	4362 (96.31%)167 (3.69%)Diagnostic breakdown in Saunders et al., 2022	 	Anyone assist in completing this survey?	 	NoYes	741 (96.99%)23 (3.01%)	4476 (98.83%)53 (1.17%)
Education: Higher: associate's degree, bachelor's degree, master's degree, doctorate/professional degree. Lower: No schooling completed, Grades 1 through 11, high school diploma or alternative credential, less than 1 year of college, 1 or more years of college but no degree.
Predefined diagnosis: mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease, mixed dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, frontotemporal dementia, vascular dementia, Parkinson's disease dementia, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, Creutzfeldt‐Jakob Disease, Korsakoff syndrome, motor neuron disease, subjective cognitive disorder, major neurocognitive disorder, stroke.

Differences between US and UK populations’ themes
We found differences in the proportion of responses between the US and UK samples. The chi‐squared tests showed there were statistically significant differences in the most frequently mentioned themes and in the most important themes (“top five”) between the US and UK samples.
There were 37 themes that were mentioned significantly more often by the US sample and 22 themes with a significantly higher likelihood of being chosen as important (“top five”) by the US sample compared to the UK sample (Table 2).
Themes that were statistically significantly more frequently mentioned by US sample and themes that had a statistically significantly higher probability of being chosen as important (“top five”) by US sample compared to UK sample.
Theme (by frequency)	Count (%)	Theme (by importance)	Count (%)	 	1	Staying active	499 (5.54%)	Driving	143 (9.29%)	 	2	Remember things	263 (2.92%)	Staying active	93 (6.04%)	 	3	Gain new skills and insights	238 (2.64%)	Remember things	39 (2.53%)	 	4	Cleaning	209 (2.32%)	Working	33 (2.14%)	 	5	Play games	131 (1.45%)	Cleaning	44 (2.86%)	 	6	Working	130 (1.44%)	Gain new skills and insights	37 (2.40%)	 	7	Give advice	194 (2.15%)	Run a household	28 (1.82%)	 	8	Critical thinking	114 (1.27%)	Give advice	34 (2.21%)	 	9	Maintain friendships	231 (2.56%)	Critical thinking	24 (1.56%)	 	10	Help others	172 (1.91%)	Manage finances	48 (3.12%)	 	11	Entertain	79 (0.88%)	Stay organized	24 (1.56%)	 	12	Mentor and teach	79 (0.88%)	Pets	23 (1.49%)	 	13	Manage finances	236 (2.62%)	Clarity of thought	19 (1.23%)	 	14	Run a household	99 (1.10%)	Entertain	11 (0.71%)	 	15	Creative activities	70 (0.78%)	Creative activities	11 (0.71%)	 	16	Sense of direction	73 (0.81%)	Mentor and teach	9 (0.58%)	 	17	Outdoors activities	108 (1.20%)	Happy and loved	8 (0.52%)	 	18	Drawing	54 (0.60%)	Using the phone	7 (0.45%)	 	19	Express feelings and emotions	84 (0.93%)	Make people laugh	9 (0.58%)	 	20	Communicate effectively	137 (1.52%)	Sense of direction	6 (0.39%)	 	21	Pets	86 (0.95%)	Learn new things	6 (0.39%)	 	22	Religious participation	110 (1.22%)	Intelligence	4 (0.26%)	 	23	Clarity of thought	93 (1.03%)		 	24	Using the phone	43 (0.48%)	 	25	Traveling	185 (2.05%)	 	26	Contribute to community	97 (1.08%)	 	27	Use toilet	123 (1.37%)	 	28	Intelligence	39 (0.43%)	 	29	Happy and loved	36 (0.40%)	 	30	Remember conversations	104 (1.15%)	 	31	Make people laugh	48 (0.53%)	 	32	Eating	78 (0.87%)	 	33	Book club	35 (0.39%)	 	34	Learn new things	27 (0.30%)	 	35	Sex life	17 (0.19%)	 	36	Camping	11 (0.12%)	 	37	Maintain focus	8 (0.09%)
There were 32 themes that were mentioned significantly more often by the UK sample and five themes with a significantly higher likelihood of being chosen as important (“top five”) by the UK sample compared to the US sample (Table 3).
Themes that were statistically significantly more frequently mentioned by UK sample and themes that had a statistically significantly higher probability of being chosen as important (“top five”) by UK sample compared to US sample.
Theme (by frequency)	Count (%)	Theme (by importance)	Count (%)	 	1	Family and friends	3101 (6.28%)	Family and friends	1218 (7.66%)	 	2	Walking	1822 (3.69%)	Maintain independence	1142 (7.18%)	 	3	Mix gardening other	1416 (2.87%)	Walking	588 (3.70%)	 	4	Chatting to friends and family	2209 (4.47%)	Mix Gardening other	327 (2.06%)	 	5	Maintain independence	1867 (3.78%)	Board and card games	144 (0.91%)	 	6	Follow a storyline	1577 (2.14%)		 	7	Use technology	764 (0.60%)	 	8	Plan future	524 (1.06%)	 	9	Shopping	728 (1.47%)	 	10	Board and card games	755 (1.53%)	 	11	Make decisions	832 (1.69%)	 	12	Meal planning	1631 (3.30%)	 	13	Walk dogs	553 (1.12%)	 	14	Sport watching	364 (0.74%)	 	15	Help family	316 (0.64%)	 	16	Creative hobbies	287 (0.58%)	 	17	Artwork	307 (0.62%)	 	18	Call, text, email friends	333 (0.67%)	 	19	Singing in a choir	229 (0.46 %)	 	20	Remember people and places	284 (0.58%)	 	21	Music	553 (1.12%)	 	22	Remember special dates	249 (0.50%)	 	23	Concerts	292 (0.59%)	 	24	Enjoy movies	343 (0.69%)	 	25	Analyze and solve problems	200 (0.41%)	 	26	Watch TV	355 (0.72%)	 	27	Remember recent events	170 (0.34%)	 	28	Dancing	279 (0.57%)	 	29	Debate politics	127 (0.26%)	 	30	Follow a recipe	179 (0.36%)	 	31	Be a good neighbor	82 (0.17%)	 	32	Zoom/video calls	81 (0.16%)

Confidence scores in most important themes in United States
Across the US sample, 87 themes that included answers chosen as most important (“top five”). Among these 87 themes, the median confidence score across the participants was 24 (interquartile range [IQR] = 22, 25), with a median confidence rating per theme of 4.5 (IQR = 4, 5).
The largest themes were chosen as most important, and the associated median confidence ratings were driving (5), staying active (5), reading (5), chatting with friends and family (5), socializing (5), maintain independence (5), family and friends (5), managing finances (5) (Appendix 2).

Differences in diagnosis and no‐diagnosis group confidence ratings
We identified 53 participants (6.90%) of the US study sample who self‐reported a neurodegenerative disease diagnosis (the diagnosis group).
The Mann–Whitney U test revealed there were differences in the overall confidence scores between the diagnosis and no‐diagnosis groups. The results indicated that those with a diagnosis rated their confidence significantly lower (median score 21, IQR = 17 to 23) than those without a diagnosis (median score 24, IQR = 22 to 25), U = 8908, p < 0.01.
Due to the low frequency of answers within themes in the diagnosis group, no statistical analysis was conducted, but we made an observation that the following themes with relatively high counts had median confidence ratings that were lower than the overall median confidence ratings for those with a diagnosis: Driving (4), Reading (3.5), Chatting with friends and family (4), Family and friends (4) (Table 4).
Top themes that the diagnosis group considered most important with mean confidence ratings in diagnosis and no‐diagnosis groups, ordered by count in diagnosis group.
Theme	Median confidence score	Count	Median confidence score	Count	 	1	Driving	4	8	5	135	 	2	Reading	3.5	8	5	65	 	3	Chatting with friends and family	4	5	5	59	 	4	Family and friends	4	5	5	49	 	5	Staying active	5	5	5	88
Note: Full list of diagnosis group's themes in Appendix 3.

Applicability of ePSOM tool across US and UK populations
Results showed alignment in domains that are driving responses in the two samples (Tables 5 and 6).
Alignment of five ePSOM tool domains across US and UK samples.
By frequency of answers	 		US sample	UK sample	 	Daily tasks	25.4%	30.7%	 	Enjoying life	22.0%	22.6%	 	Relationships and social connections	21.7%	20.4%	 	Thinking abilities	16.3%	14.6%	 	Sense of who you are as a person	14.7%	11.6%
Note: Percentage of answers out of total answers that fall within each domain.
Alignment of five ePSOM tool domains across US and UK samples.
Important answers	 		US sample	UK sample	 	Daily tasks	39.0%	44.9%	 	Enjoying life	17.7%	16.3%	 	Relationships and social connections	17.0%	14.2%	 	Thinking abilities	13.3%	13.9%	 	Sense of who you are as a person	13.1%	10.7%
Note: Percentage of answers chosen as part of top five (most important) answers in each domain.

DISCUSSION
Our study exploring individually defined brain health priorities found heterogeneity in individual‐level brain health priorities in the United States and significant differences between the US and UK populations. We found that participants with a neurodegenerative disease diagnosis were significantly less confident in managing personally meaningful priorities, although because of the small sample size, we were not able to test for statistically significant differences in confidence ratings in individual themes between the two groups with and without a diagnosis.
The implications of our findings relate to both research and clinical practice where treatment effects and the full value of interventions should incorporate the person's voice. A primary driver for early interventions in neurodegenerative disease is the potential to maintain a stage of less impairment with more autonomy, higher independence, and lower cost of care. In our study, we found statistically significant differences between the US and the UK populations’ brain health priorities defined on an individual level, suggesting there are differences in what “maintaining a stage of less impairment” means between these populations. While our previous work demonstrated differences in personally meaningful priorities between sociodemographic groups and those with and without a neurodegenerative disease diagnosis, the findings from our current study demonstrate differences between countries/cultures. The significance of these findings relates to clinical trials, which generally do not capture cultural effects in study outcomes but should incorporate treatment priorities that are considered meaningful within specific cultures. Failing to account for cultural differences in personally meaningful priorities may lead to misinterpretation of treatment outcomes, as expectations of clinical improvements and the impact of cognitive changes on everyday functioning vary between cultures.

Self‐perceived confidence in doing what matters most
The ePSOM tool was designed to capture individual‐level brain health priorities and incorporate the person's voice in study outcomes. To achieve this, we constructed the ePSOM scale around self‐reported confidence in managing personally meaningful aspects of life. This is based on evidence from our focus group study, where maintenance or loss of confidence emerged as a critical observation individuals at risk of dementia or those living with early‐stage dementia made about themselves. We note that clinical experts in our focus group study considered treatment benefits that families notice not to be “hard and fast” such as remembering specific things better, but to be around “soft skills” such as the person with disease feeling more confident in themselves. Our finding that those with a neurodegenerative disease diagnosis rated their confidence significantly lower than those without a diagnosis is consistent with previous studies that have found in the early stages of neurodegenerative disease – individuals perceive a loss of confidence in managing what they were previously able to do well. A common theme in these studies, as well as our own focus group, was the concept of “taken‐for‐granted activities” in which the person with disease starts to lose confidence. In our paper, participants used their own words to tell us what they do now that they want to continue doing even if their brain health got worse. Some of the most common themes with associated confidence ratings were driving, staying active, reading, chatting with friends and family, and socializing. We note that, despite regulatory bodies’ guidance on the importance of considering person‐centered treatment effects in clinical trials, there are currently no outcome measures in AD trials that would capture and monitor these examples of “taken‐for‐granted activities.”

Detecting meaningful change in person‐centered outcomes in early AD
The CDR scale assesses cognition and functioning in predefined areas but does not incorporate individual‐level treatment priorities, which means the CDR scale might not be sufficiently sensitive to fully capture the smallest change that would be noticeable in all individuals with early AD. For instance, some of the largest themes in our study, staying active, chatting with friends and family, and socializing, could be considered part of community affairs or home and hobbies in the CDR domains. In the community affairs domain, a CDR score change from 0.5 (mild impairment) to 1 (mild dementia) means a transition from independence to loss of independence in community affairs, and in the home and hobbies domain, a change from 0.5 to 1 means a transition from slight impairment in interests to abandoning more complicated interests. Considering that there may be an average of 3 years in between a person transitioning from mild impairment to mild dementia, capturing a person's ability to be independent longer or maintain interests longer than they would without treatment at these disease stages would likely represent a clinically meaningful treatment effect.

Analysis of qualitative treatment priorities
We note that because new treatments in AD are not necessarily expected to improve symptoms, but instead slow decline, differences between treatment and placebo groups can only be established when trial endpoints demonstrate meaningful change. The five‐point scale in the ePSOM tool was designed to detect whether an intervention was associated with maintaining what matters the most longer. However, patient‐reported outcome measures that incorporate qualitative input about personally defined treatment priorities at an individual level go beyond a numeric score on a scale. Evidence from the ePSOM studies in the United States and the United Kingdom has demonstrated that methods that capture patients’ voice lead to a heterogeneous list of treatment priorities at a group level with a wide range of relevant functions (e.g., priorities requiring primarily executive functioning, memory, attention, social cognition). This type of data enables a meaningful analysis of priorities that respond more or less to certain treatments or combinations of treatments and allow for long‐term predictions of meaningful benefits, especially as there is a need for longer trial durations to detect clinically meaningful changes.

Applicability of ePSOM tool between US and UK populations
To assess the applicability of the ePSOM tool and, specifically, whether the five ePSOM domains derived in the UK seemed applicable in the United States, we looked for proportional responses per the five domains in which participants gave free‐text responses in personally meaningful areas of life (Figure 1). We saw alignment in domains that drove responses in the two samples in terms of the free‐text responses overall and the domains from which the important (“top five”) answers were chosen in the United States and the United Kingdom. Our analyses of the data from the UK and US studies indicate that the ePSOM tool is applicable in both of these populations.
The electronic Person‐Specific Outcome Measure tool to incorporate patient voice in Alzheimer's disease clinical trials.

Strengths and limitations
There were several strengths and limitations in our study. One of the limitations was the relatively small number of people who self‐reported a neurodegenerative disease diagnosis in our study. As such, we recognize that our analysis around statistically significant differences in confidence ratings between the diagnosis and no‐diagnosis groups within themes would have been underpowered to detect true differences in confidence ratings within specific brain health priorities. In future research with larger cohorts, we plan to investigate confidence ratings between different stages of the disease, further focusing on within‐theme differences. Another limitation is our reliance on self‐reported diagnosis, which may be prone to error or bias in reporting. Because of this consideration, as well as a relatively small sample size, we analyzed the diagnosis group as a whole rather than splitting it into diagnostic categories. It would also have been valuable to have other data available from participants in our study to analyze the relationships among brain health priorities, associated confidence ratings, and other outcomes such as cognitive status. Relating the ePSOM output to other study outcomes will be part of validation of the tool in larger cohort studies where ePSOM is completed as part of a battery of tests in clinical trial protocols. Future analysis of individual brain health priorities should also include diverse racial/ethnic groups and socioeconomic status, with study designs planning for higher recruitment costs and operating via community partnerships. Despite our recruitment efforts to include a wide range of sociodemographic groups, our study had an over‐representation of participants with advanced education, limiting the generalizability of our findings. Finally, future longitudinal studies will allow us to assess trajectories of change in confidence in doing what matters the most to ascertain between‐group differences.
However, our study also offers evidence of person‐centered outcomes in AD and advances our understanding of meaningful treatment benefits in the neurodegenerative disease population. A strength of our study is that it used an evidence‐based approach to developing the ePSOM tool and capturing a person's voice in defining personally meaningful priorities. In future research, we aim to validate the ePSOM tool in other global populations.

CONCLUSION
Our findings highlight the need to capture brain health priorities at an individual level and indicate that self‐reported confidence in managing personally meaningful priorities is an appropriate construct for incorporating a person's voice in study outcomes. Our study demonstrates that while there is heterogeneity in individuals’ brain health priorities across sociodemographic groups and countries, the ePSOM approach is applicable across both the US and UK populations.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
Stina Saunders, Ali Jannati, Claudio Toro‐Serey, Sean Tobyne, Killian McManus, David Bates, John Showalter, and Álvaro Pascual‐Leone are employees of Linus Health and declare ownership of shares or share options in the company. Shane Sheehan receives consulting fees from Linus Health. Author disclosures are available in the supporting information.

ETHICS APPROVAL
The study was conducted in accordance with United States of America legislation and Good Clinical Practice guidelines. The study protocol was approved by the Advarra Institutional Review Board and participants gave informed consent to take part in the study.

CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION
We obtained consent for publication from study participants and all data in this manuscript has been anonymized.

Supporting information

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data sets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are not publicly available due to considerations surrounding individual privacy but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

REFERENCES
2024 Alzheimer's disease facts and figures
Advances in Alzheimer's disease's pharmacological treatment
Aduhelm: Biogen abandons Alzheimer's drug after controversial approval left it unfunded by Medicare
Lecanemab in early Alzheimer's disease
Donanemab in early symptomatic Alzheimer disease: the TRAILBLAZER‐ALZ 2 randomized clinical trial
A 24‐week, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled trial of donepezil in patients with Alzheimer's disease. Donepezil Study Group
Alzheimer's disease drug development pipeline: 2024
Lifestyle interventions to prevent cognitive impairment, dementia and Alzheimer disease
Lecanemab and Donanemab as therapies for Alzheimer's disease: an illustrated perspective on the data
Donanemab, another anti‐Alzheimer's drug with risk and uncertain benefit
Considering challenges for the new Alzheimer's drugs: clinical, population, and health system perspectives
Past, present and future of therapeutic strategies against amyloid‐β peptides in Alzheimer's disease: a systematic review
Guideline on the Clinical Investigation of Medicines for the Treatment of Alzheimer's Disease
Early Alzheimer's Disease: developing drugs for treatment
Towards a lifelong personalized brain health program: empowering individuals to define, pursue, and monitor meaningful outcomes
Participant outcomes and preferences in Alzheimer's disease clinical trials: the electronic Person‐Specific Outcome Measure (ePSOM) development program
What matters to people with memory problems, healthy volunteers and health and social care professionals in the context of developing treatment to prevent Alzheimer's dementia? A qualitative study
A UK‐wide study employing natural language processing to determine what matters to people about brain health to improve drug development: the electronic person‐specific outcome measure (ePSOM) Programme
Impact of clinical symptoms and diagnosis: the electronic Person‐Specific Outcome Measure (ePSOM) development programme
Glove: global vectors for word representation Proceedings of the 2014 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing (EMNLP)
What matters to patients with Alzheimer's disease and their care partners? Implications for understanding the value of future interventions
Progress in the treatment of Alzheimer's Disease is needed – position statement of European Alzheimer's Disease Consortium (EADC) investigators
Relevance of outcome measures in different cultural groups–does one size fit all?
Mild cognitive impairment: coping with an uncertain label
The changing self: the impact of dementia on the personal and social identity of women (findings from the Improving the Experience of Dementia and Enhancing Active Life programme)
Impact of cognitive impairment on mild dementia patients and mild cognitive impairment patients and their informants
The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR): current version and scoring rules
Evaluation of clinical benefits of treatments for Alzheimer's disease
Relationships of change in clinical dementia Rating (CDR) on patient outcomes and probability of progression: observational analysis
Meaningful benefits: a framework to assess disease‐modifying therapies in preclinical and early Alzheimer's disease
The search for clarity regarding “clinically meaningful outcomes” in Alzheimer disease clinical trials: CLARITY‐AD and beyond
Reaching the hard‐to‐reach: a systematic review of strategies for improving health and medical research with socially disadvantaged groups