Causes of symptoms and symptom persistence in long COVID and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Summary
Debilitating symptoms for many years can follow acute COVID-19 (“long COVID”), myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), and various post-acute infection syndromes (PAISs). Together, long COVID and ME/CFS affect 60–400 million individuals, globally. Many similar underlying biological abnormalities have been identified in both conditions including autoantibodies against neural targets, endothelial dysfunction, acquired mitochondrial dysfunction, and a pro-inflammatory gut microbiome. Each of these abnormalities may directly cause some of the symptoms. In addition, the symptoms also may be caused by ancient, evolutionarily conserved symptomatic and metabolic responses to vital threats—sickness behavior and torpor—responses mediated by specific, recently discovered neural circuits. These neural circuits constitute a symptom-generating pathway, activated by neuroinflammation, which may be targeted by therapeutics to quell neuroinflammation. Many factors cause the symptoms to become chronic, including persistent infectious agents (and/or their nucleic acids and antigens) and the fact that many of the underlying biological abnormalities reinforce each other, creating ongoing physiological vicious cycles.
Graphical abstract
The symptoms of any illness cause suffering and are the prime targets for therapy. A detailed consideration of the neurological, immunological, metabolic, and vascular mechanisms that generate the symptoms of long COVID and ME/CFS, and cause them to persist for years, suggests that targeting neuroinflammation with novel therapies may be effective.

Introduction
People with long COVID and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) suffer a similar, debilitating years-long illness that can greatly interfere with their ability to function, at work and at home. Many health professionals have regarded both illnesses as rare curiosities, and some even have doubted that the symptoms were caused by objective biological abnormalities. It is now clear that neither is the case.
Underlying abnormalities in ME/CFS and long COVID
Neurological/neuromuscular abnormalities	 		 	Neuroinflammation on positron emission tomography and magnetic resonance spectroscopy	 	Autonomic dysfunction	 	Reduced cerebral blood flow, particularly during orthostatic stress, secondary to both autonomic dysfunction and endothelial dysfunction	 	Cognitive deficits	 	Autoantibodies against neuronal targets in the central and autonomic nervous system	 	Down-regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal/prolactin/growth hormone/thyroid axes, with hypocortisolism	 	Hypometabolic state in brain	 	Increased oxidative stress	 	Small fiber neuropathy	 	Gray and white matter abnormalities on magnetic resonance imaging	 	Pain and sensory abnormalities	 	Impaired connectivity between brain regions	 	Brainstem dysfunction	 	Plasma and cerebrospinal fluid markers of neural injury	 	Sleep disorders	 	Exercising muscle displays redox imbalance and impaired mitochondrial function	 	Tryptophan-serotonin-kynurenine pathway (tryptophan pathway) abnormalities	 	Circadian dysregulation	 		 	Immunologic/infectious abnormalities	 		 	Persisting reservoirs of viral nucleic acids and antigens (in long COVID)	 	Residual tissue injury after acute infection (in long COVID)	 	Reactivation of latent herpesviruses	 	Pro-inflammatory gut microbiome	 	Decreased function and increased numbers of natural killer (NK) cells	 	Systemic inflammation characterized by elevated levels of nuclear factor κB and pro-inflammatory cytokines that correlate with severity of symptoms	 	Increased numbers of activated CD8+ cytotoxic T cells	 	T cell exhaustion in long-term illness	 	B cell abnormalities	 	Increased levels of autoantibodies	 	Activation of the complement system	 	Increased apoptosis of various white blood cells	 	Mast cell activation syndrome	 	Accelerated cellular senescence	 		 	Metabolic abnormalities	 		 	Redox imbalance: increased levels of pro-oxidants, decreased levels of antioxidants, increased nitrosative stressReduced generation of ATP from fatty acids, amino acids, glucose via the tricarboxylic acid cycle, glucose via glycolysis, oxidative phosphorylation	 	A systemic hypometabolic state—reduced levels of multiple metabolites	 	Reduced levels of cortisol secondary to down-regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis	 	Tryptophan-serotonin-kynurenine pathway (tryptophan pathway) abnormalities, including impaired tryptophan absorption (in long COVID) and polymorphisms and autoantibodies that could reduce serotonin signaling and that correlate with symptom severity (in ME/CFS)	 		 	Cardiovascular/pulmonary abnormalities	 		 	Endothelial dysfunction (ED) and blood-brain barrier disruption that correlates with cognitive deficits in long COVID	 	Reduced peak VO2 (diminished exercise capacity)	 	Increased VE/VCO2 slope (reduced ventilatory efficiency)	 	Reduced preload (venous return to the right heart)	 	Platelet abnormalities/coagulopathies	 	Increased von Willebrand factor (vWF)/ADAMST13 ratio, creating a prothrombotic state and activating complement
The abnormalities in this table are supported by the preponderance of the evidence: multiple replications by different laboratories studying different groups of people with ME/CFS or long COVID. The extensive literature summarized in this table is cited in great detail in recent review articles. Because this article focuses on the generation and chronicity of symptoms, and is not another detailed review of the underlying pathophysiology, references to the original research articles are not provided here.
First, as summarized in the following pages, the illnesses are estimated to affect hundreds of millions of people, globally, and cost society hundreds of billions of dollars annually. Second, many underlying biological abnormalities recently have been reported and replicated (Table 1) as summarized in recent reviews. The underlying abnormalities of the two illnesses, like the symptoms, are similar, as are the comorbidities and the response to therapy.
The purpose of this review is not to summarize again these underlying abnormalities. Instead, we want to highlight how recent important discoveries help address the following five questions about the symptoms. (1) Can the underlying abnormalities each directly produce the symptoms of these illnesses? (2) Could sickness symptoms also explain some behavioral changes? (3) Might the metabolic changes seen in torpor contribute to the metabolic changes seen in some people? (4) How does the brain direct the behavioral and metabolic changes? (5) Why do the symptoms and behavioral and metabolic changes become chronic, persisting for years?

A brief history of long COVID and ME/CFS

Long COVID
The incidence of a state of chronic fatigue in the year following acute COVID-19 is four to five times greater than that in matched non-COVID control subjects and also greater than that in people following influenza. Consistently observed risk factors for long COVID have been older age, lower socioeconomic status, female sex, and more severe acute infection.
It has been estimated that (1) the cumulative global incidence of long COVID ranges from 60 to 400 million individuals, depending on the definition of the illness, and (2) the cost to society of long COVID due to reductions in quality of life and labor force participation (and not including the direct costs of healthcare) will be several trillion dollars in the next 5–10 years.

ME/CFS
ME/CFS often, but not always, begins as an acute infectious-like illness (fever, respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms, aching muscles and joints) in previously healthy young adults. Sometimes the acute infection is diagnosed (e.g., acute infectious mononucleosis). More often, no attempt is made to diagnose the responsible infectious agent because it is assumed that the illness will be transitory.
In the US alone, ME/CFS is estimated to affect up to 3.1 million people and generates direct and indirect expenses of approximately $36–51 billion annually, according to the US National Academy of Medicine (NAM), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and several other analyses. An estimated 13%–45% of people with long COVID meet the NAM case definition for ME/CFS.

Symptoms and behavioral and metabolic changes in long COVID and ME/CFS
In both long COVID and ME/CFS, people experience profound fatigue, cognitive impairment, an increase in symptoms following physical or cognitive exertion (“post-exertional malaise”), pain, and a variety of other symptoms. In both conditions, as well, there are metabolic changes: a hypometabolic state both systemically and in the central nervous system and a reduced ability to produce adenosine triphosphate (ATP), as previously summarized in detail.

Post-acute infection syndromes and infection-associated chronic illnesses
An illness with very similar symptoms as seen in long COVID and ME/CFS can occur following different acute bacterial, viral, fungal, and protozoal infections: post-acute infection syndromes (PAISs). Metabolic changes in various PAISs have not yet been as carefully studied. Long COVID surely is a PAIS, and ME/CFS likely often is.
PAISs, in turn, are one example of a group of disorders that have been called infection-associated chronic illnesses (IACIs). As we use the term, PAISs are just one of three different types of IACIs. Another type of IACI involves new organ injury caused by the infectious agent, smoldering inflammation due to the infectious agent or the attempt to heal the injury it caused (such as duodenal ulcers from Helicobacter pylori) or autoimmune injury triggered by the infectious agent (such as multiple sclerosis following primary infection with Epstein-Barr virus [EBV]). Finally, another type of IACI involves the accelerated incidence of underlying diseases such as the increased incidence of atherosclerotic diseases (e.g., myocardial infarction and stroke) and dementias following COVID-19.

Can the underlying abnormalities directly produce symptoms?
Some of the underlying abnormalities can directly produce the symptoms of the illness. Before discussing how, we note that genetic vulnerabilities appear to affect these abnormalities.

Genetic vulnerabilities
Since most people who have experienced acute COVID-19 have not developed long COVID, and since relatively few people who experience acute infections develop PAISs, some vulnerability—inherited and/or environmental—likely determines who develops a chronic illness.
Although, predictably, genome-wide association studies (GWASs) involving relatively few subjects have not found strong evidence of single polymorphisms linked to ME/CFS, a very large GWAS of long COVID has identified three genome-wide significant loci (HLA-DQA1–HLA-DQB, ABO, and BPTF–KPAN2 – C17orf58), and Mendelian randomization analysis has suggested causal roles for these loci in both long COVID and ME/CFS.
In addition, a recent whole-genome sequencing study employing a deep learning algorithm identified 115 risk genes for ME/CFS, most of which exhibited reduced expression in transcriptomic studies. Specific gene expression patterns also correlated with specific groups of symptoms. The involved genes implicate the central nervous system and immune system in the pathology of the illness.
Finally, an analysis that correlates combinations of polymorphisms with long COVID and ME/CFS has found robust associations, findings confirmed in a second large population. The genes involved previously have been linked to neurological and cardiometabolic diseases.
It is of interest that genes and gene expression patterns are similar in both long COVID and ME/CFS and that some also are found in fibromyalgia (a clinically similar illness) and in major depression (MD). The similarity with gene expression patterns in MD is of interest because it now is clear that neuroinflammation is found in a subset of people with MD and that depressive symptoms can be triggered by treatment with pro-inflammatory cytokines and can be reduced by treatment with cytokine blockers.

Some abnormalities can directly cause symptoms
Primary and contributing causes of symptoms
Multiple underlying abnormalities can directly contribute to the symptoms of both long COVID and ME/CFS. In addition, a prominent cause of symptoms is likely to be ongoing systemic inflammation that leads to neuroinflammation, which then stimulates groups of neurons (neural circuits) responsible for generating stereotyped sickness symptoms, leading to energy-preserving changes in behavior. Such neural circuits have been identified in rodents.
As shown in Figure 1, several of the underlying biological abnormalities can directly cause some of the symptoms of both long COVID and ME/CFS. For example, autonomic dysfunction that leads to reduced cerebral blood flow, particularly during orthostatic stress, can impair cognitive performance. Serotonin deficiency can cause both fatigue and impaired cognition.
Endothelial dysfunction can cause vascular spasm and coagulopathy that, together, reduce cerebral blood flow and can disrupt the blood-brain barrier—both of which could directly impair cognitive performance. In addition, residual viral antigens may trigger the formation of amyloid fibrin micro-clots that impair the microcirculation. Moreover, endothelial dysfunction and fibrin, in turn, may indirectly cause symptoms by stimulating neuroinflammation, as will be described shortly.
Finally, immune dysfunction can lead to symptoms in several ways. Autoantibodies against neural targets could theoretically cause some of the symptoms of these illnesses; indeed, a few small studies have reported symptom relief with autoantibody-depleting therapies, although larger, controlled trials are necessary. Trained immunity could stimulate systemic inflammation and neuroinflammation. It is a phenomenon in which innate immune cells acquire a nonspecific memory of a past infection that can result in an aberrant and excessive activation of various innate immune pathways following new infection, even if the new infection is with a different agent from the agent that initially triggered the hyperresponsive state. Also, the fatigue, depressed mood, sleep alterations and loss of appetite that often are seen in people with chronic inflammatory diseases, like long COVID and ME/CFS, can be the result of energy shortages caused by the consumption of ATP by an overactive immune system.

Could sickness symptoms also explain the behavioral changes?

The role of sickness symptoms and behavior
Since the late 19th century, clinical scientists have recognized that infection can generate profound behavioral changes in both humans and animals: lethargy; sleepiness; disinterest in eating or drinking; and reductions in mobility, social interaction, grooming, and sexual activity. While humans articulate the presence of sickness symptoms, the presence of such symptoms in animals is inferred from the behavioral changes.
Although sickness behavior following infection has been found to be present in virtually all animals studied, two things have remained unclear: (1) the purpose of the behavioral change and (2) the mechanisms by which infection generates the symptoms that lead to the behavioral change.

The purpose of sickness symptoms and behavior
In the late 1980s, it was proposed that sickness behavior—like fever, torpor, and hibernation—results from a programmed response that occurs when an animal is faced with a vital threat. Sickness behavior is a coordinated response to an internal vital threat (like infection or injury) “perceived” by internal sensors, just as fear is a coordinated response to an external vital threat (like impending assault) perceived by external sensors (vision, hearing, and smell). Throughout evolutionary history, sickness behavior may have been more important than fear: animals are more likely to encounter infectious pathogens than predators.
Sickness behavior reduces the consumption of ATP, thereby preserving the ATP needed to support the most essential vital activities, as well as to fuel the inflammatory response needed to fight the infection and to heal tissue injury.

Neuroinflammation triggers sickness symptoms and behavior and brain hypometabolism
An important insight into the mechanisms that trigger sickness behavior came from the use, in the 1980s, of various cytokines produced by recombinant DNA technology for therapeutic purposes. Shortly after beginning intravenous infusions of such cytokines, patients would experience sickness symptoms; following completion of therapy, the symptoms would resolve. Since increased levels of cytokines reflect activation of the immune system, these observations linked immune activation to sickness symptoms.
Many investigators then sought to confirm experimentally that exposure to infectious agents, their component molecules, or the inflammatory molecules generated in response to infection (like cytokines and eicosanoids) led to sickness behavior. This was experimentally confirmed in mammals (including primates), birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and insects. Possibly analogous protective responses to vital stressors—manifested by reduced mobility, sexual activity, and metabolism—have been documented even in invertebrates, such as the worm C. elegans.
Experimentally induced systemic inflammation generates a persisting hypometabolic state in the brain, particularly in the cortex and hippocampus, as well as a persisting disruption of the blood-brain barrier. Gradually, the mechanisms by which inflammation affects fatigue and mood are being revealed. For example, very recently, several studies have identified pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, cytokine receptors on neural cells, and specific types of neurons and neural circuits involved in some mood disorders and in the much-reduced ability to exert oneself that is seen in cancer cachexia. Evidence also has been reported that the innate immune system plays an important role in the cognitive and mood alterations seen following cancer chemotherapy.
Sickness behavior is not entirely uniform within one species; can differ between species; and can be affected by social context, gender, age, and nutritional and physiological status. Also, it has been studied primarily as an acute inflammatory response, not a protracted one.
Finally, although we do not discuss it in this review, something like sickness behavior can follow non-infectious major tissue and organ injury, likely triggered by the inflammatory response necessary to heal the injury.

Neuroinflammation can be triggered from inside and outside the brain
Neuroinflammation—activation of the brain’s innate immune system—plays a central role in generating sickness symptoms. The brain’s innate immune system consists primarily of microglial cells (macrophage-like cells) and astrocytes. But what is generating the neuroinflammation? One potential trigger of neuroinflammation is active infection (new or reactivated) of the brain or residual nucleic acid and antigens from infectious agents in the brain. Another is the need to repair brain injury caused by a previous infection, even if the infectious agent and/or its molecular residue may no longer be present.
In addition, over the past 20 years, it has become clear that inflammation outside the brain also can trigger neuroinflammation. The response of the immune system to microbial pathogens does not stay local: it propagates to the brain through humoral and neural pathways. The peripheral inflammatory molecules that generate humoral and neural signals to the brain include cytokines, prostaglandins, and activated complement factors. These humoral and neural signals activate the brain’s innate immune system: as discussed shortly, this, in turn, activates neural circuits in the brain that mediate the various components of sickness behavior.
Thus, an inflammatory process anywhere in the body—such as in the lungs or gut—can generate neuroinflammation and, hence, sickness symptoms. Indeed, a direct neuronal relationship between influenza infection of the lungs and microglial activation (neuroinflammation) has been documented.
In the humoral pathway, peripherally generated circulating inflammatory mediators act on circumventricular organs, which are located outside the blood-brain barrier. In addition, inflammatory mediators can cross a blood-brain barrier made porous by inflammation. Upon entering the brain, these chemical signals are transduced into neuronal signals, activating microglia and endothelial cells to generate more molecules of inflammation. In addition, some cytokines (particularly interleukin [IL]-1, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor alpha) can be actively transported into the brain.
The neural pathway begins with receptors for cytokines such as IL-1 and for prostaglandin E2 on peripheral sensory neurons—spinal sensory nerves and, particularly, afferent fibers of the vagus nerve—that innervate the organs in which the inflammation occurs. The chemical signals and their receptors generate action potentials that travel to the solitary nucleus of the brainstem, activating microglia through generating cytokines (particularly IL-1) and/or prostaglandin E2. Signals of peripheral inflammation reach the brain more rapidly via the neural than the humoral pathway.
Thus, neuroinflammation—whether due to an inflammatory stimulus inside the brain or peripheral inflammation relayed to the brain—appears necessary to initiate sickness symptoms and behavior. However, this still begs the question: what are the mechanisms by which neuroinflammation generates such a stereotyped set of sickness symptoms? We will address this question shortly.

Might the metabolic changes of torpor contribute to the metabolic changes seen in some people?
In addition to the behavioral changes similar to those of animals facing vital threats, people with long COVID and ME/CFS also have metabolic changes similar to those of animals entering torpor or hibernation when facing vital threats: a systemic hypometabolic state (reduced levels of most metabolites in the blood) as well as hypometabolic areas in the brain (detailed elsewhere). In addition, in both conditions there is a reduced capacity to produce ATP. What value would these metabolic alterations have in an animal facing a vital threat?

The hypometabolic state

Defense and dormancy
Organisms, and their cells, can be thought of as having three “life history” states: growth, reproduction, and maintenance. The maintenance state involves defending the organism from two types of vital threat: injury—which invokes an active state of defense—and nutrient deficiency, which invokes a state of dormancy. Defense and dormancy involve different metabolic responses: defense requires energy-consuming anabolic processes while dormancy involves energy-preserving catabolic processes: a selective, tissue-specific metabolic response.
The response to infection requires both defense (to eradicate the invader and to repair injured tissue) and dormancy (to protect damaged cells from various stressors): certain cells require a hypermetabolic state, and others a hypometabolic state. That, in turn, requires a switch to toggle between the two states.

The metabolic state switch
Prime candidates for such a metabolic switch are two interlinked homeostatic signaling pathways: the mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin) and AMPK (adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase) pathways. AMPK inhibits the expression of mTOR.
A master integrator of both intracellular and extracellular signals, mTOR, regulates cell metabolism, growth, division, and survival. When activated, mTOR promotes anabolic pathways—such as fatty acid and sterol synthesis—necessary to support cell growth and differentiation, including cells involved in the immune response. There is indirect evidence of mTOR activation in people with ME/CFS.
In contrast, when AMPK senses stress (such as a relative lack of ATP, nutrients, or growth factors), it inhibits the mTOR pathway. Thus, activation of AMPK inhibits energy-consuming anabolic pathways, while enhancing energy-producing catabolic pathways—such as fatty acid oxidation. Both AMPK and mTOR perform nutrient sensing primarily within lysosomes/vacuoles. The homeostatic balance between activation of AMPK and mTOR may be different in different organs and even in different parts of the same organ.

The reduced generation of ATP
Although acute and chronic infection require and consume considerable ATP, people with both long COVID and ME/CFS have a reduced capacity to generate ATP from oxygen, glucose, fatty acids, and amino acids. Energy generation does not rise to compensate for the ATP consumed. Indeed, it is reduced. Why is that?

Mitochondrial injury
Infection, particularly persistent infection, can impair mitochondrial function. For example, SARS-CoV-2 infection, in rodents and humans, inhibits the expression of nuclear oxidative phosphorylation genes and increases the production of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROSs). Impairment of mitochondrial function can emphasize anerobic glycolysis, likely driving the increases in lactic acid levels, which have been reported in these illnesses. In addition to its impact on mitochondrial function, intracellular infection can drive aerobic glycolysis, as seen in the Warburg effect, leading to an inefficient production of ATP from glucose.
Mitochondrial stress responses increase whole-body energetic demand, and stress responses in one tissue or organ can initiate mitochondrial dysfunction in multiple organs. This mitochondrial stress response is mediated by the release from the mitochondria of mitokines—molecules with autocrine, paracrine, and endocrine properties—such as growth differentiation factor 15, its receptor, and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor family receptor α-like, which mediate anorexia and fatigue in people with cancer. Another mitokine, fibroblast growth factor 21, coordinates metabolic changes in glucose and lipid metabolism through both autocrine/paracrine effects as well as through endocrine effects on distant organs, including the brain.

An adaptive, torpor-like response
The reduced generation of ATP may also be part of the adaptive metabolic response to vital threats. This might seem counterintuitive: why would an organism that needs ATP to fight infection and heal injury reduce its capacity to produce ATP?
The infected organism must generate just as much ATP as it needs and no more. That is because ATP is required to make ATP. If sufficient ATP to fight infection is freed up by reducing various energy-consuming activities through “sickness behavior,” then using ATP to generate additional ATP becomes wasteful.

How does the brain direct the behavioral and metabolic changes?

Discovery of dedicated brain neural circuits
The brain directs specific stereotyped behavioral and physiological changes through specific, dedicated neural circuits. In the past 5 years, many such circuits have been discovered in rodents. For example, specific neural circuits appear to control the entry into and exit from general anesthesia; to regulate energy homeostasis; and to mediate specific symptoms, such as sneezing and coughing. Still, others mediate complex, stereotyped behaviors such as attempting to resuscitate fellow animals that appear to have lost consciousness; deciding on whether to persevere, consider alternative actions, or cease an action; or deciding to seek social interactions or social isolation. Specific neural circuits monitor and modulate inflammation through vagal neurons that can direct both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory responses, as needed, although vagal signals appear less potent in microglial activation (neuroinflammation) than adrenergic signals.
In sum, neural circuits dedicated to simultaneously generating specific symptoms and associated physiological and metabolic changes seem to account for a great deal more symptoms and related behavior than might have been imagined even 5 years ago.

Discovery of neural circuits that mediate sickness behavior
In the past 5 years, discrete brain neural circuits dedicated to mediating sickness behavior have been discovered in rodents. Indirect evidence suggests that they also exist in humans: when human volunteers are injected with lipopolysaccharide or typhoid vaccine, specific brain areas involved in sickness behavior have been identified by functional MRI neuroimaging. We speculate that these neural circuits likely exist in humans and may be chronically stimulated in people with long COVID, ME/CFS, and other PAISs.
As described earlier, the circuits can be stimulated by both humoral and neural pathways. When stimulated, a neural circuit originating in the area postrema and projecting to the mouse brainstem reduces the energy-consuming behaviors of eating, drinking, and movement: sickness behavior. Inhibition of this neuronal circuit diminishes sickness behavior even in the presence of an inflammatory stimulus for this behavior, such as lipopolysaccharide.
Another discrete group of neural circuits originating from the organum vasculosum and projecting to the ventromedial preoptic area of the mouse hypothalamus also induces appetite suppression, warmth seeking, and fever, mediated mainly by the autonomic nervous system. These neural circuits are functionally connected to circuits involved in the control of temperature, appetite, thirst, pain sensation, and social interactions. The neurons in these circuits are activated by cytokines and prostaglandins secreted by nearby endothelial cells, ependymal cells, astrocytes, and microglia. Within these neural circuits, subtly different subsets of neurons generate different symptoms and thereby mediate different components of sickness behavior.

Discovery of neural circuits directing metabolic adaptations to vital threats
Not only is the behavioral response to infection mediated by specific neural circuits; so is the metabolic response. The well-studied states of torpor and hibernation offer some insights into the metabolic changes seen in people with long COVID and ME/CFS. Obviously, the behavioral changes in people with long COVID and ME/CFS do not become as extreme as those seen in animals experiencing torpor or hibernation. Similarly, the less extreme hypometabolic state seen in people with long COVID and ME/CFS is similar in direction, if not magnitude, to what is seen in torpor and hibernation.
In mice, entry into and exit from torpor are regulated by a discrete neural circuit involving recently discovered neurons in the median preoptic nucleus of the hypothalamus. When stimulated, this neural circuit orchestrates a series of physiologic processes that lower body temperature, slow metabolism, and initiate torpor—even when mice are not deprived of food or facing vital threats. Stimulation of the nucleus can trigger torpor in rats, even though rats do not naturally experience torpor.
The connections between the recently discovered neural circuits that are responsible for sickness symptoms and behavior and the recently discovered neural circuits that mediate hibernation and torpor have not yet been fully elucidated. However, given that all these circuits have a home in the hypothalamus and brainstem and that the behavioral and metabolic responses of animals under vital threat are clearly coordinated, it seems likely that these circuits communicate and work in concert—and exist in humans. As one possible example, a rare torpor-like condition, Shapiro syndrome or paroxysmal hypothermia, has been described in humans and could be mediated by the human counterparts of the rodent torpor neural circuits.

Why do the symptoms and metabolic changes become chronic, persisting for years?
Underlying abnormalities that can reinforce each other and cause persisting vicious cycles of pathology and symptoms
Reinforcing abnormalities	How the abnormalities can reinforce each other, causing vicious cycles	 	Mitochondrial injury and inflammation	Inflammation generates ROS that can induce mitochondrial injury, requiring not only the generation of new mitochondria via fission or fusion but also the elimination of the damaged mitochondria through mitophagy (autophagy of damaged mitochondria).Reduced levels of ATP compromise the production and proper folding of the proteins involved in mitophagy—leading to further decreases in mitophagy and energy production and further increases in inflammation and oxidative stress—a vicious cycle.Ineffective mitophagy also leads to increased levels of mitochondrial damage-associated molecular patterns (mtDAMPs), which generate both innate inflammation and oxidative stress by activating cytosolic immune sensors—another vicious cycle.	 	Mitochondrial injury and persisting infection	Mitochondrial dysfunction of leukocytes can impair the immune response to infection because mitochondria modulate both adaptive and innate immune responses. Failure to eradicate infection, in turn, increases mitochondrial injury—a vicious cycle.	 	Redox imbalance and energy production	ROSs damage mitochondrial DNA and proteins, causing a decrease in ATP production. Damaged mitochondria release mitochondrial DNA fragments that act as damage-activated molecular patterns (DAMPs), activating Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling, perpetuating inflammation, increased ROS, and reduced energy production—a vicious cycle.	 	Redox imbalance and endothelial dysfunction	Redox imbalance enhances senescence of endothelial cells and encourages chronic endothelial dysfunction. Endothelial dysfunction, in turn, generates local redox imbalance—a vicious cycle.	 	Endothelial dysfunction, NK cell dysfunction, and neuroinflammation	In long COVID, persisting circulating spike protein binds to fibrin, which (1) promotes neuroinflammation and accentuates endothelial vascular damage and (2) causes NK cell dysfunction.Neuroinflammation and endothelial injury both produce ROS that encourage further neuroinflammation and endothelial dysfunction—a vicious cycle.NK cell dysfunction encourages viral activation and replication, which elicits a further inflammatory response, encouraging further neuroinflammation and endothelial dysfunction—a vicious cycle.	 	Dysautonomia and inflammation	The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is in constant bidirectional communication with the immune system through both cholinergic and sympathetic pathways, coordinated by the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus.Autonomic afferents signal the brain after detecting inflammation through pattern recognition receptors such as TLRs, cytokine receptors, and prostaglandin receptors.In turn, the ANS sends efferent signals (cholinergic and sympathetic) to the immune system that can be both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory (immune cells have receptors for ANS neurotransmitters).Thus, dysautonomia triggered by neuroinflammation could impair the body’s ability to contain inflammation—a vicious cycle.	 	Dysautonomia and gut microbiota dysbiosis	Gut dysmotility resulting from dysautonomia can lead to small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) and dysbiosis of the gut microbiome, although the mechanisms remain largely speculative. Dysbiosis, in turn, can generate neuroinflammation, leading to dysautonomia—a vicious cycle.	 	Redox imbalance and natural killer (NK) cell dysfunction	Because NK cells help contain viral infection, NK cell dysfunction encourages viral reactivation and replication, resulting in inflammation and redox imbalance. Redox imbalance, in turn, leads to increased levels of L-kynurenine and lactate, which can impair NK cell function— a vicious cycle.	 	Peripheral inflammation triggers neuroinflammation, and vice versa	Peripheral inflammation triggers neuroinflammation through humoral and neural pathways, and neuroinflammation can upregulate the Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway in peripheral organs, such as skeletal muscle—a vicious cycle.
Pathophysiological vicious cycles that contribute to chronicity of symptoms
Shown are the bidirectional and unidirectional connections in the underlying elements of pathophysiology that have been identified in both long COVID and ME/CFS. The multiple bidirectional connections, in which abnormalities can reinforce and perpetuate each other, could create multiple ongoing pathophysiologic vicious cycles that contribute to the chronicity of the symptoms.
Long COVID, ME/CFS, and other PAISs are chronic illnesses, often lasting years. Why do the symptoms of these illnesses persist? Several factors could account for the persistence of both the underlying abnormalities and the symptoms generated by those abnormalities (Table 2; Figure 2).

Persistence of an infectious agent and/or its molecular residue
The level of viral replication during acute COVID-19 is associated with both more severe acute infection and the development of long COVID. Persistence of replicating virus, or of just its nucleic acids and antigens, also has been linked to long COVID.
Many DNA viruses (like the herpesviruses) are well recognized to cause lifelong, ineradicable infection. However, SARS-CoV-2 is an RNA virus, and many RNA viruses are easily eradicated by the immune response. For that reason, there was skepticism that persistence of SARS-CoV-2 in human tissues might contribute to persisting symptoms. However, some RNA viruses—the retroviruses, hepatitis C virus, Zika virus, and Ebola virus—are hard or impossible to eradicate, just like some DNA viruses. Moreover, such persistent RNA viruses elicit an ongoing inflammatory response.
Indeed, residual tissue reservoirs of SARS-CoV-2 remain in some people following acute COVID-19 for several years after acute infection, particularly in the gut but also in the skull-meninges and brain. SARS-CoV-2 spike protein can be detected in plasma for up to 2 years after acute infection, probably because it is “leaking” into the circulation from tissue reservoirs.
Similarly, SARS-CoV-2-specific activated T cells persist for many months in some people with long COVID, consistent with the persistence of virus or viral antigen. Moreover, activated T cells persist in the brainstem and spinal cord for at least 2 years. The chronically activated T cells also display cellular markers of exhaustion.
Does this persistence of viral molecules, and the ongoing immune response that they elicit, correlate with the symptoms of long COVID? Several studies find evidence of persistent virus more frequently in people with long COVID than in individuals who have fully recovered.
While an ongoing, active immune response to viral reservoirs may contribute to the ongoing symptoms, a relative failure of the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection may help explain the presence of uneradicated virus. Compared to people who recover without the symptoms of long COVID, people with long COVID have lower levels of neutralizing antibodies to the virus as well as increased expression of some co-inhibitory receptors, most notably programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) and T cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain-containing protein 3 (TIM-3).
If some cases of long COVID are due to an ongoing immune response to residual reservoirs of viral molecules, then immunization and antiviral therapy of acute COVID-19 should reduce the incidence of long COVID. Indeed, observational studies have found that immunization against SARS-CoV-2 is strongly associated with a lower prevalence of persisting symptoms. Observational studies and one large randomized trial of antiviral treatment also report a lower incidence of persisting symptoms over the next year, although much more evidence bearing on this question is required.
Are persisting infectious agents also playing a role in ME/CFS? There is little evidence that a single, novel infectious agent causes ME/CFS. Instead, it is likely that ME/CFS typically is a PAIS that can be triggered by multiple different infectious agents. Therefore, a diagnostic test for ME/CFS is likely to involve measurements of the immune and metabolic response to infectious agents, in general—a fingerprint that perhaps will prove to be shared by many PAISs.

Persistence of tissue injury, requiring repair through an inflammatory response
Even if the virus and its component molecules are no longer present, the tissue injury caused by the infectious agent can persist—eliciting an ongoing inflammatory response. There is considerable evidence for this in people with long COVID. Inflammatory monocytes and macrophages may be central players in this chronic process.
This includes persistent injury in the brain. Elevated plasma levels of neurofilament light chain, a well-established marker of neuroaxonal damage, have been found in people with long COVID (but not in people who return to full health post-COVID) as well as in people with ME/CFS. Increased T cell activation in the spinal cord also has been reported in long COVID. COVID-19 causes injury to the lungs and gut, both of which are richly innervated by vagal nerve fibers. Thus, such injury could plausibly be chronically generating retrograde signals up the vagus nerve to the brainstem, triggering neuroinflammation, as described earlier.
Recently, it has been shown that endothelial injury and associated coagulopathy—in addition to reducing blood flow in the microcirculation—can also produce pro-inflammatory clots that drive ongoing thrombo-inflammation, redox imbalance, neuroinflammation (microglial activation), and neuronal loss in mice infected with SARS-CoV-2. This persisting pathology appears to be mediated by an inflammatory epitope on fibrin. Similar persisting fibrin-mediated pathology may occur in ME/CFS since similar circulating micro-clots have been noted in ME/CFS as well as long COVID, although this remains to be confirmed by multiple laboratories.

Defective recovery from inflammation
Recovery from inflammation triggered by the presence of an infectious agent, or the need to heal tissue injury, is not a passive process. It is mediated by various chemosensory receptors that respond to a variety of metabokines (metabolites that are signaling molecules) as part of the cell danger response and can be interrupted, leading to persisting inflammation.

Reactivation of latent infectious agents, particularly herpesviruses
Reactivation of latent infectious agents occurs in both long COVID and ME/CFS. This is particularly true of herpesviruses—EBV, herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, and possibly human herpesviruses-6A/B—and is more common in people with both long COVID and ME/CFS. Moreover, the degree of reactivation of EBV correlates with the level of fatigue and cognitive impairment. Reactivation of viruses other than herpesviruses as well as bacteria also has been documented. Whether the reactivation of neurotropic herpesviruses also occurs in the brain (as well as in leukocytes), and thereby directly generates neuroinflammation, has not been established. However, peripheral reactivation of the viruses would be sufficient to generate the humoral and retrograde neural signals that can trigger neuroinflammation.
There is also evidence that herpesviruses are capable of infecting and achieving latency in endothelial cells, possibly triggering and perpetuating the endothelial dysfunction, which is seen in both long COVID and ME/CFS.

Dysbiosis of the gut microbiome
Dysbiosis of the gut microbiota, leading to a state of low-level inflammation, has been documented in both long COVID and ME/CFS. This local inflammatory state causes breaches of the gut-blood barrier, with leakage into the circulation of not only inflammatory molecules but also bacterial and fungal products (such as lipopolysaccharide). This “leaky gut” is a plausible cause of chronic systemic inflammation. Beyond this pro-inflammatory effect, gut microbiota also can produce specific molecules that may cause specific diseases. What causes and perpetuates dysbiosis remains uncertain.

Autoimmunity
Hundreds of autoantibodies are generated during acute COVID-19. However, the evidence that autoimmunity is involved in the pathophysiology of long COVID is mixed, as described in a recent review. A recent study of 55 people with long COVID with neurological symptoms found that many had autoantibodies directed at human and rodent neural antigens and that specific autoantibodies correlated with particular symptoms. Many autoantibodies have been identified in ME/CFS, but whether they have functional agonistic or antagonistic properties that could affect physiology remains uncertain.

The defective neural circuit “switch”
Theoretically, the molecular “switch” that activates the neural circuit postulated to generate sickness symptoms could become defective and incapable of inactivation. Such on-off switches have been identified for various neural circuits in rodents.

Abnormalities that reinforce each other, creating vicious cycles that perpetuate the pathology
Last, and of particular importance, many of the underlying abnormalities in people with long COVID or ME/CFS have bidirectional connections. If abnormality A can worsen abnormality B, and vice versa, there is the potential for an ongoing vicious cycle that perpetuates the abnormalities and the symptoms the abnormalities may cause. Several of these potential vicious cycles are summarized in Table 2 and Figure 2.
We do not want to suggest that the symptoms of either long COVID or ME/CFS persist because of just one of the underlying abnormalities or potential vicious cycles that we identify. Indeed, we think it is likely that several are at play in these illnesses and that the predominant abnormalities in one individual may differ from those in another individual.

Conclusions and future directions
Globally, long COVID and ME/CFS are causing hundreds of millions of people to suffer and are costing society hundreds of billions of dollars. While initially it was unclear if there were any underlying biological abnormalities that could explain the symptoms of the two illnesses, it now is clear that there are and that the two illnesses share a complex underlying pathophysiology.
A “single lesion” as the cause of all the symptoms—such as a single polymorphism or a single and novel infectious agent—would be welcomed, because it could simplify both diagnostics and the development of targeted therapies. Unfortunately, the evidence is otherwise.
In this review, we address the question of how the multiple underlying abnormalities found in these illnesses may be causing both the symptoms and the chronicity of the symptoms. Each abnormality can directly cause some of the symptoms: e.g., autoantibodies against neural targets, endothelial dysfunction, acquired mitochondrial dysfunction, a pro-inflammatory dysbiosis of the gut microbiome, autonomic dysfunction, redox imbalance, and reactivation of latent infectious agents (Figure 1). Each abnormality, therefore, represents a potential target for therapy. But discovering which is predominant in any individual with these illnesses, and trying to correct the abnormality, will not be easy.
In many people, the symptoms may also be caused by ancient, evolutionarily conserved symptomatic and metabolic responses that are activated when an organism is experiencing a vital threat: the sickness behavior and torpor responses;
These responses likely are triggered by neuroinflammation and mediated by specific neural circuits that recently have been discovered in animals;
Many of the underlying abnormalities are capable of triggering neuroinflammation, individually and collectively. The neuroinflammation, in turn, may activate a common pathway: the interlinked neural circuits that generate sickness behavior and torpor-like metabolic responses;
The symptoms become chronic due to persistent infectious agents (or their nucleic acids and antigens) and tissue injury that perpetuates many of the underlying abnormalities and several other factors. In addition, many of the underlying biological abnormalities reinforce each other, creating ongoing physiological vicious cycles (Table 2; Figure 2).
The central focus of this review is to propose an additional cause of the symptoms, one that can be triggered by the underlying abnormalities and that might be more easily targeted for therapy. Specifically, we argue the following.

Implications for treatment
Many of the underlying abnormalities seen in long COVID and ME/CFS (Figure 2) can be targeted with specific therapies. However, there is no evidence yet that targeting any single, specific abnormality—for example, dysautonomia, autoantibodies to neural targets, and residual tissue reservoirs of virus—cures the symptoms in all people.
We propose another target for therapy: the neuroinflammation that activates the neural circuits that may generate sickness symptoms—including fatigue, brain fog, and pain. Targeting neuroinflammation may reduce many of the symptoms of these illnesses, at least in a substantial fraction of people. However, experience suggests that traditional anti-inflammatory drugs are unlikely to be effective and that new therapies will be required.
Indeed, a wide variety of novel treatment strategies designed to more precisely quell neuroinflammation and inflammasome activation are being tested in animals and humans. In addition, new imaging technologies that detect smoldering inflammation throughout the body with much improved sensitivity and specificity may better identify optimal candidates for such novel anti-inflammatory therapy.
The trajectory of research over the past 40 years provides reason to be optimistic about the development of effective therapies. Forty years ago, very few scientists or physicians knew that PAISs existed and how prevalent they were, let alone what the underlying pathophysiology might be. Today, the deepening understanding of the underlying pathophysiology should lead to effective new therapies for the people whose lives have been interrupted and diminished by these illnesses.

Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Clifford B. Saper, M.D., Ph.D., for his review and comments, particularly the discussion of recently discovered neural circuits. Two reviewers provided valuable insights. Sophia Villa aided greatly in creating the figures, with the help of BioRender icons. Jill Mazzetta played a key role in collecting and cataloging the literature.
This work was funded by the ,  grant () to the Center for Solutions for / at , and by  grants (, , and ). Additional support came from the  MD Anderson Cancer Center and the  MD  Support Grant ().

Author contributions
Conceptualization, A.L.K. and R.D.; writing – original draft, A.L.K. and R.D.

Declaration of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Redox imbalance links COVID-19 and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Insights from myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome may help unravel the pathogenesis of postacute COVID-19 syndrome
Long COVID: major findings, mechanisms and recommendations
ME/CFS and Long COVID share similar symptoms and biological abnormalities: road map to the literature
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: the biology of a neglected disease
Unravelling shared mechanisms: insights from recent ME/CFS research to illuminate long COVID pathologies
Long COVID science, research and policy
Mechanisms of long COVID and the path toward therapeutics
The neurobiology of long COVID
The immunology and immunopathology of COVID-19
Mild respiratory COVID can cause multi-lineage neural cell and myelin dysregulation
Unexplained post-acute infection syndromes
SARS-CoV-2 reservoir in post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC)
Patient-reported treatment outcomes in ME/CFS and Long COVID
Estimates of incidence and predictors of fatiguing illness after SARS-CoV-2 infection
Incidence and prevalence of post-COVID-19 myalgic encephalomyelitis: a report from the observational RECOVER-Adult Study
Long-term outcomes following hospital admission for COVID-19 versus seasonal influenza: a cohort study
The COVID-19 pandemic and the $16 trillion virus
The costs of long COVID
Updated ME/CFS prevalence estimates reflecting post-COVID increases and associated economic costs and funding implications
Use of cardiopulmonary stress testing for patients with unexplained dyspnea post-coronavirus disease
Post-acute COVID-19 symptoms, a potential link with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: A 6-month survey in a Mexican cohort
Chronic fatigue syndrome and cognitive deficit are associated with acute-phase neuropsychiatric manifestations of COVID-19: A 9-month follow-up study
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome is common in post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection (PASC): Results from a post-COVID-19 multidisciplinary clinic
Growing recognition of post-acute infection syndromes
Three-year outcomes of post-acute sequelae of COVID-19
Multi-ancestry GWAS of Long COVID identifies immune-related loci and etiological links to chronic fatigue syndrome, fibromyalgia and depression
Dissecting the genetic complexity of myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome via deep learning-powered genome analysis
Genetic risk factors for ME/CFS identified using combinatorial analysis
Genetic risk factors for severe and fatigue dominant long COVID and commonalities with ME/CFS identified by combinatorial analysis
Reproducibility of genetic risk factors identified for long COVID using combinatorial analysis across US and UK patient cohorts with diverse ancestries
Advancing an inflammatory subtype of major depression
Orthostatic challenge causes distinctive symptomatic, hemodynamic and cognitive responses in long COVID and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
A central role for amyloid fibrin microclots in long COVID/PASC: origins and therapeutic implications
Blood-brain barrier disruption and sustained systemic inflammation in individuals with long COVID-associated cognitive impairment
Fibrin drives thromboinflammation and neuropathology in COVID-19
A single-center pilot study of therapeutic apheresis in patients with severe post-COVID syndrome
Observational study of repeat immunoadsorption (RIA) in post-COVID ME/CFS patients with elevated ss2-adrenergic receptor autoantibodies-an interim report
Advocating the role of trained immunity in the pathogenesis of ME/CFS: a mini review
The brain and immune system prompt energy shortage in chronic inflammation and ageing
Some psychophysiological studies of motivation and of the behavioural effects of illness
Biological basis of the behavior of sick animals
Evolutionary aspects of infections: inflammation and sickness behaviors
The metabolic basis of cancer-related fatigue
Neurobehavioral effects of interferon-alpha in cancer patients: phenomenology and paroxetine responsiveness of symptom dimensions
Production of pro-inflammatory cytokines correlates with the symptoms of acute sickness behavior in humans
Cytokines and psychopathology: Lessons from interferon-alpha
Immune system to brain signaling: neuropsychopharmacological implications
Comparison of bacterial lipopolysaccharide-induced sickness behavior in rodents and humans: Relevance for symptoms of anxiety and depression
Sickness behaviors across vertebrate taxa: proximate and ultimate mechanisms
Control of larval development by chemosensory neurons in Caenorhabditis elegans
Pathogen infection induces sickness behaviors through neuromodulators linked to stress and satiety in C. elegans
Severe systemic inflammation promotes persistent brain metabolic abnormalities
Metabolomic, lipidomic and proteomic characterisation of lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation mouse model
Inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines bidirectionally modulate amygdala circuits regulating anxiety
Brain-wide mapping of immune receptors uncovers a neuromodulatory role of IL-17E and the receptor IL-17RB
A neuroimmune circuit mediates cancer cachexia-associated apathy
The neuroimmune basis of fatigue
Perspective: Drawing on findings from critical illness to explain myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Sickness: From the focus on cytokines, prostaglandins, and complement factors to the perspectives of neurons
An airway-to-brain sensory pathway mediates influenza-induced sickness
Cytokine-induced sickness behavior: where do we stand?
From inflammation to sickness and depression: when the immune system subjugates the brain
Cytokine, sickness behavior, and depression
Chronic fatigue syndrome from vagus nerve infection: A psychoneuroimmunological hypothesis
Subdiaphragmatic vagotomy blocks induction of IL-1 beta mRNA in mice brain in response to peripheral LPS
Microglia emerge as central players in brain disease
Neural circuitry engaged by prostaglandins during the sickness syndrome
Metabolic features of chronic fatigue syndrome
An evolutionary perspective on immunometabolism
Inactivation of ATG13 stimulates chronic demyelinating pathologies in muscle-serving nerves and spinal cord
mTORC1 syndrome (TorS): unifying paradigm for PASC, ME/CFS and PAIS
A guide to immunometabolism for immunologists
AMPK and TOR: The yin and yang of cellular nutrient sensing and growth control
Time-dependent recovery of brain hypometabolism in neuro-COVID-19 patients
The integrated stress response: From mechanism to disease
Core mitochondrial genes are down-regulated during SARS-CoV-2 infection of rodent and human hosts
Elevated blood lactate in resting conditions correlate with post-exertional malaise severity in patients with Myalgic encephalomyelitis/Chronic fatigue syndrome
Pathogens hijack host cell metabolism: intracellular infection as a driver of the Warburg effect in cancer and other chronic inflammatory conditions
The GDF15-GFRAL axis mediates chemotherapy-induced fatigue in mice
Hypermetabolism and energetic constraints in mitochondrial disorders
Fibroblast growth factor 21 drives dynamics of local and systemic stress responses in mitochondrial myopathy with mtDNA deletions
A high-resolution probabilistic in vivo atlas of human subcortical brain nuclei
Regulation of neural circuitry under general anesthesia: new methods and findings
Sensory circumventricular organs, neuroendocrine control, and metabolic regulation
Sneezing reflex is mediated by a peptidergic pathway from nose to brainstem
Divergent sensory pathways of sneezing and coughing
Reviving-like prosocial behavior in response to unconscious or dead conspecifics in rodents
A neural basis for prosocial behavior toward unresponsive individuals
A subcortical switchboard for perseverative, exploratory and disengaged states
A hypothalamic circuit underlying the dynamic control of social homeostasis
Manipulation of the inflammatory reflex as a therapeutic strategy
A body-brain circuit that regulates body inflammatory responses
Norepinephrine as a modulator of microglial dynamics
Brainstem ADCYAP1(+) neurons control multiple aspects of sickness behaviour
A preoptic neuronal population controls fever and appetite during sickness
Neurons that regulate mouse torpor
A discrete neuronal circuit induces a hibernation-like state in rodents
Flipping the switch on the body's thermoregulatory system
Shapiro's syndrome: Defining the clinical spectrum of the spontaneous paroxysmal hypothermia syndrome
Mitophagy in human health, ageing and disease
A role for mitochondria in NLRP3 inflammasome activation
Mitochondria as central hub of the immune system
Signaling by cGAS-STING in neurodegeneration, neuroinflammation, and aging
How mitochondria produce reactive oxygen species
Arrested development: suppression of NK cell function in the tumor microenvironment
A break in mitochondrial endosymbiosis as a basis for inflammatory diseases
SARS-CoV-2 mediated endothelial dysfunction: the potential role of chronic oxidative stress
Mitochondria and cellular redox state on the route from ageing to Alzheimer's disease
Oxidative stress and new pathogenetic mechanisms in endothelial dysfunction: potential diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets
The extended autonomic system, dyshomeostasis, and COVID-19
Autonomic nervous system and inflammation interaction in endometriosis-associated pain
Autonomic nervous system and neuroimmune interactions: New insights and clinical implications
Neuroimmune axis of cardiovascular control: mechanisms and therapeutic implications
Autonomic regulation of inflammation in conscious animals
Dysautonomia following Lyme disease: a key component of post-treatment Lyme disease syndrome?
LDHA-associated lactic acid production blunts tumor immunosurveillance by T and NK cells
L-kynurenine induces NK cell loss in gastric cancer microenvironment via promoting ferroptosis
Infection and chronic disease activate a systemic brain-muscle signaling axis
Tissue-based T cell activation and viral RNA persist for up to 2 years after SARS-CoV-2 infection
Targeting the SARS-CoV-2 reservoir in long COVID
Why does viral RNA sometimes persist after recovery from acute infections?
Reverse-transcribed SARS-CoV-2 RNA can integrate into the genome of cultured human cells and can be expressed in patient-derived tissues
Depicting SARS-CoV-2 faecal viral activity in association with gut microbiota composition in patients with COVID-19
Evolution of antibody immunity to SARS-CoV-2
Gastrointestinal symptoms and fecal shedding of SARS-CoV-2 RNA suggest prolonged gastrointestinal infection
Residual SARS-CoV-2 viral antigens detected in GI and hepatic tissues from five recovered patients with COVID-19
Persistent circulating SARS-CoV-2 spike is associated with post-acute COVID-19 sequelae
SARS-CoV-2 infection and persistence in the human body and brain at autopsy
Distinguishing features of long COVID identified through immune profiling
Plasma-based antigen persistence in the post-acute phase of COVID-19
The persistence of SARS-CoV-2 in tissues and its association with long COVID symptoms: a cross-sectional cohort study in China
Persistence of spike protein at the skull-meninges-brain axis may contribute to the neurological sequelae of COVID-19
Transcriptional reprogramming primes CD8+ T cells toward exhaustion in Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Immune exhaustion in ME/CFS and long COVID
Long COVID manifests with T cell dysregulation, inflammation and an uncoordinated adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2
Postacute COVID-19 is characterized by gut viral antigen persistence in inflammatory bowel diseases
Identification of soluble biomarkers that associate with distinct manifestations of long COVID
Covid-19 vaccine effectiveness against post-covid-19 condition among 589 722 individuals in Sweden: population based cohort study
Effect of covid-19 vaccination on long covid: systematic review
The effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines to prevent long COVID symptoms: staggered cohort study of data from the UK, Spain, and Estonia
Vaccine effectiveness against long COVID in children
Association of treatment with nirmatrelvir and the risk of post-COVID-19 condition
Health outcomes 3 months and 6 months after molnupiravir treatment for COVID-19 for people at higher risk in the community (PANORAMIC): a randomised controlled trial
Multi-organ impairment and long COVID: a 1-year prospective, longitudinal cohort study
Long COVID: plasma levels of neurofilament light chain in mild COVID-19 patients with neurocognitive symptoms
Plasma neurofilament light chain: a potential biomarker for neurological dysfunction in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Cardiovascular and haematological pathology in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): A role for viruses
Metabolic features and regulation of the healing cycle—A new model for chronic disease pathogenesis and treatment
CD3(+) T cells are critical for the resolution of comorbid inflammatory pain and depression-like behavior
Investigation of long COVID prevalence and its relationship to Epstein-Barr virus reactivation
Multiple early factors anticipate post-acute COVID-19 sequelae
Chronic viral coinfections differentially affect the likelihood of developing long COVID
Persistent SARS-CoV-2 infection, EBV, HHV-6 and other factors may contribute to inflammation and autoimmunity in Long COVID
Persistent complement dysregulation with signs of thromboinflammation in active Long Covid
Reactivation of herpesvirus type 6 and IgA/IgM-mediated responses to activin-A underpin long COVID, including affective symptoms and chronic fatigue syndrome
The reactivation of the various types of viruses following COVID-19 infection: a systematic review
Persisting illness and fatigue in adults with evidence of Epstein-Barr virus infection
Evidence for active Epstein-Barr virus infection in patients with persistent, unexplained illnesses: elevated anti-early antigen antibodies
A chronic illness characterized by fatigue, neurologic and immunologic disorders, and active human herpesvirus type 6 infection
Detection of Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus in patients with chronic fatigue
Human herpesvirus 6 and human herpesvirus 7 in chronic fatigue syndrome
Prevalence of IgM antibodies to human herpesvirus 6 early antigen (p41/38) in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome
Is human herpesvirus-6 a trigger for chronic fatigue syndrome?
Unmasking Bartonella henselae infection in the shadows of long COVID thanks to clinical metagenomics
Herpesvirus infection of endothelial cells as a systemic pathological axis in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Gut microbiota composition reflects disease severity and dysfunctional immune responses in patients with COVID-19
Inflammation-type dysbiosis of the oral microbiome associates with the duration of COVID-19 symptoms and long COVID
Gut microbiota dynamics in a prospective cohort of patients with post-acute COVID-19 syndrome
Increase in gut permeability and oxidized LDL is associated with post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2
Reduced diversity and altered composition of the gut microbiome in individuals with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Fecal metagenomic profiles in subgroups of patients with myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Insights into myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome phenotypes through comprehensive metabolomics
Deficient butyrate-producing capacity in the gut microbiome is associated with bacterial network disturbances and fatigue symptoms in ME/CFS
Multi-'omics of gut microbiome-host interactions in short- and long-term myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients
Systemic antibody responses against gut microbiota flagellins implicate shared and divergent immune reactivity in Crohn's disease and chronic fatigue syndrome
Normalization of the increased translocation of endotoxin from gram negative enterobacteria (leaky gut) is accompanied by a remission of chronic fatigue syndrome
Normalization of leaky gut in chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is accompanied by a clinical improvement: effects of age, duration of illness and the translocation of LPS from gram-negative bacteria
Changes in gut and plasma microbiome following exercise challenge in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS)
The association of fecal microbiota and fecal, blood serum and urine metabolites in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Systemic antibody responses against human microbiota flagellins are overrepresented in chronic fatigue syndrome patients
Markers of fungal translocation are elevated during post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 and induce NF-kappaB signaling
Investigating antibody reactivity to the intestinal microbiome in severe myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS): A feasibility study
Increased gut permeability and bacterial translocation are associated with fibromyalgia and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: implications for disease-related biomarker discovery
Suppressed immune and metabolic responses to intestinal damage-associated microbial translocation in myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome
Transneuronal propagation of pathologic alpha-synuclein from the gut to the brain models Parkinson's disease
Unusual phospholipids from Morganella morganii linked to depression
A causal link between autoantibodies and neurological symptoms in long COVID
The NLRP3 inflammasome inhibitor OLT1177 rescues cognitive impairment in a mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease
Immunological dimensions of neuroinflammation and microglial activation: exploring innovative immunomodulatory approaches to mitigate neuroinflammatory progression
Nanoparticle-mediated delivery of anti-PU.1 siRNA via localized intracisternal administration reduces neuroinflammation
Oral administration of ellagic acid mitigates perioperative neurocognitive disorders, hippocampal oxidative stress, and neuroinflammation in aged mice by restoring IGF-1 signaling
Inhibition of IL-11 signalling extends mammalian healthspan and lifespan
Programming tissue-sensing T cells that deliver therapies to the brain
Engineering synthetic suppressor T cells that execute locally targeted immunoprotective programs
Central glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor activation inhibits Toll-like receptor agonist-induced inflammation
CD45-PET is a robust, non-invasive tool for imaging inflammation