Gated Computed Tomography Evaluation of the Aortic Root for Treatment Planning of Patients With Aortic Stenosis
Computed tomography image analysis for transcatheter aortic valve replacement requires a comprehensive analysis of aortic root anatomy. There is no absolute threshold for any measurement that can determine treatment choice. Rather, image interpretation is a qualitative exercise, and decisions are based on accumulated experience from computed tomography anatomical review and treatment outcomes that help to refine future case selection. This review addresses potentially challenging scenarios for transcatheter aortic valve replacement and describes the imaging findings that should be considered in deciding a treatment approach. Common challenges are discussed with images to illustrate typical findings.

Introduction
Gated computed tomography (CT) evaluation of the aortic root has become central to the planning of aortic stenosis (AS) treatment. It is increasingly common for all patients with AS to undergo CT evaluation, and the findings are used to decide the treatment approach of transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) versus surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) in addition to the type of TAVR valve that will be implanted or the procedural plan for SAVR. Recent registry data from the United States and Europe suggest that TAVR has become the dominant treatment modality for patients undergoing treatment for isolated AS without need for concomitant surgery. However, it is crucial to identify high-risk scenarios for TAVR that would favor a surgical approach in patients with low operative risk. This requires a careful review of CT image data and a heart team discussion.
This review focuses on common and potentially challenging scenarios for TAVR and describes the imaging findings that should be considered in deciding a treatment approach (Central Illustration). CT image analysis requires an evaluation of annular area, left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) area, sinus dimensions, coronary height, leaflet length, sinotubular junction (STJ) height and dimensions, in addition to the presence and distribution of calcification in the annulus, LVOT, leaflets, and STJ. There is no absolute threshold for any measurement that can determine treatment choice. Therefore, terms such as large, small, and low are used relatively to describe the relation between the native anatomy and planned prosthesis type and size. Furthermore, image interpretation is a qualitative exercise and decisions are based on accumulated experience from CT anatomical review and treatment outcomes that help to refine future case selection. Challenging scenarios we will review are (1) the presence of LVOT or annular calcification, (2) leaflet calcification, (3) STJ calcification, (4) bicuspid valves, (5) low left main at risk of coronary occlusion, and (6) small and very large annuli.

Basic valve sizing
Annular sizing as determined by evaluation of the virtual basal ring is the most basic measurement required for TAVR planning. Annular area or perimeter determines the options for valve sizing for a particular patient. When borderline sizing is present, dimensions of the device landing zone and sinuses should be considered to refine sizing decisions. An LVOT dimension that is greater than the annular dimension may permit a larger valve, whereas an LVOT dimension that is smaller than the annular dimension may necessitate a smaller valve to be used. When the sinus diameter is small relative to the annulus, a smaller prosthesis would be favored. Sinus diameter and LVOT are usually proportionate to the annular size but are less susceptible to motion artifacts. They can, therefore, add supportive data for a sizing choice when annular measurements are uncertain due to limited image quality. The potential valve type and size is the starting point for CT planning for TAVR as this is the context in which the rest of a patient’s anatomy beyond the virtual basal ring needs to be considered.

Annular and LVOT calcification
Representative images of mild (A), moderate (B), and severe (C) calcification. Mild calcification: (A) A short-axis view of the aortic annulus showing 1 nodule of calcification extending <5.0 mm and covering <10% of the perimeter; the nodule is located between the right coronary cusp and noncoronary cusp (NCC). (D) Semiautomated volume calcium detection at the level of the region of interest of mild calcification. (G) Volume-rendered image showing mild calcification. Moderate calcification: (B) Two nodules at the level of the aortic annulus covering <20%. One nodule extending >5.0 and <10.0 mm. (E) Semiautomated volume calcium detection at the level of the region of interest of moderate calcification. (H) Volume-rendered image showing moderate calcification. Severe calcification: (C) Layered calcification covering >20% of the perimeter and 1 nodule below the NCC extending >10.0 mm in depth and >5.0 mm in diameter. (F) Semiautomated volume calcium detection at the level of the region of interest of severe calcification. (I) Volume-rendered image showing severe left ventricular outflow tract calcification.
The presence of annular or LVOT calcification is known to increase the risk of adverse outcomes with TAVR. Registry data show increased risk of either paravalvular leak (PVL) or annular rupture depending on the valve platform implanted. Thus, careful evaluation of calcification is important for procedural planning. Although there is no standardized way to classify the extent of LVOT calcification, several considerations are consistent among published studies. These include assessment of the circumferential extent, longitudinal extent, and maximum thickness of calcification present in the device landing zone. Based on these considerations, mild calcification is present when there is 1 nodule of calcification extending <5.0 mm in any dimension and covering <10% of the perimeter of the annulus or LVOT. The presence of 2 separate nodules of calcification or 1 extending >5.0 mm in any direction or covering >10% of the perimeter of the annulus or LVOT is considered moderate calcification. The presence of multiple nodules of calcification of single focus extending >10.0 mm in length or covering >20% of the perimeter of the annulus or LVOT is considered severe calcification. Figure 1 shows examples of mild, moderate, and severe LVOT calcification. In general, more extensive calcification, particular multiple nodules of large calcium deposits, increase the risk of adverse outcomes. Complications can also occur with relatively small calcium deposits if valve or balloon sizing is too large in relation to the aortic root dimensions.
Representative images of calcium deposits by location along the circumference of the annulus. (A) Two calcium nodules are present, with a small nodule under the noncoronary cusp and a larger nodule in the aortic mitral curtain. (B) Calcium arc adjacent to the membranous septum and right ventricle and right atrium. (C) Two calcium nodules are present, 1 in the left ventricular myocardium under the right coronary cusp and the second under the left coronary cusp in the left ventricular free wall.
The location of calcification in the annulus is also an important factor. Calcium under the left coronary cusp (the half of the sinus closest to the right cusp) or the left main has increased potential to perforate the annulus through the left ventricular (LV) free wall. Calcium under the right cusp or in the membranous septum has the potential to cause LV to right ventricular/right atrial fistulae. Conversely, calcification in the aortomitral curtain is less concerning. Fortunately, this is the most common pattern of LVOT calcification seen in patients with AS, and it can be treated successfully in almost all cases. Similarly, calcification in the LV wall under the left–right commissure is also relatively benign in isolation. Figure 2 illustrates some of the locations in which calcium deposits may be found.
Approaches to annular measurement where there is focal vs extensive left ventricular outflow tract calcification. (A) Annular measurement outside (including) the calcification obtains an area measurement of 608.0 mm2, which overestimates the actual treatable annular area. (B) Annular measurement inside (excluding) the calcification shows an area measurement of 545.0 mm2. (C) Annular measurement through a focal calcium nodule obtains an area measurement of 396.0 mm2, which most accurately estimates the treatable annulus.
Annular measurement can be challenging in the setting of annular or LVOT calcification because the presence of calcification can distort the annular contour. Annular measurement should not be performed outside the calcification. Rather, the analysis should be based on how the transcatheter valve is likely to interact with the calcium deposit. The annulus contour can be traced through the middle of a small nodule of calcium in the aortomitral curtain that is likely to be displaced by the valve or inside large calcium deposits where the goal is to accommodate the valve inside the noncalcified annular area. Figure 3 illustrates approaches to annular measurement where there is focal vs extensive LVOT calcification. Alternatively, calcification may infiltrate 1 or more of the most basal attachment points of the aortic valve cusps, obscuring the location of the virtual basal ring. In this scenario, image analysis should interpolate the likely location and place the hinge point in the calcium, rather than below the calcium, which risks overestimating annular area.
Deployment strategies are also crucial to avoid complications when annular or LVOT calcification is present. For balloon-expandable valves, avoidance of oversizing is an effective strategy to reduce the risk of annular rupture. For self-expanding valves (SEV), although risk of complications during valve deployment is low, caution during predilation and postdilation is warranted.

Leaflet calcification in tricuspid valves
Evaluation of leaflet calcium burden is best done on noncontrast images where standard CT Agatston scoring algorithms that use a Hounsfield unit value of >130 to detect calcium can be applied. Care should be taken in image analysis to include only leaflet calcium and not calcification present in the sinuses or LVOT. Evaluation of calcium load can be useful in the diagnosis of severe AS in the setting of low flow AS using the validated diagnostic threshold of 1200 Agatston units (AU) in women and 2000 AU in men. It may also help to guide the need for predilation and postdilation. However, the annular area should be considered in interpreting any absolute calcium values. In our practice, for valve platforms that do not require systematic predilation, we use calcium scores >5000 in patients with annular diameters of ≥25.0 mm and >3000 in patients with diameters <25.0 mm as a threshold to consider the need for predilation. This may not only facilitate valve delivery but also help to ensure adequate expansion of the valve prosthesis.
Representative images of high and low calcium load in noncontrast and contrast scans. (A) Noncontrast image of a patient with an aortic valve calcium score of 2736 AU and (B) contrast image in the same patient showing calcification volume of 992.0 mm2. (C) Noncontrast image of the aortic valve with a calcium score of 1828 AU and (D) contrast image showing calcification volume of 460.0 mm2.
Quantification of leaflet calcium load in contrast CT is challenging due to the inability to apply a consistent threshold for calcium detection when contrast is present in the CT images. Adjusting the Hounsfield unit threshold for calcium detection by the contrast density seen in the aorta or left atrium is one approach that can produce calcium values that are highly correlated with noncontrast Agatston scores. In individual patients, these values are typically substantially lower than the noncontrast calcium scores, so the predilation threshold should be adjusted accordingly. Figure 4 shows images of calcium load measured in noncontrast and contrast scans and the resulting values. Contrast scans also provide information about the distribution and morphology of leaflet calcification, which may provide further insight into the feasibility of TAVR and/or the need for predilation. Extremely high calcium load without clear separation between the leaflets may make valve dilation difficult due to formation of a tissue bridge across the leaflets by the calcification process.
Excessive leaflet calcification combined with small sinuses relative to planned valve size can increase the risk of sinus injury or perforation as the calcified cusp is pushed into the aortic wall causing injury. Less dramatically, such conditions can result in restriction of valve expansion due to crowding in the aortic root. As an approximate guide, we look for a minimum sinus dimension at least 3.0 mm larger than the planned valve size, especially when excessive leaflet calcification is present.

STJ junction dimensions and calcification
An illustrative case of treatment of a sinotubular junction (STJ) with extensive calcification using a short-frame balloon-expandable valve. (A) Cross-sectional image showing measurement of the STJ diameter and presence of significant calcification. (B) Volume-rendered image of the aortic root showing the distance from aortic annulus to STJ calcification. (C) Visualizing of planned valve implantation and expected interaction STJ calcification at the planned implantation depth. (D) Post-TAVR volume-rendered image showing adequate distance from STJ calcification. TAVR, transcatheter aortic valve replacement.
The STJ can provide a constraint for TAVR if it is narrow, low, and/or calcified. SEVs that have tall frames require a minimum sinus dimension to allow for adequate valve expansion. For balloon-expandable valves, the deployment balloon or stent frame may interact with STJ calcium, increasing the risk for balloon rupture or aortic root injury. Therefore, STJ area and height should be assessed in all cases. An STJ that is high and large relative to be planned valve size is favorable for TAVR. However, a small, low STJ, especially one with calcification, is a more significant challenge. In this case, a short frame valve, if it can be seated below the STJ calcium, may be preferrable. Figure 5 shows an example of a low-calcified STJ treated with a SAPIEN 3 valve (Edwards Lifesciences) implanted below the small and heavily calcified STJ. An SEV can also be used in calcified STJ anatomy provided the STJ dimensions are sufficient to permit expansion of the SEV frame and postdilation if needed.

Bicuspid valves
In bicuspid valves, annular sizing should be performed in the same manner as tricuspid valves using the virtual basal ring. Sievers 1 bicuspid valves have 3 points on the virtual basal ring although they are usually asymmetrically distributed owing to unequal cusp size. The key difference in Sievers 0 bicuspid valves is the presence of only 2 points on the virtual basal ring. In this scenario, it is important to evaluate annular area without centreline assumptions using the 3D tools in CT software to find the minimum area that intersects these 2 points.
Illustrative examples of bicuspid valves. (A) Raphe calcification with contralateral leaflet calcification and (B) raphe calcification without contralateral leaflet calcification.
In bicuspid valves, leaflet calcification assessment includes evaluation of the raphe. It is important to note the extent of raphe calcification along its longitudinal extent and any extension along the aortic sinus. Calcification in the nonfused leaflet is also important. TAVR valve deployment in bicuspid valves in typically not central in the annulus but, rather, displaced away from the raphe toward the contralateral leaflet. Therefore, extensive calcification in contralateral leaflet may limit overall valve expansion and favor SAVR. Figure 6 shows examples of raphe calcification with and without contralateral leaflet calcification.
Illustrative cases of bicuspid valves with flared and tapered aortic root anatomy. The flared aortic root (A) has adequate space for valve implantation as seen by the interaction between the aortic root and the planned valve (B). The tapered aortic root (C) does not have adequate space for valve implantation based on the interaction between the aortic root and planned transcatheter aortic valve replacement prosthesis (D).
Another crucial consideration for TAVR in bicuspid valves is the dimension of the sinuses of Valsalva. In Sievers 1 bicuspid, the minimum sinus dimension is typically found perpendicular to the raphe, a measurement that is termed the intercommissural distance. In planning bicuspid TAVR for bicuspid anatomy, it is important to consider how this distance changes above the annular plane and to compare it with the planned valve sizing. When the intercommissural distance is smaller than the planned valve size, risk of aortic root injury is increased. Conversely, when the intercommissural distance is large relative to planned valve size, TAVR can usually be safely performed. Previous bicuspid registries have classified intercommissural diameter (ICD) vs annular diameter as flared (ICD > annular diameter), tubular (ICD = annular diameter), or tapered (ICD < annular diameter), with tapered being the least common pattern observed. Figure 7 shows examples of flared vs tapered aortic root anatomy. Tapered anatomy is the highest risk for aortic root injury. Although supra-annular sizing has been recommended in such cases, this approach is not standardized and may increase the risk for PVL or patient prosthesis mismatch. Surgery is preferred for operable patients.

Left main at risk of occlusion
Early studies of left main occlusion in native valves focused on measurements of left main height and/or sinus of Valsalva diameter. Both parameters were associated with risk of left main closure; however, the positive predictive valve was very low. Many patients with low left main height can, in fact, safely undergo TAVR, whereas some patients with high left main are still at risk of closure. This is likely because closure of the left main during TAVR is a biomechanical event where the left coronary leaflet is displaced toward the left main by valve deployment, that is, it must have sufficient length and bulk and be pushed far enough by valve deployment to obstruct left main flow. Therefore, the factors to consider are left main height, left coronary leaflet length, presence of nodular calcium at the leaflet tip, sinus diameter, and planned valve size. Typically, all these variables need to be unfavorable for the left main to be at risk. In fact, left main closure with TAVR is a rare event and most patients with low left main height can safely be treated with TAVR without left main protection provided other factors are favorable.
Two contrasting cases of low left main. The first case shows a left main coronary height of 11.2 mm (A), heavy calcification of the left coronary leaflet tip and relatively narrow sinus of Valsalva width (B), and increased risk of left main obstruction with valve implantation on the volume-rendered image (C). The second case presents a left main coronary height of 9.0 mm (D), low burden of calcification of the left coronary leaflet tip and relatively wide sinus of Valsalva width (E), and low risk of left main obstruction with valve implantation on the volume-rendered image (F).
A recent study using a multiparametric approach was more successful at predicting left main closure than using a single variable. Where left main closure is a risk, use of the ACURATE neo valve may be advantageous owing to a frame design that restrains the coronary leaflets or, alternatively, left main protection may be performed using coronary wires, balloons, and/or stents. Figure 8 shows 2 cases with low left mains height were the risk of closure is present or absent based on other anatomic factors.

Small and very large annuli
Illustrative case of a small annulus treated with a self-expandingACURATEneo2 valve. (A) Aortic annular measurement of 325.6 mm2, perimeter of 64.5 mm, and nodular calcification, (B) left ventricular outflow tract measurement of 321.5 mm2 and nodular calcificaition, (C) longitudinal images of the aortic root, and (D) fluoroscopic image of the ACURATE neo2 (Boston Scientific) small valve size deployed.
Components for CT evaluation of aortic root including LVOT calcification, leaflet and STJ calcification, assessment of bicuspid valves, left main closure risk, and procedural planning for large or small annuli.
Small annulus, usually defined as a diameter less than 23.0, is a common entity. The presence of smaller annulus may place patients at higher risk of patient prosthesis mismatch. Use of SEV with supra-annular leaflets may improve hemodynamics results in such patients (Figure 9), although direct randomized comparisons with balloon-expandable prostheses are needed. Alternatively, surgical valve replacement with root enlargement may be an option.
Very large annulus patients that are at the upper end of the sizing range for current TAVR prostheses can be another challenging subset to treat. Among approved options, MyVal 32.0 mm (Meril) can treat an annular area up to 840.0 mm2, Evolut 34.0 mm (Medtronic) can treat annular diameter of 30.0 mm, and SAPIEN 3 of 29.0 mm can treat an area up to 683.0 mm2 (although prosthesis overexpansion has been used to treat larger annuli successfully). In a registry of large annuli, patients in whom the LVOT was larger than the annular area had a high risk of PVL, so these dimensions also need to be considered in the sizing decision.

Considerations for SAVR in high-risk TAVR anatomy
Most of the high-risk features for TAVR discussed above do not increase the complexity of SAVR. The presence of LVOT or annular calcification does not add to procedural complexity as the calcium deposits are debrided prior to suturing the valve in place. Similarly, leaflet calcification burden in tricuspid or bicuspid valves is not a concern for SAVR because the leaflets are also excised prior to valve replacement. In our practice, presence of excessive leaflet calcification or excessive annular/LVOT calcium is the most common reason for choosing SAVR over TAVR in operable patients without another indication for surgery. Constraint in the STJ, particularly when calcified, can pose challenges for surgical treatment. It may be more difficult to insert the desired valve size past the limitations posed by the small, calcified STJ. More extensive surgery might be required to enlarge the sinuses and remove the STJ calcification completely. Left main occlusion can occur as a complication of SAVR, however, the mechanism differs from TAVR. If a patient is deemed to be at risk for left main occlusion with TAVR, it can be addressed at surgery with leaflet removal. Given the excellent outcomes observed at medium term follow-up in the trials of TAVR vs SAVR in patients at low surgical risk, heart teams can be reassured that both therapies are safe and effective when provided to carefully selected patients.

Conclusion
Meticulous planning with CT is essential to successful outcomes in the treatment of AS. Randomized trials has excluded high-risk TAVR anatomy, and operator experience and judgment is required to select cases appropriately. Because TAVR valves are implanted in lower-risk surgical patients, operators need to ensure careful case selection is performed, and a treatment choice customized to the patient anatomy is made.

References
STS-ACC TVT registry of transcatheter aortic valve replacement
Computed tomography imaging in the context of transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI)/transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR): an expert consensus document of the Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography
Impact of left ventricular outflow tract calcification on procedural outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve replacement
Bespoke valve sizing avoids annular rupture in patients treated with a balloon-expandable transcatheter heart valve
Annular rupture during transcatheter aortic valve replacement: classification, pathophysiology, diagnostics, treatment approaches, and prevention
Why and how to measure aortic valve calcification in patients with aortic stenosis
Validation of a three-dimensional computed tomography reconstruction tool for aortic valve calcium quantification
Bicuspid aortic valve morphology and outcomes after transcatheter aortic valve replacement
Bicuspid aortic valve anatomy and relationship with devices: the BAVARD multicenter registry
Predictive factors, management, and clinical outcomes of coronary obstruction following transcatheter aortic valve implantation: insights from a large multicenter registry
Coronary obstruction from TAVR in native aortic stenosis: development and validation of multivariate prediction model
Transcatheter aortic-valve replacement with a self-expanding valve in low-risk patients
Transcatheter aortic-valve replacement with a balloon-expandable valve in low-risk patients
Rationale and design of the SMall Annuli Randomized To Evolut or SAPIEN Trial (SMART Trial)
Impact of aortic root anatomy and geometry on paravalvular leak in transcatheter aortic valve replacement with extremely large annuli using the Edwards SAPIEN 3 Valve