Salmonella spp. in Domestic Ruminants, Evaluation of Antimicrobial Resistance Based on the One Health Approach—A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Simple Summary
Salmonella continues to pose a significant threat to public health, standing as the second leading cause of foodborne illnesses in the European Union. In instances of severe infection, the treatment of salmonellosis necessitates the use of antimicrobials, among other therapeutic interventions. The escalating resistance of Salmonella spp. to antibiotics in recent years, primarily attributed to inappropriate usage in livestock, has raised considerable concerns among health authorities. The findings indicate that the low prevalence of Salmonella spp. isolated from samples of cattle, sheep, and goats in slaughterhouses, coupled with their comparatively low-to-moderate resistance to key antibiotics used in the treatment of human salmonellosis, suggests that the consumption of beef, lamb, and goat meat does not pose a substantial threat to public health in relation to the proliferation of antimicrobial resistance (AMR).
Abstract
Salmonella spp. pose a global threat as a leading cause of foodborne illnesses, particularly prevalent in the European Union (EU), where it remains the second cause of foodborne outbreaks. The emergence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in Salmonella spp. has become a critical concern, complicating treatment strategies and escalating the risk of severe infections. The study focuses on large and small ruminants, identifying a prevalence of Salmonella spp. in slaughterhouses and revealing varied AMR rates across antimicrobial families throughout a meta-analysis. Also, comparison with AMR in human medicine was carried out by a systematic review. The results of the present meta-analysis displayed a prevalence of Salmonella spp. in large and small ruminants at slaughterhouses of 8.01% (8.31%, cattle; 7.04%, goats; 6.12%, sheep). According to the AMR of Salmonella spp., 20, 14, and 13 out of 62 antimicrobials studied were classified as low (<5%), high (>5% but <10%), and very high (>10%), respectively. Salmonella spp. did not display AMR against aztreonam, mezlocillin, ertapenem, meropenem, cefoxitin, ceftazidime, levofloxacin, tilmicosin, linezolid, fosfomycin, furazolidone, quinupristin, trimethoprim and spectinomycin. In contrast, a prevalence of 100% of AMR has been described against ofloxacin, lincomycin, and cloxacillin. In the context of the main antibiotics used in the treatment of human salmonellosis, azithromycin was shown to have the highest resistance among Salmonella spp. isolates from humans. Regarding cephalosporins, which are also used for the treatment of salmonellosis in humans, the prevalence of Salmonella spp. resistance to this class of antibiotics was similar in both human and animal samples. Concerning quinolones, despite a heightened resistance profile in Salmonella spp. isolates from ruminant samples, there appears to be no discernible compromise to the efficacy of salmonellosis treatment in humans since lower prevalences of AMR in Salmonella spp. isolated from human specimens were observed. Although the resistance of Salmonella spp. indicates some degree of concern, most antibiotics are not used in veterinary medicine. Thus, the contribution of cattle, sheep and goats to the rise of antibiotic resistance of Salmonella spp. and its potential impact on public health appears to be relatively insignificant, due to their low prevalence in carcasses and organs. Nevertheless, the observed low prevalence of Salmonella spp. in ruminants at slaughterhouse and the correspondingly low AMR rates of Salmonella spp. to key antibiotics employed in human medicine do not indicate that ruminant livestock poses a substantial public health risk concerning the transmission of AMR. Thus, the results observed in both the meta-analysis and systematic review suggests that AMR is not solely attributed to veterinary antibiotic use but is also influenced by factors such as animal health management (i.e., biosecurity measures, prophylactic schemes) and human medicine.

1. Introduction
Salmonellosis is a common foodborne illness caused by various strains of the Salmonella bacterium. It affects the gastrointestinal tract and can lead to a range of symptoms from mild gastroenteritis to severe and sometimes life-threatening conditions. The Salmonella genus classified into two species: S. bongori and S. enterica. Most serotypes classified as S. enterica subsp. enterica are responsible for the majority of salmonellosis cases in humans and warm-blooded animals. Salmonella spp. is typically transmitted to humans through the consumption of contaminated food, especially undercooked or raw eggs, poultry, meat, and unpasteurized dairy products. Direct contact with infected animals or their environment can also lead to transmission.
Salmonella infections can range from self-limiting gastroenteritis to severe systemic diseases. Antibiotics are employed in cases where there is evidence of invasive infection or systemic complications. Salmonellosis therapy in humans involves the use of antimicrobial such as quinolones, third generation cephalosporins and azithromycin. Most antimicrobials described for treatment of salmonellosis in human medicine are presented in Table 1. Among quinolones, ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin, are commonly used for treating severe salmonellosis. They inhibit bacterial DNA replication by targeting DNA gyrase and topoisomerase IV enzymes. However, the emergence of quinolone-resistant Salmonella strains is a growing concern. Third generation cephalosporins like ceftriaxone and cefotaxime, are frequently employed as empirical therapy for severe salmonellosis. These antibiotics inhibit bacterial cell wall synthesis, leading to bacterial death. Third generation cephalosporins are effective against most Salmonella serotypes and are often the treatment of choice in invasive infections. Azithromycin, a macrolide antibiotic, is an alternative treatment option for salmonellosis. It acts by binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit, inhibiting protein synthesis. Azithromycin is effective against many Salmonella serotypes, including those where fluoroquinolone-resistance is common. Aminoglycosides are not recommended because, despite demonstration of good in vitro activity, they have poor clinical efficacy.
Antimicrobials referred in the literature to treat salmonellosis in human medicine.
Antimicrobial 	Family	References	 	Amoxicillin	Penicillin		 	Ampicillin	Penicillin		 	Azithromycin	Macrolide		 	Aztreonam	Monobactam		 	Cefixime	3rd gen. cephalosporin		 	Cefoperazone	3rd gen. cephalosporin		 	Cefotaxime	3rd gen. cephalosporin		 	Ceftazidime 	3rd gen. cephalosporin		 	Ceftriaxone	3rd gen. cephalosporin		 	Chloramphenicol 	Amphenicol		 	Ciprofloxacin	Quinolone		 	Delafloxacin	Quinolone		 	Ertapenem	Carbapenem		 	Fleroxacin	Quinolone		 	Gatifloxacin	Quinolone		 	Gemifloxacin	Quinolone		 	Imipenem	Carbapenem		 	Levofloxacin	Quinolone		 	Meropenem	Carbapenem		 	Moxalactam	Beta-lactam		 	Moxifloxacin	Quinolone		 	Nalidixic acid	Quinolone		 	Norfloxacin	Quinolone		 	Ofloxacin	Quinolone		 	Pefloxacin	Quinolone		 	Tigecycline	Glycylcycline		 	Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole	Dihydropyrimidine-sulfonamide		 	Trovafloxacin	Fluoronaphthyridone 		 	Rifaximin	Rifamycin

2. Salmonellosis in Cattle, Sheep and Goats
In large and small ruminants, salmonellosis can result in a range of clinical manifestations, impacting both individual animals and herd health. Cattle salmonellosis, commonly caused by several serotypes of the S. enterica (e.g., S. Typhimurium, S. Dublin), is frequently associated with clinical disease in cattle and calves. In small ruminants, S. Abortusovis and S. Brandenburg, are associated with systemic disease and abortion in does and ewe. Furthermore, S. Abortusovis is unique among salmonella serovars because it is more often associated with abortion rather than septicemia and enteritis.
The primary modes of transmission involve the ingestion of contaminated feed, water, or contact with contaminated environments. Stressful conditions, overcrowding, and poor sanitation practices can exacerbate the risk of infection within herds. Infected animals shed the bacteria through feces, further contaminating the surroundings.
Livestock affected by salmonella-induced diarrhea requires supportive care and parenteral antimicrobial therapy. The use of antimicrobial agents is controversial and probably does not influence the gastrointestinal infection. Nevertheless, because Salmonella is an invasive organism, the parenteral use of antimicrobial agents may be beneficial in preventing septicemia. Antimicrobial susceptibility patterns are difficult to predict for Salmonella species, so antimicrobial therapy in large and small ruminants (Table 2) should be based on culture and sensitivity results. In veterinary medicine, the most indicated antibiotics for gastrointestinal salmonellosis are quinolones, while it is oxytetracycline for cases of abortions outbreaks, especially in small ruminants.
Antimicrobial substances described in the literature used to treat salmonellosis in large and small ruminants.
Antimicrobial	Antimicrobial Class	References	 	Amikacin	Aminoglycoside		 	Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid	Penicillin		 	Ampicillin	Penicillin		 	Apramycin	Aminoglycoside		 	Ceftiofur	3rd gen. cephalosporin		 	Cephalotin	1st gen. cephalosporin		 	Chloramphenicol	Amphenicol		 	Enrofloxacin	Quinolone		 	Florfenicol	Amphenicol		 	Gentamicin	Aminoglycoside		 	Kanamycin	Aminoglycoside		 	Neomycin	Aminoglycoside		 	Oxytetracycline	Tetracycline		 	Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole	Sulfonamide

3. Epidemiology, Public Health Significance and Antimicrobial Resistance of Salmonella spp.
Salmonellosis is still one of the main causes of foodborne outbreak worldwide. Foodborne outbreaks of salmonellosis in humans are usually derived from foods of animal origin such as meat, eggs or milk among others. Most salmonellosis outbreaks reported happened in summer, showing a seasonal pattern. Reports of European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) reported salmonellosis as the main cause of foodborne outbreak. Thus, from a total of 2201 cases, 590 were confirmed by laboratory analysis and/or epidemiological evidence.
As previously described, Salmonella spp. has the ability to colonize both pet animals and animals of livestock interest. Furthermore, these animals can act as asymptomatic carriers and can be a source of food contamination and, therefore, a risk to public health. Other animals such as rodents, insects or reptiles can act as reservoirs and vectors for the transmission of Salmonella. Furthermore, in terms of a possible vector transmission, it has been observed that insects can act as carriers of Salmonella spp.
Food contaminated by Salmonella spp. can be of various types so it is reasonable that any of them that are contaminated may have the potential to cause food poisoning. Classically, meat and eggs have been described as the main vehicles of human salmonellosis; however, new foods (e.g., bison meat, papaya, blueberries, hazelnuts, kale, pepper, pistachios) capable of transmitting Salmonella spp. have been described recently.
The control of contamination by Salmonella spp. must be applied in all stages of the food chain “from farm to fork” where the control measures carried out in each stage are synergistic with other measures applied in the next phase of the food chain to guarantee its safety. Salmonella detection methods in feed, food animals, the environment and foodstuffs have been essential tools to ensure its control throughout the food chain. In the case of meat, contamination generally occurs on the surfaces of the carcass through contact of carcass muscle by fecal material contaminated with Salmonella spp. during slaughter and/or cutting operations in the slaughterhouse.
Relative to the AMR of Salmonella spp., the EFSA report indicates that a significant number of Salmonella spp. are resistant to the action of antibiotics commonly used in both human and veterinary medicine. High rates of Salmonella spp. isolated from human (Table 3) displayed an antimicrobial resistance prevalence of 25.3%, 26.8% and 26.2% to ampicillin, sulfonamides and tetracyclines, respectively. Also in human samples, the prevalence of susceptibility of Salmonella spp. was, on average, about 60.0%, with the highest proportion in S. enteritidis (72.1%), followed by S. derby (61.5%), S. typhimurium (58.9%) and S. infantis (54.5%). The lowest levels of susceptibility were observed in S. kentucky (19.4%) and monophasic S. typhimurium (4.5%). In human isolates reported from EU, multidrug resistance was still high (22.6%, n = 6867). Similar results have been recently reported (i.e., 2020) by the National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System of the FDA in which most of the salmonella (78%) isolated from humans displayed 100% of susceptibility to all antimicrobials included in the surveillance program. Antibiotic resistance of nontyphoidal salmonella infections increased in the last years achieving 8%, 3% and 1% for ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone and azithromycin, respectively. Also, 74% of human isolates of S. typhi are resistant to ciprofloxacin.
In recent years, it has been suggested that one of the main causes of the increase in microbial resistance has been the abusive use of antibiotics in livestock production. However, some recent studies cast doubt on this theory due to the difficulty of understanding transmission dynamics. Also, the need of increasing of sales to maximize profits of the pharmaceutical industry may contribute to the persistence of AMR. In addition, the transfer of antimicrobial resistance from meat to humans is a growing public health concern, especially in low- to middle-income countries with insufficient oversight on antimicrobial use.
Thus, the continued use of antibiotics in animal production both for the treatment and prevention of diseases enabling the transmission of resistant bacteria through the food chain is a cause for concern. The transfer of antimicrobial resistance from meat to humans has been related through the consumption of contaminated meat and/or meat products. This is because resistant bacteria present in the gastrointestinal tract of animals can persist in meat even after processing. In this way, it has been observed that horizontal gene transfer (i.e., exchange of resistance genes between bacteria) is a fundamental mechanism that facilitates the spread of antibiotic resistance. However, other authors question this way of transmission since the have observed that having livestock does not seem to contribute to the increase in AMR in humans.
Within the One Health context, antimicrobial resistance is continually transmitted between animals, humans and the environment. In this way, the fight against antibiotic resistance only in one of the three scenarios indicated above would be inadequate since each of them is influenced by the others. Animal health is inseparable from human health, so understanding resistance in samples from humans as well as its possible connection with animals is essential to develop and implement control strategies.
Strategies such as the responsible use of antibiotics in livestock production, implementation of electronic veterinary prescription in the EU, implementing biosafety measures to prevent the appearance of diseases and/or their spread, as well as establishing surveillance systems for resistant strains in both animals and humans, are essential. Thus, strict compliance with hygiene, cleaning and disinfection practices in the food production chain is essential to reduce or eliminate the risk of contamination.
In recent years, the media has indicated that antibiotic resistance is primarily due to livestock production, especially intensive farming. With the One Health perspective, this work aims to highlight that the resistance of Salmonella spp. is not only to antibiotics used in veterinary medicine but also to antibiotics used exclusively in human medicine. Since the transmission of AMR can occur through meat consumption, the objective of this study is to verify, through a meta-analysis, the prevalence of Salmonella spp. in the carcasses and/or organs of cattle, sheep, and goats, as well as their antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Furthermore, the role of Salmonella spp. (isolated in slaughterhouses) in the increase in the AMR microbial resistance of Salmonella spp. in humans is discussed in the text.
Antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. in humans by antimicrobial substance.
Antimicrobial	%	Country	Reference	 	Amikacin	3.40	Italy		 		0.01	United States		 		0.00	Central African Republic		 	Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid	40.00	Turkey		 	22.50	United States		 		8.10	United States		 		7.69	Morocco		 		5.20	Iran		 		4.30	China		 		3.12	Tunisia		 		3.00	United States		 		3.00	United States		 		0.60	United States		 		0.34	Central African Republic		 		0.00	China		 		0.00	Switzerland		 	Amoxicillin	27.80	Thailand		 		6.87	Central African Republic		 		0.00	Morocco		 	Ampicillin	100.00	Ethiopia		 		92.16	China		 		72.60	Italy		 		73.00	Taiwan		 		62.50	Tunisia		 		60.00	Turkey		 		57.50	Italy		 		55.00	United States		 		40.62	Switzerland		 		40.30	Thailand		 		39.99	Denmark		 		33.33	India		 		31.30	China		 		29.80	Europe		 		28.40	Spain		 		25.00	Nigeria		 		23.33	Nigeria		 		22.40	Iran		 		18.00	United States		 		10.71	United States		 		9.20	United States		 		7.20	United States		 		3.00	United States		 		0.00	Brazil		 	Azithromycin	36.30	Italy		 		1.96	China		 		0.80	Europe		 	Aztreonam	8.60	Iran		 	Cefalotin	25.00	Switzerland		 		4.00	United States		 		3.00	United States		 		3.60	United States		 		3.20	Spain		 		1.80	Iran		 		0.17	Central African Republic		 		0.00	Brazil		 		0.00	Morocco		 	Cefepime	13.73	China		 		7.40	India		 		2.10	China		 	Cefixime	6.90	Iran		 	Cefoperazone	6.3	Thailand		 	Cefotaxime	77.77	India		 		25.00	Nigeria		 		20.00	Nigeria		 		10.3	Taiwan		 		4.10	Italy		 		3.60	China		 		3.40	Iran		 		0.80	Europe		 		0.10	Spain		 		0.10	United States		 		0.00	Turkey		 		0.00	Central African Republic		 		0.00	Denmark		 		0.00	Switzerland		 	Cefoxitin	22.50	United States		 		8.30	United States		 		0.70	United States		 		0.00	Central African Republic		 	Ceftazidine	17.65	China		 		12.10	Iran		 		8.60	Taiwan		 		3.80	China		 		3.40	Italy		 		3.12	Tunisia		 		0.80	Europe		 		0.00	Morocco		 		0.00	Denmark		 	Ceftiofur	22.50	United States		 		8.20	United States		 		6.40	China		 		0.00	United States		 	Ceftriaxone	19.61	China		 		11.11	India		 		8.10	United States		 		6.90	Iran		 		5.00	United States		 		3.00	United States		 		1.00	United States		 		0.00	United States		 		0.00	Ethiopia		 	Ciprofloxacin	25.00	Nigeria		 		14.81	India		 		14.10	Europe		 		10.10	United States		 		8.90	Italy		 		6.50	Thailand		 		5.00	United States		 		3.92	China		 		3.33	Nigeria		 		2.80	China		 		1.80	Iran		 		1.60	Taiwan		 		1.56	Switzerland		 		0.10	United States		 		0.00	Brazil		 		0.00	Thailand		 		0.00	Ethiopia		 		0.00	Morocco		 		0.00	Spain		 		0.00	United States		 		0.00	Turkey		 		0.00	United States		 		0.00	Central African Republic		 		0.00	Denmark		 	Chloramphenicol	48.10	Taiwan		 		42.00	United States		 		38.8	Thailand		 		35.29	China		 		29.90	United States		 		20.40	Thailand		 		17.20	Iran		 		15.70	China		 		14.20	Spain		 		11.11	India		 		10.10	Denmark		 		10.00	United States		 		9.60	Italy		 		9.60	United States		 		6.40	Europe		 		5.85	Central African Republic		 		3.12	Tunisia		 		2.90	United States		 		1.00	United states		 		1.56	Switzerland		 		0.00	Morocco		 		0.00	Ethiopia		 		0.00	Brazil		 	Colistin	2.70	Italy		 	Doxycycline	77.50	Iran		 	Furazolidone	3.12	Tunisia		 	Gentamicin	62.96	India		 		33.70	Thailand		 		24.30	Taiwan		 		15.20	China		 		12.50	Nigeria		 		12.50	Tunisia		 		10.00	Nigeria		 		9.60	United States		 		6.90	Iran		 		5.60	Thailand		 		5.00	United States		 		3.00	United States		 		3.00	United States		 		3.00	United States		 		2.60	Spain		 		1.60	Europe		 		1.10	United States		 		0.60	Denmark		 		0.17	Central African Republic		 		0.00	Italy		 		0.00	Morocco		 		0.00	Ethiopia		 		0.00	Brazil		 		0.00	Turkey		 		0.00	Switzerland		 	Kanamycin	33.33	Ethiopia		 		22.40	Iran		 		14.20	United States		 		9.37	Tunisia		 		5.00	United State		 		3.12	Switzerland		 		3.10	United States		 		3.00	United States		 		3.00	United States		 		2.10	United States		 		1.60	Spain		 		0.00	Morocco		 	Imipenem	0.00	China		 		0.00	Central African Republic		 		0.00	Denmark		 		0.00	Taiwan		 		0.00	Iran		 	Levofloxacin	0.00	China		 	Piperacin/tazobactam	3.33	Nigeria		 		0.00	China		 	Nalidixic acid	74.10	Iran		 		70.31	Switzerland		 		50.90	China		 		35.00	Spain		 		23.33	Nigeria		 		21.60	Taiwan		 		20.00	United States		 		18.75	Tunisia		 		13.10	Europe		 		10.71	United States		 		11.30	United States		 		9.80	United States		 		8.20	Italy		 		6.25	Nigeria		 		4.40	Denmark		 		1.00	United States		 		0.50	United States		 		0.34	Central African Republic		 		0.00	Morocco		 		0.00	Brazil		 	Meropenem	10.00	Nigeria		 		0.00	Italy		 		0.00	Europe		 	Neomycin	12.50	Tunisia		 	Nitrofurantoin	64.70	Brazil		 		33.30	Ethiopia		 		30.00	Nigeria		 		6.25	Nigeria		 	Ofloxacin	1.40	China		 	Ticarcillin	6.87	Central African Republic		 	Tigecycline	0.20	Europe		 	Tetracycline	92.60	Thailand		 		85.40	Taiwan		 		85.18	India		 		80.00	United States		 		76.40	United States		 		68.75	Switzerland		 		67.50	Thailand		 		66.66	Ethiopia		 		50.70	Italy		 		46.66	Nigeria		 		43.00	Nigeria		 		40.00	Turkey		 		37.30	Denmark		 		31.20	Europe		 		30.50	China		 		27.30	Spain		 		21.00	United States		 		12.50	Tunisia		 		11.80	Brazil		 		11.53	Morocco		 		10.71	United States		 		9.90	United States		 		5.00	United States		 		3.51	Central African Republic		 	Norfloxacin	0.00	Thailand		 		0.00	Brazil		 	Trimethoprim	62.96	India		 		59.70	Thailand		 		19.70	China		 		6.20	Italy		 		6.10	Europe		 		5.90	Brazil		 		3.12	Switzerland		 	 Trim-sulpha	35.29	China		 		31.50	Thailand		 		20.00	United States		 		19.70	China		 		12.30	United States		 		10.40	United States		 		9.60	Europe		 		7.61	Central African Republic		 		7.00	Turkey		 		6.00	Spain		 		2.00	United States		 		3.12	Tunisia		 		0.60	United States		 	Tigecycline	2.70	Italy		 	Spectinomycin	48.00	Thailand		 	Streptomycin	100.00	Thailand		 		100.00	Ethiopia		 		87.00	Thailand		 		81.60	Taiwan		 		70.30	United States		 		62.50	Switzerland		 		42.50	United States		 		40.50	Denmark		 		37.60	China		 		19.50	Spain		 		19.00	United States		 		10.00	United States		 		12.40	United States		 		10.71	United States		 		8.80	United States		 		3.84	Morocco		 		3.12	Tunisia		 		0.00	Brazil		 	Sulfamethoxazole	100	Italy		 		100	Brazil		 		96.10	Thailand		 		89.20	Taiwan		 		43.00	Denmark		 		30.10	Europe		 		20.00	United States		 		10.00	United States		 		9.37	Switzerland		 		5.00	United states		 	Sulfisoxazole	70.00	United States		 		50.00	United States		 		47.90	China		 		8.40	United States		 	Sulfonamide	88.20	Brazil		 		75.40	United States		 		22.30	Spain		 		3.84	Morocco

4. Material and Methods

4.1. Search Strategy
The systematic review was performed in accordance with the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis) guidelines (Figure 1). Databases such as Google Scholar, Scopus, and PubMed were utilized to retrieve research papers in both English and Spanish. The article search commenced in September 2022 and concluded in April 2023. Scientific articles should include information on the presence/absence of Salmonella spp. isolated from beef, sheep, and goat carcasses and/or organs, as well as indicate the resistance against various antimicrobials.
The search for scientific articles was carried out using boolean terms in the EBSCOhost and directly in the browser bar of the aforementioned databases. The boolean terms used to identify the relevant scientific articles were “antimicrobial” AND “resistance” AND “slaughterhouse” OR “abattoir” OR “slaughter” AND “bovine” OR “sheep” OR “goat” AND “Salmonella”.

4.2. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
To conduct the meta-analysis, all research articles reporting the AMR of Salmonella spp. in slaughtered cattle, goats and/or sheep were selected. All selected publications were evaluated by all authors to determine their suitability for inclusion in the analysis. The inclusion criteria for the articles involved verifying the resistance to any antimicrobial by Salmonella spp. isolated from any part of the carcass and/or organ of cattle, goats, and/or sheep during slaughter. Publications related to systematic reviews and meta-analyses were not considered for the study. Articles studying the AMR of Salmonella spp. in the slaughterhouse environment, handlers, and/or slaughterhouse wastewater were also excluded. Those scientific papers related to the AMR of Salmonella spp. isolated from farms were not considered for the meta-analysis. Differences of AMR of Salmonella spp. among countries were not considered since production methods (intensive or extensive), type of production (milk, meat, or mixed), types of antibiotics used, or differences between serotypes have not been evaluated.

4.3. Review of the Scientific Literature and Data Analysis
The search for scientific articles was carried out from September 2022 to April 2023 (8-month period). Potentially eligible studies were selected in two steps; the first step was based on the title and abstract screening that must contain specific words as previously indicated in the heading. Irrelevant references were removed. The second step was based on the full-text reading of potentially relevant studies. For each reference, the following variables were systematically extracted and entered into a summary table: (1) author, (2) year of publication, (3) specie, (4) country of publication, (5) total samples, (6) total Salmonella spp. positive samples, (7) location of samples, (8) sampling location, (9) name of the antimicrobial substance tested and (10) number of Salmonella spp. samples resistant to each specific antimicrobial. All manuscript included in the meta-analysis, including data regarding Salmonella spp. prevalence and antimicrobial resistance evaluation, are presented in Supplementary Materials (Supplementary Materials S1 and S2). To improve the homogeneity of the studies included in the meta-analysis, the outcomes used were obtained similarly among them. Thus, isolation and identification of Salmonella spp., was carried out by classical microbiological and molecular techniques (e.g., PCR), respectively, while antimicrobial susceptibility testing was carried out in most studies by CLSI or EUCAST protocols. The assessing of the risk of bias in the included studies was based on a compliance chart of the points 1 to 9 previously described. All studies were carefully screened. If an article did not provide clear information at any point, then the scientific study was rejected for inclusion in the meta-analysis.

4.4. Meta-Analysis and Statistical Analysis
The effect size index for this meta-analysis was the prevalence of resistance of Salmonella spp. against specific antimicrobials. The effect size index is the prevalence itself, which is the magnitude that is intended to be synthesized from the estimates provided by the primary studies. The numerator value always refers to the total number of Salmonella spp. resistant to a specific antimicrobial, and the denominator refers to the total number of Salmonella spp. samples tested against the same antimicrobial used in the numerator. Thus, a value less than 0.5 indicates 100% of sensitivity of Salmonella spp. to a specific antimicrobial, while a value of 1 indicates 100% of resistance of Salmonella spp. to the antimicrobial used in the numerator.
For the statistical treatment, prevalence regarding antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. extracted from each study was subjected to a Logit transformation to have a more symmetrical distribution that asymptotically approaches the normal distribution. Then, reported results of the prevalence of the antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. and those indicated in the forest plot were transformed back to prevalence values.
Heterogeneity between studies was evaluated using the Q statistic as a test of heterogeneity, and the I2 statistic. For the pooled estimate, the values were weighted by the inverse of their variances. Random effects models were assumed instead of the fixed-effect model. Random effects models are generally preferred because they are more conservative and allow generalizing conclusions beyond the specific set of studies analyzed. The specific variance (τ2) was estimated using the restricted maximum likelihood method. In order to test for a potential moderating role of the method employed when testing the antimicrobial resistance, we have adjusted a model that included the method (Disk Diffusion versus Broth Microdilution). The Qbetween statistic allows testing for any role of a categorical moderator. This test was not possible for a number of antimicrobials as the total number of studies or the number of studies in one of the methods was too small. All statistical analyses were performed through the metafor R package® (v. 4.4.0).
Based on the prevalence of the AMR of Salmonella spp. isolated from cattle, goat and sheep at slaughterhouses against the different antimicrobials, they are classified into three categories: low (≤5), high (>5–10≥) and very (high > 10).

5. Results

5.1. Salmonella spp. Prevalence in Slaughtered Large and Small Ruminants
Based on the 49 reviewed studies, the prevalence of Salmonella spp. domestic ruminants at slaughterhouses was 8.01% (Table 4). The prevalence of Salmonella spp. in cattle, goats, and sheep was 8.31%, 7.04%, and 6.12%, respectively (Table 4). On average, 708 animals were sampled at the slaughterhouses. Carcass, fecal content, and lymph nodes were analyzed in 71.42%, 46.93%, and 28.57% of the studies reviewed, respectively. The meta-analysis showed prevalence results of Salmonella spp. (Table 5) ranging from 8.31% to 7.04%, depending on the sampling location. However, due to insufficient studies, no prevalence results were obtained from the gallbladder, kidneys, lungs, rumen, and spleen. Forest plots and funnel plots of overall prevalence of Salmonella spp. at slaughterhouse, by specie and by sample location is presented in Supplementary Materials (Supplementary Materials S3–S6).
The studies included in the meta-analysis were conducted in 21 different countries worldwide, with nearly 50% carried out in Africa. The publication dates of the studies reviewed ranged from 2002 to 2022 (see Supplementary Material S1). No statistical differences were observed by country or year of publication.

5.2. Antimicrobial Resistance of Salmonella spp. from Slaughtered Domestic Ruminants
The antimicrobial resistance was assessed for 62 different antimicrobials. Twenty-two of them were not assessed by meta-analysis due to a lack of enough data (only 1 sample) and/or the Salmonella spp. displayed 100% sensitivity to the antimicrobial analyzed. To enhance reader comprehension, a full list of the antibiotics evaluated, classified by families, is presented in Table 6. Also, antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. by antimicrobial substance of each manuscript included in the meta-analysis is presented in Supplementary Materials (Supplementary Materials S7 and S8).
The average antimicrobial resistance (AMR) by antimicrobial families was as follows: glycopeptides (96.77%), tetracyclines (34.89%), sulfonamides (22.55%), cephalosporins (18.97%), aminoglycosides (15.48%), penicillins (18.26% without cloxacillin), nitrofurans (13.74%), chloramphenicol (8.02%), quinolones (5.47% without orbifloxacin), macrolides (1.60%), lincosamides (1.72% without lincomycin), carbapenems (1.01%), oxazolidinones (0.00%), and phosphonic antimicrobials (0.00%). According to the AMR displayed by Salmonella spp., 27 antimicrobials (43.54%) were classified as low, 16 of then (20.80%) as high and 19 of then (30.64%) as very high (Table 7).
By individual antimicrobial, the classification of Salmonella spp. AMR is presented in Table 8. Salmonella spp. did not display AMR against aztreonam, mezlocillin, ertapenem, meropenem, cefoxitin, ceftazidime, levofloxacin, tilmicosin, linezolid, fosfomycin, furazolidone, quinupristin, trimethoprim and spectinomycin. In contrast, a prevalence of AMR of 100% has been described against ofloxacin, lincomycin, and cloxacillin. The antimicrobial netilmicin was not considered for classification since its prevalence in two studies was 0% and 100%.
According to the AMR of Salmonella spp., 27, 16, and 19 antimicrobials were classified as low, high, and very high, respectively. By antimicrobial families, Salmonella spp. presented very high AMR against antimicrobials belonging to cephalosporins, sulfonamides, and penicillins. However, absence of resistance of Salmonella spp. was observed against antimicrobials belonging to carbapenems and most antimicrobial macrolides, beta-lactams, and those included in the group “others”.
Regarding the methodology to determine the antimicrobial resistance, studies included in the meta-analysis used two techniques: disk diffusion assay and broth microdilution. The influence of the methodology of antimicrobial testing is presented in Table 9 and was not statistically significant for most antimicrobial substances studied. From 62 antimicrobials analyzed, ciprofloxacin (p < 0.01), gentamicin (p < 0.01), kanamycin (p < 0.05), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (p < 0.05) and streptomycin (p < 0.05), Salmonella spp. displayed higher resistance prevalence when antimicrobial testing is based on the disk diffusion assay.

6. Discussion
In Europe, salmonellosis is the second most reported foodborne gastrointestinal infection in humans after campylobacteriosis and is a major cause of foodborne outbreaks. Poultry and pig meat are the main sources of salmonellosis according to animal species. The reported prevalence of Salmonella spp. by EFSA was 0.003%, 0.03%, 0.08%, and 0.05% in chickens, turkeys, pigs, and cattle, respectively. Since AMR is considered a significant health issue, the European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Network (EARS-net) coordinated by the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) carries out the surveillance of bacterial pathogens commonly causing infections in humans. EARS-net integrates surveillance data on routine clinical antimicrobial susceptibility from clinical laboratories of member-states regarding Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Acinetobacter species, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, Enterococcus faecalis, and Enterococcus faecium. However, the surveillance of AMR of Salmonella spp. is carried out by EFSA and not by the ECDC. Monitoring of Salmonella spp. is compulsory for broilers, fattening chickens, and pigs, and AMR characterization is carried out on these samples.
Regarding cattle, the EFSA report only presented data from fecal samples in slaughtered calves less than 1 year old from selected member-states. The performance of the present meta-analysis on antimicrobial resistance has the advantage that the methodologies used to determine resistance/susceptibility are similar in all studies, whether through the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) or the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUCAST) protocols. However, some difficulties were encountered in evaluating the AMR of Salmonella spp. from cattle, goats, and sheep and their potential impact as a threat to public health. Among them, the scarce existing literature stands out, mainly carried out on farms, using fecal samples, and not in slaughterhouses. Furthermore, there is a high variety in the sample size as well as in the evaluated antibiotics.
Regarding small ruminants, the scarce research available could also be associated with the lower economic importance of sheep and goat production, which leads to veterinary pharmaceutics not developing and approving new antimicrobials. Although the variety of veterinary antimicrobial drugs for sheep and goat practice is narrow, the prevalence of AMR observed is still high, probably due to the extra-label use of antimicrobial drugs approved for cattle. However, antimicrobial resistance in sheep needs to be further studied, as other research suggests not only a low prevalence but also limited resistance to antibiotics such as amoxicillin–clavulanic acid, ampicillin, azithromycin, cefoxitin, ceftiofur, ceftriaxone, chloramphenicol, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, kanamycin, nalidixic acid, sulfisoxazole, or trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole.
Traditionally, antimicrobial resistance has been associated with the abusive and/or inappropriate use of antibiotics, which leads to treatment failure and, ultimately, the death of animals. However, the effectiveness of antibiotic treatments can be influenced by external factors such as the season, the type of livestock production (extensive versus intensive, with low prevalence of AMR in the former), the existence of pre-existing diseases. in animals, stress, the period of time elapsed from the onset of symptoms to the start of treatment, the immunological status of the animal or the impossibility of achieving therapeutic concentrations of the antibiotic at the site of infection. In addition, other factors associated with the management of animals, such as adequate nutrition, absence of vaccine prophylaxis programs or the presence of concomitant diseases, can also affect the effectiveness of antibiotic treatment. Moreover, the sampling location on the at farm appears to influence the AMR of Salmonella spp..
The prevalence of Salmonella spp. in cattle, sheep and goats, according to the result of the meta-analysis, it was approximately 8%, similar to other published results. Although the latest EFSA report regarding the AMR of Salmonella spp. indicates lower values of 0.81%, 2.1% and 1.2% for cattle, goats and sheep, respectively, on the contrary, other works have indicated higher prevalences of Salmonella spp. in sheep 43% (tonsils), 32.2% and 2.8%. This variation in the prevalence of Salmonella spp. in sheep may be related to S. enterica subsp. diarizonae, which is endemic in sheep in some countries. It is host-adapted to sheep and does not cause infections in humans.
In addition, prevalence values of Salmonella spp. of 9.3% and 2% (tonsils) have been published in goats. Although it is difficult to explain these differences in prevalence, factors such as hygiene at slaughter, implementation of Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) plans, cleaning of animals before slaughter, the hygiene of handlers and the sampling location may influence these results. Furthermore, factors such as type of production (meat or dairy), age or health status (i.e., healthy or sick) of the animals also appear to influence Salmonella spp. concentrations in carcasses.
Relative to the AMR of Salmonella spp. in calves, the EFSA report only shows results for 14 antibiotics. According to this report, Salmonella spp. is completely susceptible to gentamicin, cefoxitin, ceftazidime, meropenem and azithromycin. In our study, the results were the same for meropenem and similar for cefotaxime and azithromycin, with a prevalence of AMR less than 3%. We also observed a similar AMR for ampicillin, sulfamethoxazole, tetracycline, and tigecycline.
Aminoglycosides, which include the antibiotics gentamicin, amikacin, tobramycin, neomycin, kanamycin or netilmicin among others, are broad-spectrum bactericidal antibiotics whose mechanism of action consists of the interruption of protein synthesis by irreversibly binding to the 16S ribosomal RNA receptor in the 30S subunit of the bacterial ribosome. Relative to gentamicin, the results of the meta-analysis show a prevalence of AMR of Salmonella spp. eight times higher than that indicated in the EFSA report. Furthermore, other studies have indicated higher resistance values from 10% to 30% for gentamicin in cattle.
While other studies indicate that the resistance of Salmonella spp. in goat and sheep carcasses to gentamicin is almost complete, other studies indicated complete total susceptibility in tonsil samples from sheep at the slaughterhouse. Gentamicin is used in cattle to treat septicemia and infections of the gastrointestinal tract, urogenital tract, and skin caused by Gram-negative bacteria. Traditionally, gentamicin has been used for the treatment of neonatal diarrhea in calves. The difference in resistance observed between the EFSA report and our meta-analysis can be explained by the fact that gentamicin can cause nephrotoxic effects in calves since their renal function is not fully mature. Due to the pharmacokinetics of gentamicin in calves, several administrations are necessary to achieve bactericidal concentrations, which, together with the dehydration caused by diarrhea, increases the risk of renal failure. Currently, there are other safer and more effective antibiotic treatments, so the use of gentamicin in calves is rare, which may explain the absence of resistance of Salmonella spp. to this antibiotic.
The resistance of Salmonella spp. against amikacin has been associated with the presence of the aacA4 gene. The low prevalence of resistance observed in slaughterhouses is similar to studies carried out on farms, although prevalences of resistance of Salmonella spp. to amikacin of up to 16% have been reported. The low emergence of resistance can be attributed to the type of commercial presentation of amikacin, only available in the EU for the treatment of mastitis in cattle.
The resistance of Salmonella spp. to kanamycin, according to the results of the meta-analysis (approximately 25%), is similar to other investigations, where resistance has been associated with the presence of O-adenyltransferase genes, such as the aadb gene. The fact that kanamycin is only marketed as an antimastitis agent in the EU, it contributes to preventing the increase in its resistance. Although, in some EU countries, injectable kanamycin is licensed for use in horses.
The information available on the resistance of Salmonella spp. to neomycin and streptomycin is limited. Published works indicate that the prevalence of resistance to these antibiotics is high, mainly in dairy cattle.
The prevalence of resistance of Salmonella spp. to tobramycin is moderate, although its use as a veterinary medicine drug in the EU is prohibited. This resistance to tobramycin may be explained by the existence of genes encoding resistance to gentamicin, which display co-resistance to tobramycin.
Since data published by EFSA on antimicrobial resistance indicate high resistance to first-line antibiotics for the treatment of diarrhea in calves, the use of aminoglycosides may be a therapeutic option in the treatment of neonatal diarrhea when Enterobacteriaceae remain susceptible.
Resistance to the antibiotics ampicillin, sulfonamides, and tetracyclines presented very high prevalence in samples of Salmonella spp. isolated from humans in 2019–2020, while the prevalence of resistance of Salmonella spp. isolated from animals was moderate. The resistance of Salmonella spp. to these antibiotics was higher both in the EFSA report and in the results of our meta-analysis (22% and 31.8%, respectively). Other studies have also indicated high resistance of Salmonella spp. to ampicillin (17.28%) in domestic ruminants. Furthermore, in other studies resistance values of 95% and 100%, respectively, were observed in S. enterica subsp. diarizonae, isolated both on farms and in slaughterhouses, against sulfamethoxazole in sheep.
Ampicillin is a broad-spectrum penicillin antibiotic commonly used in ruminant veterinary clinics for the treatment of respiratory infections, mastitis, and gastrointestinal infections, including salmonellosis and E. coli infections (including diarrhea in calves). The observed high resistance may be associated with the presence of genes encoding extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBLs) that confer resistance to a wide range of β-lactam antibiotics, including ampicillin. Furthermore, the high resistance of Salmonella spp. to this antibiotic may be associated with its widespread use, since penicillin antibiotics represent a third of all antibiotics marketed in Europe, while their consumption in other continents, such as Africa, represents less than 1%. The AMR of Salmonella spp. to ampicillin of 40%, observed in our meta-analysis, suggests a high prevalence of ESBL. Thus, 100% resistance of Salmonella spp. to ampicillin has been described in dairy cows. However, no resistance was observed in sheep.
Amoxicillin is a broad-spectrum semisynthetic penicillin with bactericidal properties similar to those of ampicillin. Clavulanic acid has the function of preventing the inactivation of amoxicillin by irreversibly binding to beta-lactamases, protecting it from enzymatic inactivation.
The resistance of Salmonella spp. to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid is significant. Some studies indicate resistance values lower than 10%, while in others, Salmonella spp. has a resistance greater than 50%. The resistance of Salmonella spp. to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid seems similar in both farms and slaughterhouses. This difference of resistance seems to be associated with the health status of the animals. In healthy cattle, resistance of Salmonella spp. is less than 10% while in sick animals, the resistance of Salmonella spp. to amoxicillin-clavulanic acid exceeds 50%.
Although the objective of clavulanic acid is to inhibit beta-lactamases, the high resistance values observed in the meta-analysis are worrying. This resistance seems to be associated with the production of extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBL) not inhibited by clavulanic acid, such as PSE-1, OXA-1 and TEM-1 being encoded by bla resistance genes.. Furthermore, the presence of antibiotic efflux pumps in Salmonella spp. also seems to contribute to the high resistance against amoxicillin-clavulanic acid.
Information on the resistance of Salmonella spp. to the antibiotics aztreonam, mecillinam and ticarcillin is scarce, probably due to their non-use in veterinary medicine. However, a resistance of Salmonella spp. up to 50% for mezlocillin has been described in farms. With the aim of protecting public health, Commission Implementing Regulation 2022/1255 has prohibited the veterinary use of these antibiotics, being exclusive for the treatment of specific infections in human medicine. Carbapenems are broad-spectrum β-lactam antibiotics with bactericidal properties, mainly used in infections caused by Enterobacteriaceae with AmpC and ESBL activity. Although the resistance of Salmonella spp. observed in the meta-analysis is very low, there seems to be some concern about the increase in resistance to these antibiotics by Enterobacteriaceae (including Salmonella spp.). This resistance is mediated by carbapenemase genes, such as blaKPC, blaVIM, blaIMP, blaNDM and blaOXA-48, posing a major public health problem. The prohibition of the use of this type of antibiotics in veterinary medicine is due to the fact that these antibiotics are considered the last line of treatment in human medicine.
Amphenicols are broad-spectrum bacteriostatic antibiotics. They diffuse through the bacterial cell membrane, bind to the 50S subunit of the 70S ribosome, inhibit peptidyl transferase, and interfere with the successful binding of complete transfer RNA to the ribosome, consequently disrupting peptide formation and protein synthesis.
The resistance of Salmonella spp. to chloramphenicol according to the results of the meta-analysis (12.23%) was three times higher than the values indicated in the EFSA report. This resistance has been associated with the presence of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase genes such as catA. Resistance values of Salmonella spp. to chloramphenicol similar to the results of the EFSA report, between 1.6% and 9.0%, have been described in the literature. However, when Salmonella spp. is isolated from sick animals, resistance ranges between 50% and 90%.
Florfenicol is a fluorinated molecule derived from chloramphenicol used mainly for the treatment of respiratory diseases in cattle and sheep. The resistance of Salmonella spp. to florfenicol, both on farms and in slaughterhouses, is about 35%. Resistance to florfenicol has been associated with the presence of the FloR gene. Although the presence of the FloR gene does not seem to be the only factor that contributes to resistance, it has been observed that 11% of Salmonella spp. isolated from cadavers presented resistance to florfenicol in the absence of FloR genes.
Sulfonamides are a class of antibiotics widely used in veterinary medicine, including ruminants. Its mechanism of action is based on the inhibition of the bacterial enzyme responsible for producing folic acid, which is essential for the growth and survival of bacteria. Sulfonamides are generally used for the treatment of respiratory, urinary and/or gastrointestinal infections. The high resistance of Salmonella spp. to sulfonamides observed in the meta-analysis is in accordance as previously reported. However, combinations with trimethoprim have shown greater sensitivity of Salmonella spp.. The resistance of Salmonella spp. to sulfonamides is associated with the presence of the genes sul1, sul2 and sul3, which are located on plasmids. Furthermore, it appears that the resistance of Salmonella spp. to sulfonamides varies depending on the season of the year.
Tetracyclines are one of the most used drugs in veterinary medicine. They have a broad spectrum acting against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, both aerobic and anaerobic. Its mechanism of action is based on the inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis through its binding to the 30S ribosomal subunit of bacteria. Resistance to tetracyclines is high, not only in the slaughterhouse but also on the farm, although resistance of Salmonella spp., isolated from sheep, has not been published. The efficacy of tetracyclines has been decreasing in previous decades due to the widespread existence of resistance genes, probably associated with the prolonged and extensive use of these antimicrobials in humans and as growth promoters in animals. Resistance to tetracyclines has been associated with the presence of tet genes. Thus, it was observed that in 98% of the cases in which Salmonella spp. presented resistance to tetracyclines, almost all of the isolates had the tetA gene. However, other authors found that 66% of Salmonella spp. isolated from carcasses were sensitive although they carried tetG genes. Thus, the presence of this gene does not seem to be an essential factor for the development of resistance. Doxycycline is a second-generation tetracycline family antibiotic. It is mainly used for the treatment of bovine respiratory syndrome in fattening calves. The resistance of Salmonella spp. to doxycycline is low both in the slaughterhouse and in primary production. However, there are studies that show an increase in resistance of up to 35% in primary production.
Tigecycline is a broad-spectrum antibiotic used in serious infections. The prohibition of its use in veterinary medicine may explain the low resistance of Salmonella spp. to this antibiotic. The use of tigecycline aims to avoid resistance to tetracycline, although some studies have reported the existence of resistance genes to this antibiotic (e.g., tet(a), tet(K), tet(M), tet(x)) representing an emerging concern in public health. However, the studies on the resistance of Salmonella spp. to this antimicrobial must be carefully analyzed since there are no specific clinical breakpoints for Salmonella spp.
Macrolides are a family of antibiotics widely used in veterinary medicine against Gram-negative bacteria, whose antimicrobial action is based on the inhibition of protein synthesis. The resistance of Salmonella spp. to azithromycin (reference antibiotic for the treatment of salmonellosis in human medicine and not marketed for use in livestock) was moderate. Variable levels of azithromycin resistance in Salmonella spp. have been observed in both cattle and sheep, being associated with the presence of the genes mph(A), erm(42), erm(B) and possibly a greater expression of efflux pumps due to ramAp genes or defective ramR.
Relative to colistin, increased resistance by Salmonella spp. may be associated with its greater use in swine production for the treatment of intestinal problems as in medicated feed. In cattle and small ruminants, colistin is also authorized in the EU for the treatment of diarrhea caused by E. coli or Salmonella spp., although for these species parenteral treatment with quinolones or sulfonamides is much more common, which may explain the low resistance. Furthermore, colistin resistance genes are mainly found on plasmids, so their horizontal transmission to other bacteria is currently a public health concern.
Erythromycin and tilmicosin are antibiotics authorized in the EU for use in cattle and small ruminants for the treatment of respiratory diseases caused by Mannheimia haemolytica and Pasteurella multocida, as well as for the treatment of interdigital dermatitis caused by D. nodosus. Although it is difficult to explain the low resistance observed in the meta-analysis, it can be attributed to the low number of references included in the meta-analysis. In addition, a decrease in its use is in favor of other antibiotics such as ceftiofur (with a broader spectrum of action although with higher levels of resistance) for the treatment of claw and respiratory problems with a shorter withdrawal period. However, some studies have detected a high resistance of Salmonella spp. to erythromycin and tilmicosin both in cattle farms and in slaughtered sheep. Since resistance against these seem to be high according to the literature, the results should be carefully interpreted and monitoring measures should be implemented to verify their potential impact on public health.
Lincosamides act against Gram-positive bacteria by inhibiting protein synthesis.
Clindamycin is mainly used in veterinary medicine for companion animals, which may explain the low resistance observed in the meta-analysis. However, resistance values greater than 30% have been described in Salmonella spp..
In the case of lincomycin, the only publication found indicated resistance of Salmonella spp. of 100%. However, this result should be interpreted cautiously since lincomycin is generally used in swine production in the form of medicated feed. Its resistance has been associated with the presence of the Cfr gene that encodes unusual multidrug resistance, including resistance to lincomycin. This gene has been found in several species, such as staphylococci, enterococci and E. coli from animals intended for human consumption. Since this gene is located on the plasmid, its transfer to other bacteria, including Salmonella spp., may pose a public health risk.
Enterobacteriaceae (i.e., Salmonella spp.) are intrinsically resistant to macrolide and lincosamide antimicrobials (with the exception of azithromycin). Additionally, in vitro susceptibility testing for macrolide and lincosamide antimicrobials is problematic since there are no clinical breakpoints for Salmonella concerning lincosamides or erythromycin. Thus, reports on the low prevalence of macrolide and lincosamide resistance must be carefully interpreted.
Cephalosporins are bactericidal antibiotics against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria which interfere with peptidoglycan synthesis as well as inactivate endogenous autolysin inhibitors. Autolysin is responsible for breaking down bacterial cell walls, causing bacterial death by lysis. Cephalosporins are antibiotics widely used in veterinary medicine for the treatment of bovine respiratory syndrome, metritis and pododermatitis. However, sales of cephalosporins for use in livestock represent less than 4%. Currently, the use of 1st and 2nd generation cephalosporins should be used with caution, while 3rd and 4th generation cephalosporins should be used only if no alternative antibiotic therapy exists in categories C and/or D. Relative to 1st generation cephalosporins (cephalothin and cefazolin), the resistance of Salmonella spp. is variable. Some studies indicate a high sensitivity of Salmonella spp. to cephalothin both in cattle and in small ruminants. However, more recent studies have reported high resistance of Salmonella spp. isolated in slaughterhouses. Regarding cefazolin, the low resistance (e.g., less than 10%) of Salmonella spp. observed in slaughterhouses are in accordance with what has been published elsewhere.
In general, the resistance of Salmonella spp. to 2nd generation cephalosporins is low. In the case of cefoxitin, Salmonella spp. presents variable resistance values, from 12% or 40% to 100% in dairy farms. Furthermore, the resistance of Salmonella spp. to cefoxitin in calves with diarrhea is 8%. For cefaclor, no other bibliographic references have been found; however, given that the genes for resistance to cephalosporins are located in the plasmids, and considering the high resistance found in other enterobacteria, the high resistance observed may be due to the acquisition of resistance genes.
The resistance of Salmonella spp. to 3rd generation cephalosporins is also low. Resistance to ceftriaxone varies between 10% and 30%, although more recent studies indicate lower resistance values around 4%.
Regarding ceftazidime, the absence of resistance observed in the meta-analysis is in accordance as reported in the literature, although resistance values of 25% have been reported. In the case of cefixime, higher resistance values of Salmonella spp. on livestock farms have been published.
With respect to ceftiofur, a 3rd generation cephalosporin authorized only for veterinary use, the resistance of Salmonella spp. observed in slaughterhouses is low, and probably associated with a low prevalence of the blacmy-2 gene. The resistance of Salmonella spp. to ceftiofur has progressively decreased in recent years to values of around 20% in dairy farms. Although, in cattle farms with cases of salmonellosis, the resistance of Salmonella spp. to ceftiofur reaches 50%. Although some studies have indicated that ceftiofur use contributes to the increase in antimicrobial resistance through horizontal transfer of blaCMY-2 genes, other authors suggest that this increase is also influenced by environmental factors. Furthermore, treatments with ceftiofur appear to decrease the prevalence of Salmonella spp. in cattle; however, they exert selective pressure for more resistant strains with greater persistence over time.
Resistance to cephalosporins is mediated by class A enzymes called ESBLs, which include three families encoded by TEM, SHV and CTX-M type genes in Enterobacteriaceae. These enzymes confer resistance to 1st, 2nd and 3rd generation cephalosporins. In addition, some Gram-negative bacteria have genes encoding class C enzymes (cAmpC and pAmpC) located on plasmids, which can be easily transmitted horizontally between Enterobacteriaceae, including Salmonella spp. This class of enzymes is encoded by genes such as CMY, FOX, LAT, MIR, ACT, DHA, ACC, and MOX, which, unlike class A enzymes, confer resistance to cephalosporins, with the exception of 4th generation cephalosporins. Thus, increased resistance to cephalosporins, especially 3rd generation cephalosporins, poses a risk to public health.
Fosfomycin is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that, due to increasing antibiotic resistance, has been suggested for use in veterinary medicine mainly for infections resistant to 3rd generation cephalosporins. However, its current use in veterinary medicine is completely prohibited. Studies on the resistance of Salmonella spp. to fosfomycin are scarce. The absence of resistance observed in the meta-analysis is in accordance with the results obtained in dairy cattle farms. Furthermore, it has been described that 27% of Salmonella spp. isolated from carcasses and organs carried the fosA7.7 resistance gene to fosfomycin, which represents a risk to public health since this antibiotic is considered critically important for the treatment of human infections.
Nitrofuran antibiotics act by blocking protein synthesis, breaking DNA chains and inhibiting the activity of acetyl-coenzyme A. The results of the meta-analysis show that the resistance of Salmonella spp. to these antibiotics is greater than 20%. The result obtained is much higher than the resistance rate of less than 5% to furazolidone and nitrofurantoin in Salmonella spp. isolated in farms. The higher rate of resistance observed in slaughterhouses is difficult to explain since both antibiotics are not marketed for veterinary use. Some authors have indicated that the presence of the plasmid-mediated OqxAB gene in E. coli contributes to resistance to nitrofurantoin. Because this gene is located on plasmids, the acquisition of resistance by Salmonella spp. horizontally could explain the greater resistance observed in the slaughterhouse.
Spectinomycin, a bacteriostatic antibiotic active against certain Gram-negative aerobic bacteria, Gram-positive cocci and Mycoplasma spp., is used in ruminant medicine for both the treatment of respiratory and digestive problems. Although the results of the meta-analysis indicate 100% susceptibility to Salmonella spp., other authors reported high resistance rates in both adult cattle and calves.
Trimethoprim shows antimicrobial activity against several species of Gram-negative bacteria by inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase, interfering in the synthesis of bacterial nucleic acids and proteins. The resistance of Salmonella spp. in the slaughterhouse observed in the meta-analysis seems to be low although these results should be interpreted with caution since resistance rates between 20% and 50% have been reported in cattle and small ruminants, respectively. Furthermore, the available studies on the resistance of Salmonella spp. to trimethoprim is scarce since it is marketed in combination with a sulfonamide.
Quinolones are broad-spectrum bactericidal antibiotics that act by inhibiting the synthesis of the DNA by altering the enzyme DNA gyrase. In livestock medicine, the most common quinolones are enrofloxacin and marbofloxacin that are used for the treatment of neonatal diarrhea in calves, mastitis and respiratory problems. Although sales of quinolones represent only 3% of all antibiotics, an increase in resistance associated with mutations of the gyrA, gyrB, parC and parE genes has been verified. As a result, its use is considered restricted to specific cases.
Relative to ciprofloxacin, the resistance of Salmonella spp. ranges between 0.5% and 2%, slightly lower than results observed in the meta-analysis. Furthermore, no resistance has been reported in sheep. The resistance of Salmonella spp. to nalidixic acid is higher than ciprofloxacin in dairy farm samples, varying from complete susceptibility to 40% of resistance. This increase in resistance may be due to the fact that mutations in topoisomerases that confer resistance to nalidixic acid are more common than mutations that confer resistance to ciprofloxacin. The resistance of Salmonella spp. to ofloxacin found in the slaughterhouse is 100%, although other authors have reported similar resistance values to ciprofloxacin, ranging from 0% to 11%. Therefore, the results of the meta-analysis should be considered with caution due to the scarce literature on antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. to ofloxacin. Although ofloxacin is marketed for veterinary medicine, it is not approved for use in ruminants. Studies on the resistance of Salmonella spp. against enrofloxacin and norfloxacin are very rare, showing resistance values similar to those observed in the meta-analysis for both cattle and sheep.
From the perspective of One Health, and according to the data obtained in the systematic review, it was observed that studies about the resistance of Salmonella spp. to different antibiotics are much more extensive in samples of Salmonella spp. isolated from animals than from human samples. In our meta-analysis, information about the resistance of Salmonella spp. was obtained for a total of 58 antibiotics. In contrast, the systematic review displayed information about the resistance of Salmonella spp. from human samples for a total of 26 antibiotics.
Additionally, when comparing the antibiotics indicated in the systematic review for the treatment of salmonellosis in humans and animals, only three antibiotics (ampicillin, chloramphenicol, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole) are recommended for salmonellosis treatment. In the case of ampicillin and chloramphenicol, both antibiotics show high resistance values in isolates of Salmonella spp. from both ruminants and humans, while in the case of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, resistance is twice as high in human isolates.
If we engage in a more detailed discussion of the antibiotics in Table 10, most antibiotics licensed for use in veterinary medicine by the European Medicine Agency (not only for salmonellosis treatment) show similar AMR values for both Salmonella spp. isolated from animals and humans (gentamicin, neomycin, streptomycin, ceftiofur, ampicillin). Only kanamycin and colistin exhibit values three and two times higher, respectively, in Salmonella spp. isolated from animals than in human isolates.
Regarding the specific antimicrobials used to treat salmonellosis in humans, the AMR of azithromycin against Salmonella spp. (not licensed for veterinary use) is 4.5 times higher in human isolates. Concerning quinolones, most antimicrobial substances analyzed in the meta-analysis exhibited higher AMR values against Salmonella spp. isolated from ruminants than those isolated from humans. However, none of them (with the exception of enrofloxacin, exclusively used in veterinary medicine) are used, licensed, or commercialized for ruminant medicine or other food-producing animals. Also, the resistance pattern of Salmonella spp. against quinolones are in accordance with.
With regards to cephalosporins, most antimicrobials displayed higher AMR values against Salmonella spp. isolated from human samples, similarly as seen in the case of quinolones. In addition, for those antimicrobials that presented higher AMR values against Salmonella spp. from ruminant isolates, the antimicrobial substances are not approved for veterinary use. Furthermore, ceftiofur (an exclusively veterinary use-only 3rd gen. cephalosporin) showed slightly higher AMR resistance against Salmonella spp. in human-isolated samples than in animal-isolated samples.
Although several publications suggest that the increase in AMR is related to the misuse and/or abusive use of antimicrobials in animal production, the results of the meta-analysis, as well as data obtained from the systematic review, suggest that the AMR transmission dynamics from ruminants to humans are not entirely clear. This is because resistance of Salmonella spp., for both animal and human isolates, to most antimicrobial substances studied, displayed similar values or even higher resistance in isolates from human samples for common veterinary antibiotics used in ruminant medicine, such as ceftiofur, trimethoprim-sulfa, or oxytetracycline. Additionally, the higher resistance of Salmonella spp. (both from human and/or ruminant samples) against antimicrobials described in the meta-analysis, used exclusively in human medicine, suggests that the global AMR concern could be related to the misuse and/or abusive use of antimicrobials in human medicine and not exclusively to their misuse and/or abusive use in animal production. Also, the reduction of AMR in humans and livestock must be part of a One Health approach. Due to the lack of studies about the role of large and small ruminants in the antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp., regular surveillance of antimicrobial resistance through global targeted studies and systematic meta-analyses may improve knowledge on this topic.

7. Conclusions
The prevalence of Salmonella spp. in large and small ruminants in slaughterhouses according to the meta-analysis is 8.01% (8.31% in cattle; 7.04% in goats; 6.12% in sheep). The prevalence of resistance of Salmonella spp., depending on the family of antibiotics, is as follows: 96.77%—glycopeptides, 34.89%—tetracyclines, 22.55%—sulfonamides, 18.97%—cephalosporins, 15.48%—aminoglycosides, 14.02%—penicillins, 13.74%—nitrofurans, 8.02%—chloramphenicol, 5.47%—quinolones, 1.60%—macrolides, 1.72%—lincosamides, and 1.01%—carbapenems.
According to the resistance rates of Salmonella spp., 20, 14 and 13 antibiotics were classified as low (≤5%), high (>5% ≤10%) and very high (>10%), respectively. Although the resistance of Salmonella spp. indicates some degree of concern, most antibiotics are not used in veterinary medicine. This highlights that the increasing rates of antibiotic resistance in Salmonella spp. are not only associated with the use of antibiotics in veterinary practice but also with other factors such as the immunological status of the animal, the presence or absence of concomitant diseases, farm management, environmental factors and/or the irrational use of antibiotics in veterinary practice by humans. Thus, further research about AMR of Salmonella spp. considering these aspects (i.e., immunological status, presence of specific diseases) may be necessary.
From the One Health perspective, both the results of the meta-analysis and the systematic review indicate that the resistance of Salmonella spp., whether isolated from ruminant or human samples, to different antibiotics is, in most cases, similar. The contribution of cattle, sheep and goats to the rise of antibiotic resistance of Salmonella spp. and its potential impact on public health appears to be relatively insignificant, due to their low prevalence in carcasses and organs.
However, it is important to highlight that the available research literature on antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. isolated from animals to different antibiotics is very limited, mainly in sheep and goats, and mostly come from to low- to middle-income countries with insufficient oversight on antimicrobial use.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: , Supplementary Material S1: Research papers included in the meta-analysis; Supplementary Material S2: PRISMA check list 2020; Supplementary Material S3: Data about Salmonella spp. prevalence from studies analyzed for meta-analysis; Supplementary Material S4. Forest plot a) and funnel plot b) of Salmonella spp. prevalence in slaughtered large and small ruminants; Supplementary Material S5. Forest and funnel plots of prevalence of Salmonella spp. by specie (a: cattle, b: goat, c: sheep); Supplementary Material S6. Forest and funnel plots of prevalence of Salmonella spp. by sample location. (a): carcass, (b): feces, (c): intestinal mucosa, (d): liver, (e): lymph nodes; Supplementary Material S7. Forest plots (a) and funnel plots (b) of antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. by antimicrobial; Supplementary Material S8. Prevalence of antimicrobial resistance os Salmonella spp. by antimicrobial substance.

Author Contributions
J.G.-D.: conceptualization, bibliography search and data evaluation, writing and proofreading. S.S.: bibliography search and data evaluation. D.M.: bibliography search and writing. L.G.: bibliography search, data evaluation, proofreading. B.C.-G.: bibliography search, data evaluation, review. F.S.: bibliography search, data evaluation, proofreading, C.S.: bibliography search, data evaluation, writing, review, and proofreading. J.A.: conceptualization, bibliography search and data evaluation, meta-analysis assessment, extensive review, and proofreading. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Institutional Review Board Statement
Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement
Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement
Data are contained within the article and Supplementary Materials.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
Salmonella, food safety and food handling practices
Campylobacteriosis, salmonellosis, yersiniosis, and listeriosis as zoonotic foodborne diseases: A review
Salmonella: A review on pathogenesis, epidemiology and antibiotic resistance
Antimicrobial therapy of acute diarrhoea: A clinical review
Antimicrobials for treating symptomatic non-typhoidal Salmonella infection
Mechanisms of drug resistance: Quinolone resistance
Biological effects of quinolones: A family of broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents
Ten years experience of Salmonella infections in Cambridge, UK
The evolution of antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella Typhi
Treatment responses to azithromycin and ciprofloxacin in uncomplicated Salmonella Typhi infection: A comparison of clinical and microbiological data from a controlled human infection model
Non-typhoidal Salmonella in children: Microbiology, epidemiology and treatment
Epidemiology, clinical presentation, laboratory diagnosis, antimicrobial resistance, and antimicrobial management of invasive Salmonella infections
Salmonella infection–prevention and treatment by antibiotics and probiotic yeasts: A review
Invasive non-typhoidal Salmonella infections in sub-Saharan Africa: A systematic review on antimicrobial resistance and treatment
Penicillins and b-lactamase inhibitors
Principles of infectious disease
Non-typhoidal Salmonella infections in children: Review of literature and recommendations for management
Common problens in infectious diseases & antimicrobial therapy
Infectious gastroenteritis
Tetracyclines, glycycyclines, and chloramphenicol
Quinolones
Infectious diarrea
Sulfonemide and trimethoprim; trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Rifamycins
Salmonellosis in animals
Salmonella in dairy cattle
Epidemiology of Salmonella species in diarrheic sheep and goats
Salmonella sheep abortion: Distribution, diagnosis, and control measures
Infectious Diseases of the gastrointestinal tract
Antimicrobial decision making for enteric diseases of cattle
Salmonellosis in ruminants
Salmonellosis in cattle: A review
Diseases of the gastrointestinal system
Efficacy of florfenicol and intravenous fluid therapy for treatment of experimental salmonellosis in newborn calves
Correlations between climatic conditions and foodborne disease
Antimicrobial Resistance in the EU/EEA (EARS-Net)—Annual Epidemiological Report 2021. Stockholm
The European Union one health 2022 zoonoses report
Occurrence of Salmonella in the cattle production in France
Trends in Salmonella serovars and antimicrobial resistance in pigs and poultry in Northern Ireland between 1997 and 2016
Zoonotic potential and prevalence of Salmonella serovars isolated from pets
Pet reptiles: A potential source of transmission of multidrug-resistant Salmonella
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance profile in Salmonella spp. isolates from swine food chain
Sources and trends of human salmonellosis in Europe, 2015–2019: An analysis of outbreak data
Trends of major foodborne outbreaks in the european union during the years 2015–2019
Novel outbreak-associated food vehicles, United States
Salmonella and salmonellosis: An update on public health implications and control strategies
Salmonella detection in commercially prepared livestock. feed and the raw ingredients and equipment used to manufacture the feed: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Salmonella outbreaks linked to beef, United States, 2012–2019
The European Union summary report on antimicrobial resistance in zoonotic and indicator bacteria from humans, animals and food in 2020/2021
National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System. Integrated Report Summary
Overview of evidence of antimicrobial use and antimicrobial resistance in the food chain
Antibiotic resistance genes from livestock waste: Occurrence, dissemination, and treatment
Quantifying the transmission of antimicrobial resistance at the human and livestock interface with genomics
Industry incentives and antibiotic resistance: An introduction to the antibiotic susceptibility bonus
Role of horizontal gene transfer in the dissemination of antimicrobial resistance in food animal production
Antimicrobial resistance and food animals: Influence of livestock environment on the emergence and dissemination of antimicrobial resistance
Epidemiology of antimicrobial-resistant Escherichia coli carriage in sympatric humans and livestock in a rapidly urbanizing city
Antimicrobial stewardship: Fighting antimicrobial resistance and protecting global public health
Strengthening the science of addressing antimicrobial resistance: A framework for planning, conducting and disseminating antimicrobial resistance intervention research
Antimicrobial resistance: A growing serious threat for global public health
Evaluation of antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella strains isolated from food, animal and human samples between 2017 and 2021 in southern Italy
Antimicrobial-resistant nontyphoidal Salmonella is associated with excess bloodstream infections and hospitalizations
Serotype distribution and antimicrobial resistance of human Salmonella enterica in Bangui, Central African Republic, from 2004 to 2013
Antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella enterica group C strains isolated from humans in Turkey, 2000–2002
Antimicrobial drug resistance patterns among cattle-and human-associated Salmonella strains
Antimicrobial resistance among nontyphoidal Salmonella isolated from blood in the United States, 2003–2013
Antimicrobial resistance and genetic diversity of Salmonella infantis isolated from foods and human samples in Morocco
Antimicrobial resistance profile and presence of class I integrongs among Salmonella enterica serovars isolated from human clinical specimens in Tehran, Iran
Serovars and antimicrobial resistance of non-typhoidal Salmonella from human patients in Shanghai, China, 2006–2010
Antimicrobial resistance and molecular analysis of non-typhoidal Salmonella isolates from human in Tunisia
Multidrug-resistant Salmonella enterica serovar muenchen from pigs and humans and potential interserovar transfer of antimicrobial resistance
Antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella in the United States from 1948 to 1995
Prevalence, serotype distribution and antimicrobial resistance of non-typhoidal Salmonella in hospitalized patients in Conghua District of Guangzhou, China
Antimicrobial resistance patterns and genotypes of Salmonella enterica serovar Hadar strains associated with human infections in Switzerland, 2005–2010
Epidemiology of antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella isolated from pork, chicken meat and humans in Thailand
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella isolated from lactating cows and in contact humans in dairy farms of Addis Ababa: A cross sectional study
Antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium from human and animal sources in Italy
Human isolates of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium from Taiwan displayed significantly higher levels of antimicrobial resistance than those from Denmark
Characterization of antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella enterica isolated from pork, chicken meat, and humans in Northeastern Thailand
Antimicrobial resistance in non-typhoidal Salmonella from human sources, Spain, 2001–2003
Prevalence, antimicrobial resistance and virulence genes of Salmonella serovars isolated from humans and animals
Antimicrobial-resistant genes associated with Salmonella spp. isolated from human, poultry, and seafood sources
Evaluation of virulence and antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Enteritidis isolates from humans and chicken-and egg-associated sources
Antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella enteritidis strains isolated from broiler carcasses, food, human and poultry-related samples
Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 statement
Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis. Protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015: Elaboration and explanation
Assessing heterogeneity in meta-analysis: Q statistic or I² index?
A basic introduction to fixed-effect and random-effects models for meta-analysis
Conducting meta-analyses in R with the metafor package
CIR-Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2022/1255 of 19 July 2022 Designating Antimicrobials or Groups of Antimicrobials Reserved for Treatment of Certain Infections in Humans, in Accordance with Regulation (EU) 2019/6 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Text with EEA Relevance)
Salmonellosis
En route towards European clinical breakpoints for veterinary antimicrobial susceptibility testing: A position paper explaining the VetCAST approach
Current trends of antimicrobials used in food animals and aquaculture
High prevalence of Salmonella enterica subsp. diarizonae in tonsils of sheep at slaughter
Salmonella prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility from the national animal health monitoring system sheep 2011 study
Occurrence and characterisation of Salmonella enterica subspecies diarizonae serovar 61: K: 1, 5,(7) in sheep in the federal state of Thuringia, Germany
Antimicrobial resistance trends among Salmonella isolates obtained from dairy cattle in the northeastern United States, 2004–2011
Antimicrobial resistance dissemination associated with intensive animal production practices in Argentina: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Association between herd management practices and antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella spp. from cull dairy cattle in Central California
Antimicrobial resistant Salmonella in dairy cattle in the United States
Association between antimicrobial drug class for treatment and retreatment of bovine respiratory disease (BRD) and frequency of resistant BRD pathogen isolation from veterinary diagnostic laboratory samples
Salmonella prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility among dairy farm environmental samples collected in Texas
Quantification and prevalence of Salmonella in beef cattle presenting at slaughter
Prevalence and serotypes of Salmonella associated with goats at two Australian abattoirs
Prevalence and distribution of Salmonella in apparently healthy slaughtered sheep and goats in Debre Zeit, Ethiopia
Salmonella enterica subsp. diarizonae serotype 61: K: 1: 5:(7) a Host Adapted to Sheep
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella enterica subsp. diarizonae serovar 61: K: 1, 5,(7) in Swiss sheep flocks
Antimicrobial resistance in nontyphoidal Salmonella
Aminoglycosides: An overview
Prevalence of resistant Salmonella spp. isolated from raw meat and liver of cattle in the Wa Municipality of Ghana
Prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility of Salmonella isolates from apparently healthy slaughtered goats at Dire Dawa municipal abattoir, Eastern Ethiopia
Carriage and antimicrobial resistance of non-typhoidal Salmonella in cattle slaughtered in Ambo municipality abattoir, West Shewa zone, Oromia, Ethiopia-a point prevalence survey
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella isolated from bovine and ovine samples in slaughterhouses of Algiers, Algeria
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonella enterica and Escherichia coli O157:H7 in imported beef cattle in Jordan
Prevalence, virulence and antibiotic susceptibility of Salmonella spp. strains, isolated from beef in Greater Tunis (Tunisia)
Prevalence and drug susceptibility pattern of Salmonella isolates from apparently healthy slaughter cattle and personnel working at the Jimma municipal abattoir, south-West Ethiopia
An abattoir-based study on the prevalence of Salmonella fecal carriage and ESBL related antimicrobial resistance from culled adult dairy cows in Wuhan, China
Prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility of Salmonella species isolate from slaughtered cows in Iraq
Different multidrug-resistant Salmonella spp. serovars isolated from slaughter calves in Southern Brazil
Characterization of antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella enterica serotype heidelberg isolated from food animals
Occurrence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. and Escherichia coli isolates in apparently healthy slaughtered cattle, sheep and goats in East Azarbaijan province
Comparative field efficacy study between cefquinome and gentamicin in neonatal calves with clinical signs of septicaemia
Nontyphoid Salmonella prevalence, serovar distribution and antimicrobial resistance in slaughter sheep
Salmonella in dairy operations in the United States: Prevalence and antimicrobial drug susceptibility
Prevalence of antimicrobial resistance among Salmonella on midwest and northeast USA dairy farms
Antimicrobial resistance and serotype prevalence of Salmonella isolated from dairy cattle in the southwestern United States
The use of aminoglycosides in animals within the EU: Development of resistance in animals and possible impact on human and animal health: A review
Antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella enterica serovar Dublin isolates from beef and dairy sources
Antimicrobial resistance and genomic characterization of Salmonella Dublin isolates in cattle from the United States
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance profile of Escherichia coli and Salmonella isolated from diarrheic calves
Advice on the Designation of Antimicrobials or Groups of Antimicrobials Reserved for Treatment of Certain Infections in Humans—In Relation to Implementing Measures under Article 37 (5) of Regulation (EU) 2019/6 on Veterinary Medicinal Products
A meta-analysis of the proportion of animal Salmonella isolates resistant to drugs used against human salmonellosis in Ethiopia
Characterization of Mannheimia haemolytica isolated from feedlot cattle that were healthy or treated for bovine respiratory disease
Antimicrobial resistance and extended-spectrum β-lactamases of Salmonella enterica serotypes isolated from livestock and processed food in Portugal: An update
Consumption trends of antibiotic for veterinary use in Tanzania: A longitudinal retrospective survey from 2010–2017
Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Enterobacteriaceae in cattle production—A threat around the world
Oral amoxicillin and amoxicillin–clavulanic acid: Properties, indications and usage
Salmonella in peripheral lymph nodes of healthy cattle at slaughter
Isolation, identification, and antibiotic susceptibility testing of Salmonella from slaughtered bovines and ovines in Addis Ababa Abattoir Enterprise, Ethiopia: A cross-sectional study
Prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility profile of Salmonella serovars isolated from slaughtered cattle in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Isolation and antibiogram of Salmonella species from slaughtered cattle and the processing environment in Abuja abattoirs, Nigeria
Fecal shedding of Salmonella spp. by dairy cows on farm and at cull cow markets
Subject: National Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring System (NARMS) for Enteric Bacteria Website
Genetic characterization of the mechanisms of resistance to amoxicillin/clavulanate and third-generation cephalosporins in Salmonella enterica from three Spanish hospitals
Prevalence, evolution, and dissemination of antibiotic resistance in Salmonella
Mechanisms of action of carbapenem resistance
Extended spectrum beta-lactamase-resistant determinants among carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae from beef cattle in the north West Province, South Africa: A critical assessment of their possible public health implications
Molecular epidemiology of OXA-48 and NDM-1 producing enterobacterales species at a university hospital in Tehran, Iran, between 2015 and 2016
Genomic surveillance of antimicrobial resistance shows cattle and poultry are a moderate source of multi-drug resistant non-typhoidal Salmonella in Mexico
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella and Escherichia coli from Australian cattle populations at slaughter
Serotypes and antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella enterica recovered from clinical samples from cattle and swine in Minnesota, 2006 to 2015
Association of IS Vsa3 with multidrug resistance in Salmonella enterica isolates from cattle (Bos taurus)
Phenotypic–genotypic resistance in Salmonella spp. isolated from cattle carcasses from the north central zone of the State of Mexico
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance pattern of Salmonella isolates from apparently healthy slaughtered cattle in Ethiopia
Presence of Salmonella in the red meat abattoir lairage after routine cleansing and disinfection and on carcasses
Presence of tetracycline and sulfonamide resistance genes in Salmonella spp.: Literature review
Development and evaluation of a Luminex xTAG assay for sulfonamide resistance genes in Escherichia coli and Salmonella isolates
Antimicrobial drug use and antimicrobial resistance in enteric bacteria among cattle from Alberta feedlots
Antibiotic resistance in Salmonella enterica isolated from dairy calves in Uruguay
Fecal prevalence, serotype distribution and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonellae in dairy cattle in central Ethiopia
Effect of veterinary feed directive rule changes on tetracycline-resistant and erythromycin-resistant bacteria (Salmonella, Escherichia, and Campylobacter) in retail meats in the United States
Tetraciclinas, sulfamidas y metronidazol
Isolation, phage typing & antibiogram of Salmonella from man and animals in northeastern India
Antimicrobial resistance surveillance of tigecycline-resistant strains isolated from herbivores in northwest China
Potential of tetracycline resistance proteins to evolve tigecycline resistance
Antimicrobial resistance and mechanisms of azithromycin resistance in nontyphoidal Salmonella isolates in Taiwan, 2017 to 2018
Colistin in pig production: Chemistry, mechanism of antibacterial action, microbial resistance emergence, and one health perspectives
Evidence of sheep and abattoir environment as important reservoirs of multidrug resistant Salmonella and extended-spectrum beta-lactamase Escherichia coli
Assessment of beef carcass contamination with Salmonella and E. coli O:157 in slaughterhouses in Bishoftu, Ethiopia
A longitudinal study of Salmonella shedding and antimicrobial resistance patterns in North Dakota feedlot cattle
Antibiotic-resistant Escherichia coli and Salmonella spp. associated with dairy cattle and farm environment having public health significance
Detection and identification of antimicrobial-resistant Salmonella in raw beef at Wolaita Sodo municipal abattoir, Southern Ethiopia
Macrolides and lincosamides in cattle and pigs: Use and development of antimicrobial resistance
Assessing the antimicrobial susceptibility of bacteria obtained from animals
Antimicrobial resistance among staphylococci of animal origin
Beta-lactam antibiotics: Cephalosporins
Sales of Veterinary Antimicrobial Agents in 31 European Countries in 2021
Categorisation of Antibiotics in the European Union Answer to the Request from the European Commission for Updating the Scientific Advice on the Impact on Public Health and Animal Health of the Use of Antibiotics in Animals
Salmonella serovars and antimicrobial resistance profiles in beef cattle, slaughterhouse personnel and slaughterhouse environment in Ethiopia
Occurrence and antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella serovars in apparently healthy slaughtered sheep and goats of central Ethiopia
Trends in the serovar and antimicrobial resistance in clinical isolates of Salmonella enterica from cattle and pigs between 2002 and 2016 in Japan
Isolation, molecular identification, and antibiotic resistance profile of Salmonella typhimurium isolated from calves fecal samples of dairy farms in Hamedan
Molecular epidemiology and antimicrobial resistance profiles of Salmonella isolates from dairy heifer calves and adult lactating cows in a Mediterranean pasture-based system of Australia
Multidrug-resistant Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli and hybrid pathogenic strains of bovine origin
High prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility pattern of Salmonella species and extended-spectrum β-lactamase producing Escherichia coli from raw cattle meat at butcher houses in Hawassa city, Sidama regional state, Ethiopia
Drug resistance and susceptibility testing of Gram negative bacterial isolates from healthy cattle with different β–Lactam resistance phenotypes from Shandong province China
Quantitative dynamics of Salmonella and E. coli in feces of feedlot cattle treated with ceftiofur and chlortetracycline
Analysis of fecal microbial flora for antibiotic resistance in ceftiofur-treated calves
Antimicrobial-resistant fecal bacteria from ceftiofur-treated and nonantimicrobial-treated comingled beef cows at a cow–calf operation
Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network (CPHLN). Characterization of Canadian cefoxitin-resistant non-typhoidal Salmonella isolates, 2005–2006
Extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant Gram-negative organisms in livestock: An emerging problem for human health?
The risk of some veterinary antimicrobial agents on public health associated with antimicrobial resistance and their molecular basis
Fosfomycin: Uses and potentialities in veterinary medicine
Serotypes and antimicrobial susceptibility of Salmonella spp. isolated from farm animals in China
Serotypes and antimicrobial resistance profiles of Salmonella isolated from fresh beef processing and chilled fresh rbeef samples produced and marketed in the metropolitan region of Cuiab, in the State of Mato Grosso, Brazil
Antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella enterica subsp. enterica serovar Typhimurium from humans and production animals
Antimicrobial susceptibilities of Salmonella strains isolated from humans, cattle, pigs, and chickens in the Netherlands from 1984 to 2001
Plasmid-mediated OqxAB is an important mechanism for nitrofurantoin resistance in Escherichia coli
Antimicrobial resistance patterns of bovine Salmonella enterica isolates submitted to the Wisconsin Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory: 2006–2015
Genetic basis of multidrug resistance in Salmonella enterica serovars Enteritidis and Typhimurium isolated from diarrheic calves in Egypt
Prevalence of Salmonella and E. coli in neonatal diarrheic calves
Antimicrobial susceptibility of Salmonella isolated from cattle, swine and poultry (2001–2002): Report from the Japanese Veterinary Antimicrobial Resistance Monitoring Program
Occurrence and antimicrobial susceptibility of Salmonella in fecal and carcass swab samples of small ruminants at Addis Ababa livestock market
A review of enrofloxacin for veterinary use
Quinolones: Mechanism, lethality and their contributions to antibiotic resistance
Salmonella enterica serovar Dublin from cattle in California from 1993–2019: Antimicrobial resistance trends of clinical relevance
Salmonella prevalence and antimicrobial drug resistance in dual-purpose cattle operations in the eastern region of Zulia State, Venezuela
Isolation and characterization of antibiotic susceptibility profile of Salmonella species isolated from abattoir environment
Presence, distribution, serotypes and antimicrobial resistance profiles of Salmonella among pigs, chickens and goats in South Africa
Antimicrobial susceptibility profile of pathogenic and commensal bacteria recovered from cattle and goat farms
Prevalence of mutations within the quinolone resistance-determining region of gyrA, gyrB, parC, and parE and association with antibiotic resistance in quinolone-resistant Salmonella enterica
Simplex PCR assay for detection of blaTEM and gyrA genes, antimicrobial susceptibility pattern and plasmid profile of Salmonella spp. isolated from stool and raw meat samples in Niger state, Nigeria
Prevalence of bovine subclinical mastitis, its etiology and diagnosis of antibiotic resistance of dairy farms in four municipalities of a tropical region of Mexico
Molecular characterisation of antibiotic-resistant Salmonella enterica isolates recovered from meat in South Africa
The attribution of human infections with antimicrobial resistant Salmonella bacteria in Denmark to sources of animal origin
Modelling the effects of antibiotic usage in livestock on human salmonellosis
Prevalence of antibiotic resistance in Salmonella serotypes concurrently isolated from the environment, animals, and humans in South Africa: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance profile of Salmonella isolated from human, animal and environment samples in South Asia: A 10-year meta-analysis
PRISMA flowchart for the selection process of eligible studies.
Prevalence of Salmonella spp. in slaughtered cattle and small ruminant.
K	Prev. (%)	Tau2	I2 (%)	Q	C.I. (95%)	 	Overall	49	8.01	1.962	98.69	2651.969	5.29–11.52	 	Cattle	39	8.31	1.85	98.68	2144.36	5.54–12.29	 	Goats	5	7.04	2.39	96.19	42.318	1.83–23.61	 	Sheep	5	8.31	4.19	97.64	185.142	1.14–41.31
Prev.: prevalence, C.I.: confidence interval.
Prevalence of Salmonella spp. in slaughtered large and small ruminants by sampling location.
Stud. a	Stud b	Prev. c	Tau2	I2 (%)	Q	C.I. (95%)	 	Carcass	35	33	4.60	2.43	98.38	2267.348	2.71–7.66	 	Feces	23	22	3.73	3.77	99.24	1772.599	1.63–8.06	 	Int. mucosa	4	3	8.37	0.46	96.83	58.266	4.00–16.63	 	Kidney	3	0	-	-	-	-	-	 	Liver	8	4	1.65	3.20	91.97	53.892	0.26–9.55	 	Lungs	2	0	-	-	-	-	-	 	LN	14	-	3.95	4.57	98.72	466.521	1.24–11.83	 	Rumen	3	0	-	-	-	-	-	 	Spleen	5	0	-	-	-	-	-
a Total (%) studies reviewed. b Total studies considered for meta-analysis. c Prevalence of Salmonella spp. in slaughtered large and small ruminants from studies included in the meta-analysis.
Classification of antimicrobials studied by families.
Aminoglycosides	Amphenicols	Carbapenems	Cephalosporins	Quinolones	 		Amikacin 		Florfenicol		Ertapenem		Cefaclor		Ciprofloxacin	 		Gentamicin 		Chloramphenicol		Imipenem 		Cephalothin		Enrofloxacin	 		Kanamycin 				Meropenem		Cefazolin 		Levofloxacin	 		Neomycin 						Cefixime		Nalidixic acid	 		Netilmicin 						Cefotaxime		Norfloxacin	 		Tobramycin 						Cefoxitin		Ofloxacin 	 		Streptomycin 						Ceftiofur			 								Ceftriaxone			 								Ceftazidime 			 								Cefuroxime 			 	Lincosamides	Macrolides	Oxazolidinona	Penicillins	Phosphonic antm.	 		Clindamycin		Azithromycin		Linezolid		Amoxicillin		Fosfomycin	 		Lincomycin 		Erythromycin				Amox-clav			 				Tilmicosin				Ampicillin			 								Aztreonam			 						Cloxacillin			 								Mecillinam			 								Mezlocillin			 								Ticarcillin			 								Piperacillin			 	Sulfonamides	Tetracyclines	Nitrofurans	Others		 		Trim-sulpha		Doxycycline 		Furazolidone		Colistin			 		Sulfisoxazole		Tetracycline		Nitrofurantoin		Polymyxin			 		Sulphamtx						Quinupristin			 		Sulfonamide						Trimethoprim			 								Tigecycline			 								Spectinomycin
Amox-clav: amoxicillin-clavulanic acid; sulphamtx: sulphametoxazole; antm.: antimicrobial.
Classification * of antimicrobials (%) according to the resistance of Salmonella spp. analyzed by meta-analysis as low (≤5), high (>5–10≥) and very (high > 10).
Low	High	Very High	 	Amphenicols	Amynoglycosides	Aminoglycosides	 		Florfenicol		Amikacin		Kanamycin	 	Carbapenems		Gentamicin		Streptomycin	 		Ertapenem		Neomycin	Cephalosporins	 		Imipenem		Tobramycin		Cefixime	 		Meropenem	Cephalosporins		Cephalothin	 	Cephalosporins		Cefoxitin	Amphenicols	 		Cefazolin		Ceftriaxone		Chloramphenicol	 		Cefotaxime		Ceftiofur	Quinolones	 		Ceftazidime	Quinolones		Ofloxacin	 	Lincosamides A		Ciprofloxacin	Penicillin	 		-		Enrofloxacin		Amox-Clav	 	Macrolides A		Nalidixic acid		Amoxicillin	 		Azithromycin		Norfloxacin		Ampicillin	 	Oxazolidinone	Penicillins	Sulfonamides	 		Linezolid		Piperacillin		Trim-sulpha	 	Penicillins	Other		Sulfisoxazole	 		Mellicinam		Colistin	Tetracyclines	 		Mezlocillin		Polymyxin		Tetracycline	 		Ticarcillin		Nitrofuran	 	Tetracyclines			Nitrofurantoin	 		Doxycycline			 	Nitrofurans			 		Furazolidone			 	Others			 		Trimethoprim			 		Tigecycline			 		Spectinomycin
Amox-Clav: amoxicillin and clavulanic acid; Trim-sulpha: trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. * The following antimicrobials: aztreonam, cefaclor, cefuroxime, cloxacillin, fosfomycin, levofloxa-cin, lincomycin, quinupristin, sulfamethoxazole and sulfonamide, with only one reference in the metanalysis, were not included in the classification. A Lincosamides (e.g., clindamycin) and macrolides (e.g., erythromycin, tilmicosin) antimicrobials, with the exception of azithromycin, are not presented since they are considered intrinsically resistant to Salmonella spp.
Prevalence (%) of antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. from domestic ruminants at slaughterhouse.
Parte Superior do Formulário	 	Antimicrobial Family	N	Prev. (%)	Tau2	I2 (%)	Q	C.I. (95%)	p	 	Aminoglycosides								 		Amikacin 	13	5.06	1.1986	56.69	28.997	2.19–11.36	p  < 0.01	 		Gentamicin 	41	8.62	2.1485	84.03	138.962	5.17–14.12	p  < 0.001	 		Kanamycin 	22	23.86	2.8203	93.92	195.623	12.47–40.68	p  < 0.001	 		Neomycin 	7	7.24	4.1856	81.87	34.289	1.37–30.34	p  < 0.001	 		Tobramycin 	5	7.24	2.446	64.03	11.480	0.61–16.56	p  < 0.05	 		Streptomycin 	34	40.87	3.1341	95.95	491.214	26.38–57.15	p  < 0.001	 	Amphenicols								 		Florfenicol 	10	3.80	2.901	75.22	40.454	1.03–12.92	p  < 0.001	 		Chloramphenicol	39	12.23	2.6235	91.43	270.663	7.10–20.26	p  < 0.001	 	Carbapenems								 		Ertapenem	4	0	-	-	-	-	-	 		Imipenem 	7	1.01	0	0	1.409	0.35–2.85	ns	 		Meropenem	3	0	-	-	-	-	-	 	Cephalosporins								 		Cefaclor	1	61.53	-	-	-	-	-	 		Cephalothin	5	22.79	1.9548	96.26	112.840	7.58–51.67	p  < 0.001	 		Cefazolin 	5	2.10	1.7956	61.15	12.680	0.45–9.34	p  < 0.01	 		Cefixime	4	75.21	2.2453	66.37	10.676	32.47–95.06	p  < 0.05	 		Cefotaxime	14	2.73	1.8477	61.49	50.123	1.03–7.05	p  < 0.001	 		Cefoxitin	21	5.84	3.8066	86.98	118.054	2.31–13.99	p  < 0.001	 		Ceftiofur	3	7.24	7.3732	95.32	27.839	65.18	p  < 0.001	 		Ceftriaxone	22	6.47	3.8475	91.74	127.765	2.61–15.21	p  < 0.001	 		Ceftazidime 	7	0.00	-	-	-	-	-	 		Cefuroxime 	1	5.88	-	-	-	-	-	 	Quinolones								 		Ciprofloxacin	36	5.89	2.6675	85.68	156.243	3.15–10.70	p  < 0.001	 		Enrofloxacin	13	9.97	3.7761	85.55	47.663	3.06–27.84	p  < 0.001	 		Levofloxacin	1	0.00						 		Nalidixic acid	28	8.62	3.4502	92.70	507.717	4.15–16.98	p  < 0.001	 		Norfloxacin	12	6.53	1.5325	74.29	35.969	2.76–14.77	p  < 0.001	 		Ofloxacin 	6	100	-	-	-	-	-	 	Lincosamides								 		Clindamycin	8	1.72	3.6211	75.87	54.922	0.35–8.01	p  < 0.001	 		Lincomycin 	1	100	-	-	-	-	-	 	Macrolides								 		Azithromycin	11	2.73	3.2313	80.50	55.446	0.77–9.18	p  < 0.001	 		Erythromycin	5	2.08	8.2394	85.18	41.647	0.13–25.12	p  < 0.001	 		Tilmicosin	3	0	-	-	-	-	-	 	Oxazolidinone								 		Linezolid	4	0.00	-	-	-	-	-	 	Penicillins								 		Amoxicillin	11	14.55	5.6126	90.69	66.508	3.52–44.32	p  < 0.001	 		Amox-clav 	27	16.11	4.6991	96.03	254.694	7.28–31.90	p  < 0.001	 		Ampicillin	42	30.49	2.8935	94.27	456.560	19.76–43.83	p  < 0.001	 		Aztreonam	1	0	-	-	-	-	-	 		Cloxacillin	1	100	-	-	-	-	-	 		Mecillinam 	4	3.13	0.1372	9.86	2.749	1.17–8.02	ns	 		Mezlocillin 	3	0	-	-	-	-	-	 		Penicillin	8	4.74	9.2684	81.51	37.311	0.47–34.02	p  < 0.001	 		Piperacillin 	7	6.23	1.885	68.84	17.462	1.71–20.10	p  < 0.01	 		Ticarcillin 	4	2.23	3.1391	74.31	15.818	0.28–15.43	p  < 0.001	 	Phosphonic antm.								 		Fosfomycin	1	0	-	-	-	-	-	 	Sulfonamides								 		Trim-sulpha	29	13.70	2.8992	96.18	312.112	7.55–23.59	p  < 0.001	 		Sulfisoxazole	14	16.90	2.1318	93.49	94.230	7.95–32.30	p  < 0.001	 		Sulfamethoxazole	1	41.94	-	-	-	-	-	 		Sulfonamide	1	17.67	-	-	-	-	-	 	Tetracyclines								 		Doxycycline 	4	2.46	3.7076	72.86	13.848	0.26–19.21	p  < 0.01	 		Tetracycline	42	32.43	2.2847	94.60	400.293	22.25–4457	p  < 0.001	 	Nitrofurans								 		Furazolidone	3	0	-	-	-	-	-	 		Nitrofurantoin 	13	27.48	4.3785	94.3	85.483	9.93–56.53	p  < 0.001	 	Others								 		Colistin 	11	5.95	6.5904	81.16	58.626	1.12–26.17	p  < 0.001	 		Polymyxin	3	8.86	9.0049	80.76	10.025	0.22–81.04	p  < 0.01	 		Quinupristin	1	0	-	-	-	-	-	 		Trimethoprim 	8	0	-	-	-	-	-	 		Tigecycline	5	2.00	0.4398	19.85	4.364	0.53–6.98	ns	 		Spectinomycin	4	0	-	-	-	-	-
antm.: antimicrobial; C.I.: confidence interval; Prev.: prevalence.
Influence of the methodology (disk diffusion vs. broth microdilution) on the antimicrobial resistance of Salmonella spp. for each antimicrobial substance.
Antimicrobial Substance	Qbetween	p	 	Amikacin	0.2224	0.637	 	Amoxicillin	3.7010	0.054 A	 	Amoxicillin–clavulanic acid	0.4758	0.4903 	 	Ampicillin	1.5730	0.209	 	Azithromycin	0.5495	0.459	 	Aztreonam	-	- B	 	Ciprofloxacin	6.6788	0.009 C	 	Cefaclor	-	- B	 	Cefepime	0.0389	0.8437	 	Cephalothin	0.5218	0.470	 	Cefazolin	0.5143	0.473	 	Cefixime	-	- D	 	Cefotaxime	0.9410	0.332	 	Cefoxitin	2.4960	0.114	 	Ceftiofur	0.1048	0.746	 	Ceftriaxone	1.1128	0.291	 	Ceftazidime	0.1398	0.708	 	Cefuroxime	-	- B	 	Clindamycin	0.2772	0.598	 	Colistin	1.0607	0.301	 	Chloramphenicol	1.5414	0.214	 	Cloxacillin	-	- B	 	Dalfopristin	-	- B	 	Doxycycline	-	- D	 	Ertapenem	-	- D	 	Erythromycin	-	- D	 	Enrofloxacin	0.2229	0.636	 	Florfenicol	1.2040	0.272	 	Fosfomycin	-	- B	 	Furazolidone	-	- D	 	Gentamicin	9.2505	0.002 C	 	Imipenem	0.5650	0.452	 	Kanamycin	3.8575	0.049 C	 	Levofloxacin	-	- B	 	Lincomycin	-	- B	 	Linezolid	-	- D	 	Mecillinam	-	- D	 	Meropenem	-	- E	 	Mezlocillin	-	- D	 	Nalidixic acid	4.6581	0.030	 	Norfloxacin	0.1121	0.737	 	Neomycin	-	- D	 	Netilmicin	-	- D	 	Nitrofurantoin	0.0003	0.986	 	Ofloxacin	-	- B	 	Penicillin	-	- D	 	Piperacillin	0.2045	0.651	 	Polymyxin	0.3233	0.569	 	Quinupristin	-	- B	 	Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole	4.5165	0.033 C	 	Trimethoprim	0.0167	0.897	 	Tigecycline	0.1502	0.698	 	Ticarcillin	0.3210	0.571	 	Tobramycin	-	- D	 	Tetracycline	1.4475	0.228	 	Tilmicosin	-	- D	 	Spectinomycin 	-	- D	 	Streptomycin	4.8390	0.027 C	 	Sulfixoxazole	0.0457	0.830	 	Sulfafurazole	-	- B	 	Sulfamethoxazole	-	- B	 	Sulfonamide	-	- B
A: in the case of amoxicillin, p-value was 0.054. Although the p-value is not smaller than 0.05, this result can be considered as marginally significant, suggesting that the resistance of Salmonella spp. is probably higher in antimicrobial testing based on disk diffusion assay. B: for aztreonam, cefaclor, cefuroxime, cloxacillin, dalfopristin, fosfomycin, levofloxacin, lincomycin, ofloxacin, quinupristin and sulfafurazole, no comparison among methods was possible since only one study was included in the meta-analysis. C: in the case of ciprofloxacin (p = 0.0098), gentamicin (p = 0.0024), kanamycin (p = 0.0495), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (p = 0.0336) and streptomycin (p = 0.0278), resistance of Salmonella spp. was higher when antimicrobial testing is based on the disk diffusion assay. D: for cefixime, doxycycline, ertapenem, furazolidone, linezolid, mecillinam, mezlocillin, penicillin, tobramycin and tilmicosin, no comparison was possible since all studies included in the meta-analysis used the disk diffusion assay. E: for meropenem, no comparison was possible since all studies included in the meta-analysis use the broth microdilution assay.
Comparison of the antimicrobial resistance (AMR) of Salmonella spp. isolated from ruminants based on the results of the meta-analysis (a) and AMR of Salmonella spp. isolated from humans based on the results of the systematic review (b). Results indicate the prevalence (%) of the AMR.
Antimicrobial Family	(a)	(b)	Observations	 	Aminoglycosides				 		Amikacin 1,2,*	5.06	1.13	Commercialized exclusively for horses	 		Gentamicin 1,2,*	8.62	8.82	-	 		Kanamycin 1,2,*	23.86	8.35	-	 		Neomycin 1,2,*	7.24	12.5	-	 		Netilmicin 2	-	-	-	 		Tobramycin 1	7.24	-	Commercialized exclusively for cat and dogs	 		Streptomycin 1,2,* 	40.87	39.40	-	 	Amphenicols 				 		Florfenicol 1,*	3.80	-	-	 		Chloramphenicol 1,2,*	12.23	14.47	Not authorized in the EU for large and small ruminants	 	Carbapenems 				 		Ertapenem 2	0.00	-	-	 		Imipenem 2	1.01	0	-	 		Meropenem 2	0.00	3.33	-	 	Cephalosporins 				 		Cefaclor 2	61.53	-	-	 		Cephalothin 2,*	22.79	4.53	-	 		Cefazolin 1,2	2.10	-	-	 		Cefixime 2	75.21	6.90	-	 		Cefotaxime 2	2.73	5.84	-	 		Cefoxitin 2		7.87	-	 		Ceftiofur 1,*	7.24	9.27	-	 		Ceftriaxone 2	6.47	6.08	-	 		Ceftazidime 2	0.00	5.49	-	 		Cefuroxime 2	5.88	-	-	 		Cefepime 2	-	7.74	-	 		Cefoperazone 1,2	-	6.3	-	 	Quinolones 				 		Ciprofloxacin 2	5.89	4.14	-	 		Enrofloxacin 1,*	9.97	-	-	 		Levofloxacin 2	0.00	0.00	-	 		Nalidixic acid 2	8.62	18.97	-	 		Norfloxacin 1,2	6.53	0.00	Not authorized in the EU for large and small ruminants	 		Ofloxacin 1,2	100	1.40	Not authorized in the EU for large and small ruminants	 	Lincosamides 				 		Clindamycin 1,2	1.72	-	Commercialized exclusively for cat and dogs	 		Lincomycin 1,2	100	-	-	 	Macrolides 				 		Azithromycin 2	2.73	13.02	-	 		Erythromycin 1,2	2.08	-	-	 		Tilmicosin 1,2	0.00	-	-	 	Oxazolidinone 				 		Linezolid 2	0.00	-		 	Penicillins 				 		Amoxicillin 1,2	14.55	-	-	 		Amox-clav 1,2,*	16.11	-	-	 		Ampicillin 1,2,*	30.49	38.97	-	 		Aztreonam 2	0.00	8.60	-	 		Mecillinam 2	3.13	-	-	 		Cloxacillin 1,2	100	-	-	 		Mezlocillin 2	0.00	-	-	 		Piperacillin 2	6.23	-	-	 		Ticarcillin 2	2.23	6.87	-	 	Phosphonic antm. 				 		Fosfomycin 2	0	-	-	 	Sulfonamides 				 		Tri-sulfa 1,2,*	13.70	14.19	-	 		Sulfisoxazole 2	16.9	44.07	-	 		Sulphamtx 2	41.94	-	-	 		Sulfonamide 2	17.67	47.43	-	 	Tetracyclines 				 		Doxycycline 1,2	2.46	-	-	 		Tetracycline 1,2,*	32.43	42.29	-	 	Nitrofurans 				 		Furazolidone 1,2	0.00	3.12	Not authorized in the EU for large and small ruminants	 		Nitrofurantoin 2	27.48	33.56	-	 	Others 				 		Colistin 1,2	5.95	2.70	-	 		Polymyxin 1,2	8.86	-	Only authorized in the EU for sheep	 		Quinupristin 2	0.00	-	-	 		Trimethoprim 1,2	0.00	23.38	-	 		Tigecycline 2	2.00	-	-	 		Spectinomycin 1,2	0.00	48.00	-
* Described in the literature for the treatment of salmonellosis in large and small ruminants. 1 Antimicrobial licensed in the EU for veterinary use. 2 Antimicrobial licensed in the EU for human medicine use.