Current use of pre-clinical models for evaluation of human adenovirus-based cancer therapeutics
Human adenoviruses (HAdVs) are enjoying a renaissance in interest for the development of cancer therapies following the approval of Adstiladrin (Ferring Pharmaceuticals) for the treatment of bladder cancer, strong phase 3 data from CG Oncology’s cretostimogene grenadenorepvec, and many other products in late-stage clinical development. Most therapeutic oncolytic HAdV (oHAdV)-based vectors are engineered to enhance their natural selectivity for human cancer cells and/or to alter their capsid proteins to bias their tropism toward cancer tissues. Furthermore, modern therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors often include transgenes encoding potent immunotherapies. These transgenes have the potential to overcome the relatively modest efficacy that has been observed for non-transgene-bearing viruses, which rely on direct oncolysis of virally infected tumor cells. These modifications, and the highly complex interactions that occur between oHAdVs and the host, make it particularly challenging to develop relevant animal models to investigate acute toxicity, immunity, efficacy, and pharmacodynamics for pre-clinical development of these agents. Here, the experimental options for pre-clinical evaluation of therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors for cancer therapy are reviewed, with a focus on Ad serotype 5 (Ad5), the most common serotype for therapeutic oHAdV-based vector development.
Graphical abstract
Recent adenoviral therapies for solid tumors have demonstrated impressive efficacy in this clinic. This review explores the challenges of finding relevant models for pre-clinical development of modern therapeutic adenoviruses, including discussion of available models to aid pre-clinical phase 1 clinical development of new adenoviral therapeutics.

Introduction
Active clinical trials using therapeutic oHAdVs
Drug name	Adenovirus type	Therapeutic payload	Clinical trial details	Cancer type	Registry ID	 	ATTR-01	Modified adenovirus 5 targeting αvβ6 integrin	Anti-PD-L1 checkpoint inhibitor	Phase 1, i.v.	Epithelial solid tumors	NCT06977737	 	THEO-260	Unknown	None	Phase 1/2a, i.t.	Ovarian cancer	NCT06618235	 	Tri-Ad5	Adenovirus 5	CEA, MUC1, Brachyury + IL-15 superagonist	Phase 2b, subcutaneous	Lynch syndrome cancers	NCT05419011	 	CAdVEC	Unknown	IL-12 and PD-L1 blocker	Phase 1 + CAR T, i.t.	HER2+ solid tumors	NCT03740256	 	LOAd703	Adenovirus 5/35	CD40L + 4-1BBL	Phase 1/2a, i.t.	Pancreatic cancer	NCT02705196	 	H101	Adenovirus 5	Tumor lysis + immune activation	Phase 2, i.t.	Recurrent liver cancer	ChiCTR2300067319	 	Surv.m-CRA-1	Adenovirus 5	GM-CSF	Phase 1, i.t.	Bone and soft tissue tumors	UMIN000023120	 	CG0070	Adenovirus 5	GM-CSF	Phase 3, i.t.	Non-muscle invasive bladder cancer	NCT01438112	 	CAN-2409	Non-replicative adenovirus 5	HSV-tk gene (with valacyclovir)	Phase 3, i.t.	Prostate, pancreatic cancer	NCT02446093	 	OBP-301	Adenovirus 5	Sensitizes cancer cells to radiation	Phase 2, i.t.	Adenocarcinoma, gastric, head &neck, esophageal	NCT03921021	 	AdAPT-001	Adenovirus 5	TGF-β trap	Phase 2 + checkpoint inhibitors, i.t.	Sarcoma, triple-negative breast cancer	NCT04673942	 	VCN-01	Adenovirus 5/3	Hyaluronidase	Phase 2b, i.v.	Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma	NCT02045602	 	DNX-2401	Adenovirus 5	None	Phase 2, i.t.	Glioblastoma multiforme	NCT03178032	 	TILT-123	Adenovirus 5/3	TNF-α + IL-2	Phase 1/2 + pembrolizumab ± doxorubicin, i.v./i.t.	Platinum-resistant ovarian cancer	NCT05271318	 	AFP-AdV	Adenovirus 5	AFP	Phase 1/2 DNA prime boost, i.t.	Hepatocellular carcinoma	NCT00093548	 	Gendicine	Non-replicative adenovirus 5	Wild-type p53 gene	Phase 2, inhalation	Ground-glass lung nodules	NCT07150416	 	RGDCRAdCOX2F	Adenovirus 5	None	Phase 1, i.t.	Pancreatic adenocarcinoma	NCT06693986	 	KD01	Adenovirus 5	None	Phase 1, i.t.	Cervical cancer	NCT06552598	 	VT-101	Undisclosed	None	Phase 1, i.t.	Non-muscle invasive bladder cancer	NCT06632964	 	Adze1.C	Undisclosed	CD40L	Phase 1, i.t.	Metastatic melanoma	NCT07086105	 	MEM-288	Adenovirus 5	IFNβ + MEM40 (CD40L mimic)	Phase 1, i.t.	Advanced solid tumors	NCT05076760	 	YSCH-01	Adenovirus 5	L-IFN	Phase 1, i.t.	Relapsed/refractory solid tumors	NCT05180851
AFP, alpha-fetoprotein; TGF-β, transforming growth factor-β; i.v. intravenous; i.t., intratumoral.
Human adenoviruses (HAdVs) are common human pathogens characterized by a relatively small (∼35 kb) double-stranded DNA genome and a non-enveloped capsid. HAdVs have been extensively studied using animal models and in vitro analysis, which has revealed many biological mechanisms that govern their pathology, infection (i.e., an HAdV’s ability to enter a host cell), replication (i.e., an HAdV’s ability to reproduce in a host cell), and viral spread. This understanding has led to the development of tools and methods for the easy manipulation of HAdV genomes, and manufacture at high titers for numerous translational activities. Combined with their natural preference to infect and replicate in cancer tissue (due to disruption of innate antiviral defenses, e.g., interferons [IFNs], rapid cancer cell division, and high metabolic activity promoting increased viral replication), engineered oncolytic HAdVs (oHAdVs) have become popular vectors for the development of therapies for the treatment of various forms of cancer, with several HAdVs (replication deficient) and oHAdVs currently being tested in active clinical trials (Table 1). In the clinic, oHAdVs have demonstrated attractive safety profiles, often with maximum tolerated doses not reached, in numerous clinical trials over the last few decades. More recently, it has been demonstrated that oHAdVs can also elicit an anti-viral immune response in tumor cells, propagating the notion that oHAdVs could act as potent immunotherapies, turning cold tumors hot. For example, multiple studies have demonstrated that oHAdV infection and replication in tumors can induce the activation of pro-inflammatory and immune-attracting innate and adaptive immune pathways (e.g., STING, PAMPs and DAMPs, IFNs, chemokines), activation of antigen-presenting cells, and activation of anti-viral and/or anti-tumor T cells. Induction of these pro-inflammatory and immune-attracting pathways has the potential to overcome some of the immune-suppressive mechanisms employed by most tumors, which include physical barriers (e.g., fibroblasts, or dense tumor mass) that block the ingress of immune cells into the tumor, recruitment of suppressive cell types (e.g., T regulatory cells, M2 macrophages, macrophage-derived suppressor cells), upregulation of inhibitory receptors (e.g., programmed death receptor-1 and its ligand, lymphocyte activation gene 3, T cell immunoglobulin domain and mucin domain 3), and inhibitory metabolic mechanisms. The induction of pro-infammaltory pathways following viral infection of tumor cells has raised substantial interest in developing combinations between oHAdVs and current immunotherapies because of their synergistic attributes (i.e., oHAdVs can encourage a pro-inflammatory and immune-infiltrated tumor micro-environment that immunotherapies require to elicit their full potential).
In order to develop oHAdVs as cancer therapies, robust pre-clinical data packages are required to determine a safe starting dose (using a combination of efficacy and toxicity assessments), provide evidence of efficacy, and characterize pharmacokinetic properties (including biodistribution and shedding for safety). However, it is challenging to fully recapitulate the complexity of viral infection in the natural setting using current in vitro/ex vivo assays, and in vivo models that fully mimic oHAdV infection in humans are not currently available. Additionally, the vast majority of oHAdV-based therapies have human specific modifications to enhance their selectivity to replicate in human tumors (e.g., modification of the E1A and E1B early replication transcriptional units, or cancer cell-specific promoters to drive viral replication). As well as conditional replication, many therapeutic oHAdV’s are modified to alter their natural tropisms. For instance, an Ad5-based vector has been developed that has all three major capsid tropisms ablated (hexon, penton, and fiber knob were modified to no longer bind to factor X, common integrins, and coxsackie and adenovirus receptor [CAR], respectively) and has then been re-targeted to enter cells via a cancer selective marker (αvβ6 integrin) through the introduction of a short peptide (A20) into the fiber knob protein. Thus, although some animal models are useful for modeling native oHAdV infections in vivo due to semi-permissive infectivity (i.e., conservation of viral receptors), and in some cases replication in selective normal tissues (i.e., the virus can reproduce within some non-human cells), the added human-specific modifications further limit the utility of these models for evaluating therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors. Furthermore, it is now becoming clear that the oncolytic effect of therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors is not generally potent enough to deliver high levels of efficacy. Thus, most therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors have additional properties as gene delivery agents, encoding transgenes that can lead to the expression of human-specific immune-stimulating molecules or other toxic payloads, which can require models with a human immune system to fully assess.
In summary, due to the in-depth knowledge of viral biology, ease of genome manipulation, manufacturability, clinical safety, and the ability to enhance natural cancer selectivity and immunogenicity, oHAdVs have obvious potential as cancer therapeutics. Here, the experimental options for pre-clinical evaluation of therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors for cancer therapy are discussed, with a focus on Ad serotype 5 (Ad5), the most common serotype for therapeutic oHAdV-based vector development.

Pros and cons of in vivo model systems for pre-clinical testing of intravenously administered therapeutic adenoviruses
Animal models have been of great utility in understanding the nature of wild-type oHAdV infection and pathology. However, experiments dating back to the 1950s have demonstrated several key limitations, with no animal models yet being identified that fully recapitulate the infectivity, replication kinetics, and pathology of human infection. Of these animal models, the most commonly investigated have been mice, hamsters, rabbits, Guinea pigs, cats, ferrets, cotton rats, and non-human primates. Early investigations of these animal models demonstrated that, although all are permissive to viral infection to some degree (depending on the specificity of the oHAdV serotype), only limited or species-specific clinical pathology was observed, indicating key differences compared to the human setting where respiratory, eye, or other pathology is well documented. More recent studies have focused on the ability of oHAdVs to replicate in tissues from different animals. Although some replication has been observed in selected tissues in pigs, dogs, and Syrian hamsters, key differences in viral replication and infection kinetics compared to humans were evident. Importantly, all these studies were conducted with fully replication-competent wild-type HAdVs, so the relevance of these data for oHAdV vectors engineered for cancer-selective replication remains unknown. Indeed, only limited data suggest that oHAdV vectors engineered for cancer-selective replication can replicate in non-human tumors. The reason for this lack of robust replication in non-human tumors is not clear, but it is likely related to the ablated ability of most oHAdVs to replicate naturally in non-human tissues. Additionally, although permissibility to infection has been well documented in all of the animal models listed above, there remain very few detailed comparisons of efficiency of infection, receptor usage, receptor affinity and receptor biodistribution between humans and model species. The limited data that are available include affinity measurements of various blood factors from different animal species (e.g., factor X and factor II) interacting with hexon proteins from a selection of common HAdVs. These experiments revealed some large differences in binding affinity between blood factors from different species and viral hexon proteins that led to unexpected differences in the biology of viral infection in vivo. These data highlight further interspecies differences, most of which have not yet been characterized, that could affect oHAdV infection. Although these differences may not be problematic for answering some general questions about viral biology, they could be of major impact for clinical translation.
Characteristics of therapeutic oHAdVs that can influence pre-clinical model selection
Therapeutic oHAdVs have a complex mechanism of action that can contribute to both efficacy and toxicity. Additionally, therapeutic oHAdVs are often engineered to improve their ability to target, replicate, and lyse cancer cells or to limit their immunogenicity or targeting of normal tissues. These characteristics need to be taken into account when selecting an appropriate pre-clinical model to assess. These considerations are relevant to the oHAdVs oncolytic ability (i.e., does the model support the ability of the viral to lyse infected cells?), replication (i.e., does the model support the ability of the virus to make new viral particles?), viral specificity (i.e., does the model express the viral entry receptor similarly to human population?), half-life in blood (i.e., are blood interactions conserved in the model system?), therapeutic payload (i.e., is the model responsive to the therapeutic payload?) and immunogenicity (i.e., is the model representative of pre-existing immunity in the human population?).
Limitations of current in vivo model systems for pre-clinical development of therapeutic oHAdVs
Pre-clinical question	Immune-competent models	Immune-deficient models	 	Wild-type animals (mice, hamsters, cotton rats, rabbits, primates, shrews, pigs)	Syngeneic tumor mice/Syrian hamsters	Humanized mice	Human tumor xenograft animal mice/Syrian hamsters	Human tumor and PBMC xenograft mice	 	Therapeutic oHAdV	Toxicity	Non-human immune system, limited replication	Non-human immune system, limited replication	Limited replication	Limited replicationNo immune system	Limited: human immune system, no replication	 	Immunity	Non-human immune system	Non-human immune system	Model effects on immune response	No immune system	Limited immune system	 	Efficacy	No tumor	No replication in mouse tumor	Tumor lacking heterogeneity	Tumor lacking heterogeneity	Tumor could have different properties	 	Pharmacokinetics	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology	 	Immunotherapy	Toxicity	Non-human immune system	Non-human immune system	Model effects on immune response	Non-human immune system	Limited: human immune system	 	Immunity	Non-human immune system	Non-human immune system	Model effects on immune response	Non-human immune system	Non-human immune system	 	Efficacy	No tumor	Non-human immune system	Model effects on immune response	No immune system	Partial human immune system	 	Pharmacokinetics	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology	Non-human blood interactions & receptor biology
All models listed above have been shown to be permissive to viral infection, but their utility as pre-clinical models is dependent on faithful entry receptor expression and similar interactions with viral capsid proteins.
Advantages of current in vivo model systems for pre-clinical development of therapeutic oHAdVs
Pre-clinical question	Immune-comeptent models	Immune-deficient models	 	Wild-type animals (mice, hamsters, cotton rats, rabbits, primates, shrews, pigs)	Syngeneic tumor mice/Syrian hamsters	Humanized mice	Human tumor xenograft animal mice/Syrian hamsters	Human tumor and PBMC xenograft mice	 	Toxicity	Native immune system	Native immune system and tumor	Human immune system and tumor	N/A (no immune cells)	Human immune cells and tumor	 	Immunity	Native immune system	Native immune system and tumor	Human immune system and tumor	N/A (no immune cells)	Human immune cells and tumor	 	Efficacy	N/A (no tumor)	Native immune system and tumor	Human immune system and tumor	Human tumor (oncolysis only)	Human immune cells and tumor	 	Pharmacokinetics	Native immune system	Native immune system and tumor	Human immune system and tumor	Human tumor	Human immune cells and tumor
N/A, not applicable.
Below, the characteristics that need to be addressed for pre-clinical testing of therapeutic oHAdV vectors (Figure 1), with the requirements for each experiment and consideration of the pros and cons of the available in vivo model systems are explored. These facets are also summarized in Table 2 (limitations of in vivo models) and Table 3 (advantages of in vivo models). In general, the parameters that should be considered for pre-clinical testing of therapeutic oHAdVs are safety, specificity, potency, biodistribution of the virus, and if relevant, assessment of the production and quantification of the transgene payload. This includes safety pharmacology and short-term/acute toxicology of both the virus and of any transgene payload. These data should inform on a starting dose that has the potential to generate efficacy in patients while minimizing the risk of toxicity. The models and experiments used to generate these data depend on the virus being used, any therapeutic transgene payload, and the clinical design based on regulatory guidance.

Toxicity
Clinical toxicity for therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors is primarily driven by an acute response to viral particles by the host immune system (within 24 h of administration) that is not related to viral infectivity, replication, or expression of human-specific payloads. Acute toxicity is generally driven by innate immune pathways, the effects of which can be observed in blood and critical organs, all of which are relatively well conserved across different species. Thus, most animal models with intact immune systems can be used to test serum cytokines, general health, and toxicity to major organs (i.e., liver). Mice are usually the most attractive model for these experiments because of their availability, the abundance of experimental methods and reagents, and a broad understanding of mouse immunity and how it translates to the clinic. Thus, mice can be used to determine the maximum tolerated dose, which can in turn be used to set a safe clinical starting dose. The main disadvantage of using mice, or any animal model, to test acute toxicity is that no non-human model is 100% predictive of the human immune system. Thus, in some instances, multiple different species are used. Outside of mice, although some animals are more closely related to humans (pigs, primates, etc.), the paucity of reagents and availability of these models limits their appropriateness to test acute toxicity in most instances. Indeed, there is no relevant full toxicology model available for assessment of most oHAdV agents as no single model, including higher species, can assess all aspects of the mechanism of action.

Immunity
The primary role of the immune system is to protect the host against pathogens, including viruses. Thus, a broad array of mechanisms exists to detect, neutralize, and eliminate viruses in host tissues. For instance, when a therapeutic oHAdV-based vector is injected into the blood, it may encounter neutralizing and non-neutralizing antibodies (that may protect the virus from elimination, block its ability to enter cells, or lead to further interactions with other cells or blood factor), macrophages (including Kupffer cells in the liver), B and T cells, complement, as well as other blood components. The majority of these mechanisms are host specific, so using animals to model human diseases is challenging, with many of the differences that could affect anti-viral immunity (also relevant for considerations of toxicology and pharmacodynamics) not fully characterized.
Adaptive immune responses, both neutralizing and non-neutralizing antibodies, against therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors are particularly difficult to address using animal models. Pre-existing immunity to oHAdV serotypes that circulate in the human population have the potential to neutralize oHAdV vectors that are based on the same serotype. However, this is not always the case, and these long-lived memory responses are very difficult to induce in animal models. Additionally, the chances of developing cancer increase with age. Thus, there is a trend toward the treatment of older patients who are known to have less-active immune systems. The most common method to test pre-existing immunity in animal models is the use of immune-competent models inoculated with the oHAdV of interest, followed by a repeat dose a few weeks later. This experimental setup does not recapitulate the natural human exposure to these viruses via airborne droplets and does not address a long-lived memory response in an older human patient. Induced immunity following multiple dosing of oHAdV vectors is easier to model as the clinical dosing regimen can be mimicked using an immune-competent animal. Again, mice are the most attractive model for the reasons detailed in the previous section, with the caveat that their immune response will not be identical to that of an older human patient population. No other animal models provide a substantial advantage to mice in this regard.

Efficacy
Efficacy for oncology drugs is arguably the most challenging facet to translate from animal models to humans. Even for drugs that do not rely on a human-specific target or effector function, the heterogeneity of human solid tumors (epitope expression, stromal cells, suppressive cells, immune infiltration, physical structure, and vascularization) is challenging to mimic in a non-human setting. Syngeneic orthotopic models offer better vascularization and a fully competent immune system. These include both murine and Syrian hamster models, with evidence that some models can also support viral replication in autologous tumor cells. Although substantial development of these models is ongoing, it should be noted that not all human tumors are represented by these models and models that are faithful to the human disease are limited. Another consideration is whether syngeneic orthotopic models are compatible with human-specific effector functions (i.e., most immunotherapies) due to the lack of a human immune system. For murine syngeneic orthotopic models, very few cytokines or immune-modulating ligands (e.g., CD3 and PD-1) cross-react with human proteins, requiring the use of murine-specific surrogate molecules, or transgenic mice expressing the human protein, for which there are currently limited options. For Syrian hamster syngeneic orthotopic models, there is evidence of cross-reactivity with some human cytokines (e.g., interleukin [IL]-2, IL-21, and IL-12), but not others (e.g., [granulocyte macrophage-colony stimulating factor] GM-CSF). Thus, depending on the immune payload, Syrian hamster syngeneic orthotopic models may offer more flexibility in assessing efficacy of virally delivered immunotherapies. Patient-derived xenograft (PDX) models have the potential to recapitulate a more human-like representation of tumor heterogeneity, but tumors are normally injected ectopically (i.e., not in the relevant organ) and, therefore, develop a non-native tumor microenvironment and do not contain a full immune system (can be engrafted with human [peripheral blood mononuclear cells] PBMCs etc., but does not generate a “normal” immune system). Finally, humanized mice are currently being developed as an additional tool in which NOD scid gamma (NSG) mice, with no native immune system, can be genetically modified to knock out murine major histocompatibility complex (MHC) proteins and express human MHC proteins. The mice can then be engrafted with CD34-positive human stem cells, establishing a human-like immune system in the mice, while the removal of mouse MHC and the expression of human MHC enables engraftment of the human immune cells. Although these mice can represent excellent tools for studying the efficacy of human-specific immunotherapies, it should be noted that there are several important limitations that are relevant to therapeutic oHAdVs. First, it is still a challenge to reconstitute a fully comparable human immune system in these mice (for instance, the myeloid compartment is often under-represented). Second, human tumor cell lines can be difficult to engraft because of immune rejection.
For all of these models (syngeneic orthotopic tumor mouse models, PDX mouse models, and humanized mouse models), their utility for therapeutic oHAdVs must also be considered against other virus-specific characteristics that further limit the assessment of efficacy. First, therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors must infect tumor tissue. In order to achieve this, the virus must traffic to the tumor site (if being injected intravenously). It is established that interactions between the virus and host in the blood are not identical, especially in immunocompromised models. Full characterization has not been performed, so it is unknown just how divergent these interactions may be. These differences will influence the number of viral particles that reach tumor sites and the efficiency of transit. Furthermore, efficiency of infection is likely to be affected by any differences in the tumor microenvironment or in receptor expression. Second, therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors must then replicate, inducing oncolysis in some tumor cells. This important facet contributes to efficacy by directly killing some cancer cells, inducing immunogenic cell death, and allowing spread of the infection to other cancer cells. These characteristics will be influenced by the number of viral particles that reach the tumor. Moreover, most animal tumor models are not permissive to viral replication, making it particularly challenging to assess this aspect of viral efficacy in most syngeneic models. Thus, human xenograft tumor models are required for consideration of the impact of viral replication on efficacy. Third, most therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors encode human-specific payloads (cytokines, chemokines, bispecific T cell engagers, etc.) that require a fully intact human immune system to elicit their effector function. Arguably, the best models overall that address the various requirements for this multi-faceted mechanism of action of therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors are mouse models engrafted with human PDX tumors and human immune cells. However, these models are still limited because of the non-native tumor biology, difference in host-virus interactions, an incomplete immune system, complexity, and cost, as discussed in more detail above. These limitations are evidenced by the poor translation of efficacy in animal models to the clinical setting.

Pharmacokinetics
Assessment of biodistribution, half-life in blood, and shedding for therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors enables better prediction of potential unwanted toxicity in healthy organs and safety for anyone coming into contact with a treated patient. Immunocompetent non-tumor-bearing mouse models are most commonly used to investigate this aspect because of the strong understanding of how these characteristics translate from mice to humans. Additionally, because the majority of therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors are engineered not to replicate in healthy tissues, the lack of any natural replication in mouse tissues is of less importance than for a wild-type oHAdV. The main limitations of mice, and other animal models, for investigating pharmacokinetics are differences in virus-host interactions in the blood or other tissues, particularly interactions with the immune system (i.e., neutralization by pre-existing immunity, etc.). Such differences could alter the journey of the virus through the host, compromising the translation of such information into the human setting. This is of particular importance for oHAdVs because of the strong tropism of many serotypes, including Ad5, to the liver. Additionally, tissue biodistribution is governed by the expression of relevant viral entry receptors. The majority of wild-type oHAdVs use CAR, CD46, or desmoglein as their primary entry receptor, with common integrins as co-receptors. Most therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors also use these entry receptors, so their expression in animal models will have a major impact on viral pharmacokinetics. Some therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors have engineered tropisms to improve tumor specificity. In these cases, it is important to fully assess target expression in animal models to understand the impact and relevance of any pharmacokinetic information. Finally, it should be noted that measurements of viral pharmacokinetics in the absence of a relevant tumor does not accurately replicate the clinical situation, where only tumor-bearing patients are treated. Tumors should act as a viral sink, according to the intended mechanism of action of therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors, and thus could substantially impact pharmacokinetics.

Alternative in vitro and ex vivo pre-clinical models for intravenously administered therapeutic adenoviruses
The limitations detailed above for testing therapeutic oHAdVs using in vivo models have important implications for the development of pre-clinical packages, depending on the nature of the drug (conditional replication, tropism, payload, payload expression, etc.). First, it should be carefully considered whether in vivo testing has any relevance for addressing certain pre-clinical questions. The use of in vivo models should be scientifically justified, especially in line with the three R’s (replacement of animal models, reduction in number of animals used, and refinement to minimize potential harm, distress, and suffering for the animals that are used), which is being actively encouraged by major medical regulatory agencies. Artificial and/or poorly designed models have the risk of generating misleading or incorrect data and should be avoided, in line with International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) guidelines. Second, these limitations suggest the need for using multiple different in vivo models, with different limitations, to gain a holistic view of therapeutic oHAdV behavior. Finally, the development and use of in vitro and ex vivo models that use primary human tissue should be considered to replace, or to address the limitations of, in vivo models.
Currently, there is a range of in vitro and ex vivo models available for pre-clinical testing of therapeutic oHAdVs, many of which have been previously used to support clinical trial applications. These approaches can provide additional information or potentially be used instead of in vivo models for assessing some aspects of toxicity, immunity, efficacy, and pharmacodynamics.

Toxicity
Acute toxicity is one aspect that can be relatively well characterized using in vivo models (as detailed above). However, ex vivo whole-blood assays can also be used to investigate acute toxicity using primary human samples. Whole blood is a relatively faithful representation of different cell types in the human circulation and can be used to assess cytokines including IL-6, IL-1, IFN-γ, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), etc. Whole blood does not recapitulate the interactions of immune cells in lymph nodes and other tissues that likely contribute to reactivity in vivo and are usually in static culture systems in vitro, thus lacking the dynamic flow associated with blood in vivo, but these data can be powerful when combined with acute toxicity experiments in in vivo model systems. Whether ex vivo whole-blood assays can substitute for in vivo model systems will depend on the therapeutic oHAdV under investigation and current clinical understanding. As well as using whole blood, new approaches are being developed to investigate a range of therapeutics in whole live organs, such as the liver. Although not yet commonly used for therapeutic oHAdVs, such model systems could also be of utility when investigating toxicity in healthy tissue, particularly in the liver where some therapeutic oHAdVs are known to accumulate and can generate toxicity in vivo.

Immunity
Pre-existing immunity to therapeutic oHAdVs is particularly difficult to assess in vivo because these responses depend on long-lived memory responses from exposure in the human population. These experiments can be conducted by pre-immunizing rodents with the oHAdV serotype of interest, but whether this accurately represents responses in humans is of question. Thus, there is a strong argument for using human serum to investigate viral neutralization. Although this aspect is generally less important for pre-clinical safety assessments, it can have a major impact on efficacy as viral neutralization would prevent the ability of the virus to target tumors. Multiple studies have demonstrated that the assessment of pre-existing immunity using human serum is feasible and relatively high throughput. Thus, testing in human serum is a logical substitute for animal studies to assess pre-existing immunity, but not anti-drug antibodies.

Efficacy
Efficacy is particularly challenging to accurately assess in vivo. This is evident in the lack of correlation between pre-clinical efficacy and clinical efficacy to date. This is most likely because efficacy is dependent on tumor biology, host immunity, and receptor usage, for which there is no faithful model for a human cancer patient as discussed above. However, multiple in vitro and ex vivo systems are available, or are emerging, that provide additional systems to assess efficacy using primary human cells, or intact human tumor. The most basic experimental model is the use of cancer cell lines supporting viral replication (to investigate oncolysis). Generally, human cancer cell lines are preferred for these experiments as they are most relevant to the clinical setting, and, unlike most non-human cells, they support adenovirus replication. It should be noted that, although some murine and Syrian hamster tumor models have been described that can support adenovirus replication and are useful tools for in vivo experiments, these models do not offer any obvious advantages for in vitro testing compared to the readily available human cancer cell lines. These experiments can be conducted with or without relevant effector immune cells (oncolytic effect does not require human immune cells, whereas immunotherapeutic payloads require immune cells) to assess efficacy in a controlled system. Such experiments are generally easy to optimize and are high throughput, and the cells can be readily sourced. However, although in vitro cell line experiments can be used for proof of concept, and to compare potency of different approaches, they do not recapitulate tumor cell resistance to therapy, the effect of suppressive cell populations, or tumor 3D structure. Ex vivo dissociated tumor samples offer a more representative environment (in terms of cell types and heterogeneity) to test the potential efficacy of therapeutic oHAdVs. However, these samples lack the 3D structure of the tumor. The complex vasculature is known to restrict viral penetration and immune cell penetration into the tumor, so it is likely to have a substantial impact on efficacy. Like ex vivo dissociated tumor samples, ex vivo-derived tumor organoids (3D cell culture of tumor cell lines or primary dissociated tumor) contain a more representative cellular environment than in vitro cell lines, but as an additional advantage, they also represent some of the 3D structure of the tumor. However, ex vivo-derived tumor organoids require manipulation in the laboratory, which could alter gene expression and, by proxy, the tumor microenvironment. They also lack complex vasculature. Thus, they represent an additional tool to assess the efficacy of therapeutic oHAdVs, rather than a comprehensive model. Organoids also require more technical know-how to generate, so their accessibility and consistency can be limited, although many commercial entities now offer services for both ex vivo dissociated tumor samples and ex vivo-derived tumor organoids. Finally, as well as ex vivo-derived tumor organoids, ex vivo-derived patient tissue slices can be used to investigate the efficacy of therapeutic oHAdVs. These samples comprise intact tumor sections from biopsies and resections and can be used directly from the patient, so they have some advantages over ex vivo-derived tumor organoids. The main limitations of ex vivo-derived patient tissue slices are that they are difficult to source as they rely on access to patient biopsies directly from surgery and they require a high level of technical know-how to manipulate in the laboratory. Importantly, none of the current in vitro or ex vivo model systems can be used to test the ability of therapeutic oHAdVs to traffic to tumors via intravenous injection. As this facet will ultimately define the dose of intravenously delivered therapeutic oHAdVs that will reach the tumor, it will have a major impact on potential efficacy. Thus, in vivo models combined with a tailored selection of in vitro and/or ex vivo model systems is likely the most effective strategy for determining the potential efficacy of therapeutic oHAdVs in human clinical trials.

Pharmacokinetics
Biodistribution is another aspect that can be relatively well characterized using in vivo models (as detailed above). However, this depends on the tropism of the therapeutic oHAdV under investigation and the receptor usage in the model system compared to humans. Studying biodistribution in non-in vivo settings is obviously challenging and limited, but investigating cell lines and primary human cells for target expression and permissiveness for infectivity can supplement characterization of the specificity of therapeutic oHAdVs. Similarly, ex vivo dissociated tumor samples, organoids, and tissue slices can all also be used to assess distribution at the cellular level using microscopy, or for single-cell analysis. However, in vivo studies are likely required for most pre-clinical testing of current therapeutic oHAdVs because of their availability and previous use as established models for clinical translation.
It should be noted that as therapeutics oHAdV engineering renders these agents even more human specific, the point could be reached where standard in vivo models are no longer appropriate to assess biodistribution. This situation has already occurred for some therapeutics that are entirely dependent on human proteins for their biodistribution. In these cases, robust testing in cell lines and primary human cells was sufficient for clinical trial applications.

Summary of published pre-clinical models for therapeutic oHAdV-based vectors
The use of pre-clinical models for evaluation of toxicity, immune reactogenicity, efficacy, and pharmacokinetics of oHAdV vectors in translational research
Therapeutic	Toxicity	Immunity	Efficacy	Pharmacokinetics	Stage	References	 	Oncorine, H101, ONYX-15 (Ad5)	Human cell lines, healthy mice, and non-human primates	Healthy and humanized xenograft mice	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Mice, cotton rats, and non-human primates	Mkd China	Heise et al.; Ries and Korn; Heise et al.; Heise et al.	 	Gendicine (Ad5-p53)	Not reported	Healthy mice	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Human tumor xenograft mice	Mkd China	Wills et al.; Wills et al.; Li et al.	 	CG0070 (Ad5 GM-CSF)	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Not reported	Orthotopic & subcutaneous xenograft mice	Human cell lines	3	Ramesh et al.	 	VB-111, Ofra-vec (Ad5, Fas-c)	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Not reported	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	3	Reddi et al.	 	Enadenotucirev, ColoAd1 (Ad11/3)	Human cell lines and healthy mice	Human blood	Not reported	Human cell lines	1/2	Illingworth et al.; Di et al.	 	NG-641 (Ad11/3, CXCL9/CXCL10/IFNa)	Human cell lines and healthy mice	Human blood	Not reported	Human cell lines	1	Illingworth et al.; Di et al.	 	NG-350A (Ad11/3 anti-CD40)	Human cell lines and healthy mice	Human blood	Not reported	Human cell lines	1/2	Illingworth et al.; Di et al.	 	DNX-2401 (Ad5)	Not reported	Not reported	Xenograft mice	Human cell lines	1/2	Suzuki et al.; Fueyo et al.	 	ONCOS-102 (Ad5/3 GM-CSF)	Healthy Syrian hamsters	Not reported	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Healthy Syrian hamsters	1/2	Kuryk et al.; Kuryk et al.	 	ICOVIR (Ad5)	Human cell lines and healthy mice	Not reported	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Human cell lines	1/2	Cascallo et al.	 	VCN-01 (Ad5, hyaluronidase)	Healthy mice and Syrian hamsters	Not reported	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Healthy mice and Syrian hamsters	1/2	Bazan-Peregrino et al.; Garcia-Moure et al.; Rodríguez-García et al.	 	TILT-123 (Ad5/3, IL2)	Healthy mice and Syrian hamsters	Syrian hamsters	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Human cell lines, xenograft mice, and healthy Syrian hamsters	1/2	Havunen et al.	 	LOAd703 (CD40L, 41BBL)	Not reported	Not reported	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Human cell lines	1/2	Wenthe et al.; Eriksson et al.	 	ORCA-010 (Ad5)	Human cell lines, healthy mice, and non-human primates	Healthy and humanized xenograft mice	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Mice, rats, and non-human primates	1/2	Heise et al.; Ries and Korn; Heise et al.; Heise et al.; Dong et al.; Dong et al.	 	Ad5-yCD/mutTKSR39rep-IL12	Healthy mice	Not reported	Human cell lines and xenograft mice	Human tumor xenograft mice	1/2	Freytag et al.; Freytag et al.	 	Advince (Ad5)	Human primary cells and blood	Human blood	Human cell lines and primary cells	Not reported	1/2	Yu et al.
Mkd, marketed.
Xenograft mice all have human tumors and are immune deficient.
Numerous publications with relevant pre-clinical data are available for clinical therapeutic oHAdV assets. However, since pre-clinical reports submitted to medical agencies are not typically made public, access to full data packages leading to successful approval of clinical trial applications are not available, and since no published pre-clinical data are available for several clinical and marketed therapeutic oHAdVs, they are not discussed in this review. Nevertheless, the published pre-clinical data are useful to broadly assess the models that have generally been used to enable clinical entry (Table 4). For therapeutic oHAdVs with pre-clinical data available, the vast majority are Ad5, using CAR as their entry receptor, with modifications to limit replication to tumor cells only. Importantly, CAR is expressed and compatible with oHAdV entry in most animal models (although not always expressed on identical cell types compared to humans), whereas for therapeutic oHAdVs based on other adenovirus serotypes (most commonly Ad3 or Ad11, which primarily use desmoglein/CD80/CD86 or CD46, respectively, for entry) or with an altered tropism for a human-specific receptor (e.g., Ad5-Null-A20, which has been engineered to recognize human αvβ6 integrin), animal models can be more limited for toxicity, biodistribution, and efficacy studies. Additionally, although some of the earlier therapeutic oHAdVs relied on oncolytic effect alone, many now encode human-specific transgenes designed to activate the immune system against cancer.

Toxicity
Toxicity is primarily a measure of acute reactivity in the blood and is important for defining a safe starting dose, as detailed above. In general, most pre-clinical data for therapeutics oHAdVs include both human cell lines and healthy mouse models to assess toxicity. There are only three reports of the use of Syrian hamsters for toxicity evaluation (to better assess toxicity in a semi-permissive model of viral replication), perhaps because of the limitations of using this model for investigating the replication of therapeutic oHAdVs. Only one model (Oncorine, and later ORCA-10) utilized non-human primates for toxicity assays, perhaps because Oncorine was one of the first therapeutic oHAdVs to enter the clinic, so less was known about the safety of therapeutic oHAdVs at that point. All of these models have limitations due to the lack of a human immune system, and differences in viral infectivity and replication in non-human tissue, reflected by the range of models used.

Immunity
Immunity is generally a measure of pre-existing antibody responses to therapeutic oHAdVs, which can impact efficacy and toxicity. However, the majority of pre-clinical reports do not address this aspect. This is likely because an accurate measure of pre-existing immunity relies on a representative human population. Some pre-clinical data have attempted to address this by using ex vivo human blood, while others have use rodent models in which animals have been pre-exposed to a relevant oHAdV serotype before being dosed with the therapeutic oHAdV.

Efficacy
Efficacy remains the biggest challenge to accurately investigate because of the multi-faceted nature of therapeutic oHAdVs’ mechanisms of action. No models are available that combine a human tumor, human-like organism biodistribution of the entry receptor(s), native viral replication permissiveness (including oncolytic effect), and a human immune system to respond to human-specific transgene payloads. Thus, most efficacy studies have focused on oncolytic effect using human tumor mouse xenograft models. There is one example of the use of an orthotopic tumor model for an agent targeting bladder cancer and no models with a full immune system. Thus, efficacy is often inferred from in vitro studies in human tumor cell lines and oncolytic effect in human tumor mouse xenograft mice.

Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacokinetics can also be challenging to model for therapeutic oHAdVs because human-like organism biodistribution of the entry receptor(s) and native viral replication permissiveness can have a major impact on viral distribution in vivo. Interactions with different immune components in the blood, and with organs involved in removal of metabolites, such as the liver and kidneys, could also impact on this aspect of pre-clinical testing. Almost all published examples include inference from human cell lines to determine the entry receptor specificity of the virus and to screen healthy human tissues for permissibility to viral infection. This is usually combined with in vivo imaging (for viruses expressing, for example, luciferase transgenes) and/or qPCR (to detect viral genomic DNA) of organs from either healthy mice or immunocompromised mice engrafted with a human tumor. The in vivo studies are likely more representative for therapeutic oHAdVs that use entry receptors that are conserved in humans and mice (e.g., CAR or viruses re-engineered to recognize αvβ6 integrin) compared to human-specific entry receptors (e.g., CD46), but limitations still exist for both as it is not known how therapeutic oHAdVs with engineered selective replication behave in healthy mouse tissue compared to healthy human tissue. Consistent with the other aspects of pre-clinical testing described in this section, these findings support the notion that no single model is optimal for understanding the pharmacokinetic properties of therapeutic oHAdVs and point toward the use of multiple models to gain a comprehensive understanding of this aspect.

General requirements for pre-clinical testing of therapeutic oHAdVs
Regulatory guidelines require therapeutic oHAdVs to be tested for selectivity (cytotoxicity and replication) in tumor versus normal cell lines; permissibility (infection and replication) and toxicology in animals sensitive to both infection and pathological effects (most commonly Syrian hamsters for oHAdVs); pharmacokinetics, safety, and efficacy (oncolysis) in xenograft or syngeneic tumor model models; biodistribution including shedding using qPCR or infectivity assays to detect oHAdV in target and non-target tissues in xenograft or syngeneic tumor model models; and transgene activity (in vitro and/or in vivo, if available). In vivo models can require good laboratory practice (GLP) compliance, but non-GLP studies are acceptable if well designed and scientifically valid. These experiments are designed to inform on the clinical starting dose, safety pharmacology, and toxicokinetics and to inform on biosafety precautions for healthcare workers and close contacts. In terms of the guidance for the animal model requirements, IHC S6(R1) states that “if there are two pharmacologically relevant species for the clinical candidate (one rodent and one non-rodent), then both species should be used for short-term (up to 1 month duration) general toxicology studies.” However, it should be noted that most medical regulators will consider scientific justification for the models used to test toxicology, evidenced by the different models used in the various pre-clinical packages detailed in Table 4. Thus, it is very difficult to state a defined set of rules for which models must be used for pre-clinical testing as this will always depend on the characteristics of the therapeutic in question, and the scientific justification for the pre-clinical models used to address toxicology.
As an example, we have recently developed a pre-clinical package, which was deemed sufficient by regulators to initiate a phase 1 clinical trial, for a novel virus based on Ad5 with all three major capsid tropisms disabled (hexon, penton, and fiber knob were modified to no longer bind to factor X, common integrins, and CAR, respectively) and re-targeted to enter cells with a cancer-selective marker (αvβ6 integrin) through the introduction of a short peptide (A20) into the fiber knob protein. The virus was also engineered with the Δ24 mutation to limit replication to cancer cells and a transgene encoding for an anti-programmed death receptor ligand 1 antibody. The pre-clinical package for this virus included in vitro testing for specificity of infection and replication, in vitro testing for transgene production and functionality, healthy Syrian hamsters and healthy mice for toxicology and pharmacodynamics in normal tissues, and human tumor xenograft animal mice for efficacy based on oncolysis and pharmacodynamics in normal tissues and tumors. Importantly, pre-clinical packages that enable approval for phase 1 clinical trials are likely to vary depending on the specific virus used, the therapeutic payload, and the clinical trial design. Thus, the above case study is by no means a definitive example, but demonstrates how multiple different models (both in vitro and in vivo) can be used to answer the key questions (toxicology, immunity, efficacy, and pharmacodynamics) to guide an appropriate starting dose for clinical testing.

Conclusions
Animal models supporting infection and replication of other therapeutic viruses
Viral species	Animal models supporting infection and replication	References	 	Vaccinia virus	Mice, cotton rats, primate (Vero cells)	Venu et al.; Travieso et al.	 	Herpes simplex virus	Mice, rabbits, Syrian hamsters	Travieso et al.	 	Reovirus	Mice, Syrian hamsters, ferrets	Travieso et al.	 	Newcastle disease virus	Chickens, mice, hamsters, dogs	Travieso et al.	 	Vesicular stomatitis virus	Mice, hamsters, primates	Travieso et al.	 	Measles virus	Mice, primates, ferrets	Travieso et al.	 	Coxsackievirus	Mice, cotton rats	Travieso et al.
Although the focus of this review is on therapeutic oHAdVs, the most widely used viral species for cancer therapeutics, many of the considerations described in this review are also relevant for other therapeutic virotherapies for cancer. This includes vaccinia, herpes simplex virus, reovirus, Newcastle disease virus, vesicular stomatitis virus, measles virus, and coxsackievirus. Similarly to oHAdVs, pre-clinical models need to be considered based on whether they are compatible with viral infection and replication, although the majority of these other viral types have shown some ability to infect and replicate in mouse cells, including in some mouse tumors (Table 5). Additionally, for all of these viral species, any differences in interactions with normal tissues and the host immune system must be taken into account when considering toxicology, immune responses, and pharmacodynamics. Finally, although not all therapies that use these viral species encode human-specific immunotherapies, for those that do, efficacy can only be accurately inferred with a compatible immune system that can respond to the therapeutic payload.
The data from pre-clinical models discussed above suggest that, although some of the biology normally assessed during pre-clinical testing of therapeutic oHAdVs can be addressed with some in vivo or ex vivo/in vitro models, no single model can be used to answer all of the questions. For instance, while an immunocompromised mouse model with engraftment of a human PDX tumor and human immune cells is an attractive option for investing therapeutic oHAdV-based vector efficacy, it is not possible to assess acute toxicity, drug-host immune interactions, or pharmacokinetics in this model because of a lack of a competent immune system. Thus, because no single model fully addresses the complex and diverse mechanisms of action used by therapeutic oHAdVs, multiple models are required to develop a comprehensive pre-clinical package and to best understand the likely behavior of these promising therapeutic agents in humans.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Dr. David Krige, Dr. Alex Baker, and Prof. Alan Parker for helpful discussions.

Author contributions
D.K.C., R.C.K., J.A.D., and A.B.G. wrote the manuscript.

Declaration of interests
D.K.C., R.C.K., J.A.D., and A.B.G. are employees of Accession Therapeutics Ltd.

References
Viral Oncolysis
Adenovirus-mediated gene delivery: Potential applications for gene and cell-based therapies in the new era of personalized medicine
Oncolytic viruses: adenoviruses
Pouring petrol on the flames: Using oncolytic virotherapies to enhance tumour immunogenicity
Oncolytic Viruses and Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors: The “Hot” New Power Couple
Viral Infection of Tumors Overcomes Resistance to PD-1-immunotherapy by Broadening Neoantigenome-directed T-cell Responses
Oncolytic Adenoviruses in Cancer Treatment
Immune suppressive mechanisms in the tumor microenvironment
Animal Models in Human Adenovirus Research
Modeling the Efficacy of Oncolytic Adenoviruses In Vitro and In Vivo: Current and Future Perspectives
Prostate attenuated replication competent adenovirus (ARCA) CN706: a selective cytotoxic for prostate-specific antigen-positive prostate cancer cells
An adenovirus E1A mutant that demonstrates potent and selective systemic anti-tumoral efficacy
A mutant oncolytic adenovirus targeting the Rb pathway produces anti-glioma effect in vivo
Late viral RNA export, rather than p53 inactivation, determines ONYX-015 tumor selectivity
Foot-and-Mouth Disease Virus Forms a Highly Stable, EDTA-Resistant Complex with Its Principal Receptor, Integrin αvβ6: Implications for Infectiousness
Structure-Function Analysis of Arg-Gly-Asp Helix Motifs in αvβ6 Integrin Ligands
Efficient Intravenous Tumor Targeting Using the αvβ6 Integrin-Selective Precision Virotherapy Ad5NULL-A20
Ad5NULL-A20: A Tropism-Modified, αvβ6 Integrin-Selective Oncolytic Adenovirus for Epithelial Ovarian Cancer Therapies
Current clinical landscape of oncolytic viruses as novel cancer immunotherapeutic and recent preclinical advancements
STUDIES OF THE ADENOIDAL-PHARYNGEAL-CONJUNCTI-VAL (APC) GROUP OF VIRUSES1
Pathogenesis of adenovirus type 5 pneumonia in cotton rats (Sigmodon hispidus)
Pathology in Permissive Syrian Hamsters after Infection with Species C Human Adenovirus (HAdV-C) Is the Result of Virus Replication: HAdV-C6 Replicates More and Causes More Pathology than HAdV-C5
The Repertoire of Adenovirus in Human Disease: The Innocuous to the Deadly
Replication Properties of Human Adenovirus In Vivo and in Cultures of Primary Cells from Different Animal Species
Productive Replication of Human Adenovirus Type 5 in Canine Cells
INGN 007, an oncolytic adenovirus vector, replicates in Syrian hamsters but not mice: comparison of biodistribution studies
Syrian Hamster as an Animal Model for the Study on Infectious Diseases
An immune-competent, replication-permissive Syrian Hamster glioma model for evaluating Delta-24-RGD oncolytic adenovirus
Novel immunocompetent murine tumor models for the assessment of replication-competent oncolytic adenovirus efficacy
A novel immunocompetent murine model for replicating oncolytic adenoviral therapy
Binding of adenovirus species C hexon to prothrombin and the influence of hexon on vector properties in vitro and in vivo
Intravascular adenoviral agents in cancer patients: Lessons from clinical trials
Manipulating Adenovirus Hexon Hypervariable Loops Dictates Immune Neutralisation and Coagulation Factor X-dependent Cell Interaction In Vitro and In Vivo
Comparative Seroprevalence and Immunogenicity of Six Rare Serotype Recombinant Adenovirus Vaccine Vectors from Subgroups B and D
The role of Kupffer cell activation and viral gene expression in early liver toxicity after infusion of recombinant adenovirus vectors
Virus Binding to a Plasma Membrane Receptor Triggers Interleukin-1α-Mediated Proinflammatory Macrophage Response In Vivo
Adenovirus serotype 5 hexon is critical for virus infection of hepatocytes in vivo
Substitution of Hexon Hypervariable Region 5 of Adenovirus Serotype 5 Abrogates Blood Factor Binding and Limits Gene Transfer to Liver
Adenovirus Type 5 Interactions with Human Blood Cells May Compromise Systemic Delivery
Adenovirus-Platelet Interaction in Blood Causes Virus Sequestration to the Reticuloendothelial System of the Liver
Adenovirus-induced thrombocytopenia: the role of von Willebrand factor and P-selectin in mediating accelerated platelet clearance
Single intravenous administration of oncolytic adenovirus TILT-123 results in systemic tumor transduction and immune response in patients with advanced solid tumors
Modeling Pre-Existing Immunity to Adenovirus in Rodents: Immunological Requirements for Successful Development of a Recombinant Adenovirus Serotype 5-Based Ebola Vaccine
Tumour heterogeneity and resistance to cancer therapies
Translational value of mouse models in oncology drug development
Orthotopic and metastatic tumour models in preclinical cancer research
Syrian hamster as an ideal animal model for evaluation of cancer immunotherapy
New pancreatic carcinoma model for studying oncolytic adenoviruses in the permissive Syrian hamster
The Development of Next-generation PBMC Humanized Mice for Preclinical Investigation of Cancer Immunotherapeutic Agents
Humanized Mice for the Study of Immuno-Oncology
Oncolytic viruses for cancer immunotherapy
Adenovirus Serotype 5 Hexon Mediates Liver Gene Transfer
Adenovirus Receptors
ICH guideline S6 (R1) – preclinical safety evaluation of biotechnology-derived pharmaceuticals (EMA/CHMP/ICH/731268/1998)
An ex vivo loop system models the toxicity and efficacy of PEGylated and unmodified adenovirus serotype 5 in whole human blood
Preclinical Safety Studies of Enadenotucirev, a Chimeric Group B Human-Specific Oncolytic Adenovirus
Activity of a group B oncolytic adenovirus (ColoAd1) in whole human blood
An In Vitro Whole-Organ Liver Engineering for Testing of Genetic Therapies
In Vivo Tracking for Oncolytic Adenovirus Interactions with Liver Cells
Novel oncolytic adenovirus expressing enhanced cross-hybrid IgGA Fc PD-L1 inhibitor activates multiple immune effector populations leading to enhanced tumor killing in vitro, in vivo and with patient-derived tumor organoids
Improving immune–vascular crosstalk for cancer immunotherapy
The unique characteristics of tumor vasculature and preclinical evidence for its selective disruption by Tumor-Vascular Disrupting Agents
The Utility of a Tissue Slice Model System to Determine Breast Cancer Infectivity by Oncolytic Adenoviruses
Preclinical evaluation of an affinity-enhanced MAGE-A4-specific T-cell receptor for adoptive T-cell therapy
ONYX-015: mechanisms of action and clinical potential of a replication-selective adenovirus
Intravenous administration of ONYX-015, a selectively replicating adenovirus, induces antitumoral efficacy
ONYX-015, an E1B gene-attenuated adenovirus, causes tumor-specific cytolysis and antitumoral efficacy that can be augmented by standard chemotherapeutic agents
Development and Characterization of Recombinant Adenoviruses Encoding Human p53 for Gene Therapy of Cancer
Efficacy of multiple administrations of a recombinant adenovirus expressing wild-type p53 in an immune-competent mouse tumor model
CG0070, a Conditionally Replicating Granulocyte Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor–Armed Oncolytic Adenovirus for the Treatment of Bladder Cancer
Antitumor Activity of VB-111, a Novel Antiangiogenic Virotherapeutic, in Thyroid Cancer Xenograft Mouse Models
A conditionally replicative adenovirus with enhanced infectivity shows improved oncolytic potency
Preclinical Characterization of the Antiglioma Activity of a Tropism-Enhanced Adenovirus Targeted to the Retinoblastoma Pathway
Synergistic anti-tumor efficacy of immunogenic adenovirus ONCOS-102 (Ad5/3-D24-GM-CSF) and standard of care chemotherapy in preclinical mesothelioma model
Toxicological and bio-distribution profile of a GM-CSF-expressing, double-targeted, chimeric oncolytic adenovirus ONCOS-102 – Support for clinical studies on advanced cancer treatment
Systemic Toxicity–Efficacy Profile of ICOVIR-5, a Potent and Selective Oncolytic Adenovirus Based on the pRB Pathway
VCN-01 disrupts pancreatic cancer stroma and exerts antitumor effects
The oncolytic adenovirus VCN-01 promotes anti-tumor effect in primitive neuroectodermal tumor models
Safety and Efficacy of VCN-01, an Oncolytic Adenovirus Combining Fiber HSG-Binding Domain Replacement with RGD and Hyaluronidase Expression
Cytokine-Coding Oncolytic Adenovirus TILT-123 Is Safe, Selective, and Effective as a Single Agent and in Combination with Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor Anti-PD-1
Immunostimulatory oncolytic virotherapy for multiple myeloma targeting 4-1BB and/or CD40
Shaping the Tumor Stroma and Sparking Immune Activation by CD40 and 4-1BB Signaling Induced by an Armed Oncolytic Virus
215. Preclinical Development of ORCA-010, a Novel Potency-Enhanced Oncolytic Adenovirus
ORCA-010, a Novel Potency-Enhanced Oncolytic Adenovirus, Exerts Strong Antitumor Activity in Preclinical Models
Efficacy of oncolytic adenovirus expressing suicide genes and interleukin-12 in preclinical model of prostate cancer
Preclinical toxicology of oncolytic adenovirus-mediated cytotoxic and interleukin-12 gene therapy for prostate cancer
Preclinical Evaluation of AdVince, an Oncolytic Adenovirus Adapted for Treatment of Liver Metastases from Neuroendocrine Cancer
ICH Q5A(R2) Guideline on viral safety evaluation of biotechnology products derived from cell lines of human or animal origin (EMA/CHMP/ICH/804363/2022a)
Guideline on quality, non-clinical and clinical aspects of live recombinant viral vectored vaccines (EMA/CHMP/VWP/141697/2009)
Immunotoxicity Studies for Human Pharmaceuticals
Quality non-clinical and clinical issues relating specifically to recombinant adeno-associated viral vectors (EMEA/CHMP/GTWP/587488/2007)
EMA (2018). Guideline on strategies to identify and mitigate risks for first-in-human and early clinical trials with investigational medicinal products (EMEA/CHMP/SWP/28367/07 Rev. 1). www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/guideline-strategies-identify-and-mitigate-risks-first-human-and-early-clinical-trials-investigational-medicinal-products-revision-1_en.pdf.
EMA (2001). IHC S7A Guidance on safety pharmacology studies for human pharmaceuticals (CPMP/ICH/539/00). www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/ich-s-7-safety-pharmacology-studies-human-pharmaceuticals-step-5_en.pdf.
ICH S12 Guideline on nonclinical biodistribution considerations for gene therapy products (EMA/CHMP/ICH/318372/2021)
EMA (2018). ICH S9 guideline on nonclinical evaluation for anticancer pharmaceuticals - questions and answers (EMA/CHMP/ICH/453684/2016). www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/ich-s9-guideline-nonclinical-evaluation-anticancer-pharmaceuticals-questions-and-answers-step-5_en.pdf.
EMA (2008). Guideline on the non-clinical studies required prior to clinical use of gene therapy medicinal products (EMEA/CHMP/GTWP/125459/2006). www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/guideline-non-clinical-studies-required-first-clinical-use-gene-therapy-medicinal-products_en.pdf.
EMA (2014). Guideline on the quality, non-clinical and clinical aspects of gene therapy medicinal products (EMA/CAT/80183/2014). www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific-guideline/guideline-quality-non-clinical-and-clinical-aspects-gene-therapy-medicinal-products_en.pdf.
EMA (2008). International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use considerations: Oncolytic viruses (EMEA/CHMP/ICH/607698/2008).
Delta-24 adenoviral therapy for glioblastoma: evolution from the bench to bedside and future considerations
Multi-omics analysis reveals the dynamic interplay between Vero host chromatin structure and function during vaccinia virus infection
The use of viral vectors in vaccine development