Employing the International Classifications of Functioning, Disability, and Health to identify relevant categories for disability evaluation in older adults from the research perspective: a systematic review
INTRODUCTION
The objective of this study was to identify relevant aspects for disability evaluation used in scientific literature for older adults.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION
We employed a systematic review methodology as outlined by the ICF Research Branch. The methodology consists of four steps: 1) identifying studies that focus on disability evaluation among older adults; 2) identifying disability measures used in these studies; 3) linking the concepts contained in these measures to ICF categories; 4) conducting frequency analysis.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS
A total of 1942 concepts contained in disability measures from 137 studies were extracted. About 97.7% of the concepts could be linked, and 1862 concepts were linked to 52 second-level ICF categories. Of these, 44 categories found in at least 5% of the studies (range 5.1-85.4%) were selected to develop an outcome set that represents the relevant categories, including five categories in the Body Functions component and 39 categories from the Activities and Participation component.
CONCLUSIONS
The relevant categories identified in our study reflect the essential areas that measure disability for older adults, providing a scientific basis for developing an ICF Core Set for disability evaluation, in combination with further empirical study and expert survey. Information from the outcome set is also valuable for providing a standardized minimal set for disability measurement, which can be used for data comparison across different studies and the development of an ICF-based disability measurement tool.

Introduction
As the population ages and there continues to be a global rise in chronic health conditions, the incidence of disability among older adults is also increasing. Higher disability rates among older adults have become a significant public health challenge. Older adults with disabilities tend to have a higher risk of nursing home admission, morbidity, and mortality, incur high healthcare expenditures, and face an increased risk of falls and injuries, causing severe social, medical, and economic burdens. Thus, it is vital to identify older adults with disabilities for appropriate public health policy and planning. The measurement of disability is the first step and plays an increasingly important role in health care and policy making. It involves identifying care needs, matching interventions, setting priorities, and allocating resources.
However, disability has long suffered from a lack of consistent definitions and standardized health measurements. This lack of standardization leads to considerable diversity in various measures of disability, in terms of theoretical frameworks, terminology, content, and focus of evaluation. Variations in disability measurements also make international comparisons among various studies difficult. Furthermore, most disability measures are designed for the general population, and there are few assessment tools specifically designed for older adults. Assessment tools based on the general population are sometimes not suitable for older population. All these aspects pose major barriers to the development of disability epidemiology among older adults and further impede the development of interventions and measures required to maximize functioning and improve the quality of life for the older population experiencing disability.
The International Classification of Functioning, Disability, and Health (ICF), proposed by the World Health Organization (WHO), provides an international standard for describing and measuring disability. The ICF offers a biopsychosocial model that encompasses multidimensional aspects of disability and considers functioning and disability as outcomes of the interactions between health conditions and contextual factors. In the ICF framework, “Disability” is defined as an umbrella term, including impairments, activity limitations, and participation restrictions. The ICF provides a basis for defining and measuring disability from the body, person, and social perspective. However, the ICF consists of more than 1,400 categories, making its comprehensive application in disability measurement challenging. To address this, the WHO and the ICF Research Branch have established a scientifically-based process for developing ICF Core Sets, which prioritizes categories relevant to specific patient populations. This process begins with a preparatory phase, followed by an international consensus conference that integrates evidence from four preparatory studies. One essential preparatory study is a systematic literature review, which reflects research perspectives aiming to identify the aspects of functioning described, evaluated, or measured within the scientific literature. Together with the other three preparatory studies, including an empirical multicenter study, an expert survey, and a qualitative study, these results provide a solid foundation for the formal final consensus phase from different perspectives.
Since the ICF Research Branch standardized the development process and enhanced the quality of core sets, the development of ICF Core Sets has accelerated. These core sets are now available for various conditions to support different patient populations in daily practice, including those with neurological, cardiopulmonary, musculoskeletal conditions, and traumatic brain injury. However, to date, no ICF Core Set specifically for disability evaluation in older adults has been developed using this methodology. One study reported the development of an ICF Core Set for disability evaluation, but it was designed for functional assessment in disability claims within European social security systems. Additionally, although two ICF Core Sets have been developed for community-living older adults, they primarily address health-related problems in primary care settings. Furthermore, while a post-acute ICF Core Set has been developed for older adults in early post-acute rehabilitation facilities, its target population and application contexts differ from those of our research objective.
Consequently, the aim of the present study is to develop an outcome set following the guidelines outlined by the ICF Research Branch, which serves as the foundation for developing an ICF Core Set for disability evaluation in older adults. The initial step involved conducting a comprehensive literature review to assess existing measures of disability for this demographic. We then used the ICF as a conceptual framework to identify relevant categories based on disability measures in scientific literature to develop our outcome set. This set aims to provide a scientific basis for developing an ICF Core Set for disability evaluation in older adults, supported by further empirical studies and expert surveys. The ICF Core Set may serve as a practical tool for understanding the most prevalent and pivotal disability categories within older adults, thereby enabling more effective provision of optimal care and support tailored to their needs. Additionally, the information from the ICF Core Set provides a generic, standardized minimal set for disability measurement in older people, facilitating data comparison and the development of new measures.

Evidence acquisition
This systematic review was conducted in accordance with the guidelines and recommendations of the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA). Our review aims to answer the following research question: “what are the most relevant aspects of disability for older adults from the researcher’s perspective?” In response to this question, the method of our study is divided into four steps: 1) literature search and study selection to identify studies focusing on the disability evaluation of older adults; 2) data extraction to identify outcome measures used in these studies to measure disability; 3) linkage of the underlying concepts contained in these measures to ICF categories using the established linking rules; and 4) frequency analysis of the linked categories.

Literature search
A systematic literature search was conducted in May 2021 across the databases of PubMed, EMBASE, CINAHL, and Scopus. The search was performed in two steps: First, both free text and thesaurus terms of the respective databases (e.g., Medical Subject Headings in PubMed and Emtree terms in EMBASE) were organized to reflect the key concepts involved in the research question. These concepts were “disability,” “older adults,” and “assessment.” The search terms were then modified according to the search results to ensure that key terms were included in the final search. The ICF-CS development guidelines suggest that the review usually includes scientific literature no older than ten years; therefore, peer-reviewed journal articles in English or Chinese published between 2011 and 2021 were considered. The initial search strategy was piloted on PubMed and was then adapted and translated to other databases. The final search strategy is available in Supplementary Digital Material 1 (Supplementay Text File 1). The inclusion and exclusion criteria were based on the PICOS (Population, Intervention, Control, Outcomes, and Study design) framework. According to the aim of this review, only the “P,” “O,” and “S” components were applicable to our research. Our target population included older adults, defined by the World Health Organization’s age classification as individuals aged 60 years and above. Within the Outcomes component, we included all types of outcome measures related to the functional disability of older adults, such as technical, clinical, and patient-reported measures. To enhance the generalizability and applicability of our findings across diverse international contexts, we deliberately excluded national standards for disability evaluation that were developed from a social security perspective. The study designs included in our criteria, as recommended in the ICF-CS development guidelines, were randomized controlled trials, clinical controlled trials, cross-sectional studies, and observational studies. Table I provides further details on the inclusion and exclusion criteria used in this review.
—Inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Category	Inclusion criteria	Exclusion criteria	 	Population: general older adults	The participants included were older adults, defined as individuals aged 60 years and above	Focus exclusively on other age groups (e.g. Children) or caregivers or professional staffs or 1 specific patient population (e.g., stroke, and dementia)	 	Outcomes: disability evaluation	Any kind of outcome measures related to the functional disability of older adults (e.g., technical, clinical, and patient-reported measures) were included	1) Disease-specific questionnaires were excluded2) National standards for disability evaluation were excluded as the development of the instruments were from the social security perspective	 	Study design	As suggested in the ICF- CS development guidelines, randomized controlled trials, clinical controlled trials, cross-sectional studies, and observational studies were included	1) Qualitative studies, study protocols, case studies, economic evaluation studies, conference papers, psychometric studies, prevention studies, studies of phase- II clinical trials, studies exclusively showing laboratory parameters, animal experiments, letters, comments, and editorials were excluded2) The study reported the development or modifications of the original questionnaire and/or the initial validation of the original questionnaire were not included3) Systematic reviews and meta- analyses were not included in this review

Selection of studies
All identified studies were exported to EndNote (Version X7), and duplicates were removed. Two investigators independently screened the titles and abstracts that resulted from the search. We used a scoring system to identify which abstracts to include for full-text review following the inclusion and exclusion criteria described above: 0 = excluded, 1 = uncertainty about the eligibility, 2 = included. Subsequently, the scores of both reviewers were summed and studies with scores 2 points or more were considered for full-text screening. Significant disagreements between the first and second reviewer, (with one of the reviewers scored an article as 2 while the other reviewer scored it as 0) were resolved by consulting with a third reviewer. Inter-rater reliability was calculated by Cohen’s Kappa. Due to the large volume of abstracts from the full-text screening, we followed the ICF Core Sets development guidelines to select a random sample of full texts. To ensure a comprehensive capture of the research perspective, as per methodologies used in previous ICF Core Set studies, data analysis continued until two consecutive samples revealed less than 5% new ICF categories, indicating no significant new information. The sample size was set at 100 to ensure manageability and adequate coverage of information. The random sample was generated using a random integer set generator. The initial screening of 100 random studies was performed by two independent researchers based on eligibility criteria. Disagreements were resolved through discussion, and a third reviewer was consulted when consensus was not possible. The procedure was repeated for subsequent samples until no new significant ICF categories emerged from two consecutive sets, demonstrating the thoroughness of data coverage.

Data extraction, linking and frequency analysis
After full-text screening, the data of interest included: 1) characteristics of the study participants (such as gender, type of sample, and country where they were recruited); 2) outcome measures related to functional disability of older adults (e.g., clinical, and patient-reported measures); 3) study design (such as randomized controlled trials, cross-sectional studies, and observational studies) were extracted in duplicate by two independent reviewers. The meaningful concepts were extracted within the outcome measures and linked to ICF categories following the established linking rules. Then the two reviewers compared their data extraction and linking results, discussed disagreements, and came to a consensus. A third reviewer may be invited to reconcile disagreements between the two researchers. Finally, the linking results in two consecutive samples were compared to see if no more than 5% new categories were presented. The process of the data extraction and linking is shown in Figure 1.
—Process of data extraction and linking.
The ICF classification is a hierarchical coding system, arranged in increasing levels of detail. It consists of two parts, “functioning and disability” and “contextual factors”. Each part has two components. The former includes “Body Functions (b), and Body Structures (s)” and Activities and Participation (d)” while the latter incorporates “Environmental Factors (e)” and “Personal Factors”. Each ICF component consists of multiple domains, and each domain consists of categories that are the classification units. The letters b, s, d, and e, represent the different components, followed by an alphanumeric code indicating the category and its level (up to four levels). The first digit corresponds to the chapter number (first level), 3 digits to the second level, 4 digits to the third level, and 5 digits to the fourth level. The structure, content, and coding of the ICF are shown in Figure 2.
—Structure, content, and coding of ICF.
According to the linking rules established by the ICF Research Branch, the linking process was performed in four steps: Step 1, listed each item of the extracted outcome measures before starting the linking process. Step 2, each linker independently identified the meaningful concept from the items. When an item encompasses multiple meaningful concepts, we prioritize the central concept that captures the core intent of the item. This approach is crucial because linking additional concepts without a clear understanding of the item’s context or intended purpose can obscure its fundamental objective. This method ensures that the main purpose of the item is not overshadowed by less relevant details, thereby maintaining clarity and accuracy throughout the linking process. Furthermore, the response options of an item were linked if they contained meaningful concepts. Step 3, each linker decided the most precise ICF category that corresponds to the concepts meaning. When selecting the most precise category to describe one aspect of functioning, one should first assign the item to the appropriate component, and then to the domain and chapter. Finally, select the category that best describes the functioning within that chapter. Step 4, the linkers discussed incongruency and agreed upon one category. A third linker may be needed to reconcile when disagreements between the two linkers. In addition, the linking rules also provide guidance for concepts that cannot be linked. The cases are listed as follows: 1) If the meaningful concept is not contained in the ICF then it is assigned to nc (not covered); 2) If the information provided by the meaningful concept belongs to the universe of the ICF, but is insufficient to link to the most accurate ICF category, assign the concept to nd (not definable); 3) If the meaningful concept is a personal factor as defined in the ICF, then the meaningful concept is assigned to pf (personal factors).
This paper only reports first and second-level ICF categories. If a concept was linked to a third-level or fourth-level ICF category, the corresponding second-level category was included for analysis. Kappa coefficients were calculated at the first and second -level categories to judge the degree of agreement between the two linkers. Finally, a frequency analysis was done on the linked categories. The ICF category that repeatedly shows up in a publication is counted only once. We included the ICF categories identified in at least 5% of the publications as relevant categories for disability evaluation in older adults.

Evidence synthesis

Study selection
A total of 7,592 publications were identified. After removing duplicates, a total of 6982 publications were left. After the title and abstract scoring and selection, 486 articles were eligible for full-text screening. Of these, two computer-generated random samples of 100 articles were assessed for eligibility. Following the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 137 studies were included in the data extraction and linking procedures. The most frequent reasons for exclusion were, ineligible patient population (N.=27), irrelevant outcome (N.=22), ineligible study design (N.=4), and unclear outcome or population (N.=4). The study selection flow chart is shown in Figure 3. Cohen’s Kappa was 0.58 in the title and abstract scoring stage, indicating a moderate agreement. The references list of the included studies can be found in Supplementary Digital Material 2 (Supplementary Text File 2).
—Study selection flow chart.

Study characteristics
One hundred and thirty-seven studies were included in the data extraction procedure, of which 130 were performed in 25 different countries and seven were performed in multiple countries. Of the 130 published studies, 27.7% of the studies were conducted in the USA (N.=36), 14.6% in Brazil (N.=19), and 11.5% in China (N.=15). The total number of participants in the included studies ranged from 50 to 41,467 and were distributed across 125 observational studies (e.g., observational longitudinal studies, observational cross-sectional studies), three intervention studies, and nine secondary analyses studies. In our study, females comprised more than 50% of the participants in 115 studies (83.9%), and four studies (2.9%) exclusively involved female participants. The majority of published studies (N.=79) investigated community-dwelling older adults, with 43 studies recruiting a population-based sample. The remaining studies (N.=15) included samples from institutions including nursing homes, hospitals or rehabilitation clinics. A summary of the characteristics of the included studies can be found in Supplementary Digital Material 3 (Supplementary Table I, II).

Linking results
Of the 137 included studies, 25 standardized measures were identified in 48.2% of the studies (N.=66), including eight clinical measures and 17 patient-reported measures. Clinical measures include tests of physical impairment and tests to assess daily activities, for example, Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB), 30-second chair stand, physical performance (PP) tests, or a 6-minute walk. Of these, the most frequently used clinical measures were SPPB. Standardized patient-reported measures were fully structured self-reported questionnaires with standardized questions, answer options, and published evidence for validity and reliability. Among them, Katz Index was the most frequently used questionnaires, and was reported in 14 articles, followed sequentially by the World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS) 2.0 short version (N.=13), Lawton and Brody Instrumental Activities of Daily Living Scale (LB-IADL) (N.=11), WHODAS 2.0 full version (N.=9), and Barthel Index (N.=9). The complete list of the clinical and fully structured patient-reported measures can be found in Supplementary Digital Material 4 (Supplementary Table III). The remaining 71 (51.8%) studies used a variety of non-standardized self-reported measurements to measure disability, for example, measures specially designed for the study and measures adapted from the standardized questionnaires. The activities of Daily Living (ADL), instrumental activities of daily living (IADL), and mobility were the most common domains of included standardized and non-standardized outcome measures. A summary of the domains assessed among the included outcome measures can be found in Supplementary Digital Material 3.
From the selected outcome measures, 1942 concepts were extracted. Following the linking rules, 1897 concepts (97.7%) were linked to ICF components while 45 (2.3%) concepts could not be linked. Of the 1897 concepts, 35 concepts were linked to three different first-level ICF categories including d4 mobility (N.=3), d6 domestic life (N.=22), and d9 community, social, and civic life (N.=9). One thousand eight hundred and sixty-two concepts were linked to 52 different second-level categories. Table II presents the frequency of second-level ICF categories identified in the outcome measures. As can be seen, the second-level ICF categories identified were six (11.5%) from the Body Functions component, 44 (84.6%) from the Activities and Participation component, and two (3.8%) from the Environmental Factors component. None of the concepts were linked to categories from the Body Structures component. Of the 45 concepts that could not be linked, two were coded as “not covered,” including “equivalent of institutional care or hospital care,” and “signs or symptoms of disease.” Forty-one were coded as “not definable,” including general health influenced by related factors, activities that are too general to be linked to a specific category such as “staying by yourself for a few days,” “leaving the home,” and “ability to carry on normal activities.” The Cohen’s Kappa at the first and second-levels between the two linkers were 0.571 and 0.422, indicating a moderate agreement. Two consecutive samples were linked to 52 identical ICF categories and identified 3.8% new categories.
—Frequency of the second-level ICF categories identified in the outcome measures.
Chapter	Second-level category	N. (%)	 	b Body functions	 	b6 Genitourinary and reproductive functions	b620 Urination functions	32 (23.4%)	 	b5 Functions of the digestive, metabolic and endocrine systems	b525 Defecation functions	31 (22.6%)	 	b1 Mental functions	b152 Emotional functions	24 (17.5%)	 	b1 Mental functions	b140 Attention functions	22 (16.1%)	 	b1 Mental functions	b144 Memory functions	10 (7.3%)	 	b1 Mental functions	b164 Higher-level cognitive functions	1 (0.7%)	 	d Activities and participation	 	d5 Self-care	d540 Dressing	117 (85.4%)	 	d5 Self-care	d510 Washing oneself	110 (80.3%)	 	d5 Self-care	d550 Eating	92 (67.2%)	 	d4 Mobility	d450 Walking	80 (58.4%)	 	d5 Self-care	d530 Toileting	76 (55.5%)	 	d6 Domestic life	d640 Doing housework	71 (51.8%)	 	d4 Mobility	d410 Changing basic body position	61 (44.6%)	 	d6 Domestic life	d620 Acquisition of goods and services	61 (44.5%)	 	d6 Domestic life	d630 Preparing meals	55 (40.1%)	 	d4 Mobility	d420 Transferring oneself	53 (38.7%)	 	d8 Major life areas	d860 Basic economic transactions	51 (37.2%)	 	d8 Major life areas	d865 Complex economic transactions	51 (37.2%)	 	d4 Mobility	d455 Moving around	50 (36.5%)	 	d4 Mobility	d460 Moving around in different locations	47 (34.3%)	 	d5 Self-care	d570 Looking after one’s health	45 (32.8%)	 	d4 Mobility	d470 Using transportation	45 (32.8%)	 	d3 communication	d360 Using communication devices and techniques	40 (29.2%)	 	d5 Self-care	d520 Caring for body parts	33 (24.1%)	 	d4 Mobility	d415 Maintaining a body position	28 (20.4%)	 	d7 Interpersonal interactions and relationships	d750 Informal social relationships	24 (17.5%)	 	d9 community, social and civic life	d910 Community life	24 (17.5%)	 	d1 learning and applying knowledge	d155 Acquiring skills	22 (16.1%)	 	d1 learning and applying knowledge	d160 Focusing attention	22 (16.1%)	 	d7 Interpersonal interactions and relationships	d730 Relating with strangers	22 (16.1%)	 	d8 Major life areas	d859 Work and employment, unspecified	22 (16.1%)	 	d9 community, social and civic life	d920 Recreation and leisure	19 (13.9%)	 	d4 Mobility	d430 Lifting and carrying objects	14 (10.2%)	 	d7 Interpersonal interactions and relationships	d770 Intimate relationships	10 (7.3%)	 	d2 General tasks and demands	d210 Undertaking a single task	10 (7.3%)	 	d7 Interpersonal interactions and relationships	d799 Interpersonal interactions and relationships, unspecified	10 (7.3%)	 	d1 learning and applying knowledge	d175 Solving problems	9 (6.6%)	 	d2 General tasks and demands	d220 Undertaking multiple tasks	9 (6.6%)	 	d3 communication	d310 Communicating with - receiving - spoken messages	9 (6.6%)	 	d3 communication	d350 Conversation	9 (6.6%)	 	d4 Mobility	d445 Hand and arm use	9 (6.6%)	 	d7 Interpersonal interactions and relationships	d720 Complex interpersonal interactions	9 (6.6%)	 	d8 Major life areas	d870 Economic self-sufficiency	9 (6.6%)	 	d9 community, social and civic life	d940 Human rights	9 (6.6%)	 	d4 Mobility	d440 Fine hand use	7 (5.1%)	 	d6 Domestic life	d650 Caring for household objects	4 (2.9%)	 	d5 Self-care	d560 Drinking	3 (2.1%)	 	d6 Domestic life	d660 Assisting others	3 (2.1%)	 	d7 Interpersonal interactions and relationships	d760 Family relationships	1 (0.7%)	 	d8 Major life areas	d855 Non-remunerative employment	1 (0.7%)	 	e Environmental factors	 	e1 products and technology	e120 Products and technology for personal indoor and outdoor mobility and transportation	4 (2.9%)	 	e1 products and technology	e115 Products and technology for personal use in daily living	3 (2.1%)
Of the 52 second-level categories linked to concepts, 44 (84.6%) were found in at least 5% of the studies (range 5.1-85.4%) representing the relevant categories to measure disability, including five (11.4%) from the Body Functions component, and 39 (88.7%) from the Activities and Participation component. Of these, most of the categories were from the Activities and Participation component, and each of the nine chapters contained in this component identified ICF categories. The chapters with the most categories assigned in this component were: d4 mobility (N.=10), d5 self-care (N.=7), d6 domestic life (N.=5), and d7 interpersonal interactions and relationships (N.=5). The remaining chapters included in the “Activities and Participation component” were d8 Major life areas (N.=4), d9 community, social, and civic life (N.=3), d1 learning and applying knowledge (N.=3), d3 communication (N.=3), and d2 general tasks and demands (N.=2). Within the Body Functions component, categories from three different chapters were identified including b1 mental functions (N.=3), b5 functions of the digestive, metabolic, and endocrine systems (N.=1), and b6 genitourinary and reproductive functions (N.=1). The most frequently identified categories in our study from chapter d4, d5 and d6, were d540 dressing (85.4%), d510 washing oneself (80.3%), d550 eating (67.2%), d450 walking (58.4%), d530 toileting (55.5%) and d640 doing housework (51.8%). Ultimately, we identified relevant categories to develop an outcome set for evaluating disability among older adults. The outcome set is shown in Figure 4.
—The outcome set for disability measurement in older adults.

Discussion
This paper employed a systematic review approach to examine existing disability measures for older adults within the scientific literature. Utilizing the methodology proposed by the ICF Research Branch, we systematically extracted and analyzed concepts related to functional disability from the outcome measures and linked them to ICF categories. Our study revealed that 97.7% of the extracted concepts could be linked to ICF categories, demonstrating the utility of the ICF as an international framework for conceptualizing and classifying disability. Additionally, 84.6% of the ICF categories, identified in at least 5% of the studies, were used to construct an outcome set, and 70.5% of the concepts appeared in at least 10% of the studies, indicating high relevance in the outcome set. A total of 44 ICF categories were included in the outcome set, comprising 5 from the Body Functions component and 39 from the Activities and Participation component. These categories capture the researchers’ perspectives on the most relevant aspects for evaluating potential disability in older adults, marking a crucial first step toward developing an ICF Core Set for this population. Moreover, the ICF provides a uniform and standardized international terminology system, ensuring the universal applicability of the outcome set. Thus, this generic, standardized, minimal set not only identifies key areas of disability but also facilitates data comparison and aids in developing new ICF-based disability measures for older adults, independent of any specific diseases or previous health conditions. To our knowledge, this is the first time that an ICF Core Set has been developed from a research perspective for measuring disability in older adults. The present review provides a timely, comprehensive, and valuable overview of disability measurement in the older population over the past decade.
In this review, we identified various outcome measures for assessing disability in older adults, encompassing both clinical and patient-reported measures. Clinical measures, which are performance-based, contrast with patient-reported measures that rely on self-reports and proxy reports on functioning. Most of the included studies utilized self-reported measures, while performance-based measures (e.g., SPPB, 30-second chair stand, and 6-minute walk) accounted for only a small proportion. Self-reported measures dominated the research focus primarily because they are cost-effective and easy to administer. In contrast, performance-based measures, despite offering more objective and reliable evaluations, are less favored due to their need for specialized equipment, rigorous standardization, greater time and financial investments. However, the validity of self-reported measures can be compromised if older adults have an inaccurate perception of their functional abilities or if they face difficulty in accurately reporting them. Therefore, combining these two methods may be the best approach to obtain a comprehensive picture of an individual’s disability in the future.
Approximately half of the included studies used standardized outcome measures, including clinical measures and patient-reported measures. Among these, the Katz Index, WHODAS 2.0 short version, LB-IADL, WHODAS 2.0 full version, and Barthel Index were the most popular tools. Of these popular tools, only the Katz Index and LB-IADL scale are specifically designed for older adults. Although other measures like WHODAS 2.0 were not specifically developed for older adults, they are widely used in this demographic. However, certain items, such as “work performance” and “sexual relationships” were found to be unsuitable for assessing disability in older adults. “Work performance” often fails to reflect the realities of many older adults who are retired or no longer in the workforce. Similarly, “sexual relationships” may not be a relevant aspect of life for older adults, whose interest and involvement in sexual activities can significantly decline with age. Including these items without careful consideration could misrepresent the disability levels within older populations. Furthermore, more than half of the included studies utilized a variety of non-standardized measurements to assess disability, for example, measures specially designed for the studies or those adapted from standardized questionnaires. However, the value of these measures was limited due to ambiguous concepts and definitions, reliance on clinical impressions, the absence of a sound theoretical underpinning, and inadequate psychometric properties, leading to poor reproducibility and impracticality. Thus, the lack of proper disability measurement designed for older adults, inconsistencies in outcome measures, and the irrationality of items contained in the measures posed significant challenges for researchers in selecting the most appropriate measurements for their studies, as well as in comparing and interpreting the results of different studies. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a practical and universal instrument to more accurately measure disability in older adults.
Although disability has long suffered from a lack of consistent definition and measurement tools, most measures share several common elements. We found that ADLs, IADLs, and mobility were the most commonly assessed domains. A previous systematic review on self-reported disability questionnaires for the older adults also identified the same domains among the included questionnaires. Impairments in ADLs, IADLs, and mobility are associated with the early manifestations of disability. ADLs are the fundamental activities (e.g., bathing, dressing, toileting, and eating) typically needed to maintain the basic physical needs of older adults. In contrast, IADLs include more complex activities required for independent living, involving an individual’s ability to cope with the environment, such as shopping, housekeeping, preparing meals, and doing laundry. The specific tasks in ADLs and IADLs vary in different studies, but typically each domain contains five to seven activities. ADLs and IADLs are considered prerequisites for living independently at home. Another key component of independent functioning is mobility. Mobility encompasses various forms of movement, including changing body positions, transferring, walking, running, climbing, and using any form of transportation. Older adults with limited mobility are likely to experience a poorer quality of life, obtain fewer health care services, and face social isolation. Additionally, limited mobility poses significant risks for disability, nursing home placement, and premature death among the older population. As ADLs, IADLs, and mobility are critically important for research, practice, and public health policy in aging, these areas attract the most research attention. The continuous focus on ADLs, IADLs, and mobility in disability research underscores their fundamental importance in human life and has been particularly useful in enhancing data comparison across time, regions, and populations.
Unsurprisingly, most of the categories are from the Activities and Participation component, with d4 mobility, d5 self-care, and d6 domestic life being the chapters with the most assigned categories and the most frequently used in this component. This is because decades-long disability research has focused on ADLs, IADLs, and mobility, as mentioned earlier. Moreover, our study identified a wide range of other relevant categories for older adults with disabilities, including interacting with others, communication, participating in community, social and civic life, and learning and applying knowledge. With a shift from a “medical model” to a “biopsychosocial model” in disability research over recent decades, the scope of disability measurement has expanded. The traditional focus on ADLs, IADLs, and mobility may be restrictive. Contemporary researchers are trying to include other activities that people value and spend time on as indicators of disability; thus, a series of new indicators have been identified. Therefore, it is essential to consider more activities of life beyond the traditional focus in order to provide a comprehensive picture of disability evaluation among older adults.
Another important component included in the outcome set is Body Functions, with the majority of categories assigned to b1 mental functions. This chapter concerns the functions of the brain, including global mental functions and specific mental functions. Three specific mental functions, i.e., attention, memory, and emotional functions were identified in the mental functions chapter. Research has consistently shown that disability is associated with the ability to perform basic physical activities as well as with global and specific cognitive abilities. Moreover, psychological factors, such as emotional functions, can act as facilitators or barriers to disability. The transition to the biopsychosocial model recognizes disability as a complex, dynamic, and multidimensional concept, viewing it as the result of interactions between physical and/or cognitive impairments as well as environmental and/or psychological factors. However, our outcome set did not include the Environmental Factors component; only two categories linked to this component were identified, resulting in their absence from the outcome set. Furthermore, the ICF Core Set for disability evaluation in European social security systems did not include environmental factors. This finding was surprising because environment factors have a huge impact on the experience and extent of disability. The physical, social, and attitudinal environments in which people live can act as facilitators or barriers, influencing their functioning and playing a measurable role in disability. Unfortunately, most of the current outcome measures omit these important concepts. To gain a clearer understanding of the living environments of people with disabilities and their impacts on various aspects of disability, developing appropriate tools that include environmental factors would fill this research gap. Such factors will promote the identification of cost-effective environmental interventions. Furthermore, none of the concepts were linked to categories from the Body Structures component, possibly because we excluded disease-specific questionnaires and specific patient populations in our inclusion and exclusion criteria.
Our study uniquely contributes by synthesizing a diverse range of disability-related concepts from the literature into an outcome set that emphasizes the Activities and Participation component, directly addressing the daily challenges faced by older adults. This approach parallels the work of Tomandl et al., who also highlighted these categories within primary care settings, thus extending the scope of everyday health management beyond mere disability evaluations. In contrast, the core set developed by Spoorenberg et al. through a Delphi study achieves a balanced integration of various ICF components, namely Body Functions, Activities and Participation, and Environmental Factors. This core set offers a holistic view of general health for community-dwelling older adults who do not suffer from dementia, reflecting a comprehensive health perspective. However, our study did not extensively cover Environmental Factors, indicating an area for further holistic integration to address the broader contexts impacting older adults’ functionality. Focused on disability evaluation, our study complements two existing ICF Core Sets designed primarily for functioning within community-dwelling older populations. Integrating these functional assessments with disability evaluations could provide a more nuanced understanding of the needs of older adults, facilitating holistic geriatric care that recognizes both the challenges and potentials of this demographic. Additionally, the post-acute ICF Core Set developed by Grill et al. for geriatric patients in rehabilitation settings illustrates a detailed focus on acute recovery needs, essential for transitional care phases, and further emphasizes the need for diverse core sets tailored to specific care contexts.

Limitations of the study
Some limitations of our study need to be acknowledged. First, we only included peer-reviewed journals in English or Chinese; thus, relevant studies published in other languages may have been missed. Second, due to the overwhelming number of abstracts during the full-text screening stage, we adopted a random selection of full articles. Although we used the method of sample saturation to comprehensively capture categories to the maximum extent, this approach might lead to the underestimation of ICF categories that are especially relevant for older adults with disabilities. Third, while our review included a range of research methods such as observational and intervention studies, we did not include qualitative studies, which are crucial for understanding the lived experiences of older adults with disabilities in depth. Moreover, the outcome set developed in our study reflects the research perspective; therefore, it is necessary to screen for categories that are sufficiently reliable and sensitive to measure disability, in conjunction with validation studies. Additionally, our review did not systematically explore the potential variability in disability among older adults across different geographical and cultural contexts. Recognizing this gap, future research should investigate how specific aspects of disability may differ by region and culture, thereby enhancing the relevance of our findings for diverse older adult populations. Finally, the minimal standardized set we developed represents an acceptable baseline but may not be sufficient for evaluating disability comprehensively. Additional studies such as expert surveys, qualitative studies, and clinical studies can be considered to enhance the outcome set’s practical usefulness based on their specific valuation focus.

Conclusions
Our review provides valuable information to facilitate a comprehensive understanding of disability measurements within older populations. In this review, we identified various existing outcome measures for assessing disability in older adults, including self-reported measures, performance-based measures, and both standardized and non-standardized measures. ADLs, IADLs, and mobility were the most frequently assessed domains in the included measures. We utilized the ICF as a conceptual framework to systematically identify meaningful concepts related to functional disability. These concepts were then used to construct an outcome set that encompasses the most relevant categories from a research perspective. This set primarily focuses on the Activities and Participation component and the Body Functions component, whereas environmental factors were not addressed. Developing appropriate tools, including environmental factors, is necessary to fill the research gaps.

Supplementary Digital Material 1

Supplementary Digital Material 2

Supplementary Digital Material 3

Supplementary Digital Material 4
Conflicts of interest: The authors certify that there is no conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the material discussed in the manuscript.

References
World Health Organization. World Bank. World report on disability. Geneva: WHO; 2011.
World Health Organization. World report on ageing and health. Geneva: WHO; 2015.
Predicting nursing home admission in the U.S: a meta-analysis.
Prevalence of functional disability in activities of daily living (ADL), instrumental activities of daily living (IADL) and associated factors, as predictors of morbidity and mortality.
Functional disability and health care expenditures for older persons.
Prevention of falls and consequent injuries in elderly people.
World Health Organization. Measuring health and disability: manual for WHO Disability Assessment Schedule (WHODAS 2.0). Geneva: WHO; 2010.
The Concept and Epidemiology of Disability.
Content comparison of self-reported disability measures for the elderly according to the international classification of functioning, disability and health.
Disability Experience and Measurement.
The measurement of disability in the older people: a systematic review of self-reported questionnaires.
World Health Organization. The International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health. Geneva: WHO; 2001.
World Health Organization. How to use the ICF: a practical manual for using the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF). Exposure draft for comment. Geneva: WHO; 2013.
A guide on how to develop an International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health Core Set.
Development of ICF core set for disability evaluation in social security.
The Geriatric ICF Core Set reflecting health-related problems in community-living older adults aged 75 years and older without dementia: development and validation.
Laying the foundation for a Core Set of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health for community-dwelling older adults in primary care: relevant categories of their functioning from the research perspective, a scoping review.
ICF Core Set for geriatric patients in early post-acute rehabilitation facilities.
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews.
Refinements of the ICF Linking Rules to strengthen their potential for establishing comparability of health information.
Ahmad OB, Boschi-Pinto C, Lopez AD, Murray CJ, Lozano R, Inoue M. Age standardization of rates: a new WHO standard. Geneva: World Health Organization. 2001.
Ability and Disability in Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Literature Review Employing the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health-Children and Youth Version.
Random.org. Random integer set generator; 2018 [Internet]. Available from: https://www.random.org/integer-sets/ [cited 2024, Jul 12].
Linking health-status measurements to the international classification of functioning, disability and health.
ICF linking rules: an update based on lessons learned.
Assessment of Activities of Daily Living, Self-Care, and Independence.
Mild cognitive impairment and deficits in instrumental activities of daily living: a systematic review.
Psychometric properties of the PAT: an assessment tool for ADL performance of older people living in residential homes.
Pain intensity is associated with both performance-based disability and self-reported disability in a sample of older adults attending primary health care centers.
A protective personal factor against disability and dependence in the elderly: an ordinal regression analysis with nine geographically-defined samples from Spain.
M B, Anegawa T, Munuswamy S. Progressive disability in older people population among tribals of Telangana: a cross-sectional study.
Domains of Functional Impairment and Their Associations with Thwarted Belonging and Perceived Burden in Older Adults.
Quality of life at older ages: evidence from the English longitudinal study of aging (wave 1).
Assessing self-maintenance: activities of daily living, mobility, and instrumental activities of daily living.
Disability for basic and instrumental activities of daily living in older individuals.
Innovations in Geroscience to enhance mobility in older adults.
Mobility and aging: new directions for public health action.
Health-related quality of life in older adults at risk for disability.
Barriers to health care access among the elderly and who perceives them.
Relation of late-life social activity with incident disability among community-dwelling older adults.
Instruments to assess mobility limitation in community-dwelling older adults: a systematic review.
Mediating relationships within the Disablement Process model: a cross-sectional study of the oldest-old.
Motivation to perform activities of daily living in the institutionalized older adult: can a leopard change its spots?
Effects of changes in depressive symptoms and cognitive functioning on physical disability in home care elders.
Baseline disability in activities of daily living predicts dementia risk even after controlling for baseline global cognitive ability and depressive symptoms.
Environmental barriers and supports to everyday participation: a qualitative insider perspective from people with disabilities.
Cross-sectional and Longitudinal Associations of Environmental Factors with Frailty and Disability in Older People.
Conceptual and operational considerations in identifying socioenvironmental factors associated with disability among community-dwelling adults.