Team-based approach to arteriovenous access management
More than 800,000 people live with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) in the United States, and the incidence continues to rise. Further, the treatment landscape is evolving due to increasing prevalence of risk factors, such as diabetes and the aging United States population. More than ever, the creation and management of hemodialysis accesses require a multidisciplinary, team-based approach to provide care effectively. However, there is limited available research on the effects of multidisciplinary team (MDT)-based care in arteriovenous (AV) access outcomes and there remains no widely accepted standard regarding the composition and function of the required processes within an MDT. This manuscript provides an overview of the current literature on MDTs in AV access care, utilizing 5 specific examples where an MDT would be especially pertinent for optimizing patient care and outcomes. Our findings suggest a benefit from initiating an MDT model in AV access care and highlight potential improvements in catheter-free days and patient and provider satisfaction.

Introduction
More than 800,000 people live with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) in the United States. This disease population continues to grow, with the number of annual incident cases rising from 92,660 to 131,422 from 2000 to 2019. Hemodialysis, commonly completed through an arteriovenous fistula (AVF), is a life-sustaining kidney replacement therapy for patients with ESKD. The landscape for treating this patient population within the United States continues to evolve due to the increasing prevalence of risk factors, including diabetes and advanced age. When resources permit, care for this complex patient population can benefit from a multidisciplinary, team-based approach to provide care effectively.
Multidisciplinary teams across healthcare are recognized as critical components to managing complex medical conditions and, in many cases, are considered the gold standard in care delivery. The primary objective of a multidisciplinary team (MDT) is to facilitate collaboration among healthcare professionals from diverse areas of expertise, thereby enhancing patient-centered care and optimizing outcomes. In procedural specialties especially, where complications can impact quality of life and psychosocial well-being, team-based care ensures that issues are anticipated and addressed proactively. Contemporary examples of successful MDT approaches to medical care include tumor boards in oncological care, transplant care, and Heart Teams for complex cardiovascular care.
Building on the established MDT frameworks in other specialties, this manuscript will explore the implementation and benefits of a multidisciplinary approach to AV access management, drawing from institutional-level examples in the development and maintenance of a team-based care model. Further, this manuscript will cover the history behind the MDT approach, its structure, discuss the roles of various team members, and present specific case examples. Lastly, we will examine some of the challenges and corresponding solutions associated with using a team-based approach to AVF care.

History behind the team-based approach to AVF management
The practice of integrated care is not a recent phenomenon. Multidisciplinary care teams can be traced back to Ancient Greece, with the Corpus Hippocraticum — a set of medical texts that aimed to achieve holistic care across different disciplines in patient practice. With the development of modern medicine, specialization across medical disciplines underwent further advancement during the 1840s in Paris and subsequently became a global medical phenomenon by the 1860s. In the early 20th century, World War II expedited the move away from specialized medicine to team-based care. Sicilian-American anesthesiologist John Joseph Bonica was the first to verbalize that chronic pain caused by warfare could have various etiologies that would be best treated with a multidisciplinary team approach. The efficacy of MDTs in this period was supported by increased patient satisfaction and outcomes within specialty-oriented teams in the disciplines of surgery, mental health, and burns.
Long-standing literature and clinical practice have described the successful role of MDTs in oncology and palliative care. Within cancer care, MDTs are the gold standard. With guidelines set by the National Cancer Action Team (NCAT), MDTs have achieved enhanced outcomes and clarity in cancer care treatment. This is done through tumor boards comprised of multidisciplinary specialists that often meet weekly to discuss diagnosis and management. These teams often consist of medical oncologists, surgeons, pathologists, and radiologists who abide by published guidelines for effective MDTs. Within the field of palliative care, MDTs are utilized to address the “total pain” of physical, social, psychological, and spiritual origins within a patient’s healthcare journey. This tailored multi-faceted care on the provider end necessitates collaboration across specialties. An increase in healthcare performance has subsequently been demonstrated with an increase teamwork through palliative care MDTs.
Recently, there have been efforts to apply these approaches to AV access management – an increasingly complex discipline, as patients often carry a multitude of comorbidities. Vein mapping, completed within an MDT setting, has been associated with very low rates of primary failure and maturation failure. Interpretation of vein imaging via venography in a MDT of surgeons and interventionists leads to high rates of successful forearm AVF creation in pre-dialysis patients safely. Furthermore, 1 study has demonstrated that continuous coordination among members of MDTs throughout the creation and management of a vascular access was associated with increased success rates for AVFs and significantly improved intervention-free fistula survival rates. It is possible that the reported improvements in vascular access outcomes from utilizing a coordinated MDT approach are explained by the enabling of earlier detection and resolution of complications. Although specific follow-up schedules were not detailed in this study, MDTs in AV access care were described as being composed of vascular surgeons, nephrologists, radiologists, and nephrology nurses who were involved in continuous collaboration from planning through post-operative management. As research continues within the field of multidisciplinary AV access management, access patency outcomes are at the forefront of the literature.

Composition, structure, and roles of core AVF management team members
The management of AV accesses and hemodialysis through a multidisciplinary team-based approach has seen a similar evolution to that of multidisciplinary heart teams (MDHT) for cardiovascular care, which are currently a class I recommendation in the treatment guidelines for revascularization of complex coronary artery disease. In both cases, complex decision-making is enhanced by the diverse expertise of their respective multidisciplinary team. The most successful AV access outcomes result from comprehensive surgical care, coupled with coordinated pre-operative planning, post-operative supervision, and long-term maintenance. The core AV access management team comprises surgeons, interventionalists, and nephrologists, as well as specialized nursing staff and allied health professionals, including nutritionists, social workers, and physical therapists. In academic hospitals and practices, the roles of clinical research specialists are also important in delivering and advancing AV access care for patients. Figure 1 highlights the dynamic nature of the roles for each AV access team member in relation to the lifetime of a patient’s arteriovenous access.
The initial adoption of MDTs in AV access management stems from a recognition that successful vascular access outcomes require coordination in the preoperative planning phase, in addition to long-term maintenance and follow-up of the AV access. Recent studies have shown that centers that implement MDT programs for vascular access demonstrate improved maturation rates, reduced complications, and superior long-term patency outcomes. These promising findings laid the groundwork for more formal team-based approach recommendations including the Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI) guidelines from the National Kidney Foundation and the clinical practice guidelines of the European Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS).
While smaller initially, modern AVF MDTs have expanded beyond their initial composition. Today, they include pharmacists, care coordinators, and social workers, and engage patients and families directly in holistic decision-making. A properly operational team displays shared goals, equal partnership, efficient communication, and promotes the integration of cross-platform (virtual and in-person) input. These fundamentals of team-based approaches have demonstrated improved clinical outcomes by reducing mortality rates, complications, readmissions, and catheter days (Fig. 2). Prolonged catheter time has been associated with an increased risk of mortality, particularly within the first year of dialysis initiation. It can therefore be a valuable metric in examining the potential benefits of MDT implementation in dialysis access management.
The generation of an ESKD Life Plan, incorporating input from the patient, access surgeon, nephrologist, and palliative care specialist, is a contemporary example that operationalizes these team-based principles and demonstrates the value of multidisciplinary and collaborative AV access care. ESKD Life-Plans are comprehensive yet individualized plans for managing medical treatment and personal needs for patients approaching kidney failure. These plans are developed in collaboration between the patient and their multi-disciplinary healthcare team, focusing on maximizing quality of life.
At the institutional level, the Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery and the Division of Kidney Medicine at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, MA, implemented a multidisciplinary clinic specifically dedicated to dialysis access care, on a Saturday and a Monday each month to serve patients on all dialysis shifts. At this clinic, vascular surgeons, nephrologists, interventionalists, clinical research staff, and other specialized team members collaborate to evaluate vascular access cases. This model enables surgeons, interventionalists, and other care team members to simultaneously review diagnostic imaging for access creation or intervention, such as vein mapping or fistulograms, before seeing the patient, and allows for subsequent real-time coordination of care planning. At the same time, an MDT-based structure can involve and enrich the education of medical trainees. This is particularly relevant given the American Board of Surgery identifies dialysis access as a core component of surgical practice, listing it among the 18 core Entrustable Professional Activities. Furthermore, this approach offers an opportunity to alleviate patient burden by reducing the frequency of visits required for care and follow-up. Patient and provider satisfaction after the implementation of the multidisciplinary clinics remained consistently high over 6 months, which in turn can increase morale and interpersonal trust between physicians and patients. Moreover, providers at this clinic emphasized the value of real-time generation and efficient execution of multidisciplinary care. Other notable examples of multidisciplinary models in hemodialysis access care include the FLOW Vascular Institute in Dallas, TX and the MUSC Health Vascular Dialysis Institute in Orangeburg, SC. These clinics serve as examples of improving access outcomes by forming a synergistic environment conducive to collaboration among multi-disciplinary healthcare professionals.

Implementing research within AVF management team
In addition to the collaborative efforts used for direct patient care, clinical research and the execution of clinical trials require an MDT approach to advance treatment options and care for the dialysis-access population. One notable example of team-based research efforts is the Kidney Health Initiative (KHI), which aims to enhance the effectiveness of treatments for kidney disease. This involves various stakeholder groups, resulting in innovative and safe therapies for vascular access dysfunction. Specifically, the KHI utilized a team that included nephrologists, surgeons, radiologists, nurses, and industry representatives to enhance the width of expertise involved in research trials.
Furthermore, clinical research trials for vascular access employ an MDT-based approach, integrating Clinical Research Assistants (CRAs), administrative assistants, access surgeons, interventionalists, and nephrologists into a collaborative team. This team functions as a multidisciplinary group to enhance outcomes through the effective coordination of clinical trials and high-efficacy collaboration. The CRAs recruit applicable patients from outpatient dialysis clinics and specified AV access clinics. They, additionally, communicate with the dialysis unit staff to ensure proper mutual exchange of data and share pertinent information related to the treatment of patients enrolled in the specified trial. After the MDT has confirmed clinical trial participation and completed the proper consent processes with the patient, the CRAs perform the randomization process when applicable, and the surgeons and interventionalists proceed to perform the AV access surgery and subsequent interventions. During follow-up, CRAs ensure oversight and reporting of adverse events, accurate data collection, and assist with care coordination. Finally, a nephrologist monitors dialysis uses in the clinics and collaborates with the access surgeon to manage AV access patency in the access clinics.

Key challenges and solutions
A key challenge to the study of MDTs is the lack of consensus regarding the most appropriate outcomes for measuring and evaluating their success. Furthermore, the efficacy of MDT work varies depending on the clinical practice, the setting of the team, and the type of specialty the team operates within. Within disciplines such as cancer care, there have been studies where MDTs have been shown to significantly increase the health outcomes of patients. However, several systematic reviews have also concluded that there is insufficient evidence of the efficacy of MDTs within cancer care, mental health, and other specialties. Thus, there have been calls for an increase in empirical studies on the practice of an MDT to determine the conditions under which success is achieved within an MDT.
Another challenge in MDT use more broadly is maintaining proper structure, leadership, documentation, and a transparent agenda-making process. Without these integral components, MDTs often collapse. For instance, it has been cited that it is essential to have 1 appointed leader who focuses on addressing each individual’s role to keep everyone coordinated. Additionally, it is vital to ensure all providers in the MDT engage properly and understand their role. These features, although seemingly intuitive, can pose threats to the structure and function of the MDT. One resource to aid in proper structure is the use of standardized checklists and quality assessment protocols to ensure high-efficacy decisions are made. Training the designated leaders for their positions to maintain meetings and delegate responsibly can increase the team’s effectiveness and lead to better outcomes. At the same time, treatment and composition of the team may also require a certain degree of dynamism to adapt to specific patient needs. This sentiment is highlighted in Table 1, which demonstrates, in 5 different scenarios, how the character and makeup of the multidisciplinary team may vary by clinical scenario and need.
MDT execution can stall due to a lack of education surrounding MDTs, low financial compensation, and reduced motivation. These factors serve as potential limitations in MDTs. To increase education on MDT utilization, training programs could facilitate case-based simulations that can be completed as a course before physicians engage in the MDT. Adjusted compensation models with proper reimbursement for physicians participating in MDTs are crucial and may lead to increased motivation and engagement. Additionally, to increase intrinsic motivation, employing the use of anecdotes, successful patient stories, and progress reports may improve morale while strengthening the shared mission of the MDT.
Another key challenge in vascular access is related to critical and acute issues, such as thrombosis or hemorrhage. In times of urgency, team-based management yields significant differences in treatment and outcomes. A Pulmonary Embolism Response Team (PERT) is a multidisciplinary response team that has been shown to work in situations where individuals are under duress. The team comprises emergency medicine physicians, cardiologists, surgeons, and other key personnel. PERTs have reduced the time required for diagnosis, disposition, and heparin initiation amongst individuals with pulmonary embolisms. This model may be adopted to address acute complications within vascular access. This team would comprise of access surgeons, nephrologists, interventionalists, and dialysis nurses. Further training and protocols would need to be developed to allow for effective collaboration in executing prompt interventions for vascular access complications.

Conclusion
As the population of patients who require hemodialysis through AV access continues to grow, approaching care for these patients from a multidisciplinary, team-based perspective will become increasingly important. Multidisciplinary models have a long-standing history with contemporary forms of MDT implementation notably demonstrated through including tumor boards in oncology, Heart Teams in cardiovascular care, and the multidisciplinary approach to transplant care. These have been associated with improved health outcomes in the literature and have begun to be incorporated into clinical practice guidelines. While there is limited available research specifically describing MDT models of care in AV access management, existing data suggest that, in addition to improving patient and provider satisfaction, an MDT model in AV access management may increase the number of catheter-free days. Defining the specific roles of team members in an MDT is essential, yet there remains no widely accepted standard regarding the composition and function of the required processes within an MDT for dialysis access. Despite promising preliminary findings of MDT use for dialysis access, additional research is needed evaluate changes in dialysis access outcomes following the implementation of MDT models. Overall, MDTs for dialysis access management represent an important advancement in care, but their specific role and benefit require further investigation.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Christopher E. Holden-Wingate: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Lucinda R. Holden-Wingate: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Abraham Hussain: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Navya R.K. Kotturu: Writing – review & editing. Danielle Montano: Writing – review & editing. Abena Appah-Sampong: Writing – review & editing. Aurelie Tran: Writing – review & editing. Brett J. Salomon: Writing – review & editing. C. Keith Ozaki: Writing – review & editing. Dirk M. Hentschel: Writing – review & editing. Mohamad A. Hussain: Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing.

REFERENCES
Reported Cases of End-Stage Kidney Disease — United States, 2000–2019
The multidisciplinary team (MDT) approach and quality of care
Building and optimizing the interdisciplinary heart team
The genesis of multidisciplinary health professionals teams for pain management. a history from the hellenic antiquity to modern palliative medicine
the emergence of medical specialization in the nineteenth century
Synergistic strategies: Optimizing outcomes through a multidisciplinary approach to clinical rounds
Quality measures for multidisciplinary tumor boards and their role in improving cancer care
Multidisciplinary and multidimensional approaches to transplantation in children with rare genetic kidney diseases
Does multidisciplinary team management improve clinical outcomes in NSCLC? A systematic review with meta-analysis
Tumor boards: optimizing the structure and improving efficiency of multidisciplinary management of patients with cancer worldwide
Multidisciplinary care team for cancer patients and its implementation in several Middle Eastern countries
Teamwork and team decision-making at multidisciplinary cancer conferences: barriers, facilitators, and opportunities for improvement
The multidisciplinary team in palliative care: a case reflection
MDTeach: teaching as a tool to build teamwork and morale within a hospice multidisciplinary team
How effective is teamwork really? The relationship between teamwork and performance in healthcare teams: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Effect of nurse-led and physicianled multidisciplinary team palliative care on quality of life, negative emotions, and pain for cancer patients: a meta-analysis
Improving patient outcomes through palliative care integration in other specialised health services: what we have learned so far and how can we improve?
Preoperative mapping and multidisciplinary team are the key to success of arteriovenous access for hemodialysis
Safety of pre-operative venogram for hemodialysis access planning in pre-end-stage kidney disease patients
Effect of a multidisciplinary team in the management of vascular access for hemodialysis
The impact of multi-disciplinary vascular access team creation in incident dialysis patients: a retrospective case-control study
Decreasing dialysis catheter rates by creating a multidisciplinary dialysis access program
Vascular access morbidity and mortality: trends of the last decade
KDOQI clinical practice guideline for vascular access: 2019 update
EPAs for General Surgery
Saturday multidisciplinary hemodialysis access clinics to enhance patient care
, https://www.getcare.muschealth.org/locations/sc/charleston/musc-health-dialysis-access-institute-charlestondep-fac938 (accessed ).
Home
Clinical trial end points for hemodialysis vascular access: background, rationale, and definitions
Study 1: examining the determinants of multidisciplinary team meeting effectiveness and identifying areas of diversity Improving the effectiveness of multidisciplinary team meetings for patients with chronic diseases: a prospective observational study
Are multidisciplinary teams in secondary care cost-effective? A systematic review of the literature
Community mental health teams (CMHTs) for people with severe mental illnesses and disordered personality
Multidisciplinary teams in cancer care: are they effective in the UK?
Quality and efficacy of Multidisciplinary Team (MDT) quality assessment tools and discussion checklists: a systematic review
Contemporary outcomes of precision banding for high flow hemodialysis access
Contemporary outcomes of distal radial artery ligation for access related hand ischemia
Barriers to and facilitators of the implementation of multi-disciplinary care path-ways in primary care: a systematic review
The impact of a pulmonary embolism response team on the efficiency of patient care in the emergency department
Vascular access morbidity and mortality: trends of the last decade
Team members involved in each stage of AV access creation and management.
Key outcomes and roles of the AV access multidisciplinary team.
Cases exemplifying team-based care in AV access management.
Case Topic	Case Example	Recommended team members	Key multidisciplinary team functions	Key Clinical Considerations for MDT	Discussion	 	Pre-operative AV access planning	A 67-year-old female presents to the clinic with an eGFR of 18 mL/min/1.73 m2, which has been decreasing steadily over the past 6 months.	Access surgeon Interventionalist Nephrology Anesthesiologist Nurse	Ensuring accurate preoperative vein mapping strategyCreation of vascular access plan in line with ESKD-Life Plan	The patient is 65 years or olderPositive Frailty indicator by the scale of the provider’s choiceTiming of access creation	High-quality vein mapping with ultrasound or venography is performed with the vascular lab and/or interventional teams. The team recommends an access strategy (fistula or graft) based on vein mapping. The anesthesiologist aid in determining the most effective anesthesia (potentially neuraxial block). Appropriate HD access is created by the surgeon or interventionalist.	 	Access-related hand ischemia	A 60-year-old male with a wrist radial-cephalic fistula presents with hand numbness corresponding with stage 2 access-related hand ischemia (ARHI). Access flow was measured at 1700 mL/min, and digital pressures demonstrate a significant steal phenomenon.	Access surgeon Interventionalist Hand Surgeon Anesthesiologist Nurse	Evaluation of imaging studies (vascular lab studies ± fistulogram)MDT-based approach for distal radial artery ligation (DRAL) and/or precision bandingHand surgery assessment for carpal tunnel	High flow AV access (> 1.5 L/min)Functional deficiency from hand ischemia	Preoperative planning involves collaboration between the access surgeon and interventionalist to review imaging and flow mechanics for surgical decisions. The team plans for DRAL and potential precision banding due to the high outflow. In addition, hand surgeon is consulted if carpel tunnel syndrome is suspected.	 	High-flow AV access precision banding	A 71-year-old male with a high-flow brachial-cephalic AVF (2300 mL/min) presents with high-output heart failure.	Access surgeon Interventionalist Nephrology Cardiologist Anesthesiologist Radiologist Nurse Access Coordinator Vascular Lab Sonographer	Rule out other causes of heart failurePreoperative ultrasound3. Intra-operative precision bandingPost-operative symptom follow-up and testingLong-term access maintenance	High-output heart failure from high outflow AV access	The interventionalist assesses pathophysiology and outflow mechanics preoperatively via fistulogram. Intraoperatively, the access surgeon performs precision banding in collaboration with interventionalist to ensure adequate flow reduction. Postoperatively, the nursing team, cardiologist, nephrologist, and access surgeon coordinate to maintain cardiac and access functionality.	 	Management of a failing AV access in the context of a functioning kidney transplant	A 56-year-old female with ESKD and a left upper arm brachial-cephalic AV fistula, now 2 years post-deceased donor kidney transplant (eGFR 32 mL/min/1.73 m2), presents with left arm discomfort and aneurysmal changes.	Access surgeon Interventionalist Anesthesiologist Nephrologist Transplant nurse and team Cardiologist	Surgeon and interventionalist to assess the need for revision or ligation of access versus creation of a new accessThe transplant team to assess the longevity of the kidney transplant	Prognosis of current kidney transplantDysfunctional access with aneurysmal degeneration	The access surgeon and interventionalist collaborate on planning potential revision or ligation of access, while the transplant team assess graft failure risk. Guided decision making is utilized with all members of the multidisciplinary team when patient has concerns with utilizing their dominant hand after the procedure.	 	Difficult Cannulation	A 61-year-old male with ESKD and BMI 38 kg/m2 presents 3 months after right snuffbox radial-cephalic AV fistula creation. Dialysis staff have been unable to cannulate the access. Exam reveals a deep, poorly palpable fistula with limited augmentation.	Access surgeon Interventionalist Nephrologist Dialysis nurse Vascular Lab Sonographer	Surgeon- interventionalist collaboration enables evaluation of access depth and branching, guiding intervention for cannulation.Dialysis staff report cannulation challenges and prior attempts.Vascular lab provides key data on access diameter, depth, flow, and side branches for perioperative planning.	BMI ≥ 35 kg/m2Limited augmentation of access with adequate inflowAccess depth >6mm from skin surface	Dialysis unit staff refers the patient early to the access surgeon and nephrologist to examine the barriers that may be present for access use. The access surgeon or interventionalist orders a duplex ultrasound and performs a fistulogram to assess flow, depth, side branches, central venous stenosis, and needed for superficialization. The access surgeon can perform superficialization or side branch ligation for augmentation. The constant communication between access surgeon, interventionalist, dialysis unit team, and nephrologist is pivotal for early detection of poor maturation.