A proposed North American approach for genetic testing of individuals at risk for malignant hyperthermia
Malignant hyperthermia, a pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle, is a potentially fatal reaction triggered by exposure to volatile anesthetics or succinylcholine. Genetic testing of the three known involved genes (RYR1, CACNA1S, and STAC3) has become the first line of testing for malignant hyperthermia susceptibility. However, genetic testing has sensitivity of only up to 70%. Contracture testing may be used to rule out the disorder for some individuals. This study outlines a stepwise approach, using clinical history and assessment as well as interpretation of genetic variants to balance risks and benefits for individuals at risk of this disorder. This work has received an Affirmation of Value designation from the American Society of Anesthesiologists (Schaumburg, Illinois) and endorsement from the Canadian Anesthesiologists’ Society (Toronto, Canada).
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s12630-026-03081-y.

Purpose of the Work
Malignant hyperthermia (MH) is a pharmacogenetic disorder of skeletal muscle cells. The underlying mechanism is disruption of excitation–contraction coupling, resulting in excessive calcium ion release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum that occurs in susceptible individuals upon exposure to volatile anesthetics or succinylcholine. Uncontrolled hypermetabolism can be fatal. Dantrolene administration reduces the risk of death from 80% to 11%, but fatalities have not been eliminated, and patients still experience serious complications.
The primary genetic locus involved in MH susceptibility (MHS) is RYR1, encoding the skeletal muscle calcium release channel. It is responsible for up to 70% of patients with MHS. Two other genes: CACNA1S, encoding the α-1-subunit of L-type voltage-dependent calcium channel, and STAC3 (encoding a coupling protein), account for 1% of MHS.
The Caffeine Halothane Contracture Test (CHCT) in North America and the in vitro contracture test for the countries following the European Malignant Hyperthermia Group (EMHG, Lund, Sweden) protocol are the standard tests to rule out MHS. These tests are similar but not identical. The sensitivity and specificity are estimated to be 100% and 94% for the in vitro contracture test and 97% and 78% for the CHCT, respectively. The tests are invasive and costly, associated with morbidity and prolonged rehabilitation, and there are very few testing centers. Only about 4% of those suspected of having MHS undergo a CHCT.
Whereas genetic testing used to be expensive, with limited access, and was evaluated one gene at a time, with rapid advances in genomic clinical testing, numerous laboratories offer genetic testing as panels evaluating dozens to hundreds of genes. The cost of single-gene testing of $3,000 to $4,000 has changed to $300 for testing of a panel of dozens of genes. The practice of evaluating “hot spots” has been replaced by testing the entirety of the genes, even for genes as large as RYR1.
Sequencing the exome (the coding regions of all genes) or the genome have replaced limited indication testing. This has led to two uses of genomics: personal genomic screening and opportunistic screening. Clinical services offer exome or genome sequencing as a screening test for as low as $699. With this approach, there is the potential to identify a variant in a gene associated with MHS as an incidental or secondary finding. In fact, the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) recommends identification and return of RYR1 variants associated with MHS whenever such testing is done, regardless of the indication. The implications for anesthesiologists are critical—increasing numbers of individuals present for preanesthetic evaluations with such results without having a personal or family history of MHS. Managing these will be critical for assessing risks and determining the appropriate anesthetic management.
The key is that when the pretest likelihood is low (typical screening), the likelihood of disease after a positive test is low and the likelihood of disease after a negative test is extraordinarily low. The intermediate likelihood of a variant of uncertain significance (VUS) genetic results represents a challenge for clinicians to interpret and translate into clinical decision-making. An individual without a personal or family history of MHS may harbor a variant in one of the genes associated with MHS. This poses a very different challenge than does the individual with a personal or family history of the disorder. Anecdotal reports suggests that clinicians are uncomfortable addressing this scenario.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (Schaumburg, Illinois) and the Canadian Anesthesiologists’ Society (Toronto, Canada) have both identified the need to establish clinical approach for the interpretation of genetic variants that are linked or potentially linked to MH. Additionally, the EMHG has also set to work on answering the question of how to assess the clinical impact for those who present with genetic testing results.
With the closure of most biopsy centers in North America—only two remain open to the public—access to CHCT is now highly limited. As a result, genetic testing has become increasingly important for assessing MHS. The purpose of our article is to provide a roadmap for clinicians, particularly in North America, to guide decision-making when interpreting genetic results for MHS. We emphasize integrating genetic findings with patient history to determine the need for nontriggering anesthetics and/or additional contracture testing. We also outline recommendations for when referral for contracture testing is warranted.

Methodology, Terminology, and Scenarios
Panel members for this expert opinion article included the Director of the National Human Genome Research Institute Center for Precision Health Research of the National Institutes of Health and Chair of the ClinGen (Clinical Genome Resource) variant curation expert panel (VCEP) for RYR1-related MHS (L.G.B.), along with physician representatives from American Society of Anesthesiologists (S.W., president of the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States [MHAUS]) and the Canadian Anesthesiologists’ Society (J.P.) and a physician expert in MHS and chair of the professional advisory council for MH at MHAUS (S.R.), who assesses at-risk individuals.
The starting point for this work was the wealth of genetic research on RYR1 to provide information on genetic variants that have been linked to MH. “Diagnostic variants” have been identified based on the EMHG (www.emhg.org). The international standard for variant classification is that of the ACMG and the Association for Molecular Pathology, which was adapted for RYR1-related MHS by the ClinGen VCEP. Unfortunately, fewer data are available regarding the pathogenicity of variants in CACNA1S and STAC3. For this reason, we are only making recommendations for RYR1 variants. Practitioners who encounter a patient with a CACNA1S or STAC3 variant are advised to consult with an expert in MHS genetics.
We elected to take a combinatorial approach that considered a wide range of potential genetic test results with the patient’s family and personal medical history to guide the anesthesia care team in clinical decision-making. The decision tree is meant to serve as a guide made by our team and cannot replace the decision-making of each provider who will be caring for the patient during their procedure. No decision tree can encompass every possible clinical or genetic testing nuance. Clinicians should modify these recommendations in the face of relevant nuances or exceptions that they may encounter.
While following the algorithmic approach to each scenario may seem simple and straightforward, there are several pieces of information required to make an informed decision on each pathway. We have defined several terms in the following paragraphs.

Personal History
A personal history of MH is defined as an individual who had an adverse anesthetic reaction triggered by volatile anesthetic and/or succinylcholine exposure that is validated as an MH reaction by an MH expert or had a positive contracture test or harbors a diagnostic genetic variant for MHS. This individual is labeled as MHS, and family members of this individual are considered to have a positive family history of MH.

Family History
A family history is defined as a three-generation pedigree. This typically includes parents, siblings, children, grandchildren, grandparents, aunts and uncles, and first cousins. The pedigree may include more than three generations if the patient offers relevant information on a person who would make it a four-generation pedigree (e.g., a first cousin once removed), but the clinician is not obligated to routinely collect information on such distant relatives.

HyperCKemia
HyperCKemia is considered as persistently high (two or more standard deviations above the expected mean for a given population) serum levels of creatine kinase (CK) on at least two separate occasions. We use this term when hyperCKemia is not due to severe trauma or myopathy or occurs soon after a strenuous exercise or competitive athletic event.

Exertional Heat Illnesses
Exertional heat illnesses (EHIs) include episodes of exercise-associated muscle (heat) cramps, heat syncope, exercise (heat) exhaustion, exertional heat stroke, and exertional hyponatremia. These reactions can be difficult to assess because of poorly documented episodes. We recommend using a threshold of 40.5 °C core body temperature or rhabdomyolysis as indicated by an elevated CK associated with exercise (typically quite strenuous). Note that EHIs are distinct from heat cramps, heat exhaustion, and heat stroke. These entities are all associated with high ambient temperatures, often with high relative humidity. We have included repeated episodes of EHI, exercise-induced rhabdomyolysis, and hyperCKemia in our assessment as some individuals with recurrent exertional, heat-induced rhabdomyolysis, or idiopathic hyperCKemia tested positive by CHCT, indicating they may also be at risk of developing MH triggered by anesthesia.

Larach Clinical Grading Scale
The Larach Clinical Grading Scale (CGS) includes specific criteria for muscular rigidity, muscle breakdown, respiratory acidosis, hyperthermia, cardiac involvement, family history, and several other minor criteria. Points are assigned for each finding and then scaled to adjective descriptors. We consider a positive result to be “somewhat greater than likely” (20 to 34 points), “very likely” (35 to 49 points), or “almost certain” (50 or more points). It is of note that CGS is not a very sensitive criteria to diagnose MH reaction. In a study, only 55.8% of the true MH reactions had CGS scores greater than or equal to 35. This could be due to many factors, such as missing data or even “aborted MH” cases, (i.e., MH reactions that are diagnosed and treated early or show only a few signs of MH).

Variants
Pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants are defined per VCEP criteria. VUS is defined as a variant that is neither pathogenic or likely pathogenic nor benign or likely benign. VUS-Lo, VUS-Mid, and VUS-Hi are subcategories of VUS. A VUS-Hi is a variant with pathogenicity at the upper end of the VUS range. Clinical laboratories that use the points-based Bayesian adaptation of the Richards et al. variant classification recommendations can report these upon request. These would be variants that score 4 to 5 points on the scale, where 6 points is the lower bound of likely pathogenic. A score of 4 to 5 points corresponds to probabilities of pathogenicity of 68 to 86%. However, it is critical to recognize that probability of pathogenicity of the variant is not equal to the probability that the testee has the disorder (see Supplemental Digital Content 1, https://links.lww.com/ALN/E290, for VUS subcategorization). A family variant is defined as the variant identified in the index patient(s).

Clinical Scenarios
Flow diagram for evaluating risk of MHS based on personal history, family history, and genetic test results. Note that the while the algorithm recommends testing for RYR1, CACNA1S, and STAC3, the results interpretations in the flow diagram are limited to RYR1.
*Note that this part of the pathway addresses population screening or secondary findings results (i.e., test result in the context of no personal or family history of MHS/MH). Although current recommendations are to not return any VUS, likely benign, or benign variants from such testing, they are sometimes returned, and so are included in this flow diagram.
B, benign; CK, creatine kinase; Diagn, diagnostic; Hi, high-range; LB, likely benign; Lo, low-range; LP, likely pathogenic; MH, malignant hyperthermia; MHN, malignant hyperthermia negative; MHS, malignant hyperthermia susceptibility; Mid, middle-range; Var, variant; VUS, variant of uncertain significance; w/o, without.
In the flow diagram (Figure), we have laid out the scenarios to reflect the kinds of clinical situations that anesthesia providers will commonly encounter. The key to correctly using these diagrams is to recall that genetic tests, with very few exceptions, should be interpreted as any other diagnostic test, which is as a predictor of a potential underlying disorder. This requires that the interpreting anesthetic provider take into account the testing scenario to correctly interpret the genetic test result.
Do you have MHS or have you had an MH reaction?
Does someone in your family have MHS or have they had an MH reaction?
Have you or a family member undergone genetic testing for MHS? If yes, what were the test results?
The flow diagram appears complex but is practical to use. It is based on the anesthesiologist asking three simple questions:
Indeed, these are questions that the anesthesiologist should already be asking, and the flow diagram simply recommends a management strategy based on the answers to those simple questions. While it seems that there are many branches to the flow diagram, any single patient will follow only a small part of it, and the rest can be ignored. In Supplemental Digital Content 2 (https://links.lww.com/ALN/E291), we provide four clinical scenarios that go down distinct branches of the pathway, showing that the logic is easy to follow and implement.
Some of the scenarios may seem peculiar in that genetic test results may be presented to the provider before a documented MH event or known MHS has been identified as present. This reflects the above-noted observation that genetic testing is becoming so inexpensive that it is increasingly affordable to do the testing as a screening tool rather than just as a diagnostic tool. This markedly changes how the results must be interpreted because of the long and widely established principle that a positive test result is a strong predictor of disease (susceptibility, in the case of MHS) when there is a high previous likelihood of disease (typical diagnostic testing setting) before the test was ordered. When the likelihood of disease before testing is low (typical screening testing setting), the likelihood of disease after a positive test can be surprisingly low.
Our flow diagram (Figure) begins with the clinical scenario of a patient presenting for preoperative anesthetic evaluation for an elective surgical procedure in which the default anesthetic includes a triggering agent. We focus on preoperative assessments for elective procedures because this setting allows for thoughtful consideration of the clinical utility of genetic test results, retrieval of detailed medical records of possible past reactions or MHS, cascade testing of family members, among other factors. In an urgent operative setting, none of these are practical, and the anesthesiologist will typically opt for the use of nontriggering agents with even the slightest suggestion of a risk of MHS. As noted elsewhere in these recommendations, patients who have a symptomatic myopathy are excluded from these recommendations and should be referred to a neuromuscular clinic, where a detailed clinical and genetic testing evaluation can be performed and the risk of MHS can be assessed. When time or availability of referral for neuromuscular evaluation is not an option, such as need of urgent surgery, clinical judgment could favor use of nontriggering agents.
The first assessment is to determine whether the patient has a personal history of an MH reaction associated with a triggering agent, a history of elevated blood levels of CK, or more than two episodes of EHI. It is our anecdotal experience that poorly documented or suspected MH reactions are much more common than are well-documented reactions. The standard for evaluating these are to assess the operative anesthetic record and/or postoperative records, the latter typically from an intensive care unit if the reaction is significant, by an MH expert clinician. However, it is important to recognize that access to these services is severely limited in North America and in the United States; third-party payers do not often pay for such services.
If the individual has any of these initial attributes, they should be managed as if they are MHS. However, the work of the anesthesiologist does not end there. The next question is whether they have had genetic testing to assess for any RYR1 diagnostic variants (diagnostic testing or incidental). If yes, the patient should be encouraged in turn to advocate to their family members to be tested for this variant, and if it is present, each should be managed as MHS. If they have not been tested, the anesthesiologist should strongly encourage the patient in turn to encourage their relatives to undergo genetic testing. If testing has been performed and a diagnostic variant is not identified, the individual should be encouraged to consider undergoing a contracture test and enrolling in a research program that is studying the genetic causes of MHS. Further, all patients identified to be MHS should be strongly encouraged to wear a MedicAlert bracelet or necklace that notes their MHS so that nontriggering agents would be used in an emergency situation.
The next major branch of the algorithm for patients who do not themselves have MHS, EHI, or elevated CK is to obtain a family history. If the family history is positive for MH or MHS, the next question is whether there is a relative who has MH or MHS and has been genetically tested and has an RYR1 variant that may indicate MHS. In that case, the preoperative evaluation patient should undergo genetic testing. The key is to ensure that the current patient undergoes full sequencing of all three genes (RYR1, STAC3, and CACNA1S) associated with MHS, instead of being tested only for the variant present in their affected family member. If it is not possible for them to get tested, they should be treated as MHS. If the current patient has the familial diagnostic variant, or if they do not have the familial variant but instead have another pathogenic, likely pathogenic, or VUS-Hi variant, they should be managed as MHS, and their untested family members should be encouraged to be tested. If they do not have the familial diagnostic variant and have only a VUS-Mid or VUS-Lo or likely benign or benign variant themselves, they are not considered to be at a risk above that of the general population and can be managed using succinylcholine and/or a volatile anesthetic.
If the family history is negative, the algorithm is simpler but conceptually similar to the above section describing how to handle patients who do have a family history of MHS but who do not have the familial variant themselves. This would typically include the screening scenario alluded to in the introduction in which the individual has no indication for MHS gene testing. Again, we follow the same logic as described.
It is important to note that the terms “treat as MH negative” or “treat as MHS” are used solely to guide the use of triggering anesthetics and clinical management and do not necessarily reflect definitive diagnoses of MH negative or MHS. In many cases, the definitive diagnosis remains ambiguous. These recommendations are intended to support practical perioperative decision-making.

Additional Scenarios
The anesthetic plan for the obstetric delivery of a possible MH-susceptible patient is a hot topic for discussion on the labor deck within a hospital. If there is a family history of MH/MHS from either the maternal or paternal side of the family, care must be taken to ensure that the anesthetic plan for delivery involves nontriggering anesthetics. The paternal family history scenario could inadvertently be overlooked for the parturient, but it is essential to recognize that a fetus of an MHS father has a 50% risk of being MHS, and the mother must be treated with nontriggering agents (even if she is not MHS). An epidural analgesia during labor will not result in a risk of MH crisis for the fetus, but if the birth mother of a potentially MHS fetus is to have a cesarean delivery, the patient should be treated with precautions regardless of the mother’s personal MHS status. If the fetus being carried is possibly MHS, the mother should have a nontriggering anesthetic for any surgical or procedural care throughout the duration of her pregnancy.
Another challenging clinical scenario is often encountered in the preanesthetic evaluation. Anesthesiologists should inquire about any history of recurrent episodes of heat stroke, consistent muscle cramping with physical activity, or reports of rhabdomyolysis after heat exposure or intense workouts resulting in discolored urine (cola-colored). Any patient with this history should be assessed for MHS, and until such testing can be completed should be treated as MHS. The link between MH, heat-related illnesses, and rhabdomyolysis with exposure to heat or physical activity continues to be studied and debated within our specialty. The evidence of repeated hypermetabolic reactions in patients after heat or exercise or both provides a reason to select a nontriggering anesthetic for these individuals to reduce their potential risk during surgery.
Patients with a history of MHS who participate in athletic activities, who work in careers involving exposure to heat stress or extreme physical exertion, or who are planning on participating in an activity during which they will be placed in a potential triggering situation (e.g., a triathlon or hiking in a hot climate) should provide supervisors, employers, coaches, athletic trainers, and/or teammates with education regarding MH. In providing education on how to identify a potential crisis and how to provide assistance if a crisis strikes, the patient will be reducing the risk of a potential life-threatening adverse event and increasing their odds of survival if a crisis should strike. Again, wearing a medical alert bracelet is essential.

Discussion
Protocols for managing known MHS patients are well established and should be widely available. They are practical and reduce risks. The management of an MH reaction is highly challenging and complex. Even with optimal management, outcomes may be poor, including 10 to 15% mortality rate. Therefore, there is a strong imperative to avoid exposure to MH-triggering agents.
Because the use of triggering agents remains prevalent in anesthetic care, there is an imperative to develop approaches to identify individuals with MHS preoperatively. Contracture testing cannot serve this role for more than a very small number of highly selected patients in North America. There are only two centers open to the public in North America that offer contracture testing (in Toronto, Canada, and Minneapolis, Minnesota). The Maryland testing center (Uniformed Services University for the Health Sciences) is open only to military personnel and research participants. This severely limited availability has a real impact on clinical care standards—we cannot recommend clinical care algorithms that include testing (e.g., CHCT) that is unavailable to the overwhelming majority of patients. The situation is very different in areas where clinical contracture testing is readily available, such as Europe and United Kingdom. While we share the emphasis on patient safety with EMHG and we understand their position on diagnosis of MHS and the indications for contracture test, it was essential for us to develop an approach to assess MH risk that is practical in North America. These recommendations are not intended for practitioners outside of North America. Other countries may have yet different attributes of contraction test or genetic testing availability and costs. Those countries may have other approaches to minimizing the risk of MH.
Genetic testing is cheaper, more accessible, and highly effective for identifying MH-susceptible individuals. Increasingly, identifying MHS solely by a genetic test result is becoming more common, and anesthesia practitioners need tools to support their evaluation. Therefore, we have developed an algorithm for decision-making in the preanesthetic setting.
Key to this algorithm are fundamental attributes regarding risk. The first is that no patient can ever be at zero risk of an MH reaction. Even an individual who has had multiple exposures to a triggering agent and harbors no genetic variants in RYR1, CACNA1S, or STAC3 can have an MH reaction. Their risk is below that of the general population risk, but it is not zero. The second is related to baseline risk. Estimates of the population prevalence of MHS ranges from about 1 in 2,000 to 1 in 3,000 individuals to as high as 1 in 800. The likelihood of an MH reaction of a susceptible individual if exposed to a triggering agent can range from approximately 1 to 40%. These uncertainties make risk predictions unreliable. Instead of relying on uncertain risk predictions, we have adapted the well-established ACMG recommendations for secondary or incidental findings for individuals with variants associated with life-threatening but treatable disorders (see Supplemental Digital Content 1 for a further discussion of this issue, https://links.lww.com/ALN/E290).
The standard of care with respect to MHS risk can be illustrated by a hypothetical: an unconscious individual with trauma requiring surgery with no available healthcare records would not be considered at risk for MHS, and it would be appropriate to anesthetize them with triggering agents. Compared to the above-noted patient, if an individual is interviewed, and their medical records review is without evidence of an MH episode or known MHS diagnosis, this lowers the likelihood of MHS. If that individual lacks a positive family history of MHS, that further lowers the risk. If that individual has been sequenced for the known MHS-related genes and does not have a pathogenic, likely pathogenic, or VUS-Hi variant, that further lowers the risk. This is because the predictive power of a VUS-Mid variant in a population screening setting has poor predictive power to detect disease. This is compounded by the fact that a large majority of VUS-Mid or VUS-Lo variants are eventually reclassified as benign—more than the probability of pathogenicity would suggest because laboratories tend to overestimate the pathogenicity of these variants. For individuals who do not have clinical or family history attributes suggestive of MHS and only harbor VUS-Mid or lower, they are not at a known increased risk of MHS compared to a randomly selected individual.
Clinicians often focus on the presence of a weakly predictive VUS when they should focus instead on the absence of pathogenic, likely pathogenic, and VUS-Hi variants. An individual with no personal or family history of MH/MHS and a VUS-Mid or lower variant is at significantly lower risk of MHS than the hypothetical individual described above who has no clinical or genetic information.
We recognize that anesthesiologists are extremely risk averse when it comes to MHS risk assessment. To address these, we have lowered the threshold for variants considered to be indicative of risk from likely pathogenic to VUS-Hi. For all other disorders in which the previous probability of disease is low, current ACMG guidelines recommend that testing laboratories only return pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants. This is because returning VUS variants, even VUS-Hi variants, would lead to a high burden of false-positive testing scenarios. Given that the posttest clinical evaluation for a person with an MH-associated VUS-Hi variant is modest, that the consequences of an MH reaction so devastating, and that the avoidance of triggering agents is relatively easy, we advocate here for a lower variant pathogenicity reporting threshold than is used for all other conditions on the ACMG list. Compared to many of the disorders on the ACMG secondary findings list, the management of a susceptible individual is not highly aversive. The risk–benefit calculation favors overidentification of MHS, as compared to other disorders on that list. This will result in a large majority of patients identified as such from VUS-Hi variants being false positives; they will not ultimately be diagnosed with MHS. It is a preferable error to risking exposure to a triggering agent for the minority of that group who are true positives. Additionally, our algorithm recommends “treat as MHS” as opposed to diagnosing them with MHS. We err on the side of safety by managing them with a nontriggering agent, but we want to avoid confusing that with a diagnosis of MHS. Even with increased emphasis on safety (compared to the standard of care for genomic screening), it is critical to recognize that risk can never be reduced to zero.
There may be a hypothesis that MHS is of uncertain genetic etiology, and there may be other unrecognized genetic factors causing the MHS in a family that are not assessed by current testing. While it is true that RYR1, CACNA1S, and STAC3 variants account for only about 70 to 75% of cases of MH/MHS, this is a large majority, and the absence of such variants markedly reduces the risk. We emphasize that our approach for testing family members of a known positive case should always employ full sequencing of all three known genes. When all known pathogenic, likely pathogenic, and VUS-Hi variants are excluded, this can markedly reduce the likelihood of the rare scenario for the testee when two MHS variants are segregating in a single family. Additionally, were it to be true that variant-negative individuals should be treated as though they have the disorder, it would be pointless to ever test any family members of an individual with a diagnostic variant.
In conclusion, MH reactions still occur. Our flow diagram serves to make clinical decisions easier in this patient population, especially in North America. However, there is still a great need for education and research in this area. MHAUS (mhaus.org) provides education materials and list of MH centers for North Americans.

Objectif du travail
L’hyperthermie maligne (HM) est un trouble pharmacogénétique des cellules musculaires squelettiques. Le mécanisme sous-jacent est une perturbation du couplage excitation–contraction, entraînant une libération excessive d’ions calcium à partir du réticulum sarcoplasmique chez les personnes susceptibles lors d’une exposition aux anesthésiques volatils ou à la succinylcholine. Un hypermétabolisme incontrôlé peut être fatal. L’administration de dantrolène réduit le risque de décès de 80 % à 11 %, mais les décès n’ont pas été éliminés et des complications graves persistent.
Le principal locus génétique associé à la susceptibilité à l’HM (SHM) est le gène RYR1, qui code le canal de libération du calcium du muscle squelettique et est responsable d’environ 70 % des cas. Deux autres gènes, le CACNA1S (sous-unité α1 du canal calcique voltage-dépendant de type L) et le STAC3 (protéine de couplage), expliquent environ 1 % des cas.
En Amérique du Nord, le test de contracture à la caféine–halothane (CHCT) et, dans les pays suivant le protocole du Groupe européen de l’hyperthermie maligne (EMHG, Lund, Suède), le test de contracture in vitro constituent les examens de référence pour exclure une SHM. Bien que similaires, ces tests ne sont pas identiques. Leur sensibilité et leur spécificité sont estimées à 100 % et 94 % pour le test in vitro et à 97 % et 78 % pour le CHCT, respectivement. Ces examens sont invasifs, coûteux, associés à une morbidité et à une convalescence prolongée, et ne sont offerts que dans très peu de centres. Environ 4 % seulement des personnes soupçonnées d’être atteintes de SHM passent un CHCT.
Alors que le dépistage génétique était auparavant coûteux, peu accessible et effectué gène par gène, les progrès rapides du dépistage génomique clinique ont mené à l’offre, par de nombreux laboratoires, de panels génétiques évaluant des dizaines, voire des centaines de gènes. Le coût du dépistage d’un seul gène, qui variait entre 3000 $ et 4000 $, est passé à environ 300 $ pour l’analyse de panels comprenant des dizaines de gènes. L’évaluation ciblée de « points chauds » a été remplacée par le séquençage complet des gènes, y compris pour des gènes de grande taille comme le RYR1.
Le séquençage de l’exome (les régions codantes de l’ensemble des gènes) ou du génome entier a remplacé les analyses fondées sur des indications limitées. Cette évolution a donné lieu à deux utilisations distinctes de la génomique : le dépistage génomique personnel et le dépistage opportuniste. Des services cliniques proposent désormais le séquençage de l’exome ou du génome à des fins de dépistage pour un coût aussi bas que 699 $. Cette approche offre la possibilité d’identifier, à titre de résultat fortuit ou secondaire, un variant dans un gène associé à la SHM. D’ailleurs, l’American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) recommande l’identification et la communication des variants RYR1 associés à la SHM chaque fois que ce type d’analyse est effectué, indépendamment de l’indication clinique. Les conséquences pour les anesthésiologistes sont majeures : un nombre croissant de personnes se présentent à l’évaluation préanesthésique avec de tels résultats, sans antécédents personnels ou familiaux de SHM. La prise en charge de ces situations est cruciale pour l’évaluation du risque et la détermination de la prise en charge anesthésique appropriée.
L’élément clé est que, lorsque la probabilité prétest est faible (comme dans un contexte de dépistage), la probabilité de maladie après un résultat positif demeure faible, et la probabilité de maladie après un résultat négatif est extrêmement faible. Les résultats génétiques intermédiaires correspondant à un variant de signification incertaine (VSI) représentent un défi particulier pour l’interprétation clinique et leur traduction en décisions cliniques. Une personne sans antécédents personnels ou familiaux de SHM peut être porteuse d’un variant dans l’un des gènes associés à la SHM, ce qui pose un défi très différent de celui présenté par une personne ayant des antécédents personnels ou familiaux du trouble. Des données anecdotiques suggèrent que les cliniciennes et cliniciens se sentent mal à l’aise face à ce type de situation.
L’American Society of Anesthesiologists (Schaumburg, Illinois) et la Société canadienne des anesthésiologistes (Toronto, Canada) ont toutes deux reconnu la nécessité d’établir une approche clinique pour l’interprétation des variants génétiques associés, ou potentiellement associés, à l’hyperthermie maligne. L’EMHG s’est également penché sur la question de l’évaluation de l’impact clinique des résultats de dépistage génétique.
Avec la fermeture de la majorité des centres de biopsie en Amérique du Nord — seuls deux demeurent ouverts au public — l’accès au test de contracture à la caféine-halothane (CHCT) est désormais très limité. Par conséquent, le dépistage génétique est devenu de plus en plus important pour l’évaluation de la SHM. L’objectif de notre article est de proposer une feuille de route destinée aux cliniciennes et cliniciens, particulièrement en Amérique du Nord, afin de guider la prise de décision lors de l’interprétation des résultats génétiques associés à la SHM. Nous mettons l’accent sur l’intégration des résultats génétiques à l’histoire clinique de la personne afin de déterminer la nécessité d’utiliser des anesthésiques non déclenchants et/ou de recourir à des tests de contracture supplémentaires. Nous formulons également des recommandations quant aux situations où une orientation vers un centre de tests de contracture est indiquée.

Méthodologie, terminologie et scénarios
Les membres du groupe ayant contribué à cet article d’opinion d’experts comprenaient le directeur du Center for Precision Health Research du National Human Genome Research Institute des National Institutes of Health et président du groupe d’expertise ClinGen (Clinical Genome Resource) pour la curation des variants (VCEP) associés à la SHM liée au RYR1 (L.G.B.), ainsi que des médecins représentant l’American Society of Anesthesiologists (S.W., présidente de la Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States [MHAUS]) et de la Société canadienne des anesthésiologistes (J.P.), de même qu’une médecin experte en SHM et présidente du conseil consultatif professionnel sur l’hyperthermie maligne de la MHAUS (S.R.), responsable de l’évaluation des personnes à risque.
Le point de départ de ce travail a été l’abondance des données issues de la recherche génétique sur le RYR1, qui permettent de caractériser les variants génétiques associés à l’hyperthermie maligne. Des « variants diagnostiques » ont été identifiés selon les critères de l’EMHG (www.emhg.org). La norme internationale pour la classification des variants est celle de l’ACMG et de l’Association for Molecular Pathology, laquelle a été adaptée à la SHM liée au RYR1 par le groupe ClinGen VCEP. Malheureusement, les données sont beaucoup plus limitées concernant la pathogénicité des variants des gènes CACNA1S et STAC3. Pour cette raison, les recommandations formulées dans le présent article portent uniquement sur les variants de RYR1. Les cliniciennes et cliniciens qui rencontrent une personne porteuse d’un variant de CACNA1S ou de STAC3 devraient consulter une ou un spécialiste de la génétique de la SHM.
Nous avons choisi une approche combinée intégrant un large éventail de résultats possibles du dépistage génétique aux antécédents personnels et familiaux afin d’orienter l’équipe d’anesthésie dans la prise de décision clinique. L’arbre décisionnel proposé a été élaboré par notre groupe et vise à servir de guide; il ne saurait se substituer au jugement clinique de chaque professionnelle ou professionnel responsable des soins de la personne pendant l’intervention. Aucun arbre décisionnel ne peut couvrir toutes les nuances cliniques ou génétiques possibles. Les cliniciennes et cliniciens doivent adapter ces recommandations en fonction des particularités ou des exceptions pertinentes rencontrées en pratique.
Bien que l’application algorithmique de chaque scénario puisse sembler simple et directe, plusieurs éléments d’information sont nécessaires pour prendre une décision éclairée à chaque étape. Nous définissons ci-dessous plusieurs termes utilisés dans les sections suivantes.

Antécédents personnels
Un antécédent personnel d’hyperthermie maligne est défini comme une réaction anesthésique indésirable déclenchée par l’exposition à un anesthésique volatil et/ou à la succinylcholine, validée comme une réaction d’HM par une ou un spécialiste de l’HM, ou encore comme la présence d’un test de contracture positif ou d’un variant génétique diagnostique de SHM. Une telle personne est considérée comme susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne (SHM), et les membres de sa famille sont considérés avoir des antécédents familiaux positifs d’HM.

Antécédents familiaux
Les antécédents familiaux sont définis à partir d’un arbre généalogique sur trois générations. Celui-ci comprend généralement les parents, la fratrie, les enfants, les petits-enfants, les grands-parents, les tantes et oncles, ainsi que les cousines et cousins au premier degré. L’arbre généalogique peut inclure plus de trois générations si la personne fournit des renseignements pertinents concernant un membre qui ferait passer l’analyse à une quatrième génération (par exemple, une cousine germaine une fois éloignée), mais la ou le clinicien n’est pas tenu de recueillir systématiquement des informations sur des parentes ou parents aussi éloignés.

HyperCKémie
L’hyperCKémie est définie comme une élévation persistante des concentrations sériques de créatine kinase (CK), soit des valeurs supérieures d’au moins deux écarts types à la moyenne attendue pour une population donnée, mesurées à au moins deux occasions distinctes. Dans le présent contexte, ce terme est utilisé lorsque l’hyperCKémie n’est pas attribuable à un traumatisme sévère, à une myopathie connue ou lorsqu’elle ne survient pas peu de temps après un exercice physique intense ou une activité sportive compétitive.

Affections liées à la chaleur d’effort
Les affections liées à la chaleur d’effort (EHI pour exertional heat illnesses) comprennent les épisodes de crampes musculaires associées à l’exercice (crampes liées à la chaleur), la syncope liée à la chaleur, l’épuisement par la chaleur d’effort, le coup de chaleur d’effort et l’hyponatrémie d’effort. L’évaluation de ces événements peut s’avérer difficile en raison d’une documentation souvent incomplète. Nous recommandons d’utiliser un seuil de température corporelle centrale de 40,5 °C ou la présence d’une rhabdomyolyse, indiquée par une élévation de la CK associée à l’exercice (habituellement d’intensité élevée). Il convient de noter que les affections liées à la chaleur d’effort se distinguent des crampes de chaleur, de l’épuisement par la chaleur et du coup de chaleur classique, qui sont généralement associés à des températures ambiantes élevées, souvent accompagnées d’une humidité relative élevée. Nous avons inclus dans notre évaluation les épisodes répétés d’affections liées à la chaleur d’effort, la rhabdomyolyse induite par l’exercice et l’hyperCKémie, puisque certaines personnes présentant des épisodes récurrents de rhabdomyolyse induite par l’effort ou la chaleur, ou une hyperCKémie idiopathique, ont obtenu un résultat positif au CHCT, ce qui indique qu’elles pourraient également être à risque de développer une hyperthermie maligne déclenchée par l’anesthésie.

Échelle clinique de Larach
L’échelle clinique de Larach (Clinical Grading Scale, CGS) comprend des critères précis relatifs à la rigidité musculaire, à la dégradation musculaire, à l’acidose respiratoire, à l’hyperthermie, à l’atteinte cardiaque, aux antécédents familiaux ainsi qu’à plusieurs autres critères mineurs. Des points sont attribués à chaque élément, puis convertis en descripteurs qualitatifs. Dans le cadre du présent travail, un résultat est considéré positif lorsqu’il est classé comme « quelque peu plus que probable » (20 à 34 points), « très probable » (35 à 49 points) ou « presque certain » (50 points ou plus). Il importe de souligner que la CGS n’est pas un outil très sensible pour le diagnostic d’une réaction d’hyperthermie maligne. Dans une étude, seulement 55,8 % des véritables réactions d’HM présentaient un score CGS supérieur ou égal à 35. Cette limite peut s’expliquer par divers facteurs, notamment des données manquantes ou des cas d’« HM avortée », c’est-à-dire des réactions reconnues et traitées précocement ou ne présentant que quelques signes d’HM.

Variants
Les variants pathogènes ou probablement pathogènes sont définis conformément aux critères du groupe d’expertise ClinGen (Variant Curation Expert Panel, VCEP). Les variants de signification incertaine (VSI) sont définis comme des variants qui ne répondent ni aux critères de pathogénicité ou de pathogénicité probable, ni à ceux de bénignité ou de bénignité probable. Les catégories VSI-faible (VSI-Lo), VSI-intermédiaire (VSI-Mid) et VSI-élevée (VSI-Hi) constituent des sous-groupes des VSI. Un VSI-Hi correspond à un variant dont la probabilité de pathogénicité se situe dans la partie supérieure du spectre des VSI. Les laboratoires cliniques qui utilisent l’adaptation bayésienne fondée sur un système de points des recommandations de classification des variants de Richards et coll. peuvent, sur demande, fournir cette sous-classification. Les variants obtenant un score de 4 à 5 points sur cette échelle — où 6 points constituent le seuil inférieur de la catégorie « probablement pathogène » — correspondent à une probabilité de pathogénicité variant entre 68 % et 86 %. Toutefois, il est essentiel de reconnaître que la probabilité de pathogénicité d’un variant n’est pas équivalente à la probabilité que la personne testée soit atteinte du trouble (voir le contenu numérique supplémentaire 1, https://links.lww.com/ALN/E290, pour une sous-catégorisation des VSI). Un variant familial est défini comme le variant identifié chez la ou les personnes index au sein d’une famille.

Scénarios cliniques
Diagramme décisionnel pour l’évaluation du risque de susceptibilité à l’hyperthermie maligne en fonction des antécédents personnels, des antécédents familiaux et des résultats du dépistage génétique. Bien que l’algorithme recommande le dépistage des gènes RYR1, CACNA1S et STAC3, l’interprétation des résultats présentée dans le diagramme est limitée aux variants de RYR1.
*Cette portion du parcours concerne les résultats issus du dépistage populationnel ou de découvertes secondaires (c.-à-d. des résultats obtenus en l’absence d’antécédents personnels ou familiaux d’HM ou de SHM). Bien que les recommandations actuelles préconisent de ne pas communiquer les variants de signification incertaine, probablement bénins ou bénins dans ce contexte, ceux-ci sont parfois rapportés et sont donc inclus dans le diagramme.
B, bénin; CK, créatine kinase; Diagn, diagnostique; Hi, catégorie élevée; PB, probablement bénin; Lo, catégorie faible; PP, probablement pathogène; HM, hyperthermie maligne; HMN, hyperthermie maligne négative; SHM, susceptibilité à l’hyperthermie maligne; Mid, catégorie intermédiaire; Var, variant; VSI, variant de signification incertaine; s/o, sans.
Dans le diagramme décisionnel (figure), nous avons structuré les scénarios de manière à refléter les situations cliniques auxquelles les professionnelles et professionnels de l’anesthésie sont le plus souvent confrontés. La clé pour utiliser correctement ces diagrammes est de se rappeler que les tests génétiques, à de rares exceptions près, doivent être interprétés comme tout autre examen diagnostique, c’est-à-dire comme des outils prédictifs d’un trouble sous-jacent potentiel. L’interprétation appropriée d’un résultat de test génétique exige donc de tenir compte du contexte dans lequel le test a été réalisé.
Avez-vous une susceptibilité à l’hyperthermie maligne (SHM) ou avez-vous déjà présenté une réaction d’hyperthermie maligne?
Une personne de votre famille est-elle atteinte de SHM ou a-t-elle déjà présenté une réaction d’hyperthermie maligne?
Vous ou un membre de votre famille avez-vous passé un dépistage génétique pour la SHM? Si oui, quels en ont été les résultats?
Le diagramme décisionnel peut paraître complexe, mais il est conçu pour une utilisation pratique. Il repose sur trois questions simples que la ou le clinicien devrait déjà poser dans le cadre de l’évaluation préanesthésique :
Ces questions font déjà partie de l’anamnèse anesthésique standard, et le diagramme décisionnel propose simplement une stratégie de prise en charge fondée sur les réponses à ces questions. Bien que le diagramme comporte de nombreuses branches, chaque personne suivra en pratique un nombre restreint de parcours, et l’ensemble des autres branches pourra être ignoré. Le contenu numérique supplémentaire 2 (https://links.lww.com/ALN/E291) présente quatre scénarios cliniques illustrant des parcours distincts, démontrant que la logique de l’algorithme est simple à suivre et à appliquer.
Certains scénarios peuvent sembler inhabituels, notamment lorsque des résultats de dépistage génétique sont présentés à la ou au clinicien avant qu’un événement d’hyperthermie maligne documenté ou une SHM connue n’ait été identifiée. Cette situation reflète l’observation selon laquelle le dépistage génétique est devenu suffisamment abordable pour être utilisé comme outil de dépistage, plutôt que seulement comme examen diagnostique. Cette évolution modifie profondément l’interprétation des résultats, en raison du principe bien établi selon lequel un résultat positif est un bon prédicteur de maladie (plus exactement, de susceptibilité dans le cas de la SHM) lorsque la probabilité préalable de maladie est élevée (comme ce serait le cas dans un contexte de dépistage diagnostique traditionnel) avant même que le dépistage soit prescrit. Lorsque la probabilité de maladie avant le test est faible, comme dans un contexte de dépistage typique, la probabilité de maladie après un résultat positif peut être étonnamment basse.
Notre diagramme décisionnel (figure) débute par le scénario clinique d’une personne se présentant à l’évaluation anesthésique préopératoire en vue d’une intervention chirurgicale non urgente pour laquelle l’anesthésie par défaut comprend un agent déclenchant. Nous mettons l’accent sur les évaluations préopératoires en contexte non urgent, puisque ce cadre permet une analyse réfléchie de l’utilité clinique des résultats de dépistage génétique, la consultation de dossiers médicaux détaillés concernant d’éventuelles réactions antérieures ou une SHM, ainsi que le dépistage en cascade des membres de la famille, entre autres considérations. Dans un contexte chirurgical urgent, aucune de ces démarches n’est généralement possible, et l’anesthésiologiste choisira habituellement d’utiliser des agents anesthésiques non déclenchants dès qu’il existe le moindre soupçon de risque de SHM. Comme mentionné ailleurs dans ces recommandations, les personnes présentant une myopathie symptomatique sont exclues du champ d’application du présent algorithme et devraient être orientées vers une clinique de neurologie neuromusculaire pour une évaluation clinique et génétique approfondie, ainsi qu’une estimation du risque de SHM. Lorsque le temps ou l’accès à une évaluation neuromusculaire ne le permet pas, notamment en situation d’urgence chirurgicale, le jugement clinique peut justifier le recours à des agents non déclenchants.
La première étape de l’évaluation consiste à déterminer si la personne présente des antécédents personnels de réaction d’hyperthermie maligne associée à un agent déclenchant, des antécédents d’élévation des concentrations sanguines de créatine kinase, ou plus de deux épisodes d’affections liées à la chaleur d’effort. Selon notre expérience clinique, les réactions d’hyperthermie maligne mal documentées ou seulement suspectées sont beaucoup plus fréquentes que les réactions bien documentées. L’évaluation de ces événements repose idéalement sur l’examen du dossier anesthésique peropératoire et/ou des dossiers postopératoires, souvent issus d’une unité de soins intensifs lorsque la réaction a été significative, par une ou un clinicien expert en hyperthermie maligne. Il est toutefois important de reconnaître que l’accès à ces services est extrêmement limité en Amérique du Nord et aux États-Unis, et que les tiers payeurs couvrent rarement ce type d’évaluation spécialisée.
Si la personne présente l’un de ces éléments initiaux, elle devrait être prise en charge comme étant susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne. Toutefois, la démarche de l’anesthésiologiste ne s’arrête pas là. L’étape suivante consiste à déterminer si un dépistage génétique a été réalisé afin de rechercher un variant diagnostique du gène RYR1, que ce soit dans un contexte diagnostique ou comme découverte fortuite. Si tel est le cas, la personne devrait être encouragée à inciter les membres de sa famille à passer un dépistage ciblé de ce variant; toute personne porteuse devrait alors être prise en charge comme étant susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne. Si aucun dépistage génétique n’a été réalisé, l’anesthésiologiste devrait fortement encourager la personne à inciter ses proches à passer un dépistage génétique. Si un dépistage a été réalisé sans qu’un variant diagnostique n’ait été identifié, la personne devrait être encouragée à envisager un test de contracture et une participation à un programme de recherche portant sur les causes génétiques de la SHM. En outre, toutes les personnes identifiées comme susceptibles à l’hyperthermie maligne devraient être fortement encouragées à porter un bracelet ou un pendentif MedicAlert indiquant leur SHM, afin que des agents non déclenchants soient utilisés en situation d’urgence.
La branche principale suivante de l’algorithme concerne les personnes qui ne présentent pas elles-mêmes de susceptibilité connue à l’hyperthermie maligne, d’affections liées à la chaleur d’effort ou d’élévation des concentrations de créatine kinase. Si l’anamnèse révèle des antécédents familiaux positifs d’hyperthermie maligne ou de SHM, l’étape suivante consiste à déterminer s’il existe, au sein de la famille, une personne atteinte d’hyperthermie maligne ou de SHM qui a subi un dépistage génétique et chez qui un variant du gène RYR1 compatible avec une SHM a été identifié. Si tel est le cas, la personne évaluée en préopératoire devrait passer un dépistage génétique. Il est essentiel de veiller à ce que la personne évaluée bénéficie d’un séquençage complet des trois gènes associés à la SHM (RYR1, STAC3 et CACNA1S), plutôt que d’un dépistage limité au seul variant identifié chez le membre de la famille atteint. Si le dépistage génétique n’est pas possible, la personne devrait être prise en charge comme étant susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne. Si la personne évaluée est porteuse du variant familial diagnostique, ou si elle ne porte pas ce variant familial mais présente un autre variant pathogène, probablement pathogène ou un variant de signification incertaine de catégorie élevée (VSI-Hi), elle devrait être prise en charge comme étant susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne. Dans ce cas, les membres de la famille qui n’ont pas encore été testés devraient être encouragés à passer un dépistage génétique. En revanche, si la personne évaluée ne porte pas le variant familial diagnostique et ne présente que des variants de signification incertaine de catégorie intermédiaire (VSI-Mid) ou faible (VSI-Lo), ou encore des variants probablement bénins ou bénins, elle n’est pas considérée comme présentant un risque supérieur à celui de la population générale et peut être prise en charge à l’aide de la succinylcholine et/ou d’anesthésiques volatils.
Lorsque l’anamnèse ne révèle aucun antécédent familial, l’algorithme est plus simple, mais repose sur les mêmes principes conceptuels que ceux décrits pour les personnes présentant des antécédents familiaux de SHM mais qui ne présentent pas de variant familial. Ce scénario correspond le plus souvent à un contexte de dépistage génétique, tel que celui évoqué dans l’introduction, dans lequel la personne n’avait aucune indication clinique justifiant un dépistage des gènes associés à la SHM. L’interprétation des résultats génétiques doit alors suivre la même logique que celle décrite précédemment.
Il est essentiel de rappeler que les termes « traiter comme négatif pour l’hyperthermie maligne » ou « traiter comme susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne » sont utilisés exclusivement pour orienter l’utilisation d’agents anesthésiques déclenchants et la prise en charge clinique. Ils ne constituent pas des diagnostics définitifs d’absence ou de présence de SHM. Dans de nombreux cas, le diagnostic définitif demeure incertain. Les présentes recommandations visent à soutenir une prise de décision périopératoire pragmatique.

Scénarios additionnels
Le plan anesthésique pour l’accouchement d’une personne possiblement susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne constitue un sujet de discussion fréquent au sein des unités de travail et d’accouchement. En présence d’antécédents familiaux d’hyperthermie maligne ou de SHM, qu’ils proviennent du côté maternel ou paternel, il est essentiel de s’assurer que le plan anesthésique pour l’accouchement repose sur l’utilisation d’agents non déclenchants. Le scénario d’antécédents familiaux du côté paternel peut être involontairement négligé chez la personne parturiente; toutefois, il est crucial de reconnaître qu’un fœtus dont le père est susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne présente un risque de 50 % d’être lui-même susceptible. Dans ce contexte, la personne enceinte doit être prise en charge à l’aide d’agents anesthésiques non déclenchants, même si elle n’est pas elle-même susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne. L’analgésie péridurale pendant le travail ne comporte pas de risque de crise d’hyperthermie maligne pour le fœtus. Toutefois, si la personne enceinte porteuse d’un fœtus potentiellement susceptible doit subir une césarienne, elle devrait être prise en charge avec des précautions face à une hyperthermie potentielle, indépendamment de son propre statut de susceptibilité. Si le fœtus est possiblement susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne, la personne enceinte devrait recevoir une anesthésie non déclenchante pour toute intervention chirurgicale ou procédure réalisée pendant la grossesse.
Un autre scénario clinique complexe est fréquemment rencontré lors de l’évaluation préanesthésique. Les anesthésiologistes devraient s’enquérir de tout antécédent d’épisodes récurrents de coup de chaleur, de crampes musculaires importantes associées à l’activité physique ou de rhabdomyolyse après une exposition à la chaleur ou un exercice intense, se manifestant notamment par une urine foncée (couleur de Coke). Toute personne présentant de tels antécédents devrait être évaluée en vue d’une susceptibilité à l’hyperthermie maligne et, jusqu’à ce que cette évaluation soit complétée, devrait être prise en charge comme étant susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne. Le lien entre l’hyperthermie maligne, les affections liées à la chaleur et la rhabdomyolyse induite par la chaleur ou l’effort continue de faire l’objet de recherches et de débats au sein de la spécialité. L’existence de réactions hypermétaboliques répétées après une exposition à la chaleur, à l’exercice ou aux deux justifie le recours à une anesthésie non déclenchante afin de réduire le risque périopératoire.
Les personnes ayant des antécédents de susceptibilité à l’hyperthermie maligne qui participent à des activités sportives, exercent des professions les exposant à un stress thermique ou à un effort physique extrême, ou qui prévoient participer à des activités susceptibles de les exposer à des situations déclenchantes (par exemple un triathlon ou une randonnée dans un climat chaud) devraient informer et sensibiliser les personnes responsables de leur encadrement, de la supervision, de l’entraînement ou du suivi sportif, ainsi que les membres de l’équipe, au sujet de l’hyperthermie maligne. En fournissant de l’information sur la reconnaissance d’une crise potentielle et les mesures à prendre en cas d’urgence, la personne concernée réduit le risque d’un événement indésirable potentiellement fatal et augmente ses chances de survie si une crise devait survenir. Le port d’un bracelet ou d’un pendentif d’alerte médicale demeure essentiel.

Discussion
Les protocoles de prise en charge des personnes reconnues comme susceptibles à l’hyperthermie maligne (SHM) sont bien établis et devraient être largement accessibles. Ils sont pragmatiques et permettent de réduire les risques. En revanche, la prise en charge d’une réaction d’hyperthermie maligne demeure extrêmement complexe et exigeante. Même dans des conditions optimales, les issues peuvent être défavorables, avec un taux de mortalité estimé entre 10 % et 15 %. Il existe donc un impératif fort d’éviter l’exposition aux agents déclenchants de l’hyperthermie maligne.
Étant donné que l’utilisation d’agents déclenchants demeure répandue en anesthésie, il est essentiel de mettre en place des stratégies permettant d’identifier, en période préopératoire, les personnes susceptibles à l’hyperthermie maligne. En Amérique du Nord, les tests de contracture ne peuvent remplir ce rôle que pour un nombre très restreint de personnes hautement sélectionnées. Seuls deux centres ouverts au public offrent actuellement ces tests (Toronto, Canada, et Minneapolis, Minnesota) dans cette région du monde. Le centre du Maryland (Uniformed Services University for the Health Sciences) est réservé au personnel militaire et aux personnes participant à des protocoles de recherche. Cette accessibilité extrêmement limitée a un impact réel sur les normes de soins cliniques : il n’est pas réaliste de recommander des algorithmes de prise en charge reposant sur des tests (p. ex., le CHCT) qui sont inaccessibles à la grande majorité des personnes. La situation est très différente dans les régions où les tests de contracture sont facilement accessibles, notamment en Europe et au Royaume-Uni. Bien que nous partagions les préoccupations du Groupe européen de l’hyperthermie maligne (EMHG) en matière de sécurité des patientes et patients et que nous comprenions leur position quant au diagnostic de la SHM et aux indications du test de contracture, il nous est apparu essentiel d’élaborer une approche d’évaluation du risque d’hyperthermie maligne qui soit applicable et réaliste dans le contexte nord-américain. Les présentes recommandations ne visent pas les cliniciennes et cliniciens exerçant à l’extérieur de l’Amérique du Nord, où la disponibilité, les modalités et les coûts des tests de contracture et du dépistage génétique peuvent être très différents, et où il pourrait y avoir d’autres approches pour minimiser le risque d’hyperthermie maligne.
Le dépistage génétique est désormais moins coûteux, plus accessible et très efficace pour identifier les personnes susceptibles à l’hyperthermie maligne. De plus en plus, l’identification d’une SHM repose uniquement sur un résultat de dépistage génétique, et les professionnelles et professionnels de l’anesthésie ont besoin d’outils pour en faciliter l’interprétation. C’est dans cette optique que nous avons élaboré un algorithme décisionnel destiné à soutenir la prise de décision en contexte préanesthésique.
Au cœur de cet algorithme se trouvent plusieurs principes fondamentaux relatifs au risque. Le premier est qu’aucune personne ne peut jamais être considérée comme présentant un risque nul de réaction d’hyperthermie maligne. Même une personne ayant été exposée à plusieurs reprises à des agents déclenchants et ne présentant aucun variant génétique dans les gènes RYR1, CACNA1S ou STAC3 peut présenter une réaction d’hyperthermie maligne. Bien que son risque soit inférieur à celui de la population générale, il n’est pas nul. Le deuxième principe concerne le risque de base. Les estimations de la prévalence de la SHM dans la population générale varient d’environ 1 personne sur 2000 à 1 sur 3000, voire jusqu’à 1 sur 800 selon certaines études. La probabilité qu’une personne susceptible développe une réaction d’hyperthermie maligne lors d’une exposition à un agent déclenchant varie approximativement entre 1 % et 40 %. Ces incertitudes rendent les prédictions individuelles de risque peu fiables. Plutôt que de s’appuyer sur des estimations imprécises, nous avons adapté les recommandations bien établies de l’American College of Medical Genetics concernant la communication de résultats secondaires ou fortuits associés à des troubles potentiellement mortels mais traitables (voir Contenu numérique supplémentaire 1 pour une discussion approfondie de cette question : https://links.lww.com/ALN/E290).
La norme de soins relative au risque de SHM peut être illustrée par un scénario hypothétique : une personne inconsciente victime d’un traumatisme nécessitant une intervention chirurgicale urgente, sans information médicale disponible, ne serait pas considérée comme à risque de SHM, et l’utilisation d’agents déclenchants serait jugée appropriée. En comparaison, une personne évaluée en préopératoire dont l’anamnèse et les dossiers médicaux ne révèlent aucun épisode d’HM ni diagnostic connu de SHM présente un risque moindre. L’absence d’antécédents familiaux réduit encore davantage ce risque. Si, de surcroît, cette personne a bénéficié d’un séquençage des gènes associés à la SHM sans mise en évidence de variants pathogènes, probablement pathogènes ou de type VSI-Hi, le risque est encore diminué. Cela s’explique par le faible pouvoir prédictif des variants de signification incertaine de catégorie intermédiaire pour détecter la maladie dans un contexte de dépistage populationnel. Cela est aggravé par le fait qu’une grande majorité des variants VSI-Mid ou VSI-Lo sont finalement reclassés comme bénins — plus que la probabilité de pathogénicité ne le laisserait penser, car les laboratoires ont tendance à surestimer la pathogenicité de ces variants. Chez les personnes sans éléments cliniques ou familiaux évocateurs de SHM et porteuses uniquement de variants VSI-Mid ou inférieurs, le risque de SHM n’est pas supérieur à celui de la population générale.
Les équipes cliniques ont souvent tendance à se concentrer sur la présence d’un variant faiblement prédictif, alors qu’il conviendrait plutôt de porter attention à l’absence de variants pathogènes, probablement pathogènes ou VSI-Hi. Une personne sans antécédents personnels ou familiaux d’HM ou de SHM et porteuse uniquement d’un variant VSI-Mid ou inférieur présente un risque de SHM nettement inférieur à celui de la personne hypothétique décrite plus haut pour laquelle aucune information clinique ou génétique n’est disponible.
Nous reconnaissons que les anesthésiologistes font preuve d’une grande aversion au risque lorsqu’il s’agit d’évaluer la SHM. Afin de répondre à cette préoccupation, nous avons volontairement abaissé le seuil de pathogénicité des variants considérés comme indicateurs de risque, en incluant les variants VSI-Hi. Pour la plupart des autres troubles dans lesquels la probabilité préalable de maladie est faible, les lignes directrices actuelles de l’ACMG recommandent de ne communiquer que les variants pathogènes ou probablement pathogènes. Ainsi, on peut éviter un fardeau excessif de faux positifs. Étant donné que l’évaluation clinique post-test chez une personne porteuse d’un variant de signification incertaine de catégorie élevée associé à l’hyperthermie maligne est limitée, que les conséquences d’une réaction d’hyperthermie maligne sont particulièrement graves et que l’évitement des agents déclenchants est relativement simple, nous préconisons un seuil de déclaration de la pathogénicité des variants plus bas que celui retenu pour les autres affections figurant sur la liste de l’ACMG. Comparativement à plusieurs des affections figurant sur la liste des résultats secondaires de l’ACMG, la prise en charge des personnes potentiellement susceptibles à l’hyperthermie maligne est peu contraignante. L’analyse du rapport bénéfices–risques favorise donc une identification plus large de la susceptibilité à l’hyperthermie maligne que pour d’autres affections figurant sur cette liste. Cette approche entraînera qu’une proportion importante des personnes identifiées à partir de variants de signification incertaine de catégorie élevée soient des faux positifs et ne reçoivent ultimement pas de diagnostic définitif de susceptibilité à l’hyperthermie maligne. Nous considérons toutefois qu’il s’agit d’une erreur préférable à celle consistant à exposer, même rarement, une personne véritablement susceptible à un agent déclenchant. De plus, notre algorithme recommande de « traiter comme susceptible à l’hyperthermie maligne » plutôt que de poser un diagnostic formel de susceptibilité. Cette distinction est intentionnelle et vise à éviter toute confusion entre une stratégie de prise en charge prudente fondée sur le risque et un diagnostic établi. Même avec une approche renforcée axée sur la sécurité (comparativement à la norme de soins en matière de dépistage génomique), il demeure essentiel de reconnaître que le risque ne peut jamais être réduit à zéro.
Il a été avancé que la susceptibilité à l’hyperthermie maligne pourrait, dans certains cas, relever d’une étiologie génétique encore incomplètement élucidée, et que d’autres facteurs génétiques non identifiés pourraient être en cause dans certaines familles. Bien que les variants de RYR1, CACNA1S et STAC3 n’expliquent qu’environ 70 à 75 % des cas d’hyperthermie maligne ou de susceptibilité, cette proportion demeure majoritaire, et l’absence de tels variants réduit de façon marquée la probabilité de susceptibilité. Nous insistons donc sur l’importance, lors du dépistage des membres de la famille d’une personne porteuse d’un variant diagnostique, de recourir systématiquement au séquençage complet des trois gènes connus associés à la susceptibilité à l’hyperthermie maligne. Lorsque l’ensemble des variants pathogènes, probablement pathogènes et VSI-Hi est exclu, la probabilité — certes rare — que deux variants associés à la susceptibilité ségrègent au sein d’une même famille est considérablement réduite. À l’inverse, s’il fallait considérer que les personnes sans variant détecté demeurent néanmoins à risque équivalent, le dépistage génétique familial perdrait toute pertinence clinique.
En conclusion, bien que les réactions d’hyperthermie maligne continuent de survenir, le diagramme décisionnel proposé vise à faciliter la prise de décision clinique dans cette population, en particulier dans le contexte nord-américain. Il subsiste néanmoins un besoin important de formation et de recherche dans ce domaine. La Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States (mhaus.org) met à disposition des ressources éducatives et une liste de centres spécialisés à l’intention des cliniciennes et cliniciens nord-américains.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
This article is being published concurrently online and in the April 2026 issue (Volume 144, Number 4) of Anesthesiology and the April 2026 issue (Volume 73, Number 4) of the Canadian Journal of Anesthesia/Journal canadien d’anesthésie.
The article processing charge was funded by internal funding.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Drs. Henry Rosenberg, M.D. (Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States, Sherbourne, New York), Nikolaus Gravenstein, M.D. (North American Malignant Hyperthermia Registry, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida), and Mark Poler, M.D. (Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvania) for critical review of the article. The authors also thank Bryan Penberthy, M.F.A. (Communications and Publishing Office, Department of Anesthesiology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida), for editorial assistance with this article.

Research Support
Dr. Riazi receives salary support through a merit award from the UHN Research Institute (Toronto, Canada). Dr. Biesecker is supported by grant No. 1 ZIA HG200387-11 from the National Institutes of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute Intramural Research (Bethesda, Maryland).

Conflict of interest
Dr. Biesecker receives research support from Merck, Inc. (Rahway, New Jersey); is a member of the Illumina Corp. (San Diego, California) Medical Ethics Advisory Committee; and receives royalties from Wolters Kluwer for Up-To-Date (Alphen aan den Rijn, Netherlands). Dr. Watt is the President of the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of United States (Sherbourne, New York), and Dr. Riazi is Chair of the International Professional Advisory Council of the Malignant Hyperthermia Association of United States (Sherbourne, New York). Dr. Plester declares no competing interests.

Remerciements
Les autrices et auteurs remercient le Dr Henry Rosenberg, M.D. (Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States, Sherbourne, New York), Nikolaus Gravenstein, M.D. (North American Malignant Hyperthermia Registry, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Floride) et Mark Poler, M.D. (Geisinger Health System, Danville, Pennsylvanie) pour la revue critique de l’article. Nous remercions également Bryan Penberthy, M.F.A. (Bureau des Communications et publications, Département d’anesthésiologie, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Floride), pour son aide éditoriale pour cet article.

Soutien à la recherche
La Dre Riazi reçoit un soutien salarial sous forme de bourse de mérite de l’UHN Research Institute (Toronto, Canada). Le Dr Biesecker est soutenu par la subvention no 1 ZIA HG200387-11 des National Institutes of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute, programme de recherche intramurale (Bethesda, Maryland).

Conflits d’intérêt
Le Dr Biesecker reçoit un soutien à la recherche de Merck, Inc. (Rahway, New Jersey), est membre du comité consultatif en éthique médicale d’Illumina Corp. (San Diego, Californie) et reçoit des redevances de Wolters Kluwer pour Up-To-Date (Alphen aan den Rijn, Pays-Bas). La Dre Watt est présidente de la Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States (Sherbourne, New York), et la Dre Riazi est présidente du International Professional Advisory Council de la Malignant Hyperthermia Association of the United States (Sherbourne, New York). La Dre Plester déclare n’avoir aucun conflit d’intérêts.

References
Malignant hyperthermia: A review
Clinical presentation, treatment, and complications of malignant hyperthermia in North America from 1987 to 2006
Malignant hyperthermia in the post-genomics era: New perspectives on an old concept
European Malignant Hyperthermia Group: European Malignant Hyperthermia Group guidelines for investigation of malignant hyperthermia susceptibility
The sensitivity and specificity of the Caffeine-Halothane Contracture Test: A report from the North American Malignant Hyperthermia Registry
Association between known or strongly suspected malignant hyperthermia susceptibility and postoperative outcomes: An observational population-based study
ACMG Secondary Findings Working Group: ACMG SF v3.2 list for reporting of secondary findings in clinical exome and genome sequencing: A policy statement of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)
The Clinical Genome Resource (ClinGen): Advancing genomic knowledge through global curation
ACMG Laboratory Quality Assurance Committee: Standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants: A joint consensus recommendation of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology
Variant curation expert panel recommendations for RYR1 pathogenicity assertions in malignant hyperthermia susceptibility
Updated variant curation expert panel criteria and pathogenicity classifications for 251 variants for RYR1-related malignant hyperthermia susceptibility
Awareness of family health history as a risk factor for disease— United States, 2004
European Federation of Neurological Societies: EFNS guidelines on the diagnostic approach to pauci- or asymptomatic hyperCKemia
National Athletic Trainers’ Association position statement: Exertional heat illnesses
Malignant hyperthermia testing in probands without adverse anesthetic reaction
A clinical grading scale to predict malignant hyperthermia susceptibility
Malignant hyperthermia in Canada: Characteristics of index anesthetics in 129 malignant hyperthermia susceptible probands
Fitting a naturally scaled point system to the ACMG/AMP variant classification guidelines
European Malignant Hyperthermia Group: Consensus guidelines on perioperative management of malignant hyperthermia suspected or susceptible patients from the European Malignant Hyperthermia Group
An assessment of penetrance and clinical expression of malignant hyperthermia in individuals carrying diagnostic ryanodine receptor 1 gene mutations
NISC Comparative Sequencing Program: Using exome data to identify malignant hyperthermia susceptibility mutations
Evaluation of malignant hyperthermia features in patients with pathogenic or likely pathogenic RYR1 variants disclosed through a population genomic screening program
Large-scale application of ClinGen-InSiGHT APC-specific ACMG/ AMP variant classification criteria leads to substantial reduction in VUS
Variant classification changes over time in BRCA1 and BRCA2
ACMG Secondary Findings Working Group: Recommendations for reporting of secondary findings in clinical exome and genome sequencing, 2021 update: A policy statement of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG)