Mendelian causes of early-onset emphysema: a review of the current literature
Currently, the only known clinically relevant hereditary risk factor for emphysema is limited to mutations within the SERPINA1 gene, encoding alpha-1 antitrypsin. Although several additional rare high-impact variants have been proposed, their role in emphysema pathophysiology is unclear. This review discusses recent cases investigating novel candidate genes that may be Mendelian causes for emphysema development. We also explore potential methods to confirm the causal relation to COPD. Identifying potential new rare high-impact genetic variants may lead to novel therapeutic targets, thus improving the personalised treatment of COPD. Several gene mutations have been implicated in emphysema development, including SERPINA1, SERPINA3, PTPN6, TERT, TR, NAF1, BICD1, ELN, FBLN, FLNA and SFTPC. Mutations of the SERPINA1 and PTPN6 genes are considered definitive causes of emphysema. Studies have ascertained rare variants in cutis laxa genes (ELN, FBLN and FLNA), which cause early-onset emphysema in infants and children via defective elastin synthesis. Telomerase pathway genes (TERT, TR, NAF1 and BICD1) have also been implicated in increased COPD risk along with another member of the serpin family (SERPINA3) and SFTPC. These probable mutations for emphysema tend to present later in life. Due to being unconfirmed, they may involve a more complex gene interaction that requires further interrogation with next-generation sequencing and molecular methods, including CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) screening libraries, whole-exome sequencing or whole-genome sequencing. Although multiple novel mutations have been reported to cause emphysema, further validation is needed. Next-generation sequencing offers a promising method to understand early-onset emphysema and COPD pathogenesis.
Shareable abstract
Several gene mutations have been reported to cause early-onset emphysema with known Mendelian traits. Next-generation sequencing offers a promising method to understand early-onset emphysema and COPD pathogenesis. https://bit.ly/4695zEM

Introduction and background
COPD is a heterogeneous respiratory disease characterised by airway obstruction that hinders normal breathing. This disease consists of symptoms including cough, wheeze, dyspnoea, sputum hyperproduction and exercise intolerance. It is the third leading cause of mortality globally, as well as exhibiting high morbidity rates and healthcare costs. According to a Global Burden of Disease Study, COPD was the leading driver of increased disease burden worldwide. Moreover, in 2019–2020, the estimated total healthcare cost of COPD in Australia was AUD 994.8 million and a projected cost of USD 49 billion in the United States during 2020. According to a recent macroeconomic modelling study, COPD is estimated to cost the world economy USD 4.326 trillion in 2020–50.
The definition of COPD is based on the presence of airflow obstruction, which can result from various morphological alterations, including airway inflammation and remodelling, mucus hypersecretion (chronic bronchitis) and alveolar deterioration (emphysema). These changes can all lead to, not only the collapse of the small airways, but also cause airway remodelling and disappearance altogether, thereby impeding airflow. COPD is usually characterised by progressive and almost irreversible airflow obstruction, with emphysema typically emerging between the ages of 60 and 80 years. Early-onset emphysema is characterised by disease onset prior to the age of 55 years. COPD and emphysema can also occur in those without a smoking history, but only in rare cases and, as such, its pathogenesis remains unclear. Some studies have specifically focused on the mechanisms behind emphysema, but studies so far have been unable to advance the field in this respect due to its complexity.
Although smoking is the main risk factor, only 10–20% of smokers develop COPD. However, this is likely an underestimation due to diagnostic delay and competing causes of death that occur prior to the onset of COPD. Nonetheless, this suggests other factors, such as genetic causes, contribute to the interindividual susceptibility to the detrimental effects of smoking. Further support for genetic factors contributing to COPD development is provided by observations of Hooper et al., showing the risk of COPD increasing up to 2.7-fold in those with a family history of the disease. Additionally, studies have shown that a rare genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) causes emphysema, which is often early onset in nature. However, the verification of other genetic risk factors linked to emphysema remains elusive. As such, this review aims to identify the genes that are causal in emphysema development, particularly in never-smoker and paediatric cases.

Literature search and selection criteria
The selection criteria for the genes discussed in this review were based on a panel of experts included in the authorship of this paper. Additionally, PubMed searches were conducted on early-onset emphysema with a genetic origin. The estimated prevalence of these mutations in the general population was consolidated with the online database gnomAD (Genome Aggregation Database, https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org) (table 1), as well as epidemiological data available in searches through PubMed.
List of potential causal genes for early-onset emphysema
Gene	Gene name	SNP or amino acid/protein change	Estimated percentage prevalence	 	BICD1	Bicaudal D cargo adaptor 1	rs161981	58.25%	 	ELN	Elastin	rs1797225811, rs794729201	NA	 	SERPINA1	Serpin family A member 1 (alpha-1 anti-trypsin)	rs28929474 (Z), rs199422209 (Mheerlen), rs775982338 (Mmalton), rs764325655 (Q0bolton)Note: selected severe deficiency variants – many others exist	0.002785%, 0.006815%, 0.01813%, 0.0006817%	 	PTPN6	Protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 6	rs62621988	0.11%	 	SFTPC	Surfactant protein C	rs121917834	0.0002478%	 	TERT	Telomerase reverse transcriptase	rs10069690, rs2853677, rs377639087, rs35719940, rs1478218565, rs1554043151	34.92%, 62.54%, 0.2953%, 1.95%, 0.00006314%, 0.0003426%	 	NAF1	Nuclear assembly factor 1 ribonucleoprotein	rs376190930	0.0006818%	 	FLNA	Filamin A	c.992_993del, p.Lys331Serfs∗5	NA	 	SERPINA3	Alpha-1-anti-chymotrypsin	rs1800463	0.0001859%	 	FBLN	Fibulin	rs119489101, rs80338767	0.0004956%, 0.0001239%
The percentage prevalence of each single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is estimated based on the general population. Mutations with NA indicate that there is no current available information on gnomAD (Genome Aggregation Database).

Mendelian inheritance and causal genes for emphysema

SERPINA1
Mendelian inheritance of gene mutations has been established as a cause for emphysema development. The Z-variant of the SERPINA1 gene (p.Glu366Lys), which leads to AATD, is currently the main variant tested as a monogenic cause for emphysema and COPD, and it also increases the risk of severe liver disease. In addition to Z, at least 200 other SERPINA1 variants have been shown to decrease the quantity or function of this important anti-protease, which protects fragile alveolar tissue against proteolytic damage. Severe AATD accounts for approximately 1–3% of COPD cases and can cause early-onset emphysema. Severe plasma deficiency of this potent serine protease inhibitor is most often attributable to the rare homozygous ZZ genotype. Individuals with this genotype produce approximately 10–15% of the plasma alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) levels observed in those without AATD (referred to as wild-type MM genotype). The absence of plasma AAT leads to uncontrolled protease activity and lung tissue destruction, manifesting in early-onset emphysema in smokers as well as in nonsmokers. Of note, a growing family of SERPINA1 variants known as “Null” lead to a complete absence of circulating AAT and are thus associated with an even higher risk of emphysema when compared to Z. The high risk was illustrated by the presence of radiographic emphysema in a 24-year-old never-smoker in the first report of severe AATD caused by a complete absence of circulating AAT in the blood. The true prevalence of Null SERPINA1 variants remains underestimated and accurate data is hampered by diagnostic challenges such as the detection of Null heterozygotes (who resemble wildtype MM on protein analysis) and the limited availability of sequencing services in many countries.
Furthermore, it has also been found that the AATD MZ (heterozygote) genotype is as prevalent as 1/25–1/50 in individuals of European heritage and leads to moderate AAT deficiency. It was long believed that the MZ genotype was a “carrier” form; however, studies observing the relationship between this genotype and smoking have highlighted a significant increase in COPD risk and severity when compared to normal-risk MM smokers. Individuals compound heterozygous for Z and the milder S variant (p.Glu288Val) have also been shown to be at increased risk of COPD if they smoke. However, AATD does not account for all emphysema or COPD cases with a genetic contribution. As such, other candidate genes have been investigated to identify their role in COPD susceptibility, particularly in rare cases of early-onset emphysema in those without a history of smoking (figure 1).
Potential Mendelian causes for early-onset emphysema and their phenotypic effects. Genes of interest include BICD1, ELN, FBLN, FLNA, NAF1, PTPN6, SERPINA1, SERPINA3, SFTPC, TERT and TR. AAT: alpha-1 antitrypsin; ACT: alpha-1 antichymotrypsin.

SERPINA3
SERPINA3, which codes for alpha-1 antichymotrypsin (ACT), is a glycosylated protein that inhibits multiple serine proteases, including mast cell chymases, chymotrypsin, pancreatic cationic elastase and kallikreins 2 and 3. ACT modulates inflammatory and immune responses via chymotrypsin and cathepsin G inhibition. Currently, two point mutations in the SERPINA3 gene have been linked to COPD, as each causes a plasma deficiency of this antiprotease. One is known as Bonn-1 (p.Pro229Ala) and the other mutation as Bochum-1 (p.Leu55Pro). This mutation produces a conformational alteration in the protein, resulting in retention and aggregation within hepatocytes, with decreased circulating levels of the protease inhibitor, in a pathogenic loss-of-function mechanism similar to AATD. ACT deficiency is extremely rare within the general population, with only two published reports to date. This is likely because heterozygous individuals display a moderate ACT deficiency as they retain approximately 60% of normal ACT levels and no homozygotes have been reported to date. As such, it has been arduous to establish a confirmatory link between SERPINA3 mutations and COPD due to their rarity in the population. This suggests SERPINA3 mutations are involved in very few COPD cases and are not as consequential in overall COPD pathogenicity. Moreover, ACT has the distinctive trait, amongst other SERPIN family members, of binding to double-stranded DNA independently of its inhibitory mechanistic action. This binding has been attributed to the lysine residues sitting close to each other, however, the functional implications of this remain ambiguous.

PTPN6
Recently, the inherited loss-of-function PTPN6 variant (p.Ala455Thr) has been found to result in early-onset emphysema in a study of a French-Canadian family. Emphysema was observed in all heterozygous individuals with a smoking history, except for one male ex-smoker. In the case of heterozygous never smokers, incomplete penetrance was observed as there was varying emphysema severity, with six individuals without emphysema, all female. Segregation of emphysema and Ala455Thr was shown to be of an autosomal-dominant inheritance, with complete penetrance with smoking. Moreover, the family in this study differed clinically in emphysema distribution from what is commonly seen in smoking-related emphysema cases. The affected family members displayed basilar predominant emphysema with panacinar patterns. PTPN6 mRNA expression has also been seen to be greater in the lungs of current smokers, suggesting this gene is a potential contributor in the normal protective response to smoking. PTPN6 encodes the SHP-1 enzyme, which negatively regulates many cytokine and growth factor receptors. This variant also exhibited a reduction in phosphatase activity of SHP-1, which has been shown to result in emphysema in humans and B-cell population alterations associated with age in both humans and mice. Animal studies of a PTPN6 knockout led to inflammation in various organs and premature death, primarily from pulmonary oedema. These mice also displayed pathological characteristics of COPD, such as an increase in the number of inflammatory cells, subepithelial and parenchymal fibrosis, epithelial hypertrophy, and mucous hyperplasia. The PTPN6 gene was also shown to play a causal role in a mouse model with aluminium oxide nanoparticle-induced lesions, representative of emphysema. The overexpression of this gene conferred protection against emphysema development and airway remodelling, potentially via cell apoptosis inhibition. Of note, the PTPN6 mutation was not previously detected by genome-wide association study (GWAS), further highlighting that family-centred analysis must be reviewed in collaboration with large-scale studies to completely understand COPD-emphysema pathogenesis. Family studies can reveal rare variants or modes of inheritance that may be overlooked in large cohorts, allowing for a more comprehensive analysis via integration, as these approaches are complementary. This allows for validation within larger populations, which can be instrumental for personalised treatment and disease risk prediction or modelling. It also highlights the need to utilise other techniques to assess PTPN6, which cannot be detected by common GWAS arrays that are designed for common variants and may miss rare mutations. Overall, this indicates that with Ala455Thr, there is a complete phenotypic expression of emphysema when in conjunction with smoking, even if the mutation is only present on a single allele. However, penetrance appears incomplete in never-smokers, particularly in females. The findings in this family are suggestive of a novel type of hereditary emphysema and the first since the discovery of AATD in 1963, as well as highlighting a novel mechanism in emphysema pathogenesis.

Telomerase genes
Premature lung ageing due to telomere dysfunction has been shown to be a causal factor in cases of family aggregation of paediatric emphysema. Telomerase germline mutations represent a Mendelian cause for COPD risk and appear in families with autosomal dominance with telomere-related diseases such as pulmonary fibrosis. Currently, three telomerase genes are known to be associated with hereditary emphysema risk (TERT, TR, NAF1), as well as potential associations with the BICD1 gene. Of note, familial pedigrees of mutation carriers demonstrated that relatives who also have the mutations exhibit pulmonary fibrosis. In a study of one family, never-smokers developed pulmonary fibrosis, whereas carriers of the mutation who smoked went on to develop emphysema. This observation brings to light the distinctive gene–environment interactions that occur between a short telomere gene mutation and environmental exposure, which together dictate respiratory disease phenotype. This interaction appears especially important in women. Furthermore, qualitative scores attained from 1557 patients in the ECLIPSE study, as well as 432 individuals from the Norway group, resulted in the discovery of an emphysema locus on chromosome 12p11.2. Within this region, the more commonly linked single nucleotide polymorphism is found in the BICD1 gene, which could relate to telomere length regulation. Additionally, another study has concluded that BICD1 accumulation brought on by oxidative stress results in impaired autophagosome maturation in COPD.

ELN
Emphysema studies in both human and animal models suggest that connective tissue, particularly elastin (ELN), is compromised in emphysema cases. This is likely considered irreversible as the deterioration of elastin leads to structural changes with a lower gas exchange surface. Elastin is the main protein constituent of connective tissue elasticity and is vital to the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. Various mutations within the elastin gene have been identified, such as those leading to elastin hemizygosity, which result in multiple issues, including supra valvular aortic stenosis and Williams–Beuren syndrome, as well as a distal frameshift mutation causing autosomal dominant cutis laxa (ADCL). Emphysema symptoms linked with ADCL are known to present early in the neonatal period or during infancy and the homozygous allele of the recessive mutation in cutis laxa leads to severe emphysema. Cutis laxa refers to a range of rare connective tissue conditions that can be distinguishable by loose, redundant or inelastic skin, as well as premature ageing. It is classified within autosomal dominant, recessive and X-linked disorders, which exhibit an increase in slack connective tissue. Families with the milder autosomal dominant form display early-onset emphysema, especially if inherited with the Z-allele of SERPINA1. Two separate cohorts have discovered that mutations of the ELN gene give rise to mild cutis laxa and early-onset COPD. The ELN gene is mapped to chromosome 7; however, this chromosomal locus has not been identified as a linkage site for COPD pathogenesis and, as such, suggests that mutations of the ELN gene are a rare cause of emphysema.
A clinical trial has shown that the p.Gly773Asp mutation of human elastin is linked to mild cutis laxa and potentially increases the risk for tobacco-related COPD. A mutation in the terminal exon, c.2318 G>A, leading to a substitution of glycine 773 to aspartate (p.Gly773Asp) was observed in 1.25% of patients in a severe early-onset COPD and emphysema pedigree. Studies demonstrate this change to diminish the functional ability of the altered protein to generate sufficient elastin fibre, as well as alterations in the proteolytic susceptibility within the C-terminal section of elastin and decreased reactivity of exon 36 with cell matrix receptors. This indicates that the p.Gly773Asp mutation contributes to COPD pathogenicity. However, upon consolidation with gnomAD, this mutation was shown to be benign according to in silico predictors, highlighting the need to verify these mutations outside of individual studies. Additionally, haploinsufficiency of the ELN gene may be involved in emphysema pathogenesis as seen in mutations of this gene in two individuals with early-onset COPD, as well as with that of ELN mutations being observed in ADCL cases linked with severe premature emphysema. As the expression of ELN is vital in alveoli development for both the alveolar sacs and ducts, mutations of this gene impair alveolar growth and septal development. A previously unreported heterozygous ELN point mutation has been discovered in both the patient and his father in the form of c.2T>C, leading to p.Met1Thr. This variant causes an alteration in the methionine start codon, which is suggested to result in the absence of the elastin protein or truncation if a downstream methionine codon exists. Therefore, providing further evidence for ELN mutations as a cause of early-onset emphysema.

FBLN
Elastin fibres attach to proteins such as fibulins, which then bind to a multitude of extracellular matrix constituents and the basement membrane. At least two of the six fibulin proteins are mutated in severe autosomal recessive cutis laxa cases and often phenotypically present as early-onset emphysema. A new variant of the fibulin-4 gene (FBLN4), 11q13, was discovered in this form of cutis laxa with emphysema. This mutation led to the substitution of an amino acid in an epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like region of FBLN4, resulting in severely low amounts of extracellular protein. In the case of a Turkish family, a homozygous mutation of the fibulin-5 gene (FBLN5), 14q32.1, was also identified to cause cutis laxa and emphysema, a state further exacerbated by recurrent respiratory infections. This mutation was also found with an EGF-like region, indicating that the fibulin proteins are essential to ensure that lung ECM integrity is preserved. Of note, analogous fibrillin mutations, which share structural homology to fibulins, are known to cause Marfan syndrome. Additionally, the FBN1 (15q21.1) mutation has been identified in neonatal Marfan syndrome with extremely early-onset emphysema.

FLNA
The first filamin A (FLNA) gene mutation has been reported in a familial emphysema study consisting of non- and low-smoking individuals. The X-linked FLNA gene is responsible for cytoskeletal reorganisation, whereby loss-of-function mutations of this gene result in issues in neuronal migration, as well as connective and vascular tissue abnormalities. Respiratory issues linked to mutations in this gene often occur during early childhood with symptoms such as neonatal respiratory failure, congenital emphysema and interstitial lung disease. In this case, the mother exhibited genetic mosaicism, which was passed down to her daughter, whereby both had emphysema. Although the daughter occasionally smoked (less than 1 pack-year), this was not considered the sole reason for the emphysema. Both reportedly also had normal AAT levels, lacked syndromic features typically presenting of ADCL or telomerase gene mutations, as well as an absence of the novel PTPN6 mutation linked to emphysema. This suggests that the FLNA mutation may be a rare variant responsible for the emphysema seen in these cases. Regarding adults, a single case study has been published that describes a young male exhibiting a mosaic truncating FLNA variant along with severe obstructive lung disease. The paucity of reports of emphysema linked to FLNA mutations in adults may be attributable to premature death. A lack of diagnosis due to the limited understanding of this issue in more benign phenotypes may also contribute to the under-recognition. Furthermore, there are a variety of truncating FLNA mutations and missense mutations that have been previously discussed, indicating that there may be a multitude of clinical presentations. Individuals with a loss-of-function variant of FLNA are typically linked to premature and severe pulmonary conditions. However, the X-linked inactivation mechanism in females, as well as the level of mosaicism, may be a factor in clinical presentation and severity.

SFTPC
There has been increasing evidence for associations between surfactant protein C (SP-C) deficiency and a range of respiratory diseases. Whilst SP-B deficiency leads to fatal neonatal lung disease, mutations of the SP-C gene (SFTPC) have a broader phenotypic expression. A study has analysed this gene in 34 infants with chronic lung disease having an unknown cause and revealed that 11 patients had a heterozygous mutation in SFTPC. These abnormalities resulted in the abnormal proSP-C processing and reduced expression of normal SP-C. SP-C is vital in promoting the adsorption of lung surfactant phospholipids to the alveolar air–liquid interface. This decreases surface tension and, in turn, the work of breathing to achieve pulmonary homeostasis. Therefore, mutations of the SFTPC gene may impair alveolar dynamics, leading to emphysema.
One study reported the first depiction of combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema syndrome in an adult with an SFTPC mutation. In this case, emphysematous lesions were evident. Of note, lung cysts linked with septal thickening have been observed in patients with familial pulmonary fibrosis who carry SFTPC variants. The alveolar injury associated with this mutation may provide another genetically mediated reason for emphysema, as well as fibrosis.

Next-generation sequencing technologies to improve diagnosis of genetic causes of emphysema
Currently, next-generation sequencing technologies are routinely used for variant detection. This technology has been highly beneficial in improving genetic disease diagnosis, therapeutic interventions, and prognosis with the emergence of the screening of CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) libraries, whole-exome sequencing (WES) and whole-genome sequencing (WGS).

CRISPR screening libraries
A genome-wide pooled CRISPR screening library utilises the CRISPR/Cas9 system as a genetic loss-of-function method to discover gene-specific changes in cultured cells after a biological challenge relevant to disease pathophysiology. It does this by multiplexing multiple single-guide (sg) RNAs in a vector collectively targeting the entire genome. This is a revolutionary technique to identify the functional relevance of candidate genes to cell survival, drug resistance and proliferation. It has also been established that lentiviral vectors with a controlled multiplicity of infection ensure only a single knockout is integrated into each cell, allowing for precise analysis of specific gene edits. Although pooled genome-wide screening libraries provide comprehensive profiling and are required for cell viability assays to ascertain challenge-resistant genes, it can be confounded by off-target edits occurring despite having well-designed sgRNAs due to sequence similarity. This can impact the phenotype and lead to false positives, incorrectly suggesting that the target gene is linked to phenotypic expression. Including multiple sgRNAs targeting the same gene is important to avoid these artifacts. This can be further seen in a previous cancer vulnerability screen, which generated false-positive hits in regions of genome amplification. Because of this drawback, it is vital to replicate the findings observed in literature through these screens, which are currently lacking. A recent study has successfully utilised CRISPR interference to investigate the function of nine genes linked to COPD by GWAS in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived type 2 alveolar epithelial cells. From this, genes implicated by GWAS were verified by determining their biological role and disease outcomes from dysfunction. This approach, therefore, is fundamental to elucidate novel targets contributing to emphysema and COPD.

Whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing
As discussed in this review, rare paediatric disease cases usually arise from genetic mutations that can present clinically prior to birth or manifest later in childhood. This causes difficulty in determining a diagnosis due to the rarity, limited knowledge surrounding many diseases and the lack of understanding behind the phenotypic impact caused by genetic variants. Standard diagnostic testing primarily encompasses sequential single-gene analysis. However, the absence of defining pathognomonic determinants, multiple disease-associated genes and heterogeneity evident in clinical conditions highlights the requirement for genome-wide sequencing to determine the causal mutations in other cases. WES is a technology that examines the protein-coding areas within the genome, whereas WGS analyses both the coding and noncoding sections. Through both these methods, children presumed to have an underlying genetic condition experience expedited Mendelian disorder diagnosis, allowing for more timely initiation of relevant treatments.
WGS does facilitate more optimal genetic variant diagnosis over WES, with a Mendelian cohort showing that it diagnosed 34% of families who previously tested negative for WES. However, upon WES reanalysis 2 years later, 18% would be diagnosed, leading to an overall 19% diagnosis specific to WGS. The incremental cost associated with each additional diagnosis utilising WGS following WES reanalysis was USD 23 727 and WGS alone was USD 27 093 compared to WES reanalysis. This reveals that WGS is the optimal genomic test to attain a comprehensive coverage of diagnoses in Mendelian diseases. WES followed by reanalysis offers lower monetary expenses, although a slight decrease in detection yield. The utilisation of either methodology is contingent on the clinical case and availability in the local area (figure 2).
Flowchart highlighting the factors to consider when determining whether a case of emphysema can be attributable to a rare genetic mutation. AAT: alpha-1 antitrypsin. AATD: alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Augmentation therapy and other therapeutic interventions
Currently, patients with emphysema caused by severe AATD can receive augmentation therapy in an effort to increase functional AAT, thereby decelerating lung tissue loss. This entails the administration of a weekly intravenous infusion containing AAT protein obtained from healthy plasma. However, this therapeutic approach does not address the underlying genetic defect. There is also no therapy to address the liver issues that accompany this mutation and, as such, there is a need to generate novel treatments with a personalised approach.
Advances in the Mendelian causes of emphysema could lead to the translation into specific therapies. A phase 3 trial evaluating the efficacy of inhaled AAT for those with obstructive lung disease caused by severe AATD is currently in progress. Inhalation allows for direct administration of AAT to the lungs, the site where this protein is most required. As current COPD management strategies utilise inhaled corticosteroids, inhaled or nebulised treatments may hold promise for other genetic causes of emphysema via modulating the gene to prevent disease or slow progression, or even correct the underlying defect with gene editing strategies.
Regarding connective tissue abnormalities, antifibrotic medications to reduce lung scarring are already available. This includes pirfenidone and nintendanib to treat familial idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. However, effective long-term treatment is still needed as neither treatment halts lung fibrosis progression. For telomere shortening, adeno-associated virus (AAV)–telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) gene therapy in mice has been shown to decelerate telomere shortening, which in turn decreases lung exacerbations. The efficacy of AAV gene transfer has been studied in humans and has shown promising results in other areas, such as lipoprotein lipase deficiency and haemophilia B, although further research is needed as immunomodulation may be required to ensure expression is long-term.

Conclusion
Emphysema and COPD pose a huge health burden on a global scale. The genetic variants potentially culpable for early-onset emphysema, aside from those within the well-known SERPINA1 gene, require more investigation. Multiple new mutations have been reported to be involved in emphysema pathogenesis. However, further validation of these findings via promising emerging methods such as CRISPR screening libraries, WES or WGS in larger cohorts is imperative. By confirming these associations, Mendelian causes of hereditary emphysema can be better understood and the field of precision medicine can be enhanced to allow for individual diagnostic and treatment advancement for rare variants.

Points for clinical practice
We discuss several gene mutations that have been reported to cause early-onset emphysema with known Mendelian traits, providing clinicians with a single source to screen.
- Early-onset of emphysema
- Minimal to no history of cigarette smoke
- Minimal occupational exposures
- Strong family history of COPD or emphysema
- Low serum AAT protein level in the absence of an acute phase response (normal C-reactive protein)
Consider the following factors as supportive of a genetic cause of emphysema:
If patients meet some or all of these criteria, consider referral to clinical genetics, where telomere length measurement and/or genetic testing such as WES or WGS may be indicated.
Future studies should be designed to evaluate known variants, especially in patients with early-onset emphysema or a family history of early-onset emphysema, to address the gap in knowledge in relation to patient characteristics, tissue and blood sampling, along with molecular methods.
The application of next-generation sequencing may accelerate and improve the rates of genetic disease diagnosis, prognosis and therapeutic intervention for patients, especially in these rare subtypes of COPD.
Provenance: Submitted article, peer reviewed.
Conflict of interest: M. van den Berge reports grants from GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Roche, Genentech and Chiesi. T.P. Carroll reports grants from the US Alpha-1 Foundation and is an unpaid member of the US Alpha-1 Foundation Grant Advisory Committee. The other authors declared no conflicts of interest.

References
Treatment trials in young patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and pre-chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients: time to move forward
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Novel strategy to identify genetic risk factors for COPD severity: a genetic isolate
Global, regional, and national burden of chronic respiratory diseases and associated risk factors, 1990–2019: results from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2019
COPD generates substantial cost for health systems
The global economic burden of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease for 204 countries and territories in 2020–50: a health-augmented macroeconomic modelling study
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
COPD exacerbations: defining their cause and prevention
Small airway determinants of airflow limitation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Small-airway obstruction and emphysema in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Early-onset, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with pulmonary hypertension that was likely induced by toluene exposure
Multifaceted mechanisms in COPD: inflammation, immunity, and tissue repair and destruction
Novel therapy for COPD
Progress in the mechanism and targeted drug therapy for COPD
Identifying targets for COPD treatment through gene expression analyses
Improved patient outcome with smoking cessation: when is it too late?
Prevalence and incidence of COPD in smokers and non-smokers: the Rotterdam study
Most patients with COPD are unaware of their health threats and are not diagnosed: a national-level study using pulmonary function test
Risk factors for COPD spirometrically defined from the lower limit of normal in the BOLD project (2012)
Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency
The electrophoretic α1-globulin pattern of serum in α1-antitrypsin deficiency
SERPINA1 and more? A putative genetic contributor to pulmonary dysfunction in alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency
Emphysema in nonsmokers: alpha 1-antitrypsin deficiency and other causes
Identification and characterisation of eight novel SERPINA1 Null mutations
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency: a variant with no detectable α1-antitrypsin
Pitfalls and caveats in α1-antitrypsin deficiency testing: a guide for clinicians
Clarification of the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in α1-antitrypsin deficiency PiMZ heterozygotes
Clarifying the risk of lung disease in SZ alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency
Alpha-1 antitrypsin MZ heterozygosity is an endotype of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
The serpin superfamily and their role in the regulation and dysfunction of serine protease activity in COPD and other chronic lung diseases
Z α-1 antitrypsin deficiency and the endoplasmic reticulum stress response
SERPINA3 (aka alpha-1-antichymotrypsin)
Early-onset emphysema in a large French-Canadian family: a genetic investigation
The mutation PTPN6Ala455Thr causing pulmonary emphysema affects B cell populations and causes spontaneous pulmonary tertiary lymphoid tissue formation
The regulatory effects of PTPN6 on inflammatory process: reports from mice to men
Suppression of PTPN6 exacerbates aluminum oxide nanoparticle-induced COPD-like lesions in mice through activation of STAT pathway
Family-specific variants and the limits of human genetics
AI for science: predicting infectious diseases
Telomerase mutations in smokers with severe emphysema
Telomere length is a determinant of emphysema susceptibility
Loss-of-function mutations in the RNA biogenesis factor NAF1 predispose to pulmonary fibrosis–emphysema
Telomerase and the genetics of emphysema susceptibility. Implications for pathogenesis paradigms and patient care
Updates on the COPD gene list
Genome-wide association study identifies BICD1 as a susceptibility gene for emphysema
Bicaudal D1 impairs autophagosome maturation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Cellular and connective tissue changes in alveolar septal walls in emphysema
A functional mutation in the terminal exon of elastin in severe, early-onset chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Pulmonary function and emphysema in Williams–Beuren syndrome
What can naturally occurring mutations tell us about the pathogenesis of COPD?
Haploinsufficiency of elastin gene may lead to familial cardiopathy and pulmonary emphysema
A novel elastin gene mutation resulting in an autosomal dominant form of cutis laxa
Autosomal dominant cutis laxa with severe lung disease: synthesis and matrix deposition of mutant tropoelastin
Impaired distal airway development in mice lacking elastin
Elastin protein levels are a vital modifier affecting normal lung development and susceptibility to emphysema
Basic components of connective tissues and extracellular matrix: elastin, fibrillin, fibulins, fibrinogen, fibronectin, laminin, tenascins and thrombospondins
Autosomal recessive cutis laxa syndrome revisited
Fibulin-4: a novel gene for an autosomal recessive cutis laxa syndrome
Filamin A mutations: a new cause of unexplained emphysema in adults?
47 patients with FLNA associated periventricular nodular heterotopia
Interstitial lung disease in children – genetic background and associated phenotypes
A novel surfactant protein C mutation resulting in aberrant protein processing and altered subcellular localization causes infantile interstitial lung disease
Alveolar dynamics and beyond – the importance of surfactant protein C and cholesterol in lung homeostasis and fibrosis
Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema syndrome associated with familial SFTPC mutation
High-content CRISPR screening
Genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 library screening identified PHGDH as a critical driver for sorafenib resistance in HCC
The significance of controlled conditions in lentiviral vector titration and in the use of multiplicity of infection (MOI) for predicting gene transfer events
Impact of genetic variation on CRISPR-Cas targeting
CRISPR screens provide a comprehensive assessment of cancer vulnerabilities but generate false-positive hits for highly amplified genomic regions
CRISPR interference interrogation of COPD GWAS genes reveals the functional significance of desmoplakin in iPSC-derived alveolar epithelial cells
Cost-effectiveness of whole-genome vs whole-exome sequencing among children with suspected genetic disorders
Whole-genome sequencing in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Whole exome and genome sequencing in mendelian disorders: a diagnostic and health economic analysis
Editing approaches to treat alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD)
Personalised indication of augmentation therapy for emphysema associated with severe alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency: a case series
Phase III, efficacy and safety of “Kamada-AAT for inhalation” (InnovAATe)
Inhaled corticosteroids in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: benefits and risks
Antifibrotic drugs for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: what we should know?
Telomerase treatment prevents lung profibrotic pathologies associated with physiological aging
Intramuscular administration of AAV1-lipoprotein lipase S447X lowers triglycerides in lipoprotein lipase-deficient patients
Successful transduction of liver in hemophilia by AAV-factor IX and limitations imposed by the host immune response