Indication‐Specific Dosing and Dose‐Evaluation Strategies in New Indications for Non‐Oncology Monoclonal Antibodies
Abstract
Compared to traditional small molecule drugs, monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) often display more complex pharmacokinetic (PK) and pharmacodynamic (PD) properties that may be impacted by disease‐specific factors. For mAbs in non‐oncology indications, where the same drug might be used for conditions involving different organ systems and/or having different degrees of severity, the need for indication‐specific dosing and/or tailored dose evaluation strategies is more evident. However, a comprehensive analysis on this topic has not been conducted for approved non‐oncology therapies. In this work, we extracted literature information for non‐oncology mAbs approved in the past 20 years to provide a comprehensive exploration of indication‐specific dosing and dose evaluation strategies in the new indications. Our analysis included 21 mAbs with 50 supplemental approvals for new indications. Indication‐specific dosing was prevalent, with 15 out of 21 mAbs having different recommended dosing regimens across two or more indications. The majority of the new indications were supported by Phase 2 dose‐ranging studies and/or Phase 3 studies that evaluated more than one dosing regimen. Importantly, our analysis uncovered a relationship between indication‐specific dosing, dose evaluation strategies, and organ system classification of the original versus the new indication. We delved into dose justification supporting the new indications, including the types of data and modeling approaches used or considered. Through case studies, we highlighted factors that may influence dose selection in new indications, such as target expression levels, disease severity, and benefit–risk profile. Lastly, we made practical recommendations regarding dose optimization approaches in clinical drug development across multiple indications.

Introduction
Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) have emerged as a cornerstone of modern therapeutic interventions, offering highly specific and targeted approaches to treating a wide array of diseases. These engineered molecules, designed to mimic or enhance the immune system's natural antibodies, have found applications across various medical fields, including immunology, infectious diseases, and oncology. While most mAbs are designed to be target specific and thus typically have a wider therapeutic window than small molecules, the dosing strategy of mAb therapies across indications still presents unique challenges that demand careful consideration. In general, it is recognized that the dosing strategy may vary across indications due to disease‐specific impact on pharmacokinetic (PK)/pharmacodynamic (PD) and benefit–risk assessments. However, a comprehensive analysis on indication‐specific dosing and dose evaluation strategies of new indications for approved non‐oncology therapies has not been conducted.
Compared to traditional small molecule drugs, mAbs often exhibit more complex PK and PD properties that can vary depending on the disease‐specific factors. Specifically, mAbs typically exhibit two distinct clearance pathways: (1) a nonspecific, linear IgG elimination pathway mediated by binding to the Fc receptors, and (2) a nonlinear, target‐mediated elimination pathway mediated by binding to its pharmacological target. As a result of these properties, the PK of mAbs can potentially be impacted by target expression levels, serum protein levels, and other disease‐related factors, on top of demographic factors such as body size, age, and sex. In terms of PD, large interindividual variability has been observed possibly due to the complexity of the mechanisms of action, tissue distribution, interaction with the target antigen, and downstream pharmacological pathways of mAbs. In the context of non‐oncology mAbs, where the same antibody might be used to treat conditions affecting different organ systems and/or with varying degrees of severity, the need for indication‐specific dosing and/or tailored dose evaluation strategies thus becomes even more apparent.
Dose optimization across indications and patient populations is important for several reasons. First, indication‐specific dose optimization efforts facilitate the optimization of therapeutic outcomes by ensuring adequate evaluation of the relationship between dose/exposure and response, in light of uncertainties that arise when extrapolating to a new disease state and patient population and potential differences in benefit–risk considerations. These uncertainties may be due to differences in target expression, disease severity, and tissue distribution, or a combination of these factors. A good understanding of the PK/PD relationship across indications helps in determining the optimal dosing regimen, which is crucial for maintaining therapeutic levels of the drug over time. Second, from a regulatory perspective, dose optimization has been a focal point of many drug approvals. Dose ranging has long been the standard in most of the non‐oncology therapeutic areas, and in recent years, the health authorities are expecting more of that from oncology therapeutic areas as well (e.g., Project Optimus). While it remains to be seen how the implementation of Project Optimus shifts the dose optimization paradigm in oncology drug approvals, in the non‐oncology space, the conventional paradigm has emphasized selection of dose(s) that maximizes both efficacy and safety. Dose‐ranging studies have been critical to evaluate different dosing regimens to determine the one that provides the best balance of efficacy and safety, to support the dose selection in the pivotal clinical trials and eventually the initial approvals of non‐oncology drugs. The dose evaluation strategy for the supplemental indications of non‐oncology drugs, however, appears to be less consistent, given the differing extent of extrapolation from the original indication. Therefore, an analysis on the dose optimization strategies across indications in approved non‐oncology drugs is expected to shed light on the regulatory expectation on supplemental indications. It is foreseeable that dose optimization effort across indications can provide compelling evidence to support dosing recommendations and address regulatory concerns related to the extrapolation of dose finding from one indication to another, ensuring that the recommended dosing regimen is based on sound scientific principles.
We aim to provide a comprehensive exploration of indication‐specific dosing and dose evaluation strategies in new indications with non‐oncology mAbs. Here, we focus on approved mAbs for our analysis as their PK/PD may be more likely to vary due to disease‐specific factors, but we expect most of the learnings to be readily translatable to small molecules and other modalities. By examining the rationale behind indication‐specific dosing, we seek to elucidate the factors that influence dosing selection decisions and to inform the dose optimization strategies in clinical drug development across multiple indications.

Methods
As this study collected data from publicly available sources, institutional review board approval and patient consent were not required. From the Drugs@FDA database, we manually extracted all supplemental Biologics License Applications (sBLAs) approvals for new indications that occurred between January 2004 and June 2024 for mAbs originally approved by the FDA between 2004 and 2023. Here, we defined new indications as supplemental indications that are distinct from any previously approved use for an agent, as opposed to supplemental indications that are considered modification of a previously approved indication or expansion in patient population of already approved use. This analysis excluded antibody–drug conjugates, Fc fragments, biosimilars, and radiodiagnostic agents, and it was restricted to sBLAs for new indications in non‐oncology adult populations. For each mAb with an identified sBLA included in the study, we identified the FDA's approval packages and/or European Medicines Agency (EMA)’s European Public Assessment Reports (EPARs) of the original and new indications to gather insights into the regulatory considerations and clinical trials supporting each approval. In cases where these reviews were not available, we supplemented our data with information from publications detailing the pivotal trials that supported the sBLA approvals. The latest US prescribing information (USPI) was retrieved to identify the recommended dosing regimens and evaluate whether they varied across indications. The dosing information from the EMA Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) was also examined but was not used as the source data in this analysis. Determining the sameness of recommended dosing regimens considered the entirety of the recommended dosing regimen for the majority of the intended population, including any loading dose or dose escalation schedule if applicable. MAbs were then categorized based on the presence of indication‐specific dosing and dose evaluation strategies for the new indications. To explore the potential impact of disease‐related factors on the pattern of indication‐specific dosing and dose evaluation strategies, the original and new indications were further classified based on (1) if both the original and new indications were rare diseases, and (2) if not, if they were associated with the same or different organ systems (i.e., nervous/endocrine, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, respiratory, renal, integumentary [skin], reproductive, immune, or systemic). In addition, rationale of dosing strategies was also extracted from FDA's approval packages or EMA's EPARs when available and highlighted through case examples. This systematic approach ensured a thorough and focused analysis of dosing strategies for new indications of non‐oncology mAbs, providing valuable insights for clinical pharmacology and drug development.

Results

Overview of Indication‐Specific Dosing
Between January 2004 and December 2023, the FDA approved a total of 103 mAbs. Among these, 37 mAbs were initially approved for oncology indications, and 2 mAbs received supplemental approvals for new indications in oncology; these 39 mAbs were therefore excluded from further analysis. Among the remaining 64 mAbs, 21 mAbs had supplemental approvals for new indications, with a total of 50 new indications for these 21 mAbs (Figure 1, Table 1). Of these, 15 mAbs had different recommended dosing regimens across two or more indications, while 6 mAbs maintained the same recommended dosing regimen across all indications. Specifically, for 1 out of the 15 mAbs that had different recommended dosing regimens across indications (brolucizumab), the only difference lies with the loading dose, while for the other 14 mAbs, the differences across all indications affect the entire dosing regimens (Table 1). The 50 supplemental approvals for new indications were predominantly for the treatment of autoimmune diseases, dermatological conditions, and gastrointestinal disorders. This distribution underscores the versatility of mAbs in treating a range of non‐oncological conditions, particularly in the realm of immune‐mediated diseases. As the analysis was based on information from the USPI, we also examined recommended dosing regimens in SmPC but only noted minor differences (Table 1), and therefore the overall conclusions would likely remain largely similar if SmPC were used as the source data.
Construction of the analysis dataset. New indication is defined as a supplemental indication that is distinct from any previously approved use of an agent. MAb, monoclonal antibodies.
Monoclonal Antibodies Approved by the FDA for Two or More Non‐Oncology Indications in Adult Populations Included in this Analysis (n = 21)
Generic Name	Brand Name	Indicationsa	Recommended Dosing Regimen (USPI)b	Same or Different Recommended Dosing Regimens Across Indications	 	Faricimab	Vabysmo	nAMD, DME	6 mg IVT Q4W	Same	 	Macular edema following RVO	 	Risankizumab	Skyrizi	PsO	150 mg SC at Weeks 0, 4, then Q12W	Different	 	PsA	 	CD	600 mg IV at Weeks 0, 4, 8 (induction); 180 mg or 360 mg SC at Week 12 then Q8W (maintenance)f	 	Brolucizumab	Beovu	nAMD	6 mg IVT Q4W for the first 3 doses, then 6 mg IVT Q8–12W	Differentc	 	DME	6 mg IVT Q6W for the first 5 doses, then 6 mg IVT Q8–12W	 	Galcanezumab	Emgality	Migraine	240 mg SC, then 120 mg SC Q4W	Different	 	Episodic cluster headacheh	300 mg SC, then 300 mg SC Q4W	 	Ravulizumab	Ultomiris	PNH	40 to <60 kg: 2400 mg IV, 3000 mg IV 2 weeks later then Q8W60 to <100 kg: 2700 mg IV, 3300 mg IV 2 weeks later then Q8W≥100 kg: 3000 mg IV, 3600 mg IV 2 weeks later then Q8W	Same	 	aHUS	 	gMG	 	NMOSD	 	Dupilumab	Dupixent	AD	600 mg SC, then 300 mg SC Q2W	Different	 	Asthma	600 mg SC then 300 mg SC Q2W, OR 400 mg SC then 200 mg SC Q2W	 	CRSwNP	300 mg SC Q2W	 	EoE	300 mg SC QW	 	PN	600 mg SC, then 300 mg SC Q2W	 	Sarilumab	Kevzara	RA	200 mg SC Q2W	Same	 	PMR	 	Ixekizumab	Taltz	PsO	160 mg SC at Week 0, then 80 mg SC at Weeks 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, then 80 mg SC Q4W	Different	 	PsA	160 mg SC at Week 0, then 80 mg SC Q4W	 	AS	 	nr‐axSpA	80 mg SC Q4Wf, g	 	Secukinumabd	Cosentyx	PsO	300 mg SC at Weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 then Q4W	Different	 	PsA	150 mg SC at Weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, then Q4W OR 150 mg SC Q4Wf, g (can be increased to 300 mg SC Q4W if inadequate response)	 	AS	 	nr‐axSpA	150 mg SC at Weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, then Q4W OR 150 mg SC Q4Wf, g	 	HS	300 mg SC at Weeks 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, then Q4W (can be increased to 300 mg SC Q2W if inadequate response)	 	Alirocumab	Praluent	HeFH, CVD	75 mg SC Q2W (if inadequate response, can increase to 150 mg SC Q2W)	Different	 	Cardiovascular event prevention	 	HoFH	150 mg SC Q2W	 	Evolocumab	Repatha	HeFH, CVD, HoFH	140 mg SC Q2W or 420 mg SC Q4W	Same	 	Cardiovascular event prevention	 	Mepolizumab	Nucala	Severe asthma	100 mg SC Q4W	Different	 	EGPA	300 mg SC Q4W	 	HES	300 mg SC Q4W	 	CRSwNP	100 mg SC Q4W	 	Belimumabe	Benlysta	SLE	10 mg/kg IV Q2W for the first 3 doses and then Q4W	Same	 	Lupus nephritis	 	Tocilizumab	Actemra	RA	IV: 4 mg/kg Q4W → 8 mg/kg Q4W;SC: <100 kg: 162 mg Q2W → 162 QW; >100 kg: 162 mg QWf	Different	 	GCA	SC: 162 mg QW	 	CRS	IV: 8 mg/kg (up to four times, at least 8 h apart)	 	SSc‐ILDh	SC: 162 mg QW	 	COVID‐19	IV: 8 mg/kg (one additional dose can be administered 8 h later)	 	Ustekinumab	Stelara	PsO	≤100 kg: 45 mg SC at Weeks 0, 4, then Q12W;>100 kg: 90 mg SC at Weeks 0, 4, then Q12W	Different	 	PsA	 	CD	Induction: (≤55 kg) 260 mg, (>55 to 85 kg) 390 mg, (>85 kg) 520 mg IV single dose; maintenance: 90 mg Q8W SCf	 	UC	 	Golimumab	Simponi	RA, PsA, AS	50 mg SC Q4W	Different	 	UC	200 mg SC at Week 0, 100 mg SC at Week 2, then 100 mg Q4Wf	 	Canakinumab	Ilaris	CAPS	150 mg SC Q8W	Different	 	TRAPS/HIDS/MKD/FMF	150 mg SC Q4W (can be increased to 300 mg SC Q4W if inadequate response)	 	Gout flares	150 mg SC (re‐treatment allowed at least 12 weeks later)	 	Certolizumab pegol	Cimzia	CD	400 mg SC at Weeks 0, 2, 4, then Q4W	Different	 	RA	400 mg SC at Weeks 0, 2, 4, then 200 mg SC Q2W (400 mg Q4W can be considered)	 	PsA	 	AS	400 mg SC at Weeks 0, 2, 4, then 200 mg SC Q2W or 400 mg SC Q4W	 	PsO	400 mg SC Q2Wf	 	nr‐axSpa	400 mg SC at Weeks 0, 2, 4, then 200 mg SC Q2W or 400 mg SC Q4W	 	Eculizumab	Soliris	PNH	600 mg IV QW to Week 4, 900 mg IV at Week 5, then 900 mg IV Q2W	Different	 	aHUS	900 mg IV QW to Week 4, 1200 mg IV at Week 5, then 1200 mg IV Q2W	 	gMG	 	NMOSD	 	Ranibizumab	Lucentis	nAMD	0.5 mg IVT QM	Different	 	Macular edema following RVO	 	DME	0.3 mg IVT QMf	 	DR	 	mCNV	0.5 mg IVT QM	 	Natalizumab	Tysabri	MS	300 mg IV Q4W	Same	 	CDh
AD, atopic dermatitis; aHUS, atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome; AS, ankylosing spondylitis; CAPS, cryopyrin‐associated periodic syndromes; CD, Crohn's disease; COVID‐19, coronavirus disease 2019; CRS, cytokine release syndrome; CRSwNP, chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps; CVD, cardiovascular disease; DME, diabetic macular edema; DR, diabetic retinopathy; EoE, eosinophilic esophagitis; EGPA, eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis; FMF, familial Mediterranean fever; GCA, giant cell arteritis; gMG, generalized myasthenia gravis; HeFH, heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia; HES, hypereosinophilic syndrome; HIDS/MKD, hyperimmunoglobulin D syndrome/mevalonate kinase deficiency; HoFH, homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia; HS, hidradenitis suppurativa; IV, intravenous; IVT, intravitreal; LDL‐C, low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol; mCNV, myopic choroidal neovascularization; MS, multiple sclerosis; nAMD, neovascular (wet) age‐related macular degeneration; NMOSD, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder; nr‐axSpA, non‐radiographic axial spondyloarthritis; PMR, polymyalgia rheumatica; PN, prurigo nodularis; PNH, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria; PsA, psoriatic arthritis; PsO, plaque psoriasis; Q2W, every 2 weeks; Q4W, every 4 weeks; Q6W, every 6 weeks; Q8W, every 8 weeks; Q12W, every 12 weeks; QM, every month; QW, every week; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; RVO, retinal vein occlusion; SC, subcutaneous; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; SSc‐ILD, systemic sclerosis‐associated interstitial lung disease; TRAPS, tumor necrosis factor receptor associated periodic syndrome; UC, ulcerative colitis.
Listed in the order of approval dates in the United States, the first row indicates the original approval, and subsequent rows indicate supplemental approval(s) for new indication(s).
For the majority of the intended adult population.
Only differ in loading dose.
Current analysis restricted to recommended subcutaneous dosage.
Current analysis restricted to recommended intravenous dosage.
Difference in recommended dosing regimen approved by the EMA.
Recommended dosing regimen approved by the EMA differs in the use of loading dose but not the maintenance dose.
Indication not approved by the EMA.

Dose Evaluation Strategies Supporting the New Indications
The analysis of dose evaluation strategies among the 21 approved mAbs reveals interesting trends in their clinical development plans (Figure 2). Our data reveals that a significant portion of new indications (37 out of 50, 74%) did not conduct Phase 2 dose‐ranging (D‐R) studies, suggesting a strategic decision to accelerate the clinical development by leveraging dose selection from the previous indication(s). Nevertheless, when considering both Phase 2 D‐R and Phase 3 (pivotal) studies together, more than half of the supplemental approvals for new indications (29 out of 50, 58%) were supported by studies that evaluated more than one dosing regimen in clinical trials. Overall, the data reveals a strategic approach to integrate dose optimization with later‐stage clinical evaluations, potentially streamlining the development process while still ensuring assessment of dosing in relation to efficacy and safety parameters. Of note, while most cases with Phase 2 D‐R conducted (8 out 13) still evaluated more than one dosing regimen in pivotal trials (Figure 2), this was mostly due to the need to optimize complex dosing regimens consisting of induction and maintenance phases in autoimmune diseases such as inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD).
Overview of dose evaluation strategies supporting the 50 new indications from the 21 approved monoclonal antibodies in the analysis dataset. New indication is defined as a supplemental indication that is distinct from any previously approved use of an agent. Ph2 D‐R studies, phase 2 dose‐ranging studies; Ph3, Phase 3.
We then aimed to investigate dose evaluation strategies based on whether the recommended dosing regimen for the new indication was the same as those approved for one or more of the previous indications of the same mAb. Unsurprisingly, new indications with recommended dosing regimens different from previous indications were more likely to be supported by Phase 2 D‐R studies (Figure 3): Among the 21 new indications with different recommended dosing regimens from any of the prior indications, 15 out of 21, 71% tested more than one dosing regimen in Phase 2 D‐R and/or Phase 3 trials. In contrast, for the 29 new indications with the same recommended dosing regimen as one or more of the prior indications, an equal distribution was observed: 14 out of 29 tested more than one dosing regimens in Phase 2 D‐R and/or Phase 3 trials, while the rest did not.
Overview of dose‐ranging strategies supporting the 50 new indications from the 21 approved monoclonal antibodies, stratified by whether the recommended dosing regimen for the new indication was the same as the recommended dosing regimen approved for one or more of the previous indications of the same agent. New indication is defined as a supplemental indication that is distinct from any previously approved use of an agent. Ph2 D‐R studies, phase 2 dose‐ranging studies; Ph3, Phase 3.

Patterns of Indication‐Specific Dosing and Dose Evaluation Strategies in Relation to Organ System Classification
The investigation into the relationship between indication‐specific dosing and the organ system classification of the original and new indications has revealed significant insights and patterns (Figure 4). For new indications associated with the same organ system as the original indications (n = 14), it was observed that the majority of the new indications (9 out of 14, 64%) maintained the same recommended dosing regimen as the original indication. For these nine cases, either there was overlap in patient populations (i.e., dupilumab [atopic dermatitis vs prurigo nodularis], secukinumab [plaque psoriasis vs hidradenitis suppurativa], mepolizumab [asthma vs chronic rhinosinusitis], alirocumab and evolocumab [low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol reduction in primary hyperlipidemia vs prevention of cardiovascular events], and ranibizumab and faricimab [neovascular age‐related macular degeneration vs macular edema following retinal vein occlusion]), or there was no distinct difference in the disease severity between the original and new indications (sarilumab [rheumatoid arthritis vs polymyalgia rheumatica] and ranibizumab [neovascular age‐related macular degeneration vs myopic choroidal neovascularization]). On the other hand, 5 out of 14 exhibited variations in their recommended dosing regimens than the original indications. A notable example of such variation is brolucizumab, which applied different loading dosing regimen to reduce treatment burden (by extending treatment frequency from every 4 weeks [Q4W] to every 6 weeks) while maintaining the same maintenance dosing regimen for the treatment of diabetic macular edema (DME) compared to neovascular age‐related macular degeneration (nAMD). Furthermore, in two instances, a higher dosage was presumably utilized to address more severe phenotypes of the disease (episodic cluster headache vs migraine with galcanezumab, and reduction of low‐density lipoprotein cholesterol [LDL‐C] in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia [HoFH] vs heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia [HeFH] with alirocumab). Conversely, when examining new indications that span different organ systems than the original indication (n = 29), a substantial 25 out of 29, 86% employed altered dosing regimens compared to the original indication. Three out of the four instances that exhibited the same dosing regimen as the original indication involved expanding to new indications that are major co‐morbidities of the original indication (i.e., going from plaque psoriasis to psoriatic arthritis with ustekinumab and risankizumab, and going from systemic lupus erythematosus to lupus nephritis with belimumab). In addition, this analysis also showed the absence of a clear pattern for instances where both the original and the new indications were considered rare diseases (n = 7), which might involve either the same or different organ systems.
Overview of the relationship between organ system classification and indication‐specific dosing among the 50 new indications. New indication is defined as a supplemental indication that is distinct from any previously approved use of an agent.
We further attempted to rank order recommended dosing regimens by organ systems for mAbs approved in indications involving different organ systems, but we did not identify any consistent patterns. Some drugs have adopted higher doses in IBD, including risankizumab, ustekinumab, and golimumab, which were initially approved for plaque psoriasis or rheumatological conditions. For these drugs, dose selection in pivotal trials in IBD was mainly driven by findings from their Phase 2 IBD studies, while their Phase 2 dose selection may be based on observations with TNF antagonists needing higher induction doses in IBD than other indications. However, two other drugs in our dataset, certolizumab pegol and natalizumab, used the same or similar dosing in IBD compared to other indications.
Our analysis of dose evaluation strategies based on the organ system classification of the original and new indications has also shown intriguing patterns (Figure 5). For new indications within the same organ system as the original approval, we observed a complete absence of Phase 2 D‐R studies across all 14 cases, and a minority (6 out 14, 43%) tested more than one dosing regimen in Phase 3. In contrast, new indications involving different organ systems than the original indications were in general supported by a more comprehensive approach to dose evaluation. While 17 out of 29, 59% of these indications did not conduct Phase 2 D‐R studies, when also considering Phase 3 studies, the majority of the new indications (22 out of 29, 76%) targeting different organ systems than the original approval evaluated more than one dosing regimen in at least one of these phases. This strategic difference underscores the recognition that successful therapeutic expansion often requires a more thorough exploration of dosing parameters when venturing into different organ systems.
Overview of the relationship between organ system classification (first two categories from Figure 4) and dose evaluation strategies among the new indications. New indication is defined as a supplemental indication that is distinct from any previously approved use of an agent. Ph2 D‐R studies, phase 2 dose‐ranging studies; Ph3, Phase 3.

Justification for Indication‐Specific Dosing
In general, the approved recommended dosing regimen was sufficiently supported by empirical evidence of dose/exposure–response relationships observed from the clinical development program consistent with regulatory guidelines, while the underlying rationale of indication‐specific dosing may not be explicitly stated in the approval data packages. Occasionally, retrospective modeling analyses were specifically referenced in the approval packages to support the need for a new dosing regimen over the previously approved dosing regimen, and these analyses have pointed to altered PK/PD relationship potentially due to higher target expression levels as the justification rather than significantly altered systemic PK.
To inform what could best support internal decision making when expanding into new indications, we further investigated the rationale prospectively provided for pivotal trial dose selection in the approval data packages when available. The types of data/modeling used or considered can be roughly categorized as follows: (1) pathophysiological evidence regarding disease similarity between indications, (2) greater disease severity and/or higher target expression levels in the new indication, (3) available clinical experiences in the previous and/or the new indications, (4) empirical dose/exposure–response observed from the initial (non‐pivotal) studies in the target population, which might also be pooled with data from previous indications to support a dose/exposure–response meta‐analysis, (5) PK and PK/PD modeling and simulation to support dosing regimens that achieve the same or different target concentrations, and (6) literature information from external molecules, including comparison of dosing between indications for the external molecule, and the relative in vitro potency of the molecule in development versus the external molecule. While the first and second categories of evidence have been used to support evaluating the same and different dosing regimen than in previous indication(s), respectively, the remaining categories of evidence were mostly used to support either scenario.
In the next section, we elaborated on case studies that could best highlight considerations that supported indication‐specific dosing of mAbs in non‐oncology indications, by using the following criteria: (1) the new indication had a different recommended dosing regimen than any of the previously approved indications, (2) the clinical program had no Phase 2 D‐R, and (3) only evaluated one dosing regimen in the pivotal studies. As shown in Figure 3, there are five cases that meet all three criteria, and they are explained in detail as follows.

Case Studies

Mepolizumab (Eosinophilic Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis)
Mepolizumab, a mAb targeting interleukin‐5 (IL‐5), was initially approved for the treatment of severe eosinophilic asthma with 100 mg Q4W subcutaneously (SC) as the recommended dosing regimen in adults. On the other hand, for eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (EGPA), a rare systemic vasculitis characterized by high levels of eosinophils, 300 mg Q4W SC was the only dosing regimen tested in the pivotal study and was not previously approved. As noted in the EPAR, compared to asthma, patients with EGPA have much higher levels of eosinophils impacting multiple organs, and can experience significant increases in blood and tissue eosinophils before relapse or during taper of oral corticosteroids. The selection of a higher dose in EGPA was considered necessary to maximize suppression of eosinophil activity to manage the more severe clinical manifestations of EGPA. Of note, 250 mg Q4W and 750 mg Q4W intravenously were previously studied in the Phase 2 D‐R for the original indication and had no safety concerns, and thus from the regulatory agency's perspective, no safety issues were anticipated at 300 mg Q4W SC when it was proposed.

Eculizumab (Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome)
Eculizumab, a mAb that inhibits the complement protein C5, was initially approved for the treatment of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH). Its indication was later extended to atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS), a rare disease characterized by uncontrolled complement activation leading to hemolysis, thrombocytopenia, and renal failure. In PNH, the approved adult dosing regimen is 600 mg weekly for 4 weeks, 900 mg at Week 5 and then every 2 weeks. In aHUS, the dosing regimen evaluated in the pivotal studies and the recommended adult dosing regimen is 900 mg weekly for 4 weeks, 1200 mg at Week 5, and then every 2 weeks. According to the EPAR, this change in dosing regimen was supported by selection of a higher target trough level in aHUS than PNH. Data from eculizumab PNH clinical studies showed serum concentrations >35 ug/mL suppressed serum terminal complement activation, but breakthrough hemolysis and incomplete terminal complement inhibition was occasionally observed in patients with PNH treated with PNH‐specific dosing regimen. On the other hand, breakthrough from terminal complement inhibition was considered unacceptable in patients with aHUS, who may experience rapid loss of renal function. Therefore, a higher target trough level of 50–100 µg/mL was chosen in aHUS to achieve better efficiency toward terminal complement inhibition and to account for higher free C5 levels observed in patients. Thereafter, the proposed dosing regimen in aHUS was determined by PK simulations aiming to maintain this target trough level, while maintaining peak concentrations within 700 µg/mL that was safely tolerated in previous studies. It appeared that the target trough level was not prospectively driven by PK/PD modeling. Retrospectively, observed data indicated that trough concentrations >50 µg/mL led to functional complement inhibition in terms of hemolytic activity, and further confirmation of the dosing rationale came from retrospective PK/PD modeling showing >80% inhibition of free C5 expected at the target trough level.

Alirocumab (HoFH) and Dupilumab (Chronic Rhinosinusitis with Nasal Polyps)
In both cases, though the recommended dosing regimen of the new indication was considered different from the original indication by the criteria of this analysis, they remained largely similar.
Alirocumab is a mAb targeting proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) shown to lower LDL‐C levels. Prior to the approval in HoFH, alirocumab was approved in adults with established cardiovascular disease or with primary hyperlipidemia (including HeFH), with a recommended starting dose of 75 mg Q2W in the majority of the intended population, which could be adjusted to 150 mg Q2W if the LDL‐C response is inadequate. For HoFH, 150 mg Q2W was the only dosing regimen evaluated in the pivotal trial and became the recommended dosing regimen. The 150 mg Q2W is considered the highest approved dosing regimen in previously approved indications, and selecting this more potent dosing regimen over 75 mg Q2W is considered reasonable in HoFH, as this patient population has extremely high LDL‐C levels and high risk of early‐onset atherosclerotic cardiovascular diseases.
Dupilumab, a mAb targeting the interleukin‐4 receptor alpha subunit, was approved for moderate‐to‐severe atopic dermatitis and asthma prior to the approval for chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal polyps (CRSwNP). The recommended dosing regimen in adults is a loading dose of 600 mg followed by 300 mg Q2W in atopic dermatitis; a loading dose of 400 mg followed by 200 mg Q2W; or a loading dose of 600 mg followed by 300 mg Q2W in asthma. For CRSwNP, the recommended dosing regimen and the dosing regimen evaluated for primary endpoints in pivotal trials is 300 mg Q2W, which is the same as the recommended maintenance dosing regimen in atopic dermatitis and the higher recommended maintenance dosing regimen in asthma. The selection of 300 mg Q2W in CRSwNP was supported by the treatment effect seen in CRSwNP‐related endpoints in asthma patients with nasal polyps as co‐morbidity in previous trials. The decision to eliminate the use of a loading dose in CRSwNP was supported by PK and PK/PD simulations that showed minimal difference in steady‐state drug levels and steady‐state response of clinical endpoints with or without a loading dose of 600 mg. The timepoint for primary endpoint(s) appears to be one important factor when determining the need for loading dose. As noted in the EPAR, at the recommended dosing in CRSwNP, the median time to PK steady state was 16 weeks based on population PK modeling, and the co‐primary endpoints for CRSwNP were evaluated at Week 24 in the pivotal studies. In contrast, in the pivotal studies for atopic dermatitis, the co‐primary endpoints were assessed earlier at Week 16, and therefore the need for using loading dose to shorten the time to steady state was more likely to be justified.

Galcanezumab (Episodic Cluster Headache)
Galcanezumab, a mAb that targets calcitonin‐gene‐related peptide (CGRP), was initially approved for the prevention of migraine, at a recommended dosing regimen of 240 mg once followed by monthly dosing of 120 mg. Cluster headaches are characterized by severe, unilateral pain attacks that occur in clusters, often leading to significant disability and impacting the quality of life. The pivotal trial of galcanezumab for treating episodic cluster headache evaluated dosing of 300 mg at baseline and at 1 month, which formed the basis of the recommended dosing regimen. While the exact dose rationale for galcanezumab in episodic cluster headaches is not explicitly detailed in the literature, we speculated that it was influenced by the need to address the more intense and debilitating nature of cluster headaches compared to migraines. Moreover, this dose regimen was supported by available clinical safety data, as 300 mg Q4W was the highest dose evaluated in the Phase 2 D‐R for the original indication.
To summarize from these case studies, the evaluation of a single dosing regimen in pivotal studies for the new indication that was different from previously approved dosing regimens but without empirical dose optimization was mostly justified from higher target expression levels and/or greater disease severity, guided by PK and PK/PD modeling and simulation, and supported by available clinical safety experiences.

Discussion
Our comprehensive analysis of drug indication expansion and associated dosing strategies revealed a multifaceted approach to dosing new indications. Indication‐specific dosing was prevalent with mAbs in non‐oncology indications, 15 out of 21 molecules in our analysis dataset had different recommended dosing regimens across two or more indications. This underscores the critical importance of posology refinement, particularly in the context of mAb dosing when expanding to new indications. Overall, 58% of the new indications were supported by Phase 2 D‐R and/or pivotal studies that evaluated more than one dosing regimen, with a higher percentage (71%) observed for new indications having different recommended dosing regimens from any of the prior indications, thus underscoring the significance of dose optimization in these settings.
A clear difference was observed in the pattern of indication‐specific dosing and dose evaluation strategies when the original and new indications were classified based on whether or not they were associated with the same organ system. Indication‐specific dosing was more commonly observed when the original and new indications involved different organ systems (86%) than that involving the same organ systems (36%). This disparity coincided with the difference seen in dose evaluation strategies, with more thorough dose exploration observed in the former setting. It is possible that indication expansion to physiologically distinct areas involves increased complexity in translating drug PK/PD and/or different benefit/risk considerations, and therefore warrants more thorough dose evaluation. Meanwhile, it is foreseeable that indication‐specific dosing may be more likely to occur when one evaluates more than one dosing regimen rather than taking a single dosing regimen throughout the clinical development process for the new indication. Nevertheless, the stark contrast in dose evaluation strategies we observed between same‐system and cross‐system indication expansions highlights the nuanced approach taken by drug developers. On the other hand, there was no clear pattern for instances where both the original and new indications were considered rare diseases. As formal dose‐ranging studies might not be feasible in the development of therapies for rare diseases, this heterogeneity likely has resulted from different approaches of translating PK/PD modeling across indications. Of note, in this work we did not classify the new indications based on the specific organ systems they are associated with, in order to produce more generalizable findings across therapeutic areas.
To uncover the underlying rationale that may have necessitated the use of different dosing regimens across indications, we delved into dose justification supporting the new indications as referenced in the approval data packages. On the basis of clinical safety and efficacy data from the pivotal trials, the key support for the recommended dosing regimen came from empirical dose/exposure–response analyses. To prospectively support dose selection in the pivotal trials, disease‐specific considerations (such as knowledge about disease pathophysiology and comparative disease severity and target burden), clinical data from the previous indications, emerging data in the target population (including empirical dose/exposure–response from non‐pivotal studies and available clinical experiences), PK and PK/PD modeling and simulation, and literature data from external molecules have been referenced in the approval packages. We have further highlighted through several case examples that a higher dose may be justified or needed in the presence of higher target expression levels and/or more severe disease where underdosing is more likely to have unfavorable consequences.
Our analysis showcased PK and PK/PD modeling and simulation as an important tool to translate drug‐ and disease‐related considerations to dose requirement, particularly when there are complex PK/PD considerations in predicting therapeutic effect or when there is a lack of empirical data to support traditional dose/exposure–response analyses, such as in the context of rare diseases. Given the complexities of the interplay between mAbs, targets, antibody‐target complexes in the periphery, and at the site of action, PK/PD modeling has long been viewed as a valuable tool to support preclinical‐to‐clinical translation and guide dose selection for mAbs. On the other hand, mechanistic systems models, though not referenced in approval packages as support for indication expansion for non‐oncology mAbs in this analysis, could have been used to guide internal decision making as outlined in the recent literature.
In summary, the observed prevalence of indication‐specific dosing for non‐oncology mAbs underscores the importance of dose optimization when expanding into new indications. Our analyses suggest that incorporating empirical dose ranging is highly recommended when expanding into new indications involving different organ systems. Assessing the need for different dosing may still be needed for new indications within the same organ system if differences in disease severity and/or target expression levels may translate into a different dose requirement. There does not appear to be a one‐size‐fits‐all dose optimization approach for new indications, but based on our analysis, it appears reasonable to recommend initiating dose optimization effort early (e.g., conducting Phase 2 D‐R) when complex dosing regimens are anticipated, such as those comprising both induction and maintenance phases. Last but not the least, through summarizing dose justification provided in approval data packages and highlighting specific case studies, we sought to inform drug developers considerations and types of data/modeling that could drive dosing selection in clinical development of new indications, emphasizing the importance of integrating these important sources of information into decision‐making processes.

Conclusions
Our analysis highlights the complexity of dose optimization in indication expansion for non‐oncology mAbs. The prevalence of indication‐specific dosing, the critical role of dose evaluation strategies, and their relationship with organ system classification underscore the overall importance of dose optimization, especially when expanding into indications associated with different organ systems. We highlighted the indication‐specific factors, such as the target expression levels, disease severity, and benefit–risk profile, that could influence dosing selection decisions and the dose optimization strategies in the clinical development of new indications. We also emphasized the importance of integrating various sources of data and modeling approaches in driving dosing decisions, including the use of PK and PK/PD modeling and simulation, particularly when there are complex PK/PD considerations in predicting therapeutic effect or when there is insufficient empirical data to support traditional dose/exposure–response analyses. These insights collectively contribute to a more nuanced understanding of dose selection and evaluation, potentially informing future strategies in clinical pharmacology and drug development.

Conflicts of Interest
Sherouk M. Tawfik was an employee of Genentech, Inc. when the work was conducted. Fei Tang is an employee of Genentech, Inc.

Funding
This work was supported by Genentech, Inc.

Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

References
The pharmacology and therapeutic applications of monoclonal antibodies
A guide to rational dosing of monoclonal antibodies
Realizing the promise of Project Optimus: challenges and emerging opportunities for dose optimization in oncology drug development
Pharmacokinetics of monoclonal antibodies
Clinical pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of monoclonal antibodies approved to treat rheumatoid arthritis
Drugs@FDA: FDA‐approved drugs
Characteristics of efficacy evidence supporting approval of supplemental indications for prescription drugs in United States, 2005–14: systematic review
European Medicines Agency ‐ Medicines
Induction therapy with the selective interleukin‐23 inhibitor risankizumab in patients with moderate‐to‐severe Crohn's disease: a randomised, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled phase 2 study
US Food and Drug Administration: Guidance for Industry: Exposure‐Response Relationships — Study Design, Data Analysis, and Regulatory Applications
ICH Harmonised Tripartite Guideline: Dose‐response Information to Support Drug Registration
Nucala assessment report EMEA/H/C/003860/II/0036/G
Complement regulatory genes and hemolytic uremic syndromes
Soliris assessment report EMEA/H/C/000791/II/0027
Population pharmacodynamic/pharmacokinetic modeling of eculizumab and free complement component protein C5 in pediatric and adult patients with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) Poster presented at American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics Annual Meeting
Modeling and simulation of eculizumab in paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) and atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) patients: learning from one indication to the next Poster presented at American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics Annual Meeting
Efficacy and safety of alirocumab in adults with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia: the ODYSSEY HoFH trial
Dupixent assessment report EMEA/H/C/004390/II/0017
Trial of galcanezumab in prevention of episodic cluster headache
Modeling pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of therapeutic antibodies: progress, challenges, and future directions
Monoclonal antibodies: what are the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic considerations for drug development?
Quantitative systems pharmacology: an exemplar model‐building workflow with applications in cardiovascular, metabolic, and oncology drug development