Towards a phylogenetically informed approach to solving protein–protein interactions
Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) are critical to all cellular activities. Despite having a large number of proteins, cells have spatial and temporal control over PPIs to avoid dysregulation in cellular pathways. Considerable research efforts have aimed to find new PPIs, curate PPIs from the literature and build searchable PPI databases. These databases have been widely used by experimental and computational scientists. Here we find that the PPIs captured by these databases are highly heterogeneous and concentrated on a small number of species. These issues hamper researchers from capturing the full landscape of reliable PPIs, affecting the accuracy of machine-learning models and the effectiveness of experimental designs. However, there are opportunities to fill gaps computationally and experimentally. We suggest developing a phylogenetically informed approach to test PPIs experimentally and computationally.

Introduction
Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) drive key cellular processes, including replication, transcription, RNA processing and translation, and contribute to complex regulatory networks. They are also important for studying disease states, as many diseases are due to aberrant PPIs. This has motivated various small- and large-scale experiments in probing the number and type of PPIs across different model organisms, which are captured by several publicly available databases.
However, in a crowded cellular environment, the number of unique, non-functional, stochastic interactions between different proteins grows quadratically with proteome size (specifically, following the binomial coefficient nC2). For example, Escherichia coli and Homo sapiens have roughly 4K and 20K proteins respectively, and there are approximately 8M and 200M potential unique one-to-one interactions respectively. Yet, only a modest fraction of all possible PPIs are biologically relevant, suggesting that many interactions are the non-functional products of a crowded cellular environment. This means distinguishing functional from non-functional interactions is critical, particularly for complex species with a large cohort of proteins.
Proteins can form homo- or hetero-oligomeric complexes through transient or permanent interactions, which may be obligate (essential for a complex’s function) or non-obligate. Dynamic oligomeric states, such as those in the translation initiation complex eIF3 or the spliceosome, typically involve transient interactions. Therefore, interaction strength is not equivalent to functional importance. Unlike transient interactions, permanent interactions—such as those in steroid receptors and HIV-1 pre-integration complexes—often result in unstable monomers when not bound in the complex. These permanent interactions are typically essential for both the structural integrity and function of the complex.
Various experimental and computational methods have been developed to detect PPIs. Common techniques include in vitro methods (e.g., GST-pulldown) and in cellulo methods (e.g., proximity ligation assay and yeast two-hybrid genetic system). Some other experimental techniques combine in cellulo and in vitro methods (co-immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry-based approaches). Recently, advanced machine learning approaches leveraging sequence and coevolutionary information have gained significant traction, such as those implemented in AlphaFold3 and ESM3. In silico and experimental methods have also been used in conjunction to characterise PPIs. Moreover, numerous innovative techniques have been developed to improve PPI detection, e.g., novel assays based on colocalisation and protein-fragment complementation.
The collective efforts in solving PPIs have generated a substantial amount of PPI data (Figure 1), which is available in the literature. While remarkable progress has been made in recent years, many challenges persist. The large-scale identification of PPIs can generate a high number of false positives, making it hard to distinguish functional interactions from random noise. Therefore, efforts have been made to develop and curate PPI databases, including BioGRID, DIP, IntAct, mentha, MINT, STRING, and SIGNOR. These databases provide metadata on the source publications, species studied and experimental methods, helping researchers assess the reliability and relevance of each PPI entry.
Sizes and distributions of protein–protein interaction (PPI) databases.
(A) An UpsetR plot illustrating the overlap between PPI databases based on unique primary UniProt IDs. Databases are listed on the left of the lower panel. The black dots indicate intersections between different databases. The bars to the left show the database sizes, and the bars above indicate the overlap size (e.g., STRING holds 680K PPIs, 313K unique to STRING). Physical-only PPI releases were used whenever possible, as for BioGRID and STRING. (B) Overlap coefficients between PPI databases (left panel). To rule out the possibility of ID mis-assignments, homology clustering of protein sequences was performed using the amino acid sequence identity thresholds of 0.8 and 0.9. The differences between the overlap coefficients before and after clustering are negligible (right panel). (C) Counts of the unique proteins (UniProt IDs) for each species for PPIs that were found in two out of eight databases (the 10 most common species are shown).
However, here we find that the PPIs captured by these databases are variable, sparse and focused on model organisms. Several efforts, such as HitPredict and ConsensusPathDB, have aimed to unify PPI databases, and these meta-databases may help fill some gaps. However, these meta-databases do not address the issue that most PPIs have been identified in a limited number of species. Encouragingly, we find that protein complexes with experimentally determined structures are enriched in the highly conserved PPIs (Figure 2), suggesting an opportunity to use structural and in silico approaches to further explore conserved PPIs.
Conserved PPIs were sourced from eight PPI databases.
(A) UpSet plot shows the conservation of PPIs, based on the overlap of homologous protein pairs (OrthoDB ID pairs) across species (NCBI taxonomy IDs). Dots with vertical edges connecting them indicate a union between sets, while the vertical bar plot above indicates the size of the union (e.g., Homo sapiens and Mus musculus share 13,643 PPIs). (B) The number of conserved PPIs hosted in the eight PPI databases. The proteins are grouped by orthology, where PPIs that share the same pairs of OrthoDB IDs in multiple species are defined as evolutionary conserved. (C) Many PPIs are not represented in the PDB structure database. Notably, structurally characterised PPIs are overrepresented among highly conserved interactions compared with less conserved ones, as indicated by the odds ratios above the points (6, 22, 80, etc). For example, for conserved PPIs in two species, the odds of finding corresponding complex structures deposited in the PDB are six times higher than that of non-conserved PPIs. Moreover, for conserved PPIs found in 6 or more species, > 97% of these have a corresponding PDB structure, whereas for 5 species there are 35 PPI structures remaining to be solved (see Figures 3 and 4). PDB, Protein Data Bank.
The 10 largest conserved PPI networks.
The nodes represent orthologous protein groups (by OrthoDB IDs). The blue and red edge colours represent structurally solved (with PDB IDs) and unsolved PPIs, respectively. Only PPIs observed in at least five species are shown.
We propose broadening the scope of PPI analysis to include a broader range of species. A phylogenetically informed approach inspired by the successes of phylogenetically informed data acquisition through genome sequencing, such as the GEBA (Genomic Encyclopedia of Bacteria and Archaea ) and Zoonomia projects, is promising. Prior work on estimating the statistical power of comparative genomic methods showed that the detection of smaller conserved elements improves as more genome sequences are added. We anticipate that these seminal studies will have important implications for PPI analysis, similar to their impact on comparative genomics during the early days of genome sequencing. It is worth noting that evolutionary conservation is the single feature that reliably leads to the prediction of functionally consequential variation. Given the continuous innovation of PPI detection techniques, we believe that a phylogenetically informed approach is timely, worthwhile and achievable.

Current challenges

There is a poor overlap between PPI databases
Multiple efforts have been made to curate experimentally tested PPIs from the literature and make them accessible through online databases. However, the number of functionally obligate interactions is expected to be small compared with the number of potential mis-interactions. Due to the labour-intensive nature of experimental interaction studies, these databases can only capture a small fraction of PPIs. Therefore, several attempts have been made to predict PPIs in silico.
Available in silico prediction tools for PPIs may use a limited number of curated data sources (e.g., STRING) as training and test datasets. The assumption is that PPIs with experimental validations are reliable and can be sourced from one of the largest public databases (Table 1). To test this assumption, we analysed eight popular PPI databases and found a low overlap between PPI databases (Figure 1A). No database captures a core set of interactions; conversely, most databases have a large proportion of PPIs that are unique (Figure 1A and B). Of the eight PPI databases, only 4,425 PPIs were found across five databases (Figure 1A). STRING is very inclusive, whereas SIGNOR and DIP have very little overlap with other databases (Figure 1A and B). Quantifying overlap coefficients between the PPI databases shows the median overlap coefficient of 0.35, ranging from a minimum of 0.01 (BioPlex vs SIGNOR) to a maximum of 1.0 (IntAct vs MINT, where MINT represents a smaller subset of IntAct, comprising 11% of its entries) (Figure 1A and B). Theoretically, there should be some consistency, as PPI databases all source data from published literature (except for BioPlex, Table 1). Low overlap among PPI databases hampers researchers from accurately capturing the full landscape of reliable PPIs. This fragmentation may lead to inconsistent conclusions about protein functionality and its contribution to cellular/organism fitness.
Datasets of protein–protein interactions (PPIs)
Database	Dataset description	Reference	 	BioGRID	Physical multi-validated interactions		 	DIP	Experimentally determined interactions between proteins		 	IntAct	Experimentally derived interaction data available in the published scientific literature and from direct scientists’ submissions prior to publication in a peer-reviewed journal.		 	mentha	Source databases: MINT, IntAct, DIP, MatrixDB, BioGRID		 	MINT	Experimentally verified PPIs mined from the scientific literature by expert curators		 	SIGNOR	Experimental evidence about causal interactions between proteins and other entities of biological relevance		 	BioPlex	Protein interactions in human cells via affinity-purification mass spectrometry		 	STRING	Experimentally determined, physical-only interactions between proteins
One possible cause of low overlap between databases is the inconsistent use of IDs between databases, e.g., for protein isoforms. To investigate this further, we clustered PPI sequences using sequence similarity (MMSeq2). The results show that sequence clustering did not greatly increase the overlap between databases (Figure 1C). The difference between the overlap coefficients before and after sequence clustering was lower than 5%, confirming the inconsistency between the databases. There are at least two possibilities: (i) databases capture only a fraction of PPIs reported in the literature—an issue that was identified a decade ago that persists to this day (Figure 1), and (ii) while databases may have varying inclusion criteria, which could explain some discrepancies between them, we also observe that the proteins in the databases are heavily concentrated on/predominantly belong to model organisms (Figure 1C). To address potential bias derived from model species, analyses of evolutionary conservation of PPIs may have the potential to discriminate between bona fide functional and mis-interactions. Our findings reveal several limitations of the contents of PPI databases, which hinder our ability to accurately reconstruct and understand PPI networks.

Biased sampling of model organisms confounds the identification of conserved PPIs
Next, to explore the factors that might explain the poor overlap, we group the PPI datasets by organisms. We find that many PPIs have only been discovered in a single species, and that this distribution largely reflects the biased sampling towards a few diverse model organisms (e.g., human, yeast, fruit fly; Figure 2A and B). This shows an unintended consequence of resource allocation to a limited number of model organisms, despite the advantages gained through studying model organisms. The limited number of model organisms studied hinders efforts to distinguish between non-functional, transient interactions and robustly identified functional interactions that likely have an impact on phenotype or fitness. This sampling bias also limits our understanding of the roles of species-specific and conserved PPIs across diverse lineages.
To investigate the importance of PPI conservation, we examined the proportion of evolutionarily conserved PPIs with corresponding solved tertiary structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB). Our expectation is that the PDB provides a ‘gold standard’ of the most reliable PPIs identified to date. For each PPI, we identified homologous groups using OrthoDB annotations. This allowed us to determine the number of species across which each conserved PPI was observed. We then calculated the proportion of PPIs within each species span that have at least one corresponding complex structure deposited in the PDB.
We find that the complexes with PPIs conserved across four or more species are more likely to be structurally solved (Figure 2C, odds ratios above the points). Structurally solved PPIs are mostly ribosomal proteins, whereas structurally unresolved PPIs are mostly involved in metabolic pathways (Supplementary Figure S1). As conserved PPIs are less likely to remain unsolved (Figure 2C), this presents an attractive opportunity for solving their interactions through structural biology and in silico methods. This suggests that prioritising structurally unsolved, evolutionarily conserved PPIs could address gaps in functional PPI networks.

Proposed solutions

Most conserved PPIs remain to have structures solved
To bridge existing PPI databases with orthology-based inference frameworks, we highlighted the 10 largest conserved PPI networks to identify opportunities for resolving structurally unsolved interactions (Figure 3). The two largest interaction hubs are ribosomes and/or proteasomes, followed by the translation initiation complex (eIF3), spliceosome and respiratory complex I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase). The complete list of PPIs that remain to be structurally solved is available on GitHub (https://github.com/lcscs12345/ppi_conservation/blob/main/data/wnt_ror/unsolved.csv).

Case Study: tackling WNT–ROR interaction through a phylogenetically informed approach
To bridge existing PPI databases with orthology-based inference frameworks, we highlighted the 10 largest conserved PPI networks to identify opportunities for resolving structurally unsolved interactions (Figure 3). The two largest interaction hubs are ribosomes and/or proteasomes, followed by the translation initiation complex (eIF3), spliceosome and respiratory complex I (NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase). The complete list of PPIs that remain to be structurally solved is available on GitHub (https://github.com/lcscs12345/ppi_conservation/blob/main/data/wnt_ror/unsolved.csv).
Among the conserved PPIs with no available structural data, the WNT–ROR (receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor) interaction stood out as a biologically important yet unresolved case. This case study demonstrates how a phylogenetically informed approach can prioritise such interactions for computational modelling and future experimental validation. The Wnt signalling network contains a high proportion of structurally unsolved PPIs that are highly conserved (Figure 3, 5 red edges vs 3 blue edges). This includes the WNT and ROR ligand-receptor interactions previously detected across five species. WNT is a large family of glycoproteins (OrthoDB ID: 2,874,082at2759), whereas ROR belongs to a large group of ABL proto-oncogene 1, non-receptor tyrosine kinases (OrthoDB ID: 1,614,410at2759). To understand why WNT–ROR has not been structurally solved, we searched PDB for relevant complexes and found a crystal structure for WNT3 and Fzd8 frizzled domain (PDB ID: 6AHY, human WNT3 in complex with the mouse Fzd8 frizzled domain). This is relevant to WNT–ROR, as ROR2 also has a frizzled domain that has 34% similarity with the mouse Fzd8 frizzled domain (Figure 4A). These two interactions are functionally relevant, as Wnt5A–ROR1/2 interactions inhibit Wnt3 signalling in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Prediction of WNT5A and ROR ligand-receptor interaction using ESMFlow.
(A) Sequence alignment of the frizzled domains for human ROR2 and mouse Fzd8. (B) ESMFlow prediction of WNT5A (grey outline) ‘clamped’ on ROR2 (green outline) as shown by a representative structure from the ensemble. ROR2 consists of IgG-like, frizzled and kringle extracellular domains and a pseudokinase domain (not shown). (C) Cα root-mean-square fluctuations (RMSF) show that the WNT5A and ROR2 binding sites are highly flexible (black dotted circles, residues in bold; as colour-coded in the RMSF plots). See also the interaction sites annotated in the NCBI CDD entries cd19347 and cd07468. (D) The contact map shows the transient contacts between the WNT5A C-terminus and the ROR2 frizzled and kringle domains. The colour bar represents the frequency of contacts across the ensemble. The space outside the square boundaries corresponds to all possible spots for intermolecular contacts. (E) Prediction of the ensemble structures for WNT5A/B–ROR1/2 across eight species. The predicted WNT–ROR structures and the WNT3–Fzd8 frizzled domain crystal structure (PDB: 6AHY) are mostly in the same fold (template modelling [TM]-scores > 0.5, red dotted line).
The crystal structure 6AHY shows an interaction involving O-palmitoleoyl Ser 244 of WNT5A (or Ser 223 of WNT5B). However, a recently solved ROR2 crystal structure lacks a hydrophobic groove to accommodate the palmitoleate moiety (PDB ID: 9FSE). This study proposed that WNT–ROR ligand-receptor interaction is weak but highly specific, in which a co-receptor may be involved. Therefore, solving the WNT–ROR interaction structurally may be highly challenging. To tackle this computationally, we tested the WNT5A–ROR2 interaction using AlphaFold3. We used a palmitic acid molecule as a ligand to mimic the palmitoleate moiety, as this has been useful in predicting 6AHY accurately. 6AHY likely contributed to the AlphaFold3 training set using PDB structures released before 2021-09-30. We obtained ipTM (interface predicted template modelling) confidence scores of 0.79 for 6AHY but 0.18 for WNT5A–ROR2, indicating a low confidence in predicting the WNT5A–ROR2 interface.
We further predicted WNT5A–ROR2 interactions using ESMFlow, which produces structural ensembles of proteins without requiring multiple sequence alignments as input. One limitation of this prediction is that post-translational modifications could not be included. Although potential interactions involving the WNT5A palmitoleate modification could not be captured, the amino acid residues around S244 were predicted to be flexible (Figure 4B and C). We also predicted transient interactions between the WNT5A C-terminus and the ROR2 frizzled and kringle domains (Figure 4D). Both the S244 and C-terminal regions of WNT5A were predicted to be highly flexible, suggesting that WNT5A ‘clamps’ on ROR2. Such transient structure could not be predicted using AlphaFold by default. Although AlphaFold can be customised to predict alternative protein structures using subsets of multiple sequence alignments, it is a weak predictor of fold switching. In addition, we predicted the structural ensembles for WNT5A/B–ROR1/2 across eight species. We found that WNT–ROR and WNT3–Fzd8 frizzled domain (PDB: 6AHY) are mostly in the same fold, except for those in C. elegans and Drosophila melanogaster that are more distantly related to others. (Figure 4E, 75% of predicted complexes have TM-scores > 0.5). This supports the notion that WNT–ROR interactions are highly conserved. This example highlights that key PPIs we don’t understand structurally can be tackled through a phylogenetically informed approach.

Future directions
We have shown that the majority of PPIs are sparsely curated in well-established databases. Calderone et al. found that PPI databases were sparse in 2013, and this issue persists despite cross-referencing across multiple databases and the rapid growth in computational power over the past 12 years. While meta-databases offer a temporary solution, addressing the inconsistencies between databases requires significant investment in community-driven curation efforts and sustained funding support. Limited curation can lead to inaccurate predictions of protein function, misallocation of research funds and hinder drug discovery efforts. Moreover, for machine learning purposes, a large and well-curated set of reliable PPIs is required to distinguish functional interactions from random noise.
Through our efforts in consolidating PPIs, we have found that PPIs detected across multiple species are more likely to be robustly validated by experimental structural solutions. This suggests that PPIs detected across multiple species are more reliable, while those identified in only one species may represent random interactions lacking validation of their importance for organismal fitness. This presents an attractive opportunity for structural biologists to solve core, conserved PPIs found across multiple species, as less conserved PPIs are likely to be accessory interactions. While focusing on conserved PPIs has been valuable, it is essential to acknowledge the potential importance of less conserved PPIs and strive for a more balanced research agenda with a broad perspective.
We propose creating a set of core/gold-standard PPIs using a multi-disciplinary approach combining functional genomics, computational modelling and structural biology. This phylogenetically informed approach will span across multiple species as inspired by the Zoonomia, GEBA and Protein Structure Initiative: Biology projects. The experimental results and evolutionary models (e.g., ESM3 and EVcomplex2) may help reconstruct the evolutionary history of PPIs and identify functionally important amino acid residues. For example, building upon successful coevolutionary analyses in S. cerevisiae, we propose extending this approach to other species to distinguish conserved core interactions from evolutionarily transient ones and resolve inconsistencies between existing PPI databases. Specifically, inclusion in the ‘gold standard’ will require evidence from at least two independent sources (e.g., experimental validation, a strong coevolutionary signal and consistent prediction across multiple computational methods) and demonstrated conservation across diverse species. For non-model organisms, we suggest prioritising PPIs with high-confidence computational predictions (e.g., TM-scores > 0.5 and ipTM scores > 0.6) for experimental validation, particularly in underrepresented clades such as lophotrochozoans and early branching bilaterians. Community input and expert curation should be integral to the ongoing maintenance and expansion of this resource.
We envisage that the proposed high-confidence, well-curated PPI dataset will serve as a foundational resource for the scientific community. It will facilitate the development of more accurate computational methods and experimental designs, and provide a reliable framework for studying protein function, disease mechanisms and drug discovery. We encourage researchers to contribute to this effort by sharing data, expertise and computational tools, and we advocate for sustained funding to support the critical work of PPI curation.

Perspectives
There is limited overlap among protein–protein interaction (PPI) databases, which hinders the identification and exploration of the reliable PPI landscape.
The focus on model organisms limits the identification of conserved PPIs across diverse species.
Many conserved PPIs lack structurally solved complexes, providing an opportunity for structural and computational biologists to address gaps. Evolutionary models of PPI conservation may help distinguish between conserved and evolutionarily transient interactions.

Supplementary material

Competing Interests
The authors declare that there are no competing interests associated with the manuscript.

Funding
This work was funded by the Royal Society of New Zealand (RSNZ) Te Apārangi, Marsden Grant (19-UOO-040) to PPG. CSL was supported by Marsden Grants (19-UOO-040 and 21-UOO-238).

Open Access
This article has been published open access under our Subscribe to Open programme, made possible through the support of our subscribing institutions, learn more here: https://portlandpress.com/pages/open_access_options_and_prices#conditional

CRediT Author Contribution
C.S.L. contributed to writing ⩕ original draft, writing ⩕ review and editing, conceptualisation, data curation, formal analysis, funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, project administration, software, validation and visualisation. P.M. contributed to writing ⩕ review and editing, data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, supervision, validation and visualization. P.C.F. contributed to writing ⩕ review and editing, conceptualisation, funding acquisition, investigation, project administration, resources, supervision, validation and visualisation. P.P.G. contributed to writing ⩕ original draft, writing ⩕ review and editing, conceptualisation, data curation, formal analysis, funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, project administration, resources, supervision, validation and visualisation.

Abbreviations
GEBA
Genomic Encyclopedia of Bacteria and Archaea
PDB
Protein Data Bank
PPI
protein–protein interaction
RMSF
root-mean-square fluctuation
ROR
receptor tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor
ipTM
interface predicted template modelling

References
Recent advances in the development of protein-protein interactions modulators: mechanisms and clinical trials
Comprehensive characterization of protein-protein interactions perturbed by disease mutations
Non-adaptive complexity and biochemical function
An assessment of quaternary structure functionality in homomer protein complexes
The generality of constructive neutral evolution
Rescuing error control in crosslinking mass spectrometry
Mass spectrometry-based protein-protein interaction networks for the study of human diseases
Emergence of power law distributions in protein-protein interaction networks through study bias
Computational approaches to predict protein-protein interactions in crowded cellular environments
Thermodynamics of protein destabilization in live cells
Thermodynamics of Macromolecular Association in Heterogeneous Crowding Environments: Theoretical and Simulation Studies with a Simplified Model
Diversity of protein-protein interactions
Mass spectrometry-based methods for characterizing transient protein–protein interactions
A dynamic compositional equilibrium governs mRNA recognition by eIF3
Understanding the dynamic design of the spliceosome
A hydrophobic ratchet entrenches molecular complexes
Structural basis for HIV-1 DNA integration in the human genome, role of the LEDGF/P75 cofactor
Structural and functional role of INI1 and LEDGF in the HIV-1 preintegration complex
Production of unstable proteins through the formation of stable core complexes
Techniques for the analysis of protein-protein interactions in Vivo
Protein-protein interaction detection: methods and analysis
Protein detection using proximity-dependent DNA ligation assays
Proximity ligation assay: an ultrasensitive method for protein quantification and its applications in pathogen detection
A novel genetic system to detect protein-protein interactions
Isolation of proteins and protein complexes by immunoprecipitation
Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3
Simulating 500 million years of evolution with a language model
ReLo is a simple and rapid colocalization assay to identify and characterize direct protein-protein interactions
Tapioca: a platform for predicting de novo protein-protein interactions in dynamic contexts
A new method to experimentally quantify dynamics of initial protein-protein interactions
Accurate and sensitive interactome profiling using a quantitative protein-fragment complementation assay
Next-generation large-scale binary protein interaction network for Drosophila melanogaster
The BioGRID database: A comprehensive biomedical resource of curated protein, genetic, and chemical interactions
DIP, the Database of Interacting Proteins: a research tool for studying cellular networks of protein interactions
The IntAct database: efficient access to fine-grained molecular interaction data
mentha: a resource for browsing integrated protein-interaction networks
Using the MINT Database to Search Protein Interactions
The STRING database in 2023: protein-protein association networks and functional enrichment analyses for any sequenced genome of interest
SIGNOR 3.0, the SIGnaling network open resource 3.0: 2022 update
HitPredict version 4: comprehensive reliability scoring of physical protein-protein interactions from more than 100 species
ConsensusPathDB 2022: molecular interactions update as a resource for network biology
A phylogeny-driven genomic encyclopaedia of Bacteria and Archaea
Genomic encyclopedia of bacteria and archaea: sequencing a myriad of type strains
1,003 reference genomes of bacterial and archaeal isolates expand coverage of the tree of life
Integrating gene annotation with orthology inference at scale
Evolutionary constraint and innovation across hundreds of placental mammals
A model of the statistical power of comparative genome sequence analysis
Quantitative estimates of sequence divergence for comparative analyses of mammalian genomes
Protein–protein interaction prediction with deep learning: a comprehensive review
State-of-the-art computational methods to predict protein-protein interactions with high accuracy and coverage
Dual proteome-scale networks reveal cell-specific remodeling of the human interactome
MMseqs2 enables sensitive protein sequence searching for the analysis of massive data sets
Model organisms--A historical perspective
Ror is a nervous system-specific co-receptor for Wnt ligands
Purified Wnt5a protein activates or inhibits beta-catenin-TCF signaling depending on receptor context
The receptor tyrosine kinase Ror2 is involved in non‐canonical Wnt5a/JNK signalling pathway
The C. elegans ROR receptor tyrosine kinase, CAM-1,non-autonomously inhibits the Wnt pathway
Robo and Ror function in a common receptor complex to regulate Wnt-mediated neurite outgrowth in Caenorhabditis elegans
Structure and function of the ROR2 cysteine-rich domain in vertebrate noncanonical WNT5A signaling
PTK7/Otk interacts with Wnts and inhibits canonical Wnt signalling
Evolutionary divergence in the catalytic activity of the CAM-1, ROR1 and ROR2 kinase domains
AlphaFold meets flow matching for generating protein ensembles
AlphaFold predictions of fold-switched conformations are driven by structure memorization
Predicting multiple conformations via sequence clustering and AlphaFold2
High-throughput prediction of protein conformational distributions with subsampled AlphaFold2
How significant is a protein structure similarity with TM-score = 0.5?
The protein structure initiative structural genomics knowledgebase
Protein Structure Initiative Material Repository: an open shared public resource of structural genomics plasmids for the biological community
Large-scale discovery of protein interactions at residue resolution using co-evolution calculated from genomic sequences
Computed structures of core eukaryotic protein complexes