Development and evaluation of online medication support tools for older people: a systematic review
Abstract
Background
Success of online medication support tools is contingent on how well they are designed and address the needs of users, especially older people.
Objective
To characterise existing online medication support tools for older people and describe their development and evaluation.
Methods
This systematic review was undertaken following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines. Five electronic databases (MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, Scopus and Web of Science) were searched from inception to October 2024 for studies describing the development and/or evaluation of online medication support tools for older people aged ≥65 years, or their informal caregivers. The mixed-methods appraisal tool was used for quality assessment. Extracted data were analysed descriptively.
Results
A total of 1621 studies were identified, and 29 studies met the inclusion criteria. Over 80% (n = 21) of the tools were mobile health apps or websites. The most common development approach involved user-centred design methodologies (comprising user needs assessments, focus groups, interviews and user experience workshops). Usability testing using questionnaires and surveys (n = 13 tools) were the most common evaluation techniques followed by think-aloud protocol (n = 9 tools), interviews and focus groups (n = 9 tools). Findings across 22 studies suggest that user satisfaction of the developed online tools was high. The remaining seven studies did not measure usability of the final prototype or explicitly report on usability.
Conclusion
Findings reveal heterogeneity in the methods used to develop and evaluate online tools for older people. Overall, all methodologies were feasible and led to the development of tools that demonstrated good to excellent levels of usability.
Protocol registration
International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) CRD42024483579.
https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/view/CRD42024483579

Key Points
This review summarises online medication support tools for older people and carers and the approaches used to develop and evaluate them.
Iterative refinement driven by user feedback may be more influential than any one approach for developing high-usability tools.
Use of questionnaires and surveys is the most common technique for measuring usability of tools and obtaining user feedback.
User feedback showed that older people desire simple navigation, large text, personalisation, audio support and access to educational content.
Resistance to change, lack of digital confidence and technical issues were barriers to online tool adoption by older people.

Introduction
The explosion of health information technologies (HITs) has ushered in new paradigms in healthcare delivery with a shift towards person-centred models of care, via the development of a range of online patient-facing healthcare tools. With the growing adoption of HITs amongst patients, healthcare practitioners (HCPs) are presented with increasing opportunities to engage and support patients and caregivers in decisions around their health, including medication use. Research indicates that use of HITs including online medication support tools by patients and informal caregivers is high, even amongst older people. In accordance with Turjamaa and colleagues’ definition of smart medication systems, in this paper, online medication support tools refer to online resources, programs and systems, aimed at assisting individuals (patients or caregivers) with medication management, including reduction of medication-related errors and improvement in adherence. These tools may encompass electronic medication management systems, mobile health (mHealth) applications (apps) and online platforms providing medication and health-related information, medication reminders or personalised support for safe use of medications.
Existing systematic reviews provide valuable insights into different strategies and tools for improving medication adherence and safety amongst older people, using technology. However, there is a gap in the research pertaining to the development and evaluation of online medication support tools for this population. Understanding the methods used to develop and evaluate online technologies improves and ensures that the tools are user centred and address the needs of the target population. Current literature centres around discrete elements, such as adherence strategies or decision support systems, without a comprehensive approach to the design, implementation and evaluation of online platforms for older users. This warrants a systematic review of the evidence to understand how HITs have been developed and evaluated and to guide the future development and evaluation of similar online interventions. Success of many health technologies is contingent on how well the intervention is designed and how well it addresses the needs of users. This is particularly true for technologies developed for older people.
This primary aim of this systematic review is to describe the development and evaluation of online medication support tools for older people ≥65 years. The secondary aim is to characterise existing online medication support tools currently available for this cohort. The primary outcomes of this review are descriptions of how online medication support tools for older people and informal caregivers have been developed and how these tools have been evaluated. The secondary outcome is a description of the features and characteristics of online medication support tools for users.

Methods
This systematic review was conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist and registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO CRD CRD42024483579) on 11 October 2024.

Search strategy
Electronic databases MEDLINE (1946–October 2024), EMBASE (1947–October 2024), CINAHL (1982–October 2024), Scopus (1978–October 2024) and Web of Science (1970–October 2024) were searched. The research team selected databases and search terms in consultation with experienced academic librarians (IR, KE and TA). Search terms and Medical Subject Headings combining website development, user testing, online tools and medication were used to identify relevant studies. See Appendix S1 in the Supplementary Data section for details of the search strategy and selection criteria.

Article selection and data extraction
All studies yielded from the database search were imported into Covidence, and duplicate references were removed. Two investigators (T.E.A. and A.L.) independently screened the title and abstracts coding them in one of three categories: ‘include’, ‘exclude’ or ‘unclear’. Studies coded as ‘include’ and ‘unclear’ based on title/abstract screening were subject to a full-text review by the two independent reviewers. Discrepancies were resolved through discussions between the two investigators, and where doubts persisted, a third investigator (S.N.H. or L.K.O.) was consulted for arbitration. A PRISMA flow chart was used for presenting reasons for excluding any full-text studies. Covidence and Excel were used for data extraction from included studies. The data that were extracted included the study characteristics, research design, setting, methods for the development and evaluation of the online tool, key features of the tool, disease targeted, medication category and details of the end-users. Data extraction was completed by two reviewers (T.E.A. and A.L.) independently.

Quality assessment
The mixed-methods appraisal tool (MMAT) was applied to each of the 29 shortlisted studies to assess quality. The MMAT provides researchers with checklists for critically reviewing the methodological quality of mixed-methods studies, qualitative research, quantitative descriptive studies, non-randomised studies and randomised controlled trials (RCTs). Adapted to the study design, five questions are asked to critique the methodological quality of each study. Two investigators (T.E.A. and A.D.) independently assessed the methodological quality of all included studies, with any discrepancies discussed until a consensus was reached.

Data analysis
The nature of the objectives and outcomes of the review precluded a quantitative analysis. Consequently, the output of this review is presented as a descriptive synthesis of the included studies focusing on their contribution to the review outcomes. A meta-analysis could not be undertaken due to the heterogeneity of the study designs, interventions and outcome measures.

Results
A systematic search across the five databases yielded 1621 studies. After removal of duplicates, title and abstract screening was conducted for the remaining 1220 studies. Overall, 999 studies were excluded, and 222 studies were retained for full-text review. A further 183 studies were excluded during the full-text review with the most common reasons being ineligible patient population (n = 82), ineligible study design (n = 53) and ineligible intervention (n = 36). During data extraction, a further 10 studies were excluded because of ineligible or unclear patient population (n = 7), ineligible outcome (n = 2) or no tool developed (n = 1), yielding 29 studies for inclusion (Fig. 1).
PRISMA flow diagram of systematic review search.
The 29 studies included in this review were conducted in the USA (n = 9), Canada (n = 4), Australia (n = 3), China (n = 3), Belgium (n = 2), France (n = 2), New Zealand (n = 1), Netherlands (n = 1), Portugal (n = 1), Sweden (n = 1), Spain (n = 1) and Malaysia (n = 1). There was heterogeneity in study designs: mixed methods (n = 18), qualitative studies (n = 4), quantitative non-randomised studies (n = 2), randomised control trials (n = 3) and quantitative descriptive studies (n = 2). Study population sizes ranged from small cohorts (n = 10–20) in qualitative or pilot usability studies to larger cohorts (n = 96–152) in RCTs or app trials. Table 1 presents a summary of the included studies.
Summary of included studies and their tools.
First author, year	Country	Study design	Study aim/s	Participant characteristics	Tool and description	 	Balsa 2020 	Portugal	Mixed methods	To describe the essentials of the tool and report on usability evaluation	Older people with T2DMMean age (range): 70.91 (67–80) for patients (n = 11; males = 8) and 54.33 (40–63) for experts (n = 9; males = 1)	VASelfCare prototype is a mobile app prototype of an intelligent Virtual Assistant that supports older people with T2DM in medication adherence and lifestyle changes	 	Bengtsson 2014 	Sweden	Mixed methods	To evaluate the usability and reliability of the tool	Patients with HTN who were fluent in SwedishMean age (range):Female (n = 9): 69 (54–73)Male (n = 12): 62.5 (49–82)	An interactive HTN-specific mobile phone self-report system that also includes a login-restricted web-based feedback module	 	Bereznicki 2013 	Australia	Prospective, proof-of-concept study	To measure the clinical effect of the tool	Participants were required to have a long-term indication for warfarin, have been taking warfarin for at least 6 months and have internet access in their home. Physician consent was necessary for patient involvement in trialMean age of patients (n = 16; males = 12) was 69.8 (SD 10.1)	Portable INR monitor with online decision support via a website	 	Burns 2019 	Australia	Mixed methods	To examine the usability and utility of the tool	Informal caregivers for people living with dementia*User testing n = 10 (females = 6 [60%]) mean age 51.83 × English FG n = 16; females = 15 [94%]1 × Italian FG n = 6; females =5 [83%]Macedonian interviews n = 9; females = 2 [22%]	Managing Medicines for People with Dementia Website version 2 (MMPDv2) is a website containing medication management resources to assist caregivers of people with dementia with managing medications	 	Cao 2024 	China	Mixed methods	To design, develop and evaluate the usability of the tool	Older adult stroke survivors (n = 15; males = 10 [66.7%])Mean age (range): 71.33 years (60–87)	OASapp is a mHealth app to improve medication adherence amongst older adult stroke survivors	 	Cook 2023 	Canada	Mixed methods	To design, develop and evaluate the usability of the tool	Older adults with cancer (n = 17); males (82.4%)Patient age (years):>85 (n = 1)81–85 (n = 5)76–80 (n = 7)70–75 (n = 4)	Comprehensive Assessment for My Plan (CHAMP) is a self-reported, electronic GA tool, designed for older people with cancer (and oncologists) to increase accessibility to GA and improve treatment decision-making	 	de Sant’ Anna 2011 	France	Descriptive case study with observational methods	To evaluate the feasibility of the tool and measure its impact on the user’s mood	Individuals (n = 17) >65 years with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease (MMSE between 17 and 28) and their caregivers (husbands/wives; n = 9)	An online computer program for individuals with Alzheimer’s disease and their caregivers	 	Dériot 2024 	France	Prospective interventional pilot study	To evaluate the feasibility of the tool and measure its impact and use	Older adults with glaucoma (n = 31); females (64.5%)Mean age (SD): 70.7 (8.0); for participants in the ITTMean age (SD): 70.6 (8.6); for participants in the PPS	CONNECTDROP is a novel Medication Event Monitoring System (MEMS) for patients with glaucoma, paired with a mHealth application	 	Donald 2021 	Canada	Mixed methods	To design, develop and evaluate the usability of the tool	A total of 18 participants (14 CKD patients and 4 caregivers); 72% (13/18) were male, 67% (12/18) were over the age of 65 years	My Kidneys My Health is a web-based self-management support prototype for adults with CKD	 	Gasteiger 2022 	New Zealand	Mixed methods	To design, develop and evaluate the usability of the tool	Older adults with mild dementia and age-related health needs (n = 74), carers/relatives (n = 8) and experts (n = 37)	Bomy is a home-based robot for mood stabilisation and cognitive improvement in older adults with dementia or MCI	 	Guo 2017 	China	RCT	To perform a randomised controlled trial of a mobile AF app	mAF App intervention arm (n = 113 patients; mean age, 67.4 years; 57.5% were male; mean follow-up, 69 days)Usual care arm (n = 96 patients; mean age, 70.9 years; 55.2% were male; mean follow-up, 95 days)	The simple mobile AF (mAF) App was designed to incorporate clinical decision-support tools, educational materials and patient involvement strategies with self-care protocols and structured follow-up	 	Holden 2020 	USA	Mixed methods	To test the usability and feasibility of the tool	Patients ≥60 years and using anticholinergic medications. Mean age 67.6 (SD = 7.8, range 60–85); females 61%; Black or African American 54%; White 31%	Brain Buddy is a consumer-facing mHealth app that informs older people on the risks and benefits of anticholinergics	 	Knaepen 2021 	Belgium	Prospective study with mixed methods	To validate the AF-EduApp by an expert panel and to assess its usability (conducted before the start of the prospective RCT study above)	HCPs (n = 15; median age 37 years (IQR: 25–58); 5 males) and AF patients (n = 10; median age 66 years (IQR: 45–80); 6 males)	AF-EduApp is a mHealth app aimed at improving the user’s AF knowledge, increasing self-care capabilities, providing electronic monitoring to improve adherence to OAC and facilitates communication with the user’s care team	 	Knaepen 2023 	Belgium	RCT	To evaluate the usability, satisfaction and communication effectiveness of the tool	A total of 152 patients effectively used the App during a mean follow-up of 386.8 ± 108 days	 	Lee 2018 	Malaysia	Qualitative study	To evaluate the usability (ease of use) and utility (impact on user’s decision-making process) of the tool	13 patients with T2DM: median age 65 years, 10 men and 9 women had secondary education/diploma, 4 were graduates/had postgraduate degree	An online decision aid for older people with T2DM. The website design features were interactive and included a personalised HbA1c chart, an attribute-selectable option matrix and an interactive weighing-scale graphic	 	Lin 2009 	USA	Mixed methods	To test the usability of the tool	Older patients with HTN with mean ages of 78 and 82 for the two formal usability trial samples	The PEP is an interactive medication literacy program that teaches older people with hypertension how to prevent adverse self-medication behaviours and adhere to their medication regimen	 	Madill 2019 	USA	Mixed methods; pilot project	To examine the usability and utility of the tool	Older adults with chronic lower back pain (CLBP). Mean age of the group (n = 45) was 75.5 years	Take Back Your Back [‘the app’] is an office-based iPad app for older people with CLBP that screens for CLBP conditions, provides personalised patient education and facilitates patient–provider communication	 	Martin-Hammond 2015 	USA	Mixed methods	To describe the iterative design process employed to conceptualise and design the tool	Older people (n = 7 males = 4) mean age = 70 (SD = 3.1)Human–computer interaction researchers (n = 2)	A novel interface to assist older people with the task of selecting appropriate OTC medication. This intervention was designed to be presented on a kiosk and allow for touch input and audio output	 	Metting 2023 	Netherlands	Cross-sectional qualitative study	To examine the usability and utility of the tool and obtain insights on common barriers of older people when using health-related websites	11 patients (9 women) with a mean age of 66 (SD 9) years. Of these, 5 had asthma, 3 had COPD, 2 had asthma–COPD overlap syndrome and 1 had bronchiectasis	Pharmacy-based personalised patient web portal that provides medication overview and information on associated diagnoses	 	Mira 2015 	Spain	Pilot intervention study	To design, develop and evaluate the tool	Community-dwelling older adults (n = 61). Mean age was 68.8 years (SD 8.3) and 24 (39.3%) were >70 years; 38 (62.3%) were men	TUMEDICINA is an app that transforms medication-associated ean-13 (barcodes) and QR codes into verbal instructions, to enable safer use of medication by the elderly patients taking multiple medications	 	Neafsey 2008 	USA	Participatory usability study with mixed methods	To present the results of a 3-month beta test of the tool	Older adults (n = 11; all females) with HTN. Mean (SD) age was 80.36 (8.52) years (range, 65–98 years)	PEP-NG is a touch screen–enabled PEP that was modified to the ‘next generation’ to capture self-medication behaviours of older people with hypertension and assess related knowledge and self-efficacy. The program analyses patient-entered information and delivers interactive educational content tailored to the reported behaviours	 	Quintana 2019 	USA	Mixed-methods observational usability study	To present the preliminary results of a usability study of the tool	Persons aged ≥18 years who are involved in the care of an older person aged ≥75 years, or the older person themselves were invited to participate in the study. N = 7 caregivers, median age was 50 (2.5 IQR) and 71% were female	InfoSAGE App is a mHealth app intended for both family members and ageing adults for the mobile management of medication listsIt consists of a web app and mobile app for the sharing of tasks, calendars, contacts, medication lists and associated care discussions	 	Ross 2011 	USA	Qualitative study	To develop two** personal health applications on a common PHR platform	Older adults (mean age: 82 years) with multimorbidity, on multiple medications and prone to care transitions	CCT is a Personal Health Application (PHA) that helps older people and their lay caregivers manage their medication regimens during care transitions. The CCT prototype provides participants with an easy, linear navigation structure, to complete four main functions: medication list creation and management, medication information retrieval, doctor visit preparation and information on when to seek assistance	 	Siek 2010 	USA	Mixed methods	To discuss the design and evaluation of the Colorado Care Tablet (CCT)	Older adults with multimorbidity	 	Siek 2011 	USA	Comprehensive case study (of 6 studies)	To discuss the design of CCT and provide a set of guidelines to help design future Personal Health Applications	Older adults (mean age: 76.4 years; n = 22; males = 12, females = 10) with multimorbidityCaregivers (mean age: 52.7 years; n = 9; males = 2, females = 7)	 	Sien 2024 	Canada	Mixed methods	To report on the user evaluations of the tool	15 older adults aged ≥65 years with cancer and multimorbidity and 3 carers participated in this study. 14 of the 18 (77%) participants were >70 years old and 12 (67%) of them female and 6 (33%) males	A self- and symptom-management app to support older people living with cancer and multimorbidity. The app provides guidance on how to report symptoms, events and daily emotional states and provides an easy display to integrate these various inputs and share insights with healthcare providers	 	Silvera-Tawil 2024 	Australia	Mixed methods	To co-design a digital health technology tool with people with lived experience of stroke or TIA and clinicians	People living with stroke or TIA; mean age 71.94 (10.25) yearsClinicians providing healthcare and education services to individuals after stroke or TIA	CAPS is a multicomponent digital technology support program for secondary prevention of stroke. It consists of a mobile app that integrates wearable activity trackers and smart devices (Fitbit watches and fitness trackers, Oura ring or Apple Watch) and a clinician web portal that includes an electronic message system	 	Sun 2024 	China	RCT	To develop a health behavioural digital tool for hypertensive patients	People >60 years old with HTN (n = 54; mean age 67.24, SD 4.19 years; females = 30 [56%])	HBDIHP is a cloud platform–based Intelligent Health Promotion System that leverages health sign data and health questionnaire responses to generate intelligent health reports, personalised exercise prescriptions and other tailored health recommendations	 	Tran-Nguyen 2022 	Canada	Mixed methods	To design, develop and evaluate the tool	Older adults with post-fracture acute pain; design workshops with 6 participants (4/6, 67% women; 2/6, 33% men; mean age 76.7, SD 9.5 years) usability testing with 10 participants (women 7/10; men 3/10; mean age 68.6, SD 4.12 years)	This tool is a mobile health (mHealth) app prototype that supports older people in the self-management of post-fracture acute pain
*
The authors (Burns et al.) were contacted and clarified that their online tool was based on a review of the literature and formative research that only involved caregivers of people living with dementia who were aged >65 years.
**
The aim of this study was to develop two complementary personal health applications on a common PHR platform: one to assist children with complex health needs (MyMediHealth) and one to assist older adults in care transitions (Colorado Care Tablet). MyMediHealth is outside the eligibility criteria for this review; thus, data concerning this intervention have not been extracted.
CCT, Colorado Care Tablet; CHAMP, Comprehensive Assessment for My Plan; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CLBP, chronic lower back pain; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; HBDIHP, Health Behavioural Digital Intervention for Hypertensive Patients; HTN, hypertension; INR, international normalised ratio; ITT, intention-to-treat; PPS, per-protocol set; mAF, mobile Atrial Fibrillation; MEMS, Medication Event Monitoring System; mHealth app, mobile health application; MMPDv2, Managing Medicines for People with Dementia Website version 2; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; OAC, oral anticoagulant; OTC, over-the-counter; PEP, personal education program; PEP-NG, next-generation personal education program; PHA, personal health application; PHR, personal health record; QR codes, quick response codes; RCT, randomised controlled trial; T2DM, type 2 diabetes mellitus; TIA, transient ischaemic attack.

Participants
Most studies included in this review concentrated on older people with cardiovascular diseases or related chronic conditions (hypertension (n = 4), atrial fibrillation (n = 3), type II diabetes (n = 2), stroke (n = 2), chronic kidney disease (n = 1)). Studies involved older people with mean/median ages ranging between 65 and 82 years. Seven studies included informal caregivers of older people, with their mean/median ages ranging from 50 to 63 years. Eight studies involved HCPs and experts with median ages ranging from 37 to 54 years. Although gender distribution varied, 13 studies showed a higher proportion of males, 9 studies reported more female participants, whilst 7 studies included both genders with balanced or unspecified proportions.

Existing online medication support tools captured by included studies
Across the 29 studies, 26 online medication support tools for older people and informal caregivers were identified. The tools were categorised as mHealth apps (n = 13, 50%), websites (n = 9, 35%), bots (n = 2, 8%) and others (n = 6, 23%) with some tools classified across more than one category (e.g. the VASelfCare prototype was classified as a mHealth app and a bot). Of the six tools classified as ‘other’, one was a Medication Event Monitoring System paired with a mHealth app, two were electronic Personal Education Programs, one was a Personal Health Application, one was a cloud platform–based Intelligent Health Promotion System and one was an over-the-counter (OTC) consumer decision-making tool, presented on a touch-screen kiosk. Tools varied in the disease profiles of their target population: cardiovascular diseases (n = 9), dementia (n = 3), type II diabetes (n = 2), cancer (n = 2) and other conditions (n = 7) such as glaucoma, chronic kidney disease and respiratory diseases. Five tools did not target a specific disease profile (Table 2).
Features of online medication support tools for older people.
Name or short description of tool; year	Classifications of online medication support tools	Condition/s targeted	Medication category	End-user	 	mHealth app	Website	Bot	Other	Older person	Caregiver	HCP	 	VASelfCare prototype; 2020 	X		X		Type II diabetes	NS	X			 	Bengtsson’s Interactive self-report system; 2014 	X	X			Hypertension	NS	X			 	Bereznick’s Online decision support; 2013 		X			– Atrial fibrillation– Thrombosis– Heart valve	Warfarin	X		X	 	Managing Medicines for People with Dementia Website version 2 (MMPD v2); 2019 		X			Dementia	NS		X		 	OASapp; 2024 	X					Stroke	NS	X			 	CHAMP—Comprehensive Assessment for My Plan; 2023 		X			Cancer	NS	X		X	 	de Sant’ Anna’s Online computer program; 2011 		X			Alzheimer’s disease	Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors or N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor blockers	X	X		 	CONNECTDROP paired with a mHealth application; 2024 	X			X	Glaucoma	Fixed combination of timolol/dorzolamide eye drop	X		X	 	My Kidneys My Health; 2021 		X			Chronic kidney disease	NS	X	X		 	Bomy daily care robot; 2022 			X		Dementia	NS	X			 	mAF App*; 2017 	X					Atrial fibrillation	Anticoagulants	X		X	 	Brain Buddy; 2020 	X					NS	Anticholinergics	X			 	AF-EduApp; 2021 	X					Atrial fibrillation	Anticoagulants	X		X	 	Lee’s Online patient decision aid (PDA); 2018 		X			Type II diabetes	Insulin	X			 	Lin’s Computer-mediated personal education program (PEP); 2009 					X	Hypertension	Antihypertensives	X			 	Take Back Your Back [‘the app’]; 2019 	X					Chronic lower back pain	NS	X			 	Martin-Hammond’s Over-the-counter (OTC) consumer decision-making tool; 2015 					X	NS	OTC medications	X			 	Metting’s Pharmacy-based patient web portal; 2023 		X			Respiratory diseases (e.g. COPD, asthma)	NS	X			 	TUMEDICINA; 2015 	X					NS	NS	X			 	Neafsey’s Personal Education Program Next Generation (PEP-NG); 2008 					X	Hypertension	OTC pain relievers and antihypertensives	X			 	InfoSAGE App; 2019 	X					NS	NS	X			 	Colorado Care Tablet; 2010 		X		X	NS	NS	X			 	Sien’s Self-management App; 2024 	X				Cancer and multimorbidity	NS	X			 	CAPS**; Care Assistant and Support Program for People After Stroke or TIA; 2024 	X				Stroke or TIA	Medications for stroke or TIA management	X			 	HBDIHP; Health Behavioural Digital Intervention for Hypertensive Patients; 2024 				X	Hypertension	Antihypertensives	X			 	Tran-Nguyen’s Mobile App Prototype in Older Adults for Post-fracture Acute Pain Management; 2022 	X				Post-fracture acute pain	NS	X
*The mAF App was designed with versions for patients and doctors, respectively.
**CAPS available as a mHealth app for older people and as a separate interface for clinicians which is a web portal. The components of the clinician interface which is separate from the mHealth app has not been captured in this review.
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; HCP, healthcare practitioner; TIA, transient ischaemic attack; NS, not specified.

Approaches employed to develop online medication support tools for older people
Two-thirds (n = 20) of studies in this review described their tool development process. Four studies provided limited information on how their tools were developed and five studies provided no information. There was variability in approaches taken to develop online medication support tools for older people, ranging from user-centred design methodologies to outsourcing of technological development expertise. Figure 2 shows the overlaps between the (a) approaches and (b) techniques in the development and evaluation of online medication support tools for older people visualised as UpSet plots. The bar plot to the left of each UpSet plot depicts the total number of tools utilising a given approach or technique.
Approaches (a) and techniques (b) in the development and evaluation of online medication support tools for older people. SUS, System Usability Scale; RITE, Rapid Iterative Testing and Evaluation.
The most common approach (n = 16 tools, 62%; Fig. 2a) involved employing methods and principles of user-centred design (also referred to as iterative participatory design, iterative user-centred design or co-design) wherein the end-user’s needs (i.e. older people and/or informal caregivers) and requirements are translated into prototypes, tested with intended end-users and modifications made iteratively in response to user feedback. The aim of this approach is to improve the design and enhance usability and utility of the tool. User needs assessments, surveys, workshops, focus groups, interviews and design sessions with relevant stakeholders including the end-users were commonly used methods facilitating a user-centred design approach. The second most common approach (n = 10 tools, 38%; Fig. 2a) for developing online medication support tools for older people involved reviewing the literature to inform the design of related tools. This was achieved by conducting literature reviews, systematic reviews of the literature, scoping reviews or reviewing the findings of prior work. The third most common approach was the development of tools based on established frameworks and guidelines (n = 8 tools, 31%; Fig. 2a). A range of frameworks and guidelines were used including the Behaviour Change Wheel framework, design guidelines for older people, Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford Design Thinking model and the Technology Acceptance Model, modified Delphi Panel technique and others (Fig. 2). Additionally, outsourcing expertise from information technology companies and expert advisory panels was another approach employed in the development of four tools (Fig. 2a). Some tools utilised multiple development strategies, e.g. the self-reported, electronic geriatric assessment tool for older people with cancer, CHAMP, was designed using a combination of frameworks (Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford Design Thinking model and the Technology Acceptance Model), a systematic review of the literature to inform which self-management interventions to include in the tool, user-centred design sessions with older people and input from a health literacy expert to guide text included in CHAMP. No information was provided on the development of five tools.

Evaluation of online medication support tools for older people
All but two studies in this review examined the evaluation of their tools to varying degrees. Although Siek et al. did not present the evaluation of their tool, the Colorado Care Tablet, in their paper, its evaluation was presented in Ross et al. and Siek et al. studies. Sun et al. provided no information on the evaluation of their tool, the health behavioural digital intervention for hypertensive patients. From the remaining 27 studies, techniques that have been used to test the usability, feasibility and/or utility of online medication support tools were identified (Fig. 2b). The most used techniques were questionnaires and surveys (n = 13 tools), followed by think-aloud protocol (TAP) (n = 9 tools), interviews and focus groups (n = 9 tools) and the System Usability Scale (SUS) (n = 5 tools). Other techniques included alpha testing (n = 2 tools), beta testing (n = 3 tools), Rapid Iterative Testing and Evaluation (RITE) (n = 2 tools), heuristic testing (n = 2 tools), cognitive games (n = 1), reliability test–retest (n = 1) and self-reported attitudes and behaviours (n = 1 tool). No information was provided on the evaluation of one tool. Some tools utilised a combination of techniques, e.g. the AF-EduApp that used TAP and the Jessa Atrial fibrillation Knowledge Questionnaire together with app-user data to determine time spent on app and different functions used (Table 3).
Development and evaluation of online medication support tools for older people, grouped by category of the tool.
Author/tool	Development of the tool	Evaluation of the tool	 		Approach(es)	Content and context	Technique(s)	Rating and results	 	Mobile health applications (mHealth apps)	 	Bengtsson; Interactive self-report system	(1) User-centred design—focus groups—design meetings(2) Review of the literature	(1) FG with older people with HTN (n = 15) and HCP (n = 12) and supplemented by a literature review(2) Ten interdisciplinary design meetings were held, focusing on the wording of items and response options	(1) Cognitive interviews (using a structured interview guide)(2) Reliability was examined using a test–retest*	The mobile phone self-report system was reliable and perceived as easy to use(1) Cognitive interviews showed satisfactory item comprehension, relevance and coverage(2) The test–retest results yielded high correlations (>.90) for 4 of 10 questions and satisfactory (>.70) for 2 of 10 questions and just below threshold .70 (rtt = .69) for the remaining 2 questions	 	Cao; OASapp	(1) Review of the literature(2) Storyboard approach(3) Frameworks, guidelines and models(4) Outsourced expertise	(1) Phase 1 included a cross-sectional survey, a systematic review of the literature including a search for stroke apps on the app stores of Apple App Store and Google Play Store, and a nominal group technique (NGT)(2) Storyboard approach; to map out and organise ideas based on the findings from the app store review, literature search, cross-sectional study and NGT(3) Phase 2, the app development was based on a framework of guiding interface design for older adults, the Health Belief Model and Technology Acceptance Model(4) A technology team and an expert advisory panel	(1) Alpha testing with content experts and an app expert—heuristic evaluation form—app modifications were carried out based on results of alpha testing(2) Beta testing with older adult stroke survivors to determine if app meets users’ needs. Participants evaluated the app using the Chinese version of the Usability Metric for User Experience (UMUX) questionnaire	(1) Overall, users of OASapp were satisfied based on reports from alpha and beta testing(2) Mean UMUX score was 71.4 points (SD 14.6 points) which was higher than 68 on the System Usability Scale (SUS) score, which is the minimum cut-off point for a usable system	 	Dériot; CONNECTDROP (A MEMS-connected device) paired with a mHealth application	NR	NR	(1) Patient Satisfaction questionnaire (PQ.01–17). Primary outcome was global patient satisfaction after 9 weeks. Secondary outcome measures included participant feedback on handling the MEMS and the connected application and their usability	(1) This intervention achieved a high global satisfaction score of 74.1% from study participants(2) 70.4% found the tool easy to use(3) 59.2% found the mHealth application useful in reminding them to take their treatment(4) 70.4% achieved an ‘adherence score’ ≥80% after 8 weeks	 	Guo; mAF App	NR	NR	(1) Questionnaires	(1) >90% of patients agreed that the mAF App was easy, user-friendly and helpful.(2) Patients’ knowledge was improved greatly in those with the mAF App over time (all P < .05), whereas this was not observed in the patients with usual care(3) QoL scores were significantly increased in the mAF App arm	 	Holden; Brain Buddy	(1) User-centred design(2) Professional design team(3) Prior research	(1) Iterative development and refinement by study personnel, professional design team and tested with end-users	(1) Usability; SUS(2) Feasibility; self-reported attitudes (feeling informed) and behaviours (speaking to a physician)	(1) Overall usability was acceptable or better, with 100% of participants completing each Brain Buddy task and a mean SUS score of 78.8, corresponding to ‘Good’ to ‘Excellent’ usability(2) Feasibility. 100% felt better informed after using Brain Buddy and 94% planned to speak to their physician about their anticholinergic related riskOn follow-up, 82% reported having spoken to their physician	 	Knaepen 2021 and Knaepen 2023; AF-EduApp	The AF-EduApp is an in-house developed applicationThe concept of the AF-EduApp is based on insights from previous projects of the research group. NFI	(1) Think-aloud protocol (TAP)(2) Jessa Atrial fibrillation Knowledge Questionnaire(3) App-user data collected from app to determine time spent on app and different functions used(4) After 1 month of usage, the patients returned to the hospital and filled in a questionnaire about their satisfaction with the app	(1) Participants were positive about the app and generally its functions were clear and well organised(2) After the pilot study (n = 20), 16 patients indicated they wanted to use the app for a longer period. The measurement (27%) and education (17%) modules were the two most used modules with a significant improvement in knowledge (71.9% to 87.5%; P = .013)	 				(5) Patient satisfaction assessed through a study-specific Patient-Reported Outcome and Experience Measures questionnaire	(1) 73% of app users reported they would participate in this project in future, and 85% were more motivated actively engage in their health due to the extra education(2) 69% found the notifications (e.g. medication reminders) helpful	 	Madill; Take Back Your Back [‘the app’]	Take Back Your Back [‘the app’] is an in-house developed application built using Swift and Xcode (Apple, Cupertino, CA, USA). NFI	(1) Alpha testing—TAP—usability questionnaire(2) Beta testing—applying the same structured questionnaire	(1) Rated highly for usability and utility(2) 82% of participants agreed the app would help them communicate with their doctor and provides useful information about potentially harmful or unnecessary interventions(3) Participants were able to successfully use the app without assistance and would be willing to do so in their primary care office	 	Mira; TUMEDICINA	NR	NR	(1) Usability testing—user satisfaction survey	(1) User satisfaction with the app was 8.3/10; no difference between patients with or without experience using technology(2) Best-valued attributes of the app were its simplicity, clarity of verbal messages (59, 96.7%), clarity of information provided (58, 95.1%) and usefulness of verbal messages (57, 93.4%)	 	Quintana; InfoSAGE App	NR	(1) The app was developed by the Division of Clinical Informatics at the Harvard Medical Faculty Physicians at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in conjunction with ageing researchers. NFI	(1) Usability testing—observation, survey and qualitative data collection	(1) Overall, participants were satisfied with the ease of completing the scenarios (1.3, SD: 0.5), the amount of time each task took (1.3, SD: 0.5), difficulty of each task (1.7, SD: 0.5) and utility in their caregiving (1.2, SD: 0.4)	 	Sien; Self-management App	(1) User-centred design; Design Thinking modela(2) Frameworks and guidelines	(1) Grey’s self-management framework, a design thinking approach involving older people with lived experiences of cancer, was used to design a medium-fidelity app prototype	(1) Rapid Iterative Testing and Evaluation (RITE)(2) SUS(3) Post-test interviews	(1) Participants evaluated the app as very usable; average SUS score of 87 which is regarded ‘best imaginable’(2) This high SUS score reflects high user satisfaction and usability, indicating that the app has great potential to assist older people in their self-management activities	 	Silvera-Tawil; Care Assistant and Support Program for People After Stroke or TIA (CAPS)	(1) Co-design	(1) Following an iterative co-design process, supported by evidence from user needs surveys and user-experience workshops, a consumer-facing app that integrates wearable activity trackers and a clinician web portal were designed and developed to support secondary prevention of stroke	(1) Usability testing (of the prototypes)—feedback survey completed by 112 consumers—user testing of the prototypes	(1) Suggestions for a simple app design, without multiple screen levels to reduce cognitive load(2) Use pictures and icons over text(3) Clear labels and instructions(4) Large buttons and scalable font size(5) Option for the app to ‘speak’ instruction(6) There were mixed opinions about the need to include any other educational content within the app(7) Some privacy concerns expressed(8) Participants questioned the practicalities of collecting survey data via the smart watch, given the small form factor, but strongly supported the use of the smart watch for sensor-based data collection and reminders	 	Tran-Nguyen; Mobile App Prototype in Older Adults for Post fracture Acute Pain Management	(1) Review of the literature(2) Multidisciplinary team(3) User-centred design	(1) Literature review(2) Multidisciplinary team(3) User-centred design approach involving:—surveys—participatory design workshops	(1) Usability testing:—observational study of users on the app via zoom—TAP—Post-test Interviews	(1) All participants found the medium-fidelity prototype useful and easy to use.—Feedback obtained informed the development of the high-fidelity prototype.(2) The final prototype was rated useful by users, for managing acute pain and was easy to navigate.	 	Websites	 	Bereznicki; online decision support	(1) Outsourced expertise; consultant information technology company(2) User-centred design—focus groups with patients and doctors	(1) The website was developed in collaboration with a consultant information technology company(2) 2 focus groups to improve website design and identify required functionalities, flow of information and training requirements were held	(1) Questionnaires —featuring visual analogue scales, ranging from 0 to 10. Scores <5 indicated disagreement with the statements provided, whilst scores >5 indicated agreement with the statements provided	(1) Patients reported that the website was easy to use (median score 7.5, range 5.7–9.5) and were satisfied with the support provided (median score 9.5, range 7.5–9.5)(2) 100% of patients found the tool worthwhile and felt more confident about taking warfarin	 	Burns; Managing Medicines for People with Dementia Website version 2 (MMPD v2)	(1) Outsourced expertise(2) User-centred design(3) Frameworks and guidelines	(1) The website (MMPD v2) was designed by an external provider in consultation with the project team(2) 3× focus groups and 7× interviews with participants were conducted(3) Themes identified were used to guide the development of the intervention(4) Health literacy guidelines were used to ensure that the website information was easy to understand	(1) Internet Self-management Uniform Reporting Framework**(2) Google Analytics(3) Online user evaluation survey; modified version of the Perceived Health Web site Usability Questionnaire*** for Older Adults(4) Summative user testing using Morae Recorder****(5) TAP(6) Field notes(7) Assessment of the readability and quality of information using a range of tools*****	(1) Data collected from the evaluation surveys during the pilot test showed that site users were generally satisfied with the MMPDv2 site(2) Findings from the focus groups and interviews were also generally positive	 	Cook; CHAMP	(1) Frameworks and guidelines(2) Review of the literature(3) User-centred design(4) Input from a health literacy expert	(1) A modified Delphi Panel technique was used to reach consensus on what screening tools for the respective geriatric assessment (GA) domains (e.g. falls risk) to include in the electronic GA. The 5-stage Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford Design Thinking model and the Technology Acceptance Model guided the interface development and usability testing(2) A systematic review of recommendations for providing test results back in online environments without a healthcare provider present, and a systematic review to assess which self-management interventions to include in the recommendations for older adults, was conducted(3) Design sessions with older people were held to develop the interface following a user-centred design methodology to ensure its usabilityInterface development occurred in two stages: collaborative design sessions and a usability assessment(4) A health literacy expert was involved in the wording of all text included in CHAMP for the older adult interface	(1) One-on-one virtual interviews with older adults(2) Five-stage Hasso Plattner Institute of Design at Stanford Design Thinking model (empathise, define, ideate, prototype and test)(3) Technology Acceptance Model(4) TAP(5) SUS	(1) The interactive prototype used in the patient usability testing sessions had a mean SUS score of 85 out of 100 (SD = 4.93), which is considered good usability	 	de Sant’ Anna; Online computer program	(1) Co-design	Older people with Alzheimer’s disease (AD) were co-constructors. NFI	(1) Each participant had four private practical sessions to work on the program, guided by a psychologist. The patient’s performance and time spent on the program was recorded by a technician(2) Questionnaires	(1) AD patients’ performances and their overwhelmingly positive answers to the questionnaires (program learning steps, computer manipulation and global satisfaction) confirmed that this intervention is adaptable and feasible to AD patients	 	Donald; My Kidneys My Health	(1) Review of the literature(2) Co-design(3) Frameworks and guidelines	(1) Patient partners contributed to the conceptualisation of the research problem and the identification of relevant literature for our scoping review and national survey for CKD clinics(2) 6 focus groups and 11 interviews (33 patients and 15 caregivers), to identify perceived self-management and preferred features of the proposed tool. 2 additional sequential focus groups were facilitated to obtain participant feedback and preferences regarding the proposed features(3) Co-design (involving patient partners, patient and caregiver study participants, clinicians, researchers, software developers, graphic designers and policymakers) and usability testing of the website(4) Content was also acquired from Improving Global Outcomes CKD guidelines, Health on the Net guidelines, The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines and content expert input from clinicians specialising in CKD care	(1) Heuristic testing; using 10 heuristic principles by Nielsen(2) Usability testing through in-person 60-min interviews with patients with CKD and their caregivers(3) TAP(4) SUS	(1) Heuristic testing: resulted in modifications being made to the prototype before usability testing(2) Usability testing: participants reported that the following features were important for them to return to the website: personalised food tool, my health care provider question list, symptom guidance based on CKD severity, and medication advice(3) Usability was high, with a mean SUS score of 90 out of 100(4) Participants identified future considerations, including linking the website with a patient portal to upload personal health information	 	Lee; Online patient decision aid (PDA)	(1) User-centred design(2) Review of the literature(3) Frameworks and guidelines	(1) Interviews with clinicians, patients and policymakers(2) Literature review(3) IPDASi criteria	(1) TAP(2) Website testing, interviews and analysis were repeated until minimal usability issues were encountered	(1) Navigation and layout issues addressed with modifications such as removing hidden functions and using simple language(3) use of interactive web functions	 	Metting; Pharmacy-based patient web portal	NR	The website was produced by a Dutch pharmacy organisation; NFI	(1) Two focus groups: a 45-min session where users tested the website followed by a 120-min session for semi-structured interviews	(1) Users were generally positive about the website, especially the areas providing disease-related information and the medication overview(2) Users appreciated that the website would enable information sharing with HCPs(3) Some difficulties were reported with website navigation and layout(4) Few privacy or safety concerns were raised by users	 	Bots	 	Balsa; VASelfCare prototype	(1) Frameworks and guidelines(2) Rule-based approach; virtual assistant (VA) dialogue	(1) Dialogue flows between user and the VA, achieved via behaviour-change techniques (BCTs) identified through the Behaviour Change Wheel (BCW) framework	(1) Field tests(2) SUS; Portuguese version(3) Questionnaire (3 open and 2 closed questions)(4) Diaries, digital notes and telephone follow-ups	(1) Aggregated mean SUS score was 73.75 (SD 13.31), a borderline rating of excellent	 	Gasteiger; Bomy daily care robot	(1) Participatory design approach consisting of 6 phases (phases 1–3 focus on development) involving semi-structured interviews with older adults with MCI or MD, carers, relatives and experts in MCI or dementia(2) Outsourced expertise	Phase 1: defining requirements n = 33 (9 older people with MCI or MD, 8 carers and 16 experts)Phase 2: Scenario design n = 18 (9 older people and 9 experts)Phase 3: Technical development and suitability (n = 10 experts)	(1) Feasibility testing with cognitive stimulation games(2) Questionnaire(3) Participants used the robot in their homes for up to 1 week. At the end of the week, they were interviewed using a semi-structured schedule with questions about their use of the robot, general opinions and perceptions of usefulness	(1) The final robot and games were acceptable to older adults, and useful for delivering stimulating activities and providing reminders for medication, health and wellbeing checks(2) Personalisation is required to optimise human–robot interaction, and imagery and speech should be consistent with local users	 	Others	 	Lin; Computer-mediated personal education program (PEP)	(1) Participatory design	NR	(1) Focus groups(2) TAP*	(1) Older people rated the PEP system usability, system usefulness and system-use satisfaction at a moderately high level for prototype 1 and at an exceptionally high level for prototype 2(2) A 201.91% reduction in interface errors and a 31.08% decrease in interface time was found between the two trials	 	Ross; Colorado Care TabletbSiek 2010; Colorado Care TabletSiek 2011; Colorado Care Tablet	(1) Prior research(2) Participatory design(3) Design guidelines for older people	Developed over a 2-year period: a 6-month needs assessment informing interface design, and an 18-month design, development and evaluation periodIteratively developed the CCT interface from low-fidelity, paper-based prototypes to a functional prototype application	(1) RITE(2) Instant Data Analysis	(1) CCT was well accepted by users in their 60s and 70s(2) Users >80 years old refused to use any electronic medication management system, regardless of how simplified its interface(3) Users liked the concept of entering medications by scanning medication barcodes, but in practice, the research team found that scanning was too inconsistent to be incorporated	 	Martin-Hammond; an over-the-counter (OTC) consumer decision-making tool	(1) Prior research(2) User-centred design(3) Interviews	(1) Results from the prior study were used in the current study to inform the design of an initial prototype that was used in review sessions with HCI researchers and as a probe in sessions with older adults(2) An iterative design process was used. The process included:Semi-structured interviews; two brainstorming and review sessions with human–computer interaction researchers and design sessions with older adults	(1) Semi-structured interviews to understand usability concerns and features and functionality older adults may find useful for selecting appropriate OTC medication	(1) Results suggest that older adults found features of the prototype supportive for assisting with OTC decision-making; however, results also indicate the need for a more flexible design to accommodate individuals with different information needs, personalisation preferences and navigation preferences	 	Neafsey; Personal Education Program Next Generation (PEP-NG)	(1) User-centred design	(1) Focus groups with older adults and advanced practice nursing students to gain feedback on the usability of the tablet, PEP-NG wireless, touch-screen interface and software system. Consistent with expectations, participants provided suggestions on how to make the navigation easier and more intuitive. Consensus was achieved for data entry boxes, progress bar, scroll bar, menus, clock, entry method (finger vs. stylus), cart, privacy shield and printout characteristics. The database and interface architecture and system programming were then designed accordingly	(1) Usability testing using TAP(2) Beta testing	(1) Findings suggest that older adult user satisfaction was high(2) Blood pressure declined over the four visits for 82% of the participants(3) The next generation of the Personal Education Program had a large effect size in increasing knowledge and self-efficacy for avoiding adverse self-medication behaviours(4) Behaviour risk score did not change significantly but was significantly correlated with systolic blood pressure on the fourth visit	 	Sun; Health Behavioural Digital Intervention for Hypertensive Patients (HBDIHP)	(1) Frameworks and guidelines	The tool was established through:(1) Developing relevant digital health education materials(2) Using the BCW framework to select BCTs(3) Constructing the tool’s logic following the DMIC model guidelines	NR	NR
A nominal group technique comprises four key stages: silent generation, round robin, clarification and voting (ranking or rating).
*The test–retest was analysed by calculating the intraclass correlation coefficient (rtt).
**Internet Self-management Uniform Reporting Framework (iSMURF) has six domains, namely website design, support, study design, website use, user characteristics and reporting outcomes.
***The Perceived Health Web site Usability Questionnaire (PHWSUQ) for Older Adults has 3 domains, namely satisfaction, ease of use and usefulness.
****Summative user testing using software program Morae Recorder was conducted. This software records the participant’s visual, audio and mouse movements.
*****Quality and suitability of the information, readability and usability of the website were evaluated in focus groups and interviews.
Readability tools included Flesch–Kincaid, Gunning Fog, Simple Measure of Gobbledygook, Dale–Chall, Flesch–Kincaid Reading Ease, Italian Read-IT. Italian Translated Readability Analyser Evaluation tools included Health-Related Web Site Evaluation Form, Suitability Assessment of Materials, Health on the Net, Foundation Checklist.
aThe Design Thinking model, involving a user-centred approach, with engagement from patient partners as co-researchers was used. A Design Thinking model involves iterative rounds of developing empathy for users, defining functional and usability requirement priorities, and ideating collective perspectives to produce a final prototype. Participant feedback was obtained in multiple waves to ensure that the design was user validated at every step.
bColorado Care Tablet (a website and mHealth app).
AD, Alzheimer’s disease; BCTs, behaviour-change techniques; BCW, Behaviour Change Wheel; CCT, Colorado Care Tablet; CHAMP, Comprehensive Assessment for My Plan; CKD, chronic kidney disease; DMIC, digital micro-intervention care; FG, focus group; GA, geriatric assessment; HBDIHP, Health Behavioural Digital Intervention for Hypertensive Patients; HCP, healthcare practitioner; IPDASi, International Patient Decision Aids Standard; mAF, mobile atrial fibrillation; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; MD, mild dementia; MEMS, Medication Event Monitoring System; MMPDv2, Managing Medicines for People with Dementia Website version 2; NGT, nominal group technique; NR, not reported; NFI, no further information provided; OTC, over-the-counter; PDA, patient decision aid; PEP, personal education program; UMUX, Usability Metric for User Experience; RITE, Rapid Iterative Testing and Evaluation; SUS, System Usability Scale; TAP, think-aloud protocol.
Irrespective of the type of online tool developed (i.e. apps, websites, bots and others), the main optimisation concerns emerging from usability testings with older people were around navigation and layout in support of larger text, simple navigation and user-friendly interfaces; user preferences for text to speech and personalisation; educational content; and privacy or safety concerns of the online tool. Having implemented user suggested modifications, for 18 of the 26 tools older people and caregivers gave good to excellent ratings for usability and utility. Overall findings across 22 studies suggest that user satisfaction of the developed online medication support tools was high. The remaining studies did not measure usability of the final prototype or explicitly report on its usability.

Quality appraisal
Most studies (n = 23) were of high quality, meeting ≥4 criteria on the MMAT checklist. Five were of moderate quality and one was of low quality. Given the descriptive nature of this review and inability to conduct meta-analysis, all studies were included. See Appendix S2 in the Supplementary Data section for full details of the MMAT ratings for all studies.

Discussion
To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review that has extracted data on the characteristics of online medication support tools for older people and how these tools have been developed and evaluated. This review described the tool features and investigated the methodologies and techniques used to develop and evaluate online medication support tools for older people and caregivers. Across the included studies, a variety of development strategies were employed ranging from user-centred design including iterative prototyping and agile methodologies to expert-driven guidelines and frameworks. Despite these methodological differences, all tools reported high levels of feasibility and usability, with end-users reporting satisfaction with the tools. Overall, the findings highlight a growing interest in leveraging digital technologies to enhance medication management and self-care in ageing populations, particularly those with chronic conditions such as type II diabetes, hypertension, dementia and multimorbidity.
Our findings reveal that user-centred design methodologies, reviewing the literature to inform tool design, employing principles of established frameworks and guidelines, and outsourcing expertise are the approaches commonly used in the development of online medication support tools for older people. When implemented, either alone or in combination, these approaches resulted in the development of tools that users found easy to use and that they were generally satisfied with. The most used techniques for evaluating online medication support tools for older people include questionnaires and surveys, TAP, and interviews and focus groups. However, many of the tools underwent multiple iterations during their development, incorporating feedback from users or expert panels to refine the tools. This iterative refinement process appeared also to be a common factor contributing to the success of the tools, thus suggesting that the responsiveness of developers to user feedback and a commitment to iterative improvements may be more influential in achieving effective and usable tools than the use of one methodology alone. Our review adds to the literature by providing a basis from which a step-by-step framework guiding the development and evaluation of online tools with high usability for older people may be created.

Development approaches
User-centred design emerged as the most frequently employed approach (62%) either alone or in combination with other approaches. This aligns with previous reviews which have also highlighted user-centred design as central to effective digital interventions for older populations. Four studies documented the use of outsourced technical development, reflecting a collaborative model of digital health innovation between researchers and technology developers. Incorporating end-user involvement, e.g. through participatory design sessions, workshops, surveys, interviews and iterative prototype testing, is a key strategy for ensuring usability and acceptance amongst older people. Evidenced in the development of OTC decision-making tool for older people, implementing a user-centred design process with engagement from patient partners as co-researchers improved adoption and usability of their tool by users. Holden et al. developed Brain Buddy by adopting an iterative, user-centred design approach, leading to the creation of a mHealth tool educating older people on risks of anticholinergic medications. The usability testing revealed high user satisfaction (mean SUS score: 78.8), with all participants feeling more educated and 94% planning to talk about medication risks with their doctor. Lack of details regarding tool development in nine studies indicates a gap in transparent reporting.

Evaluation techniques and outcomes
In most studies, the use of questionnaires and surveys (n = 13) was the most common method for evaluating usability and utility, followed by TAP and qualitative feedback (n = 9). Five studies used the SUS and various other techniques, including alpha/beta testing, RITE, heuristic evaluation and cognitive testing. The evaluation methods presented here are in line with the latest best practices in digital health usability testing.
User feedback showed that older people desired simple navigation, large text, personalisation, audio support and access to educational content, which aligns with previous research on ageing and technology adoption. It should be noted that 18 of the 26 tools received satisfactory to excellent user satisfaction and usability scores. These findings confirm the importance of using responsive design methods and refining it with user feedback in iterations. There were some studies that failed to provide sufficient details on their evaluation processes, and some did not report on the usability or final testing of their tools. There is a gap in the consistent reporting of digital tool evaluation in ageing and health literature.

Implications and future directions
Development of online medication support tools using existing literature and in partnership with older people, incorporating user feedback and a commitment to iterative improvements, remains vital for enhanced acceptability and utility. Development of future tools may want to focus on interactive designs and interfaces that allow for user personalisation whilst also supporting communication and engagement with HCPs. This may allow for researchers and designers to better tailor interventions to meet the unique needs of the older person and promote disease self-management and user confidence knowing they can readily access their HCP as required.
Despite the proliferation of online medication support tools and the use of user-centred design principles, not all older people may be amenable to using online tools and their implementation alone may not be sufficient in all contexts. Studies included in this systematic review revealed barriers, such as resistance to change, lack of perceived digital confidence and difficulties with using technology. Whilst older people may indeed benefit from medication management via online tools, Siek et al. reported that a subset of older people aged 80+ years were unwilling to use any online medication management tool regardless how simplified the interface. Incorporating a range of behaviour-change techniques, such as education, modelling, environmental restructuring and persuasion, may improve the effectiveness and adoption of the interventions. Additionally, supporting the use of online tools with physical interactions with family and HCPs is essential to maximise the older person’s independence, increase self-confidence and alleviate carer burden.
Another consideration in the development of online support tools is in relation to maintaining the privacy and security of the user’s information. Employing strategies like multifactor authentication and password protection inevitably increases the complexity of online health technologies which may serve as a deterrent for their use by older people who prefer simple, user-friendly tools. Furthermore, older people are more prone to have multimorbidity (i.e. multiple chronic conditions). In this systematic review, 70% of identified tools were for a single condition (Table 2); therefore, the total burden arising from using multiple HITs needs to be considered when designing tools for older people. Use of multiple HITs presents several challenges including alert fatigue, having to familiarise oneself with and integrating various interfaces into daily routines, connecting and managing multiple accounts across different online platforms, and the potential for encountering contradictory information from uncoordinated apps, devices and individuals involved (e.g. online coaches, clinicians from various platforms). Incorporating the principles of the GERIATRIC 5Ms, mind, mobility, medications, multicomplexity and matters most, can guide the creation of more holistic and person-centred tools. Developers of future online medication management tools for older people should investigate methods to consolidate medication management across online tools and platforms, thereby reducing the number of online tools required for optimal benefit for individuals with multimorbidity.

Strengths and limitations
The strengths of this systematic review are that it consolidates studies and includes diverse user groups, employs mixed-methods evaluations and increasingly relies on theoretical frameworks. Nevertheless, there are some limitations. First, any pertinent non–English-language studies would have been missed, as the review criteria excluded non-English publications. Second, although this review’s inclusion criteria enabled identification of a range of literature, the use of broader search terms means that publications with narrow, more specific subject areas such as studies with a specific focus on disease- or medication-specific online tools may have been missed. Third, as this review only captured studies focusing on online medication support tools for older people groups with a mean or median age ≥65 years, studies where the mean or median age of the older people were not stated, unclear or <65 years were excluded. Fourth, this review included studies of varying qualities, designs and settings which may affect synthesis and may introduce bias when combining the results in a single review. Additionally, this review was limited to published academic literature and excluded any reports on development and evaluation of HITs for medication management by older people in the grey literature. Lastly, because of the heterogeneity of developed tools and study designs, a meta-analysis could not be conducted, therefore limiting the generalisability of our findings.

Conclusion
A range of approaches and techniques have been identified in the development and evaluation of online medication support tools for older people. This review suggests that a user-centred design approach is most prevalent for developing high-usability online medication support tools for older people. Use of questionnaires and surveys with a combination of open and closed questions is the most common technique for measuring usability of interventions and obtaining user feedback. No single type of online tool appeared to be more commonly associated with better usability outcomes than another. However, acceptance of online interventions by older people appears to be influenced by some key factors. These include how the tool interface has been designed and where simple navigation, large texts and audio support are valued, alongside concerns regarding information security and privacy. Furthermore, older people prefer personalised tools tailored to their individual circumstances.
Aligning the development of tools to address the specific needs of older people, such as sensory and cognitive impairments, drug-induced geriatric syndromes like falls and incontinence, and other adverse drug reactions common in older individuals, may enhance the usability and clinical relevance of future tools. Developers are encouraged to move beyond single-disease medication support to embrace holistic approaches that support older people with multimorbidity and polypharmacy. A responsiveness to user feedback and employing development approaches that incorporate iterative prototyping are essential to ensuring that these tools are both effective and satisfactory to their users.

Supplementary Material

Declaration of Conflicts of Interest:
None declared.

Declaration of Sources of Funding:
This work was supported by the Australian Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF) Dementia Ageing and Aged Care Mission [grant numbers 2016045 to T.E.A., 2032639 to A.D.], the National Health and Medical Research Council Investigator Grant [grant number 2025289 to A.L.] and the Penney Ageing Research Unit, Royal North Shore Hospital, to K.W.

Data Availability:
All data are available on request from the corresponding author.

Research Data Transparency and Availability:
The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding author.

References
Older adults can use technology: why healthcare professionals must overcome ageism in digital health
How smart medication systems are used to support older people’s drug regimens: a systematic literature review
Reducing potentially inappropriate prescriptions for older patients using computerized decision support tools: systematic review
A systematic review of compensation and technology-mediated strategies to maintain older adults' medication adherence
User-centered methods for designing patient-centric self-help tools
Designing an over-the-counter consumer decision-making tool for older adults
Usability of an intelligent virtual assistant for promoting behavior change and self-care in older people with type 2 diabetes
Is CONNECTDROP®, a medication event monitoring system add-on paired with a smartphone application, acceptable to patients with glaucoma for taking their daily medication? The CONDORE pilot study
Usability testing by older adults of a computer-mediated health communication program
Beta testing of a network-based health literacy program tailored for older adults with hypertension
Two complementary personal medication management applications developed on a common platform: case report
Colorado Care Tablet: the design of an interoperable personal health application to help older adults with multimorbidity manage their medications
Designing a personal health application for older adults to manage medications: a comprehensive case study
Development of a health behavioral digital intervention for patients with hypertension based on an intelligent health promotion system and WeChat: randomized controlled trial
Usability and feasibility of consumer-facing technology to reduce unsafe medication use by older adults
Use of QR and EAN-13 codes by older patients taking multiple medications for a safer use of medication
A usability evaluation of the InfoSAGE app for family-based medication management
A web-based self-management support prototype for adults with chronic kidney disease (My Kidneys My Health): co-design and usability testing
Developing an interactive mobile phone self-report system for self-management of hypertension. Part 2: content validity and usability
Usability and utility evaluation of the web-based “Should I Start Insulin?” patient decision aid for patients with type 2 diabetes among older people
Mobile app prototype in older adults for postfracture acute pain management: user-centered design approach
mHealth app to improve medication adherence among older adult stroke survivors: development and usability study
The development of an electronic geriatric assessment tool: comprehensive health assessment for my plan (CHAMP)
A new smartphone application for integrated transmural care of atrial fibrillation, AF-EduApp: usability and validation study
Engagement of atrial fibrillation patients with the AF-EduApp, a new mobile application to support AF management
Supervised patient self-testing of warfarin therapy using an online system
Evaluating the Managing Medicines for People With Dementia Website version 2
Participatory design, development, and testing of assistive health robots with older adults: an international four-year project
Mobile health technology for atrial fibrillation management integrating decision support, education, and patient involvement: mAF app trial
Overcoming the digital divide for older patients with respiratory disease: focus group study
Multicomponent support program for secondary prevention of stroke using digital health technology: co-design study with people living with stroke or transient ischemic attack
Development of an evaluative, educational, and communication-facilitating app for older adults with chronic low back pain: patient perceptions of usability and utility
Interaction and stimulation through a computer: a program specially designed for mild to moderate Alzheimer’s patients
Tailored self-management app to support older adults with cancer and multimorbidity: development and usability testing
Factors influencing acceptance of technology for aging in place: a systematic review
A review of age-friendly virtual assistive technologies and their effect on daily living for carers and dependent adults
An age-old problem: examining the discourses of ageing in HCI and strategies for future research
Acceptance and use of health information technology by community-dwelling elders
Usability and safety in electronic medical records interface design: a review of recent literature and guideline formulation
Factors predicting the use of technology: findings from the Center for Research and Education on Aging and Technology Enhancement (CREATE)
Older adults: are they ready to adopt health-related ICT?
Beyond adoption: a new framework for theorizing and evaluating nonadoption, abandonment, and challenges to the scale-up, spread, and sustainability of health and care technologies
Addressing online health privacy risks for older adults: a perspective on ethical considerations and recommendations
Multi-morbidity and polypharmacy in older people: challenges and opportunities for clinical practice
Cumulative burden of digital health technologies for patients with multimorbidity: a systematic review
Optimizing geriatric care with the GERIATRIC 5Ms