Gepants in Primary Care: A Targeted Approach to Acute and Preventive Treatment of Migraine
With 80% of migraines diagnosed and managed by primary care clinicians, a knowledge of standard of care and novel therapy is essential for those caring for people with this chronic disease. This review describes a new class of medication, calcitonin gene-related protein (CGRP) antagonists, known as gepants and their use with the focus on the general class of gepants rather than any specific type. These medications were developed specifically for acute and preventive treatment of migraine and appear to be more tolerable with fewer side effects than standard-of-care medications. Previous standard-of-care medications were developed for managing non-migraine disorders but were found to demonstrate efficacy in migraine control despite not directly targeting migraine pathophysiology. Evidence-informed review of the literature and real-world application of gepants is presented to provide a solid understanding of the class and guidance for use.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s40122-025-00757-z.

Key Summary Points
A range of symptoms and treatments pose challenges in migraine management.	 	Acute and preventive treatment target calcitonin gene-related protein (CGRP) impacts migraine generators.	 	Primary care clinicians play a pivotal role in migraine diagnosis and treatment.	 	Real-world evidence supports clinical trial data in demonstrating drug effectiveness.	 	Gepants offer targeted treatment options for patients with migraine.

Introduction
The 2016 Global Burden of Disease study highlighted that migraine is among the top five leading causes of years lived with disability. This prevalent, disabling neurological disorder disproportionately affects women, with prevalence 2–3 times higher than in men. Women also tend to experience longer and more disabling attacks. Its high prevalence, socio-economic burden, and personal impacts have been documented across many epidemiological studies.
Migraine is typically characterized by recurring, often highly disabling attacks of severe headache, nausea, vomiting, phonophobia, and photophobia. Headache intensity is typically moderate or severe, one-sided and/or pulsating, and aggravated by routine physical activity; it can last from hours up to 2–3 days. Supplementary Table 1 comprises the International Classification of Headache Disorders (ICHD)-3 and ICHD-4 defined migraine categories. Approximately 30% of people with migraine experience migraine with aura.
The management of migraine presents considerable unmet needs, with diagnostic challenges attributed to the variety of symptom presentations and treatment approaches (Supplementary Table 2). When primary care clinicians choose migraine treatment options, they should consider multiple factors including tolerability, efficacy, and cost associated with treatment. We have entered an era of migraine treatment (acute and prevention) with medications specifically engineered to target the pathophysiologic processes believed to cause migraine. This review identifies current evidence for the gepant class of migraine medications and their use in migraine prevention with a particular emphasis on the role of primary care clinicians.

Search Strategy
References were identified by the PubMed and Embase database searches between 2015 and August 2023. The search terms were “CGRP small receptor antagonists”, “CGRP antagonists”, “gepants”, “next generation gepants”, “CGRP acute medication”, “gepants migraine prevention”, “migraine”, “diagnosis”, “disability”, “pathophysiology”, “pharmacology”, “therapy”, “triptans”, and “treatment”. Only publications in English were included. Additional data was included from abstracts presented at the American Headache Society and American Academy of Neurology Meetings, 2023. This article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any new studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.

Introducing Gepants Class
Completed clinical trials for gepants: landmark for approval
Gepants	Landmark CTs	CT number	Indication	Treatment gepants (mg) and placebo	Number of participants analyzed (completed)	Efficacy (% of patients)	Safety	 	Pain freedom	MBS	Any AEs %	SAE, n	 	Second-generation	Rimegepant	Lipton 2019 	NCT03237845	Acute migraine	75	538	19.6	37.6	17.1	1	 	Placebo	542	12	25.4	14.2	2	 	Croop 2019 	NCT03461757	Acute migraine	75	679	21.2	35.1	13	0	 	Placebo	689	10.9	26.8	11	0	 	Croop 2021 	NCT03732638	Preventive migraine	75	310	− 4.3 (− 4.8 to − 3.9)*	− 2.9 (− 3.3 to − 2.5)#	36	3	 	Placebo	316	− 3.5 (− 4.0 to − 3.0)	− 1.7 (− 2.2 to − 1.3)#	36	4	 	Ubrogepant	Dodick 2019 (Achieve I)	NCT02828020	Acute migraine	50	457	19.2	38.6	27.0	3	 	100	479	21.2	37.7	28.7	2	 	Placebo	479	11.8	27.8	23.3	0	 	Lipton 2019 (Achieve II)	NCT02867709	Acute migraine	25	474	20.7	34.1	22.0	1	 	50	487	21.8	38.9	27.3	0	 	Placebo	493	14.3	27.4	22.4	0	 	Atogepant	Ailani 2021 	NCT03777059	Preventive migraine	10	193	− 3.7 ± 0.2*	–	52.9	2	 	30	207	− 3.9 ± 0.2*	–	52.2	0	 	60	204	− 4.2 ± 0.2*	–	53.7	0	 	Placebo	201	− 2.5 ± 0.2*	–	56.8	2	 	Third-generation	Zavegepant	Lipton 2023 	NCT04571060	Acute migraine	10	622	24	40	30	0	 	Placebo	653	15	31	16	0
AE adverse events, CT clinical trials, MBS most bothersome symptom, SAE serious adverse events
*Efficacy = mean ± SD change from baseline in the mean number of migraine days/month across the 12-week treatment period
#Change in mean number of total migraine days per month during weeks 1–4, days
Ongoing clinical trials for gepants: expansion of indication
Gepants	CT.gov registration number	Indication being studies	Treatment group	Estimated study completion date	 	Second-generation gepants	Rimegepant	NCT05217927 (completed, not published)	Preventive treatment, episodic migraine	75 mg QD	December 11, 2024*	 	75 mg every other day dosing	 	Placebo	 	Ubrogepant	NCT05125302 (recruiting)	Acute treatment of migraine in children and adolescents (Age 6–17 years)	Low dose	May 5, 2026	 	High dose	 	Placebo	 	Atogepant	NCT03855137 (completed, not published)	Prevention of chronic migraine	30 mg BID	January 20, 2022*	 	60 mg QD	 	Placebo	 	NCT04686136 (active, not recruiting)	Prevention of chronic or episodic migraine	60 mg QD	October 8, 2025	 	Third-generation gepants	Zavegepant	NCT05989048 (active, not recruiting)	Acute treatment of migraine in Asian adults	Intranasal 10 mg (single dose)	May 28, 2025	 	Placebo
Only ongoing phase 3 studies evaluating either general safety-efficacy in adult/children/adolescent or long-term safety-efficacy have been listed
BID twice a day, QD once daily
*Actual study completion date
The goal in migraine management is to curtail migraine activity, allowing individuals to live migraine-free. Once calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) was discovered as playing a major role in migraine activation, the development of CGRP-blocking agents commenced. Several gepants have been developed and tested in clinical trials and are summarized in Tables 1 and 2.

First-Generation Gepants
The clinical development of first-generation gepants, including olcegepant, BI 44370 TA, MK-3207, and telcagepant (MK-0974), had been terminated early. Reasons for randomized clinical trial (RCT) discontinuations include low oral bioavailability for olcegepant; hepatotoxicity for MK-3207 and telcagepant (doses > 300 mg); and lack of evidence for superior efficacy versus triptans for telcagepant. BI 44370 TA was discontinued due to commercial reasons.

Second-Generation Gepants
Second-generation gepants were developed to overcome the hepatotoxicity of its predecessors.
Ubrogepant was the first gepant approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the acute treatment of migraine in December 2019. This medication is available in two doses, 50 mg and 100 mg tablets, with a half-life of 5–7 h. The clinical trials were designed to reflect real-world practice, allowing patients to take a second dose of study drug or a rescue medication of their choice, if required.
Rimegepant was approved for acute treatment of migraine with or without aura and then later was found efficacious in preventive treatment of episodic migraine as well. This is available as 75 mg once oral disintegrating tablet (ODT) for acute treatment, with a half-life of 11 h. For the preventive treatment, dosing is every other day (QOD). The treatment effects of rimegepant (75 mg) have been evaluated exclusively in a female population as well, and indicated benefits for the acute and preventive treatment of migraine. Moreover, single 75 mg oral dose of rimegepant in healthy lactating women was safe and well tolerated in a phase 1 study assessing the pharmacokinetics.
Atogepant is the first oral gepant approved specifically for the prophylaxis of episodic migraine in adults, and was later approved for the treatment of chronic migraine. Both indications require once-daily dosing with no requirement of dose titration. The dosage should be adjusted based on precautions and clinical judgement, with a recommended starting dose of 60 mg for chronic migraine.

Third-Generation Gepants
Third-generation gepants were developed with the aim of providing an alternate route of administration to oral delivery for severe nausea or vomiting.
Zavegepant is a high-affinity CGRP receptor (CGRP-R) antagonist approved in the USA (March, 2023) as a nasal spray for the acute treatment of migraine, with or without aura, in adults. While oral tablets are the most used common form of acute treatment for migraine, their efficacy can be limited by the rate of gastrointestinal tract absorption and first-pass hepatic metabolism. They may also be unsuitable for patients with gastrointestinal motility issues. Nasal delivery offers an alternative route and potentially reduces the frequency of gastrointestinal related AEs. However, zavegepant nasal spray targets the lower nasal space, where absorption due to rapid elimination from nasal drip or clearance to the nasopharynx and rapid mucociliary clearance is limited.
It is imperative to recognize that the gepant class comprises non-peptide small molecules that exert their inhibitory effects on CGRP at the receptor site. The pharmacokinetics of these agents reveal that they undergo primary metabolism via the hepatic system, specifically through the CYP3A4 enzyme, with secondary involvement of the renal system. The comprehensive dosing profile and potential drug–drug interactions (DDIs) of gepants are detailed in Supplementary Table 4. This summary serves as an invaluable resource for clinicians in the judicious selection of suitable gepant therapy for patients.

Pathophysiology of Migraine
A typical migraine can evolve through four chronological phases based on its temporal relationship to headache (Supplementary Table 3). These phases are a result of underlying complex physiologic changes occurring within the brain and can last for hours to days. The exact mechanism(s) of migraine is not entirely understood. However, it is thought an internal or external stimulus may trigger a cascade of events, including the activation of trigeminal cervical complex, cortical spreading depression, release of CGRP and other peptides, vasodilation, mast cell activation, and neurovascular inflammation. These events are clinically observed in the phases of migraine demonstrating why migraine is recognized as a neurological disorder that impacts the whole brain—not just a pain pathway. During migraine, clinical symptoms such as pain, sensory disturbances, autonomic changes, and other physiological effects are observed.

How Gepants Affect Migraine Pathophysiology
Pathway for migraine trigger. CGRP calcitonin gene-related peptide
CGRP, a key player in migraine pathophysiology, is a neuropeptide composed of 37 amino acids with α and β isoforms. The α isoform of CGRP (α-CGRP) is widely expressed in neurons within the central nervous system (CNS) and in sensory nerve endings in the periphery. CGRP serum levels are elevated during migraine attacks as well as episodes of other neurovascular headache types such as cluster headaches. The CGRP-induced vasodilatation is a prominent clinical feature of migraine attacks. Both the CGRP ligand and CGRP-R are located in the central and peripheral nervous systems, including the trigemino-vascular system (TGVS) pathways, where CGRP and CGRP-R are expressed in trigeminal neurons, which are the primary site for the induction of migraine pain (Fig. 1). Gepants act at the receptor site and as CGRP antagonists, blocking and mitigating the effects of CGRP in both the acute and preventive treatment of migraine.
Pathophysiology of migraine. The components of the calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptor (receptor amplifying membrane protein 1 [RAMP1] and calcitonin receptor-like receptor [CLR]) and the signal pathway from receptor component protein (RCP) to the adenylyl cyclase system. (a) Step 1: Upon release of CGRP, it docks into the space between CLR and RAMP1, causing its activation. Step 2: After activation it is removed from the cell surface and internalizes into the cell and couples with a receptor component protein (RCP) and adenylyl cyclase. This raises CAMP levels and in turn activates protein kinase A (PKA) and downstream phosphorylation leading to vasodilation and neural function. (b) CGRP antagonist blocks step 1 and hence step 2 and therefore activation of adenylyl cyclase is blocked
Evolution of therapeutics in migraine management. CGRP calcitonin gene-related peptide
CGRP-R, a G protein-coupled receptor, comprises a seven-transmembrane (7-TM) part, the calcitonin receptor-like receptor (CLR), and a 1-TM part, the receptor amplifying membrane protein 1 (RAMP1). The details are depicted in Fig. 2. CGRP-R antagonists can be used as a medication for both acute or preventive treatment of migraine. They act as competitive antagonists at the human CLR/RAMP1 receptor. The evolution of acute and preventive therapy for migraine management is presented in Fig. 3.

Migraine Management
Effective migraine management involves trigger recognition and avoidance, good lifestyle management strategies, and effective medication management by treating early with acute medications, and personalization of acute and preventive treatment approaches. The American Migraine Foundation has recommended five types of lifestyle adjustments (referred as SEEDS—mnemonic for Sleep, Exercise, Eat, Diary, and Stress) to mitigate environmental triggers and aid in migraine management which provides an excellent resource.

Gepant Use and Clinical Decision-Making
Gepants are small CGRP-R antagonists that hold promise as an acute treatment for migraine as first-line therapy, when NSAID or triptans lack efficacy, produce intolerable side effects, or are contraindicated. Two medications in this class, atrogepant and rimegepant, are approved for preventive use. The rationale for their use is similar: the preventive gepants should be considered first-line therapy or when other preventive medications are not suitable. Other classes of evidence-based acute and preventive medications are summarized in Supplementary Table 2.
Unlike traditional standard-of-care therapy, gepants offer a targeted approach by inhibiting the CGRP pathway at the receptor site, which plays a crucial role in migraine pathophysiology. This targeted action makes gepants a rational choice as first-line therapy, since they directly target the migraine process and are well tolerated. Additionally, other characteristics to consider are gepants do not cause direct vasoconstriction, thus offering advantages regarding safety for patients with cardiovascular or cerebrovascular risk. Another notable characteristic is gepants do not seem to cause rebound or medication overuse headache (MOH). Being designed to selectively target the TGVS, CGRP-related therapies are more specific, generally have few or mild adverse effects, and offer substantial improvements over existing medications. This makes choosing this medication an excellent option for managing patients with MOH and helping wean off the overuse of OTC, triptan, or opioid medication use. It is also beneficial in the setting of poorly controlled chronic migraine when acute therapy is needed but the risk for medication overuse is high.
It is crucial to consider the potential for patients to use the medication too frequently or in higher doses than recommended when making decisions about prescribing or using medications. Medication overuse can lead to negative health outcomes, such as dependency, reduced effectiveness of the medication, or adverse side effects. Therefore, primary care clinicians should weigh this risk along with other factors when deciding on the best course of treatment for their patients.
Additionally, the cost of treatment and the number of patients needed to achieve at least 50% reduction in migraine days should also be taken into consideration. The cost of gepants is considerably higher compared to traditional treatments such as triptans and NSAIDs. However, there are specific subgroups of patients who do not respond well to triptans and NSAIDs. For these patients, gepants present a suitable acute treatment option.
Currently, head-to-head clinical trials comparing the efficacy of various gepants are not available. Researchers have instead followed a strategy of indirect treatment comparison between atogepant and rimegepant. The data for rimegepant appears to be relatively limited for preventive treatment, especially when compared to atogepant (Table 1). Rimegepant’s efficacy only slightly surpasses that of a placebo, whereas data for atogepant shows favorable comparisons with monoclonal antibodies. However, the differences in treatment frequency should be noted: atogepant 60 mg once daily and rimegepant 75 mg once every other. Moreover, multiple factors need to be considered before prescribing a medication, such as ease of access, cost, and efficacy for specific population types. These considerations are crucial for any therapeutic area or medication, not only for migraine treatment. Given the high cost of these treatments, social determinants of health also play a significant role in prescription decisions. More studies with head-to-head trials are required to provide clearer insights. Primary care clinicians are best positioned to prescribe these treatments, considering the multiple variables involved.
Standard medications considered for acute and preventive migraine, included in American Headache Society (AHS) guidelines, are listed in the Supplementary Table 2.

Review of Real-World Studies
Real-world studies of second-generation gepants
Publication	Date	Patient population	Study type	Country	Migraine type	Patients #	Gepants	Outcome	 	Rosen 2023 	Nov 2015 to Nov 2022	Any migraine patient with a rimegepant prescription fill through 11/30/2022 (real-world administrative claims study)	Retrospective longitudinal analysis	US database	Migraine	34,486	Rimegepant	Barbiturate discontinuation rate: 49.4% use by 6 months following initiation of rimegepant treatment	 	Chiang 2021 	Jan 2020 to NA	Adult patients with migraine with aura or without aura	Post-market cohort study	Arizona, USA	Chronic migraine, migraine with aura, migraine without aura, MOH	106	Ubrogepant	Complete headache freedom and headache relief for ≥ 75% of all treated attacks at 2 h post-dose 19.0% and 47.6% patients, respectively. Very satisfied with ubrogepant: 31.1%	 	Adams 2023 	NA	Acute treatment of migraine in people receiving onabotulinumtoxinA(COURAGE study)	Prospective, observational, effectiveness study	USA	Acute treatment of migraine in people receiving onabotulinumtoxinA	122	Ubrogepant and onabotulinumtoxinA	MPR: 2 h 53.3%; 4 h 76.2% participants; post-doseRNF: 2 h: 25.4%; 4 h: 45.9% participants; post-dose	 	Shewale 2022 	NA	US adult users of the Migraine Buddy application (UNIVERSE study)	Observational cross-sectional study	USA	Migraine headaches	302	Ubrogepant	Achieving pain relief: 2 h 76.1%; 4 h: 83.3%, and 24 h: 78.4% patients; post-dose
NA not available, MPR meaningful pain relief, RNF return to normal function
Real-world evidence (RWE) on the effectiveness of treating migraine is limited. Real-world studies provide important additional information since CT participants may not be representative of the diverse patient population consulted in clinical practice. Additionally, CT exclusion criteria and restrictions on medication use also limit their generalizability. RWE further supports primary care clinicians in understanding drug effectiveness, thus enabling them to prescribe gepants appropriately to the patient population. Lack of experience and/or awareness with gepants use may cause prescription hesitation amongst primary care clinicians. A few real-world studies on effectiveness of second-generation gepants are presented in Table 3.
Presented below are real-world case scenarios involving patients with migraine who seek treatment at our headache centers. These scenarios, along with their management approaches, are described below as exemplary case studies and would be applicable to any one gepant (Supplementary Table 5).

Case Study 1
A 31-year-old woman was seen in May of 2023. She recalls experiencing headache since menarche in her teenage years, coinciding with her menstrual cycle. However, in the last 6 months, she had been experiencing daily headaches at pain scale of 4/10, and at least once a week, lasting 2–3 days with a pain scale of 8/10. To continue her routine work, she started taking ibuprofen 2–3 times a day and achieved migraine relief. For severe headaches, she used sumatriptan (100 mg tablets) ≥ 2 days a week and later, medications became ineffective offering only a few hours of relief.
During the examination, the overuse of NSAIDs in combination with triptan was determined with presentation and symptoms being consistent with MOH. Her focal exam findings revealed increased tone and tenderness of the paraspinal and upper trapezius muscle groups, along with a limited range of motion of the neck; the rest of the examinations were normal. She was diagnosed with chronic migraine without aura with MOH.
She was counselled for adopting effective lifestyle management strategies known as SEEDS and weaning off NSAIDs and triptan. We encouraged her that weaning off these medications would likely improve her headache symptoms, as her pain was due to MOH and its associated symptoms. Some counselling was required to explain that some migraine pain might persist initially; however, it was emphasized that pain management with relaxation strategies, good hydration, exercise, and good sleep could lead to significant improvements.
A gepant was prescribed to manage her moderate to severe migraine pain. After a1-month follow-up, the patient reported experiencing moderate (4/10 pain scale) intensity headaches during the first 2–3 weeks. However, she adhered to the recommendations and noticed an improvement. Currently, the patient has only a few mild headache days, with one migraine that responded well to gepant treatment. The patient expressed satisfaction with the medication and reported no side effects.
Rational: The mechanism of action (MOA) of gepants does not seem to lead to MOH like other acute treatments. The goal was to reduce the medication overuse and reinstate effective migraine control by implementing good lifestyle strategies (SEEDS) along with proper hydration and mood control.

Case Study 2
A 57-year-old man with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, coronary artery disease, obstructive sleep apnea, and a body mass index of 34 was seen in June 2023. He had experienced mild myocardial infarction 6 weeks ago. His migraine with aura, occurring 5–9 days a month, was successfully treated with orally administered sumatriptan (100 mg tablet at the headache onset); however, this medication was discontinued per the recommendation of his cardiologist given the contraindication in patients with CV disease. Subsequently, he was prescribed opioids for migraine management.
Rational: Given the vasoconstriction effect, triptans are not recommended for patients with CV risks and twofold increased risk for ischemic stroke in patients with migraine with aura presents challenges for migraine management. Opioids are also not recommended for the acute treatment of migraine due to their known side effects.
Our goal was to consider other preventive treatment to control the migraine pain, thereby reducing the need for acute treatment as well as reinforcing good lifestyle strategies to optimize migraine control and overall health status. A gepant was prescribed to manage his migraine with aura. After a 3-month follow-up, the patient reported a good response to the medication targeting migraine and reported mild fatigue as a side effect, which does not interrupt activities of daily living.
Choosing a gepant provided a good option as there is no vasoconstriction effect. However, since the MOA of gepant involves CGRP blocking, it may thereby block the body’s natural ability to vasodilate vessels. There was a theoretical risk of prolonging an ischemic CV event; however, given the short half-life of gepants, this risk was considered low at time of medication use. Therefore, it was prudent to counsel the patient regarding this potential risk.
RWE provided here suggests that gepants can be prescribed for acute or preventive migraine treatment if the contraindications and precautions have been considered. Special considerations should include the patient having side effects due to triptans or contraindications to triptans, or medication overuse.
Emerging RWE also supports the effectiveness and safety of gepants in diverse patient populations (Table 3). Studies have shown that gepants can be used effectively in both acute and preventive settings, providing a versatile treatment option for primary care providers.

Implications for Primary Care Clinicians
In the USA, primary care clinicians in primary care settings diagnose and manage the majority of people with migraine. A knowledge gap exists as most primary care clinicians receive limited formal education in this disease state. Understanding differentiation between primary and secondary headache is essential for safe effective care. Counselling patients regarding medication options, reducing medication overuse, lifestyle choices, trigger management, the importance of maintaining a detailed log of headache frequency, duration, and intensity is critical. Most primary care clinicians are unfamiliar with gepants as a pharmacological class and struggle with the use of these medications in acute and preventive migraine management. Primary care clinicians well informed about diagnostic criteria and novel evidence-based treatment can support positive patient outcomes. They play a key role educating patients regarding treatment adherence and expectation management as complete pain relief may not be achievable in certain cases. Available novel medication therapies promote and maintain good quality of life for many people with migraine, whether they experience one migraine a month or experience chronic migraine. Primary care clinicians advocate for access and lower costs for newer acute and preventive therapies when there are contraindications or treatment failure with standard of care options. With the use of gepant medications, better migraine management can be achieved. Primary care clinicians can thus help in preventing progression to chronic disease, reduce migraine-related early disease and urgent care visits, reduce disability, and improve productivity at work.

Conclusion and Future Directions
Gepants offer a novel and effective approach as both preventive and acute targeted treatment options for people with migraine with limited treatment options. The clinical data currently available for these therapeutics demonstrate efficacy combined with manageable safety. Their targeted mechanism of action and RWE make them a valuable addition to the current therapeutic landscape for migraine treatment. Unlike earlier medications that were developed for other indications and later adapted for migraine therapy as they demonstrated efficacy in migraine prevention, gepants targeting CGRP were developed specifically for migraine and do not appear to be associated with the tolerability issues that accompanied earlier therapies. Preventive strategies reducing migraine attacks also include lifestyle modifications, management of comorbidities, behavioral and physical therapies, and other pharmacological treatments.
Effective migraine management begins with an accurate diagnosis and involves timely and appropriate acute treatment. Managing migraine with acute and preventive strategies for those significantly impacted can lessen the disability and functional impairment caused by this condition. Proper diagnosis and therapies, especially preventive options that are both efficacious and safe, are essential in reducing the associated disease burden. Gepants, which target the CGRP pathway, offer a treatment alternative for individuals with migraine, their caregivers, and health care providers.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Author Contributions
Maureen A. Moriarty and Carol A. Barch contributed to the main concept and design of article, drafting the manuscript, reviewing the drafts and provided critical revisions to enhance the quality of the paper. Both of the authors reviewed and approved the final draft of the submitted manuscript.

Funding
Pfizer supported the medical writing of this review. The journal’s Rapid Service Fee was also funded by Pfizer.

Data Availability
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.

Declarations

Conflict of Interest
Carol A. Barch served as a consultant for AbbVie and Aptar, Maureen A. Moriarty served as a consultant for AbbVie. Carol A. Barch and Maureen A. Moriarty are on the AbbVie and Pfizer advisory board (March 2024).

Ethical Approval
This article is based on previously conducted studies and does not contain any new studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.

References
Global, regional, and national incidence, prevalence, and years lived with disability for 328 diseases and injuries for 195 countries, 1990–2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016
Headache Classification Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS). The International Classification of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition. Cephalalgia. 2018;38(1):1–211.
Prolonged migraine aura: new insights from a prospective diary-aided study
Pathophysiology of migraine: a disorder of sensory processing
Small-molecule CGRP receptor antagonists: a new approach to the acute and preventive treatment of migraine
Novel therapies in acute migraine management: small-molecule calcitonin gene-receptor antagonists and serotonin 1F receptor agonist
Ubrogepant: first approval
New generation gepants: migraine acute and preventive medications
Rimegepant: first approval
Rimegepant for the acute and preventive treatment of migraine in women: results from 4 randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials (P9–12007)
Human milk and plasma pharmacokinetics of single-dose rimegepant 75 mg in healthy lactating women
Atogepant: first approval
Product monograph. QULIPTA®atogepant tablets. https://www.abbvie.ca/content/dam/abbvie-dotcom/ca/en/documents/products/QULIPTA_PM_EN.pdf. 2023. Accessed Oct 2024.
Zavegepant: first approval
Nasal delivery of acute medications for migraine: the upper versus lower nasal space
Rimegepant, an oral calcitonin gene-related peptide receptor antagonist, for migraine
Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of rimegepant orally disintegrating tablet for the acute treatment of migraine: a randomised, phase 3, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
Oral rimegepant for preventive treatment of migraine: a phase 2/3, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
Ubrogepant for the treatment of migraine
Effect of ubrogepant vs placebo on pain and the most bothersome associated symptom in the acute treatment of migraine: the ACHIEVE II randomized clinical trial
Atogepant for the preventive treatment of migraine
Safety, tolerability, and efficacy of zavegepant 10 mg nasal spray for the acute treatment of migraine in the USA: a phase 3, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled multicentre trial
The CGRP pathway in migraine as a viable target for therapies
CGRP receptor antagonists and antibodies against CGRP and its receptor in migraine treatment
Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) is a key molecule released in acute migraine attacks-successful translation of basic science to clinical practice
CGRP: sensory neuropeptide with multiple neurologic implications
Current understanding of trigeminal ganglion structure and function in headache
Cortical spreading depression as a site of origin for migraine: role of CGRP
Gepants — a long way to cure: a narrative review
Anti-CGRP and anti-CGRP receptor monoclonal antibodies as antimigraine agents. Potential differences in safety profile postulated on a pathophysiological basis
New insights into the regulation of CGRP-family receptors
CGRP antagonists: unravelling the role of CGRP in migraine
New oral drugs for migraine
Comparing the liver safety profiles of 4 next-generation CGRP receptor antagonists to the hepatotoxic CGRP inhibitor telcagepant using quantitative systems toxicology modeling
Pharmacological treatment of migraine: drug classes, mechanisms of action, clinical trials and new treatments
American Migraine Foundation. Lifestyle changes for migraine management. https://americanmigrainefoundation.org/resource-library/lifestyle-changes-for-migraine/. 2021. Accessed Oct 2023.
The risks or lack thereof of migraine treatments in vascular disease
CGRP as the target of new migraine therapies - successful translation from bench to clinic
Cost per treatment responder analysis of atogepant compared to rimegepant for the preventive treatment of episodic migraine
Efficacy of lasmiditan, rimegepant and ubrogepant for acute treatment of migraine in triptan insufficient responders: systematic review and network meta-analysis
Comparison of new pharmacologic agents with triptans for treatment of migraine: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Benefit-risk assessment based on number needed to treat and number needed to harm: atogepant vs calcitonin gene-related peptide monoclonal antibodies
The American Headache Society consensus statement: update on integrating new migraine treatments into clinical practice
Reduction in barbiturate prescription fills and quantity dispensed following initiation of rimegepant treatment: a real-world administrative claims study
Real-world efficacy, tolerability, and safety of ubrogepant
Real-world effectiveness, satisfaction, and optimization of ubrogepant for the acute treatment of migraine in combination with onabotulinumtoxinA: results from the COURAGE Study
Real-world effectiveness of ubrogepant among participants with prior treatment failure: subgroup analysis from the UNIVERSE study (P12–2.001)
Blocking the CGRP pathway for acute and preventive treatment of migraine: the evolution of success
Risk of ischaemic stroke in patients with migraine: a longitudinal follow-up study using a national sample cohort in South Korea
Butalbital in the treatment of headache: history, pharmacology, and efficacy
Characterizing opioid use in a US population with migraine: results from the CaMEO study