New approach methodologies to model liver fibrosis in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) is a significant global health issue and a leading cause of liver fibrosis, with no effective pharmacological treatments available. Conventional 2D cell cultures and animal models do not fully recapitulate the complex cell–cell interactions and multicellular microenvironment that drive disease progression in humans, which limits their ability to predict therapeutic efficacy accurately. The recent introduction of the FDA Modernization Act 2.0 has paved the way for the use of human-relevant New Approach Methodologies (NAMs) in drug discovery and toxicity testing. This review focuses on recent advancements in NAMs that model MASH-associated liver fibrosis, such as human liver spheroids, iPSC-derived liver organoids, precision-cut liver slices, 3D bioprinting, and liver-on-a-chip systems. By mimicking multicellular interactions and the liver microenvironment, NAMs offer a valuable platform for mechanistic studies and drug screening. Assessing their strengths and limitations can lead to deeper mechanistic insights and expedite the development of new therapeutics for MASH-associated liver fibrosis.

INTRODUCTION
Liver fibrosis is characterized by excessive deposition of extracellular matrix within hepatic tissue, where fibrotic collagen accumulation disrupts normal liver architecture, impairs liver function, and ultimately increases the risk of patient mortality. Chronic liver injuries from various etiologies—such as metabolic dysfunction–associated steatohepatitis (MASH), alcohol consumption, and viral hepatitis—cause the development of liver fibrosis. Liver fibrosis is a key pathological feature of MASH and is driven by activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) in response to hepatocyte lipotoxicity and inflammation. The pathology of MASH involves hepatic lipid accumulation, myeloid cell–mediated inflammation, activation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), and complex multicellular crosstalk.
Despite its increasing prevalence, there are currently no effective therapies for MASH with fibrosis. One major reason for this is the low translational efficiency of animal models in MASH-related liver fibrosis; mouse models do not fully replicate human MASH. In particular, drugs that improve MASH in mice have failed in human trials. For decades, in vitro two-dimensional (2D) cultures of the primary hepatocytes have been considered the gold standard in liver research. However, liver cells undergo phenotypic changes in short 2D cultures. Primary human hepatocytes isolated from liver tissue rapidly dedifferentiate in vitro, losing key hepatocyte-specific phenotypes such as cytochrome P450 expression, while primary human HSCs become spontaneously activated in conventional 2D culture. Human MASH livers consist of multiple cell types, including cells absent in normal human livers. During MASH, macrophages derived from circulating monocytes are recruited to the liver, leading to phenotypically distinct macrophage populations. Taken together, these limitations underscore the need for experimental models that more accurately capture the cellular complexity and disease-relevant phenotypes of human MASH and liver fibrosis.
In 2022, the FDA Modernization Act 2.0 was enacted, allowing for alternative testing methodologies in the development of drug and biologic applications, thereby replacing the long-standing requirement for animal testing established in 1938. This comprehensive policy supports the use of new approach methodologies (NAMs), which include human-relevant cell-based systems such as induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived assays, organoids, and organs-on-chips, as well as in silico approaches that utilize advanced artificial intelligence technologies. In liver research, several experimental platforms have been developed to assess hepatotoxicity and model liver diseases for drug screening. However, precise modeling of the structural complexity and multicellular interactions of human liver tissue in vitro remains a significant challenge.
In order to facilitate the development of antifibrotic therapy, experimental platforms have been studied to replicate fibrotic liver conditions in vitro. Complex three-dimensional (3D) culture systems have been found to outperform conventional 2D cultures of both primary hepatocytes and HSCs. In this review, we will examine current technologies for modeling liver fibrosis and discuss their respective advantages and limitations. This review focuses on cell-based experimental platforms, although the NAM landscape also encompasses in silico and AI-based approaches.

Human liver spheroid
Human liver spheroids are 3D cultures of human liver cells that self-assemble into spherical structures on collagen-coated surface, and recapitulate key periportal liver features in vitro. These spheroids typically consist of approximately 3,000 to 5,000 liver cells, primarily composed of primary human hepatocytes, along with nonparenchymal liver cells such as HSCs and myeloid cells. In fact, this system is among the most widely used, as it addresses key limitations of conventional 2D cultures and supports long-term cell viability and function.
In a recent study by Kim et al., human liver spheroids were generated using 5,300 cells, composed of 57% primary human hepatocytes, 28% human liver non-parenchymal cells (NPCs) such as myeloid cells, T cells, B cells, natural killer T cells, endothelial cells, and others, along with 15% HSCs. This composition reflects the physiological cell proportions found in human MASH livers. Here, additional HSCs were added to achieve a hepatocyte-to-HSC ratio similar to that seen in fibrotic livers. Human liver cells were isolated from donor livers through perfusion and enzymatic digestion, followed by gradient-based separation into distinct cell populations. The isolated cells were either cryopreserved or used fresh for spheroid generation. Hepatocytes, NPCs, and HSCs were co-cultured on collagen-coated ultra-low-attachment plates, leading to the spontaneous formation of 3D liver spheroids within 7 days. These spheroids were maintained for at least 14 days, during which all cell types remained viable, and key liver functions, including albumin secretion and hepatocyte-specific gene expression, were well preserved (Fig. 1). MASH conditions were induced by culturing the spheroids in MASH-conditioned medium containing oleate, palmitate, glucose, fructose, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), and transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1). After 7 days of incubation, steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis were successfully induced in the spheroids.
Human liver spheroids provide a suitable platform for high-throughput screening of anti-fibrotic therapeutic agents. For example, treatment with the ALK5 inhibitor SB-431542, a selective inhibitor of the TGF-β1 receptor, reduced the expression of fibrogenic markers (ACTA2, COL1A1, COL1A2) and proteins (αSMA and collagen type I) in MASH-induced human liver spheroids. Moreover, this platform can be employed to screen antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) therapies for liver fibrosis. For instance, human liver spheroids were treated with ASOs targeting LARP6, an RNA-binding protein that regulates liver fibrosis, followed by incubation with MASH-conditioned media. The ASO exhibiting the most potent LARP6 knockdown efficiency showed the strongest anti-fibrotic effect in the spheroids.
Successful withdrawal of the etiological agent causing liver injury can lead to the regression of fibrosis. Experimental models of fibrosis demonstrate that this process is reversible, provided the underlying cause is eliminated and adequate time is allowed for the liver to restore its normal structure. During fibrosis regression, approximately 50% of activated HSCs undergo apoptosis, while the remaining cells transition to a quiescent-like phenotype through inactivation. Although in vivo experimental models have demonstrated liver fibrosis regression and HSC inactivation, these processes are difficult to model in vitro because HSCs spontaneously activate under conventional 2D culture conditions. In human liver spheroids, however, the removal of MASH-conditioned media significantly downregulates fibrotic markers and upregulates markers of HSC inactivation, such as BAMBI and PPARG. In contrast, HSCs cultured in conventional 2D conditions undergo spontaneous activation and do not inactivate. Overall, these findings underscore the potential of human liver spheroids as a reliable platform for studying fibrosis regression and HSC inactivation.
While human liver spheroid systems offer an effective platform for modeling liver fibrosis and screening anti-fibrotic drugs, several limitations remain. Donor-to-donor heterogeneity in spheroid models leads to variable fibrotic progression in response to TGF-β1 and lipid overload. Gaining insights into patient genomic backgrounds may enhance our understanding of disease pathogenesis and facilitate precision medicine approaches. In addition, the lack of liver zonation in the current spheroid systems may restrict their ability to accurately recapitulate liver developmental processes and pathological responses.
Spatial heterogeneity may be more accurately modeled by incorporating the functions of liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs) into the system, particularly their production of angiocrine factors such as Wnt/β-catenin signaling, which drives the distinct characteristics of periportal and pericentral regions.

Human liver organoid
Human liver organoids (HLOs) can be derived from stem cells, progenitor cells, and differentiated cells obtained from liver tissues. iPSC-derived HLOs are generated through a two-step process in which somatic cells (e.g., skin fibroblasts or peripheral blood mononuclear cells) are first reprogrammed into iPSCs and then directed to differentiate into hepatic lineage cells. Through the stepwise addition of growth factors that replicate embryonic liver development, these cells spontaneously develop 3D structures that often contain hepatocyte-like cells and biliary lineages.
Because iPSC-derived HLOs reflect the donor’s genetic background, they are well-suited for studying the effects of genetic variants, including single-nucleotide polymorphisms, on donor-dependent liver disease outcomes. iPSC-derived HLOs generated from patients carrying the PNPLA3 rs738409 missense variant (p.I148M), a strong genetic risk factor for MASLD, can recapitulate accelerated disease progression. Moreover, their capacity for long-term expansion makes iPSC-derived HLOs applicable to high-throughput applications such as Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR)-based screening and hepatotoxicity testing.
In metabolic liver diseases, fibrosis is driven by complex interactions between injured hepatocytes, inflammatory myeloid cells, and activated HSCs. While earlier studies primarily focused on the differentiation of parenchymal hepatocyte-like cells from iPSCs, recent developments have expanded these approaches to generate nonparenchymal liver cell populations, including immune cells. In HLOs composed of hepatocyte-, stellate-, and Kupffer-like cells differentiated from human iPSCs, exposure to free fatty acids (e.g., oleic acid) induces lipid accumulation, inflammation, and fibrotic responses.
Pluripotent stem cells (PSCs)-based hepatic models provide a platform for generating multi-lineage liver organoids from a common cellular origin. For example, PSC can be differentiated into fetal hepatocyte, endothelial, mesenchymal, and immune lineages, and can form fetal liver-like organoids. Human PSC-derived liver organoid models that recapitulate the cellular composition of the fetal liver can successfully mimic complex immune interactions in lipotoxic hepatitis following exposure to palmitic acid. In addition, liver organoid–based drug screening represents a promising assay platform for liver toxicology. PSC-derived organoid assays with multiplexed readouts measuring viability and cholestatic and/or mitochondrial toxicity showed high predictive performance for 238 marketed drugs (sensitivity: 88.7%, specificity: 88.9%). These findings suggest that HLOs provide a reproducible platform for compound optimization, mechanistic studies, precision medicine, and drug screening applications.
Despite these breakthroughs, however, significant limitations remain. The primary challenge is the “immaturity” of the cells within the organoids. iPSC or PSC-derived hepatocytes exhibit fetal-like phenotypes, characterized by the continued expression of alpha-fetoprotein and significantly lower cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme activity compared to fully differentiated primary hepatocytes. This immaturity limits their utility in predicting the toxicity of drugs that require bioactivation by specific CYP enzymes. Moreover, the complexity of the differentiation protocols results in high batch-to-batch variability and heterogeneity, posing challenges for reproducibility and standardization, which are necessary for high-throughput pharmacological testing.
Multiple approaches have been explored to support mature hepatocyte replication and/or function in vitro for the generation of reproducible and scalable human 3D organoids. In response to chronic liver injury, adult hepatocytes exhibit plasticity, dedifferentiating into proliferative bipotent progenitor-like cells. Under defined 3D organoid culture conditions, mouse and human primary hepatocytes could be sustained long-term as organoids. These organoids retained key hepatocyte functions and gene expression profiles (Alb＋, Krt19−/Krt7−) while also expressing the fetal hepatocyte marker Afp, a feature observed during liver regeneration following partial hepatectomy.
In a recent study, Yuan et al. developed an assembloid platform that integrates patient-derived hepatocyte organoids with primary human portal mesenchyme and human cholangiocyte organoids, successfully recapitulating key features of biliary fibrosis. Assembloids were generated by combining hepatocyte organoids, cholangiocyte organoids derived from ductal cells, and portal fibroblasts. To model biliary fibrosis, the composition of the assembloids was modified by increasing the proportion of mesenchymal cells. Compared to homeostatic-like organoids, the fibrotic organoids displayed early proliferative responses in cholangiocytes, increased hepatocyte apoptosis, inflammatory responses (e.g., TNF, IL-6, and IL-4), and enhanced collagen deposition. In biliary fibrosis, cholangiocyte expansion, known as the ductular reaction, promotes inflammatory wound-healing signaling that contributes to fibrogenesis.

Precision cut liver slice
Human precision-cut liver slices (PCLS) preserve the complex multicellular architecture of the hepatic environment. Human liver tissues are perfused and stored in University of Wisconsin solution before PCLS are prepared at a thickness of 250 μm using a tissue microtome. Prolonged culture of PCLS from healthy liver for 48 hours leads to collagen deposition and increased expression of fibrogenic markers, with the exception of αSMA. This early onset of fibrosis in the human PCLS is a strong platform for evaluating antifibrotic therapeutics. In fact, treatment with TGF-β or PDGF inhibitors (e.g., pirfenidone and rosmarinic acid) in PCLS models suppressed early-onset fibrosis. Unlike proteolytic dissociation methods that compromise tissue integrity to isolate single cells, the PCLS technique maintains the native multicellular composition of liver tissue, including primary hepatocytes and NPCs—such as Kupffer cells, HSCs, and LSECs, all embedded within their native ECM. PCLS also retain physiological liver zonation and the acinar location-dependent metabolic heterogeneity of hepatocytes.
To induce MASH in PCLSs, human PCLSs were cultured for up to 96 h in a medium containing high concentrations of sugar, insulin, and fatty acids. Under these conditions, the PCLSs exhibited lipid accumulation, inflammation, and fibrosis. Nevertheless, the use of PCLS for modeling chronic liver diseases is inherently limited by their restricted long-term viability. PCLS functional stability typically declines significantly after 3 to 5 days of ex vivo culture, a timeframe that is insufficient to capture chronic disease progression or sustained therapeutic effects. Furthermore, the mechanical stress generated during the slicing procedure causes acute tissue injury, which triggers wound-healing responses and HSC activation, ultimately promoting culture-induced fibrosis. These artifacts limit fibrosis-related analyses by overlapping with experimentally induced fibrotic pathways.

Bioprinted human liver tissue
3D-bioprinted liver tissues utilize bioinks—hydrogel formulations infused with living cells—to create hepatic models with precise architectural control through layer-by-layer deposition. In bioprinting multicellular liver constructs, hepatocytes and NPCs are arranged using cell-specific hydrogel bioinks to produce human liver models, such as the ExVive Human Liver Tissue developed with NovoGen Bioprinter. Unlike self-assembling spheroids that rely on spontaneous cell aggregation, 3D bioprinting allows for the controlled spatial arrangement of primary hepatocytes, endothelial cells, and HSCs, which supports the reconstruction of lobular architecture and long-term phenotypic stability. Because the cells in the 3D construct are placed close together immediately after fabrication, they quickly form tight junctions and produce endogenous extracellular matrix, resulting in dense microtissues that closely mimic native liver tissue. The inclusion of Kupffer cells further enhances the model by modulating hepatocyte injury responses; Kupffer cells reduced early hepatocyte injury and prolonged fibrogenic stimulation in bioprinted human liver tissues. A 7- to 10-day post-print acclimation period is necessary for injury biomarkers to reach steady-state levels, reflecting a transient wound-healing response driven by printing-induced HSC activation, followed by a return to a quiescent-like phenotype.
3D-bioprinted liver tissues successfully replicated essential fibrogenic features after exposure to fibrosis-associated stimuli. Specifically, bioprinted human liver tissues, composed of four key cell types—hepatocytes, HSCs, Kupffer cells, and LSECs—mixed in physiologically relevant ratios, developed steatosis, inflammation, and fibrosis when incubated with MASH-conditioned media containing free fatty acids, LPS, and fructose. The transcriptomic profiles of 3D-bioprinted human MASH liver tissues differed significantly from those of normal controls and closely matched those of patient-derived MASH liver biopsies.
A major advantage of this platform is its capacity to precisely control the spatial organization of specific cell types, enabling the investigation of how cell–cell positioning and distance affect fibrotic signaling. Spatially resolved methods provide mechanistic insights into the paracrine crosstalk that drives fibrosis, insights that are often overlooked in spheroid or simple co-culture models. Automated 3D-bioprinting ensures reproducible tissue architecture and scalable throughput, enhancing consistency across experiments.
Despite recent advances in bioprinting, limitations still exist. Extrusion-based bioprinting, the most commonly used method, has a printing resolution of approximately 100-200 μm, which prevents the fabrication of functional capillary-scale vasculature. In thick tissue constructs (> 400 μm), limited perfusion restricts nutrient and oxygen diffusion, leading to necrotic cores. Additionally, the shear stress generated during the printing process can compromise cell viability, and the high cost and technical complexity of the required equipment limit throughput compared to scalable spheroid-based assays.

Liver-on-a-chip
Microphysiological systems (MPS), often referred to as liver-on-a-chip technologies, integrate 2D or 3D cell culture with microfluidic engineering to mimic critical dynamic mechanical and physical cues of the human liver. Human liver-on-a-chip systems consist of primary hepatocytes interfaced with LSECs, Kupffer cells, and HSCs, under continuous physiological fluid flow. Unlike static culture systems, MPS platforms utilize continuous perfusion, which provides a constant supply of nutrients and oxygen while removing metabolic waste, thereby supporting long-term culture for up to four weeks.
Liver-on-a-chip systems effectively replicate in vivo cell–cell and cell–ECM interactions, as well as the native tissue architecture. Although these platforms come in various formats and designs, they all adhere to the fundamental principles of MPS. Typically made from glass or polymeric materials, the devices feature hollow channels that are lined with living cells. Continuous perfusion of culture medium through these channels fosters the development of microtissues under dynamic culture conditions. For example, liver-on-a-chip platforms usually consist of upper and lower channels separated by an ECM-coated porous membrane, thereby mimicking a hepatic sinusoid-like architecture. Hepatocytes are cultured in the upper channel, while LSECs and other NPCs, including HSCs and Kupffer cells, are positioned in the lower channel. Co-culturing with organ- and species-specific endothelial cells enhances hepatocyte functions, such as albumin secretion and xenobiotic metabolism. Shear stress present in MPS promotes hepatocyte polarization and supports the maintenance of differentiated phenotypes, resulting in improved transporter function and bile canaliculi formation. Under physiological conditions, oxygen gradients play a crucial role in regulating liver zonation. MPS can replicate this hepatic zonation from the periportal (Zone 1) to the pericentral (Zone 3) regions. Recently, oxygen gradients of 3.7-8.9%, maintained by a dual radical flow, have allowed liver-on-a-chip systems to closely mimic in vivo hepatic zonation. This advancement enables precise assessment of zone-specific hepatotoxicity; for instance, acetaminophen toxicity, which primarily affects Zone 3 due to elevated CYP2E1 expression, can be modeled in MPS but is challenging to observe in traditional static cultures.
When liver-on-a-chip systems are exposed to a lipotoxic environment, they progressively develop MASH-like phenotypes. Steatosis can be induced by adding free fatty acids, such as oleic acid and palmitic acid, to the culture medium. Compared with 2D cultures, microfluidic chips demonstrate slower and more chronic lipid accumulation, emphasizing the benefits of dynamic systems for modeling progressive diseases like MASH. Liver-on-a-chip systems can be maintained under MASH-inducing conditions (e.g., free fatty acids with or without LPS) for at least 10 days and recapitulate key hallmarks of human MASH, including intracellular lipid accumulation, hepatocellular ballooning, apoptotic cell death and increased inflammatory and HSC activation compared with healthy conditions. LPS can be incorporated into the culture medium to further simulate disease progression toward MASH. Elafibranor, a PPAR agonist investigated as a therapeutic agent for MASH, inhibited the development of MASH-specific markers in liver-on-a-chip models of MASH.
Despite their physiological advantages, MPS platforms have limitations for high-throughput screening. Due to their technical complexity and specialized equipment requirements, these systems typically have lower throughput compared to spheroid-based models. Additionally, materials used for chip fabrication, such as polydimethylsiloxane, tend to non-specifically absorb small hydrophobic drugs. This can result in an underestimation of drug potency and toxicity, highlighting the necessity for careful experimental design and validation of drug concentrations within the system.

DISCUSSION
Liver fibrosis, characterized by excessive extracellular matrix deposition, is associated with increased mortality, and poses a major clinical challenge. MASH, a leading cause of fibrosis, represents a significant global health burden, with no approved pharmacological treatments currently available. The absence of robust, human-relevant liver fibrosis models has impeded the development of antifibrotic drugs and limited our understanding of the mechanisms underlying fibrotic diseases. Recently, the FDA Modernization Act 2.0 has expedited the shift towards NAMs, encouraging the use of human-relevant in vitro models instead of animal testing. This review discusses recent advancements in NAMs, including human liver spheroids, HLOs, PCLS, 3D-bioprinting, and liver-on-a-chip platforms, each offering unique advantages for modeling liver fibrosis.
Human liver spheroids provide scalable models that mimic multicellular interactions and fibrosis regression phenotypes; however, they are limited by donor variability and the lack of physiological zonation. iPSC-derived HLOs present a renewable system for studying genetic risk factors, but their application is restricted by fetal-like cellular immaturity and complex differentiation protocols. PCLS maintain native tissue architecture and allow for the assessment of antifibrotic efficacy in early-stage disease; nevertheless, their use is constrained by reduced viability during prolonged culture and mechanical stress from slicing. 3D bioprinting allows for precise spatial control of hepatic cells, yet its practical application is limited by printing resolution and costs. In contrast, liver-on-a-chip platforms replicate physiological shear stress and oxygen gradients, but they face challenges related to technical complexity and material absorption (Fig. 2). In summary, while no single model fully captures the pathophysiology of human liver fibrosis, the strategic selection of complementary NAMs based on their respective strengths can enhance our mechanistic understanding and accelerate drug development.
Future developments in NAMs are essential to overcome their current limitations. For example, incorporating vascular networks into hepatic organoids will enhance their functionality and stability, enabling long-term modeling of chronic liver disease. Another significant challenge faced by current NAMs is the absence of inter-organ crosstalk, which limits their capacity to model systemic effects. Liver fibrosis, particularly MASH, is not a localized liver condition but a systemic metabolic disorder linked to various comorbidities in other organs. MASH is closely associated with cardiovascular disease (CVD), especially heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. In patients with MASH, CVD is the leading cause of mortality, followed by cancer, liver-related deaths, and renal failure. Although this correlation is supported by shared pathophysiological mechanisms and overlapping risk factors, the risk of CVD in MASH patients appears to be independent of traditional cardiovascular risk factors and escalates with the severity of liver disease. Additionally, MASH patients with advanced fibrosis face high risk of chronic kidney disease progression. By linking organoids that replicate different tissues—such as liver, kidney, and heart—through controlled flow, these systems facilitate the investigation of inter-organ interactions in a physiologically relevant context.
Human liver organoids, particularly spheroid-based systems made up of differentiated cell populations, are ideal for high-throughput screening applications, especially in assessing hepatotoxicity and modeling diseases. Standardizing organoid protocols is crucial for developing reproducible, reliable, and widely accessible platforms for biomedical research.
As more research groups develop organoid models, it becomes essential to establish standardized evaluation frameworks for comparing organoids across different laboratories and assessing their predictive performance and clinical relevance. In hepatotoxicity studies, utilizing a reference panel of compounds with well-documented clinical hepatotoxicity would facilitate the systematic validation of organoid-based assays. Correlating the toxicity responses observed in organoids with actual clinical outcomes can offer valuable insights into the predictive accuracy and overall suitability of these systems. Additionally, for disease modeling applications such as liver fibrosis, performing single-cell resolution transcriptomic analysis of organoids represents a powerful approach for evaluating their translational relevance and potential clinical applicability.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflicting interests.

References
The origin and fate of liver myofibroblasts
Liver fibrosis scores predict liver disease mortality in the united states population
Found in translation-fibrosis in metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH)
Molecular and cellular mechanisms of liver fibrosis and its regression
Comprehensive study of the murine MASH models' applicability by comparing human liver transcriptomes
2D and 3D liver models
Mechanistic evaluation of primary human hepatocyte culture using global proteomic analysis reveals a selective dedifferentiation profile
The fibrotic response of primary liver spheroids recapitulates in vivo hepatic stellate cell activation
Multi-modal analysis of human hepatic stellate cells identifies novel therapeutic targets for metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease
Niche-specific reprogramming of epigenetic landscapes drives myeloid cell diversity in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
Alternatives to animal testing to assess MASH drugs and hepatotoxicity
FDA modernization act 2.0: transitioning beyond animal models with human cells, organoids, and ai/ml-based approaches
The effect of three-dimensional co-culture of hepatocytes and hepatic stellate cells on key hepatocyte functions in vitro
Protocol to generate human liver spheroids to study liver fibrosis induced by metabolic stress
Building consensus on definition and nomenclature of hepatic, pancreatic, and biliary organoids
Isolation of Primary human liver cells from normal and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis livers
RNA-Binding Protein LARP6 coordinates hepatic stellate cell activation and liver fibrosis
Clinical evidence for the regression of liver fibrosis
Cirrhosis of the Liver: A reversible disease?
Heterogeneity of HSCs in a mouse model of NASH
Mechanisms of hepatic stellate cell activation
ETS1 Suppresses hepatic stellate cell activation and liver fibrosis
Gene expression profiles during hepatic stellate cell activation in culture and in vivo
Multi-zonal liver organoids from human pluripotent stem cells
hESCs-derived organoids achieve liver zonation features through LSEC modulation
Metabolic and non-metabolic liver zonation is established non-synchronously and requires sinusoidal wnts
Human liver organoids: from generation to applications
High-fidelity drug-induced liver injury screen using human pluripotent stem cell-derived organoids
Generation of expandable human pluripotent stem cell-derived hepatocyte-like liver organoids
Single-cell eQTL analysis identifies genetic variation underlying metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis
Establishment of human fetal hepatocyte organoids and CRISPR-Cas9-Based gene knockin and knockout in organoid cultures from human liver
Modeling steatohepatitis in humans with pluripotent stem cell-derived organoids
Chapter 3 - generation of multi-cellular human liver organoids from pluripotent stem cells
Modeling immune lineage co-development in human pluripotent stem cell-derived liver organoids
Transcriptional, functional, and mechanistic comparisons of stem cell-derived hepatocytes, HepaRG cells, and three-dimensional human hepatocyte spheroids as predictive in vitro systems for drug-induced liver injury
Long-term culture of genome-stable bipotent stem cells from adult human liver
Long-term expansion of functional mouse and human hepatocytes as 3D organoids
Human assembloids recapitulate periportal liver tissue in vitro
Central role for cholangiocyte pathobiology in cholestatic liver diseases
Precision-cut liver slices: a versatile tool to advance liver research
Human precision-cut liver slices as a model to test antifibrotic drugs in the early onset of liver fibrosis
Precision-cut liver slices as an ex vivo model to evaluate antifibrotic therapies for liver fibrosis and cirrhosis
Best practices and progress in precision-cut liver slice cultures
Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease in a dish: human precision-cut liver slices as a platform for drug screening and interventions
Precision-cut liver slices: characteristics and use for in vitro pharmaco-toxicology
Viability, function and morphological integrity of precision-cut liver slices during prolonged incubation: effects of culture medium
Bioprinted 3D primary liver tissues allow assessment of organ-level response to clinical drug induced toxicity in vitro
Bioprinted liver provides early insight into the role of kupffer cells in TGF-β1 and methotrexate-induced fibrogenesis
Editor's highlight: modeling compound-induced fibrogenesis in vitro using three-dimensional bioprinted human liver tissues
Induction of MASH in three-dimensional bioprinted human liver tissue
The material world of 3D-bioprinted and microfluidic-chip models of human liver fibrosis
3D Bioprinting of functional tissue models for personalized drug screening and in vitro disease modeling
Self-regulation of growth in three dimensions
Controlling shear stress in 3D bioprinting is a key factor to balance printing resolution and stem cell integrity
Reproducing human and cross-species drug toxicities using a liver-chip
Performance assessment and economic analysis of a human liver-chip for predictive toxicology
Human nonalcoholic steatohepatitis on a chip
In vivo and in vitro models to study liver fibrosis: mechanisms and limitations
A Physiological Oxygen gradient liver-zonation-on-a-chip reveals HIF-2α Intervention in Hepatic Lipotoxicity
Investigating nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in a liver-on-a-chip microfluidic device
Organoid vascularization: strategies and applications
The gut-liver axis in liver disease: pathophysiological basis for therapy
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and hcc in a hyperphagic mouse accelerated by western diet
MASLD: a systemic metabolic disorder with cardiovascular and malignant complications
Western diet promotes renal injury, inflammation, and fibrosis in a murine model of alström syndrome
Current advances and future perspectives of liver-on-a-chip platforms incorporating dynamic fluid flow
A human liver organoid screening platform for DILI risk prediction
The organoid cell atlas
Application of microphysiological systems to enhance safety assessment in drug discovery
Utility of spherical human liver microtissues for prediction of clinical drug-induced liver injury
Single-cell transcriptomics stratifies organoid models of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease
Human liver spheroid. (A) Schematic illustration of human liver spheroid generation. (B) Immunofluorescence staining of human liver spheroids after 14 days of incubation. Bright field (BF) images and staining for vimentin (VIM) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α (HNF4α) are shown. Scale bar, 200 or 250 μm.
Overview of NAMs to model human liver fibrosis in MASH. Schemetic overview of 5 NAM platforms discussed in this review – human liver spheroid, human liver organoid, precision-cut liver slice, 3D bioprinting, and liver-on-a-chip. Each NAM offers distinct strengths and limitations for modeling liver fibrosis.