Endoscopic evaluation of indeterminate biliary strictures: Cholangioscopy, endoscopic ultrasound, or both?
Accurate and timely diagnosis of biliary strictures can be challenging. Because the diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy of standard endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography‐based tissue sampling for malignancy are suboptimal, additional endoscopic evaluation by cholangioscopy and/or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is often necessary to differentiate between malignant and benign biliary strictures to guide clinical management. While direct visualization by cholangioscopy and/or high‐resolution imaging by EUS are often the first step in the evaluation of an indeterminate biliary stricture (IDBS), tissue diagnosis by cholangioscopy‐guided biopsy and/or EUS‐guided fine‐needle tissue acquisition is the preferred modality to establish a diagnosis of malignancy. Because each modality has its own strengths and limitations, selection of cholangioscopy and EUS is best guided by the biliary stricture location and local expertise. Artificial intelligence‐assisted diagnosis, biopsy forceps with improved design, contrast‐enhanced EUS, and dedicated fine‐needle biopsy devices are recent technological advances that may further improve the diagnostic performance of cholangioscopy and EUS in patients with IDBS.

INTRODUCTION
Accurate differentiation of malignant biliary strictures (MBS) from benign biliary strictures (BBS) is crucial to guide appropriate clinical management in patients with biliary strictures. However, distinguishing between MBS and BBS remains a diagnostic challenge despite advances in cross‐sectional imaging and pancreatobiliary endoscopy, since biliary strictures can be caused by intraluminal lesions (e.g. cholangiocarcinoma, primary sclerosing cholangitis [PSC], IgG4‐related sclerosing cholangitis) or extraluminal lesions (e.g. pancreatic cancer, malignant lymph node compression). While a mass involving the bile duct or pancreatic head detected on cross‐sectional imaging or endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) often favors a diagnosis of MBS, the presence of a mass lesion may not always represent genuine malignancy, as inflammatory “pseudotumors” may also be seen in patients with autoimmune pancreatitis, which is benign in nature. In patients without a definite mass on imaging, characterizing the nature of biliary strictures is often more difficult. To complicate matters, malignancy may develop in patients with an initially benign condition such as PSC, highlighting the need for further workup if cholestasis worsens and/or development of a dominant stricture on follow‐up magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography.
Biliary strictures are considered “indeterminate” when no obvious mass lesion is observed on cross‐sectional imaging and/or initial endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)‐based tissue acquisition is inconclusive. Up to 20% of all biliary strictures are classified as indeterminate biliary strictures (IDBS) after initial evaluation by cross‐sectional imaging, conventional ERCP‐based tissue sampling, and serum tumor markers. Among patients with IDBS, up to two‐thirds of the IDBS were eventually diagnosed as malignant, whereas one‐fourth of the resected lesions were actually benign in observational studies. Because the diagnostic yield of standard tissue acquisition techniques by ERCP is suboptimal, additional diagnostic endoscopic procedures and surveillance imaging are often required to manage patients with IDBS. Here we aim to review the current status of cholangioscopy and EUS for evaluation of IDBS and discuss emerging technologies that may further enhance the diagnostic performance of these two procedures.

STANDARD ERCP AND ITS LIMITATIONS
After cross‐sectional imaging, ERCP is the next investigation in the management of patients with obstructive jaundice and suspected biliary stricture. While performance of an adequate cholangiogram is the fundamental first step in the assessment of a biliary stricture, cholangiographic appearance alone may not reliably differentiate between MBS and BBS. As such, tissue sampling is the preferred method to confirm a diagnosis of malignancy. Although standard ERCP‐guided brush cytology and transpapillary intraductal biopsy are commonly performed, the diagnostic yield of these two techniques remains unsatisfactory. In a recent meta‐analysis of nine studies (n = 730 patients), the pooled sensitivity of biliary brush cytology and transpapillary intraductal biopsy for the diagnosis of MBS were only 45% and 48.1%, respectively, despite a high pooled specificity of 99% in both modalities. Combining these two modalities improved the pooled sensitivity for the diagnosis of MBS to 59.4%, which was still suboptimal. If EUS or intraductal ultrasound (IDUS) is planned for further investigation of the biliary stricture, ideally they should be performed before stenting of the stricture, since inflammatory changes of bile duct related to stenting may affect interpretation of the endosonographic appearance of the biliary stricture.

STRATEGIES TO IMPROVE THE DIAGNOSTIC YIELD OF STANDARD ERCP‐GUIDED TISSUE ACQUISITION
Various tissue acquisition and molecular diagnostic techniques have been reported to improve the efficacy of standard ERCP‐guided tissue sampling. In a retrospective study of 218 patients, balloon dilation of the biliary stricture before intraductal biopsy was shown to increase the intraductal biopsy sensitivity from 41% to 71% (P = 0.03) and accuracy from 55% to 87% (P < 0.01), with no difference in adverse event rates from intraductal biopsy alone. Recently, tube‐assisted biopsy techniques for evaluation of IDBS have been evaluated. In this technique, a small‐caliber conventional biopsy with a 1.8‐mm cup size is advanced through a catheter sheath to the target site under fluoroscopic guidance have been reported to be useful, with an adequate tissue sampling rate from 69% to 82.9%. Potential advantages of this technique over cholangioscopy‐guided biopsy may include: the ability to use larger‐caliber forceps, relatively easy insertion of biopsy forceps to the target site, and lower cost.
Designed to detect chromosomal aneuploidy, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) has been evaluated as a stand‐alone modality or in combination with other ERCP‐guided tissue sampling techniques in diagnosing MBS. When used as a single modality, FISH has a sensitivity of 30.8% to 59% and a specificity of 88.9% to 100% for MBS. Addition of FISH to standard ERCP‐guided tissue sampling techniques has been shown to improve the diagnosis of malignancy in patients with IDBS. In a study comparing the diagnostic yield of brush cytology, intraductal biopsy, FISH, and combined triple modality (cytology + biopsy + FISH), the triple modality group was found to have the highest sensitivity (82%) and specificity (100%) in diagnosing MBS when compared to that of brush cytology (27%), intraductal biopsy (50%), or FISH (59%).
Next‐generation sequencing (NGS) represents another promising molecular diagnostic technique that may improve the diagnosis of MBS and help to identify actionable targets for oncologic therapy. Recently, the use of NGS to identify genomic mutations in malignancy of the biliary system using standard ERCP‐guided brush cytology or intraductal biopsy specimens has been reported. In a study of 252 patients with biliary strictures, a 28‐gene NGS panel using standard ERCP‐guided brush cytology or intraductal biopsy specimens was shown to have a sensitivity of 73% and a specificity of 100%, increasing the sensitivity of pathological evaluation for MBS from 35% to 77% for brush cytology and from 52% to 83% for intraductal biopsy.
Despite the promising results, dedicated molecular diagnostic techniques may not be widely available. Hence, the relatively more available endoscopy‐based techniques such as cholangioscopy and EUS are recommended in the evaluation of IDBS after inconclusive standard ERCP‐based tissue sampling.

CHOLANGIOSCOPY FOR INDETERMINATE BILIARY STRICTURES
Two‐operator “mother‐baby” cholangioscopy system;
Single‐operator digital cholangioscopy system via the working channel of duodenoscope;
Single‐operator direct peroral cholangioscopy using an ultra‐slim upper endoscope or a dedicated multibending ultra‐slim endoscope;
Single‐operator video choledochoscopy via a percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage (PTBD) fistula track;
Single‐operator digital cholangioscopy system via a PTBD fistula track.
Cholangioscopy has become an invaluable tool in the evaluation of IDBS, since it allows direct visualization and targeted biopsy of the intraductal pathology. Significant technological advancement has occurred since the introduction of peroral cholangioscopy in the 1970s. Currently, the following cholangioscopy systems are available:
In the “mother‐baby” cholangioscopy system, a dedicated “baby” video cholangioscope is inserted through the working channel of a “mother” therapeutic duodenoscope for the cholangioscopic examination (Fig. 1). While excellent image quality and narrow‐band imaging (NBI) capability are the strengths of this system, the requirement of two skillful endoscopists for operation of the “mother‐baby” system and the fragility of the baby scope have limited wide adoption of this technqiue. Aiming to address the fragility issue, a new‐generation baby video cholangioscope (CHF‐B290; Olympus Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan) with improved durability of the bending section of the insertion tube has recently become available (Fig. 2).
Two‐operator “mother‐baby” cholangioscopy system.
New‐generation baby video cholangioscope with improved durability of the insertion tube bending section (CHF‐B290; Olympus Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan).
The technically demanding nature of the two‐operator “mother‐baby” cholangioscopy system has prompted the development of a peroral single‐operator cholangioscopy (SOC) system via a duodenoscope in the early 2000s. However, evaluation of biliary strictures by the first‐generation SOC, a catheter‐based fiberoptic system (SpyGlass Direct Visualization System; Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA), can be challenging, as its image quality is often regarded as suboptimal. Over the last decade, this SOC platform has been upgraded to a digital system (SpyGlass DS and SpyGlass DSII Direct Visualization System), with significantly better image resolution, wider field of view, and a slightly larger working channel for accessories, leading to improved visualization and targeted biopsy of intraductal pathology (Fig. 3). Alternatively, peroral cholangioscopy can be performed directly using an ultra‐slim upper endoscope or a new multibending ultra‐slim endoscope (CHF‐Y0010; Olympus Medical Systems) after sphincterotomy. An anchoring balloon is often necessary to facilitate deep advancement of the ultra‐slim upper endoscope for examination of proximal biliary strictures. While excellent image quality with NBI capability can be obtained and larger biopsy forceps can be used with the technique of direct peroral cholangioscopy, the required expertise and dedicated equipment are often less widely available when compared with the DSOC platform. In patients who required PTBD for management of biliary obstruction not amenable to ERCP‐based techniques, single‐operator percutaneous cholangioscopy can be performed using a 5.2 mm diameter videocholedochoscope or a recently available short‐length 3.5 mm diameter digital cholangioscopy catheter with 4‐way tip control and a 1.2 mm working channel (SpyGlass Discover digital catheter) (Fig. 4). While the percutaneous approach offers the shortest distance to the biliary stricture, this technique requires creation and serial dilation of a percutaneous fistula tract, which is more invasive and uncomfortable for the patient when compared to the peroral cholangioscopy approach.
Peroral digital single‐operator catheter‐based cholangioscope (SpyGlass DSII Direct Visualization System; Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA).
A new short‐length 3.5 mm diameter digital cholangioscopy catheter (SpyGlass Discover digital catheter, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) for percutaneous cholangioscopic examination.
Digital single‐operator cholangioscopy showing a polypoid mass with tortuous dilated “tumor vessels” compatible with cholangiocarcinoma (white arrows).

CURRENT STATUS AND EMERGING TECHNOLOGY OF VISUAL DIAGNOSIS BY CHOLANGIOSCOPY
Direct visualization of the biliary tree remains the cornerstone of cholangioscopic examination in patients with IDBS. Representative DSOC images of biliary strictures caused by cholangiocarcinoma, PSC, and IgG4‐related sclerosing cholangitis are shown in Figures 5, 6, 7, respectively. While a consensus for the visual diagnosis of MBS and BBS has not been well established, cholangioscopic features suggestive of malignant/neoplastic biliary strictures include: irregularly dilated and tortuous tumor vessels, papillary projections, nodular or polypoid masses, and infiltrative lesions. In a meta‐analysis of 10 studies using the legacy fiberoptic SOC, the pooled sensitivity and pooled specificity of a cholangioscopic visual impression (VI) for diagnosis of MBS were 84.5% and 82.6%, respectively. The overall pooled sensitivity (93%) and specificity (86%) of VI for MBS by DSOC and direct peroral video cholangioscopy were found to be higher than those of legacy fiberoptic SOC in another recent systematic review and meta‐analysis of 13 studies (876 patients) utilizing DSOC and direct peroral video cholangioscopy. In subgroup analysis, VI by DSOC has a pooled sensitivity of 94% and a pooled specificity of 86% for the diagnosis of MBS.
Digital single‐operator cholangioscopy showing areas of scarring, small inflammatory pseudopolyps, and multiple bile duct strictures in a patient with a longstanding history of primary sclerosing cholangitis (white arrows).
Digital single‐operator cholangioscopy showing a benign biliary stricture due to focal bile duct wall thickening from inflammation in a patient with IgG4‐related sclerosing cholangitis (white arrows).
Despite improvement of image resolution in the DSOC system, interobserver variability in the interpretation of cholangioscopic visual features still exists among advanced endoscopists, including experts in the field. In recent years, several classifications of visual criteria such as the Monaco classification and the Carlos Robles–Medranda classification have been developed to enhance the diagnostic accuracy by DSOC. The Mendoza classification proposed in 2021 represents the latest effort to reduce the interobserver variability of VI for IDBS. Based on five visual criteria previously shown to be statistically associated with malignancy in the Monaco classification and the Carlos Robles–Medranda classification (tortuous and dilated vessels, irregular nodulations, raised intraductal lesions, irregular surface with or without ulcerations, and friability), the Mendoza criteria has a high intraclass correlation for both neoplastic (0.90) and nonneoplastic (0.90) diagnoses and an overall diagnostic accuracy of 77% (range 64–88%).
Recently, the utility of artificial intelligence (AI)‐assisted diagnosis in differentiating MBS from BBS has been evaluated in both single‐center and multicenter studies. Based on deep‐learning models or convolutional neural networks trained with DSOC images of both MBS and BBS, AI‐assisted visual diagnosis of MBS during DSOC was found to have high diagnostic accuracy (90.6–94.9%) in three studies published in full articles and has the potential to reduce interobserver variability.

CHOLANGIOSCOPY‐GUIDED BIOPSY AND STRATEGIES TO IMPROVE ITS DIAGNOSTIC YIELD
Targeted biopsy by cholangioscopy can be particularly useful in patients with IDBS and inconclusive pathological diagnosis from prior ERCP‐based tissue sampling techniques. Legacy fiberoptic SOC‐guided biopsy was found to have a pooled sensitivity of 60.1% and a pooled specificity of 98.0% for MBS in a meta‐analysis of 10 studies. In a more recent systematic review and meta‐analysis of 11 studies utilizing DSOC, DSOC‐guided biopsy had a higher pooled sensitivity of 74% and a similarly high pooled specificity of 98% in diagnosing MBS. Limited data of head‐to‐head comparison between ERCP‐based tissue sampling techniques and DSOC‐guided biopsy is available. In the only multicenter randomized trial comparing DSOC‐guided biopsy and ERCP‐guided brushing to date, DSOC‐guided biopsy was shown to have a significantly higher first‐sample sensitivity for MBS than ERCP‐guided brushing (68.2% vs. 21.4%, P < 0.01).
When compared with biopsy obtained by direct peroral cholangioscopy using endoscopes with a 2.2 mm working channel, the diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy of biopsy obtained by DSOC with a 1.3 mm working channel have been less satisfactory. In a recent meta‐analysis, direct peroral cholangioscopy‐guided biopsy was found to have a significantly higher pooled sensitivity for MBS than that of DSOC‐guided biopsy (92% vs. 79%, P = 0.004). The lower diagnostic yield of DSOC‐guided biopsy is likely related to the small specimen size (1–2 mm) obtained by the SpyBite forceps (Boston Scientific).
Strategies have been developed to improve the diagnostic yield of DSOC‐guided biopsy. Recently, a new biopsy forceps with microteeth and a slightly larger cup volume designed for better tissue grasping (SpyBite Max forceps; Boston Scientific) has become available for DSOC. While the new features of this DSOC forceps may have theoretical advantages over the legacy SpyBite forceps, comparative data on specimen size obtained by SpyBite Max and SpyBite legacy forceps have been conflicting, with one study reporting similar specimen sizes and another study reporting slightly larger specimen size (1.8 mm2 vs. 1.0 mm2, P = 0.004) in the SpyBite Max forceps group. The impact of different biopsy numbers and the use of rapid on‐site evaluation (ROSE) of DSOC‐guided biopsy specimens by pathologists have been evaluated in a single‐center randomized controlled trial comparing the diagnostic yield of DSOC‐guided biopsy with or without ROSE. A median of one biopsy with ROSE and a median of three or four biopsies without ROSE were shown to have similar diagnostic sensitivity (75% vs. 76.9%; P = 0.99) and diagnostic accuracy (87.5% vs. 90%; P = 0.99). While ROSE has the potential to improve the diagnostic yield of DSOC‐guided biopsy, even with fewer than three biopsies, ROSE for DSOC‐guided biopsy is not considered standard practice in centers with a cholangioscopy service. In centers without ROSE, data from this study suggested that a minimum of three biopsies should be taken to achieve a reasonably high diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy for MBS.

ENDOSCOPIC ULTRASOUND AND FINE‐NEEDLE TISSUE ACQUISITION FOR INDETERMINATE BILIARY STRICTURES
Evaluation of biliary strictures by EUS can be performed with IDUS using a high‐frequency ultrasound probe during ERCP, or a dedicated radial or linear array echoendoscope placed in the proximal duodenum. These imaging modalities should be performed before stenting of the stricture, since inflammatory changes of bile duct related to stenting may affect the interpretation of the endosonographic appearance of the biliary stricture.
Intraductal ultrasound allows real‐time cross‐sectional imaging of the bile duct and was found to be highly accurate in differentiating between MBS and BBS, with a sensitivity of 93%, specificity of 90%, and accuracy of 91% in a large retrospective study. Despite its favorable diagnostic performance, wide adoption of IDUS was limited by its tendency to understage biliary tract tumors, suboptimal staging for locoregional lymph nodes due to limited ultrasound penetration depth, and a lack of tissue acquisition capability.
Endoscopic ultrasound performed with a dedicated echoendoscope allows high‐resolution imaging of the extrahepatic bile duct, pancreatic parenchyma, locoregional lymph nodes, and tissue acquisition capability by fine‐needle aspiration (FNA)/fine‐needle biopsy (FNB). In patients with suspected distal biliary stricture but without a definitive pancreatic head lesion observed on initial cross‐sectional imaging, EUS is particularly useful in detecting small lesions in the pancreatic head or distal common bile duct. Figure 8A shows a small hypoechoic mass in the distal common bile duct that was detected by EUS but not definitively seen on initial multidetector computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen with contrast (Fig. 8B). In addition, bile duct wall thickening due to malignancy or inflammation can be effectively imaged on EUS. Figure 9A shows an EUS image of diffuse smooth common bile duct wall thickening due to inflammation in a patient with IgG4‐related sclerosing cholangitis, resulting in a common bile duct stricture demonstrated on the ERCP cholangiogram (Fig. 9B). In a meta‐analysis of 36 studies, the sensitivity and specificity of EUS imaging without FNA in diagnosing MBS were 78% and 84%, respectively. The capability of EUS to assess for locoregional lymphadenopathy is an advantage over cholangioscopy. EUS with or without FNA was shown to be more sensitive than cross‐sectional imaging in identifying locoregional lymph nodes in patients with cholangiocarcinoma (86% vs. 47%, P < 0.001).
(A) Endoscopic ultrasound showing a small 1 cm hypoechoic mass in the distal common bile duct traversed by a biliary stent, compatible with a small cholangiocarcinoma (white arrows). (B) This small lesion was not definitively observed on initial multidetector computed tomography of abdomen with contrast (white arrow indicating the dilated common bile duct).
(A) Diffuse smooth wall thickening of the common bile duct observed on endoscopic ultrasound in a patient with IgG4‐related sclerosing cholangitis (white arrows). (B) Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography cholangiogram showing the common bile duct stricture in a patient with IgG4‐related sclerosing cholangitis (white arrows).
The use of advanced EUS imaging techniques can further increase the diagnostic sensitivity for small pancreatobiliary lesions. In a prospective study of 277 patients with solid pancreatic lesions, contrast‐enhanced harmonic EUS (CEH‐EUS) was shown to be superior to contrast‐enhanced multidetector CT in detecting small pancreatic masses ≤2 cm in size. Combining CEH‐EUS with EUS‐guided FNA (EUS‐FNA) increases the diagnostic sensitivity of EUS‐FNA for pancreatic solid lesions from 92% to 100%.
When compared to ERCP‐based tissue sampling, EUS‐FNA was found to have a higher sensitivity (75% vs. 49%) and accuracy (79% vs. 60.7%) for MBS in cases with mass‐forming lesions delineated by EUS imaging. Despite the strengths of EUS in the evaluation of IDBS, the location of biliary stricture may affect the diagnostic performance of EUS for MBS. In a meta‐analysis of 20 studies, the pooled sensitivity for malignancy of EUS‐FNA was found to be higher in distal (83%) vs. proximal biliary strictures (76%). This is likely due to the observation that the majority of distal MBS are related to extrinsic compression by pancreatic head tumors, which can be effectively assessed by EUS given the close proximity of pathology to the duodenum.
Techniques of EUS‐guided tissue acquisition have evolved over time. In the last decade, there has been a paradigm shift from FNA to FNB to procure tissue core for histological examination when multiple dedicated FNB devices become available. In a recent meta‐analysis of 18 randomized controlled trials comparing FNA and FNB devices, FNB was found to provide a higher pooled diagnostic accuracy (87% vs. 80%, P = 0.02), tissue core rate (80% vs. 62%, P = 0.002), and adequate tissue diagnosis with fewer passes (P = 0.03).
Despite the potential benefits of EUS‐FNA, preoperative EUS‐FNA should only be performed if it will change clinical management in patients with potentially operable MBS, since needle track tumor seeding remains a concern.

UTILITY OF SAME‐SESSION EUS AND ERCP
In patients with obstructive jaundice, but without a definitive mass lesion in the pancreatic head or distal bile duct on initial cross‐sectional imaging, performance of EUS ± FNA before ERCP in the same session may help to streamline the diagnostic workup and guide the need for subsequent ERCP. Same‐session EUS and ERCP were shown to be feasible and safe in a large study of 418 patients with unexplained biliary obstruction, with high diagnostic accuracy for MBS (90%) and BBS (92%) by EUS. In a multicenter study of 263 patients with suspected malignant biliary obstruction who underwent same‐session EUS and ERCP, the EUS/ERCP combination was found to have the highest diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy (85.8% and 87.1%, respectively) when compared to those of EUS‐FNA alone (73.6% and 76.1%, respectively) or ERCP alone (56.5% and 60.5%, respectively). However, the diagnostic sensitivity and accuracy of combined EUS and ERCP were not different from those of EUS‐FNA in patients with large masses (≥4 cm). The utility of combined EUS‐FNA and ERCP‐guided tissue sampling in patients with suspected MBS was further confirmed in a meta‐analysis of six studies (497 patients), with a pooled sensitivity of 86% and a pooled specificity of 98%.

ENDOSCOPIC WORKUP OF IDBS BASED ON STRICTURE LOCATION
The diagnostic performance of cholangioscopy and EUS for IDBS may be affected by the location of biliary stricture. Obtaining a stable cholangioscope position for targeted biopsy can be technically challenging in patients with tight distal bile duct stricture. On the other hand, optimal imaging and adequate tissue acquisition of perihilar biliary strictures by EUS are often difficult. As such, it would be practical to triage the use of cholangioscopy and EUS for IDBS evaluation based on stricture location (Fig. 10). In a prospective study of 59 patients with obstructive jaundice from suspected MBS and inconclusive ERCP‐based tissue sampling, the stricture location‐based evaluation approach demonstrated a high diagnostic accuracy for malignancy in cholangioscopy‐guided biopsy for proximal biliary strictures (93.6%) and EUS‐FNA/FNB for distal biliary strictures (96.3%).
Algorithm for endoscopic evaluation of biliary strictures. ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; IDUS, intraductal ultrasound.

FOLLOW‐UP STRATEGY FOR PATIENTS WITH INCONCLUSIVE RESULTS BY CHOLANGIOSCOPY AND EUS
Figure 10 outlines a practical approach for endoscopic evaluation of biliary strictures. If positive tissue diagnosis for malignancy is obtained at any stage of the endoscopic workup, patients would undergo treatment for malignancy per standard of care. If tissue sampling is negative for malignancy but cholangioscopic visual impression and/or EUS imaging findings are suggestive of malignancy, cholangioscopy‐guided biopsy and/or EUS‐guided FNA should be repeated. Despite an exhaustive effort to exclude malignancy, inconclusive workup by cholangioscopy and EUS can still occur in a subgroup of patients, in whom follow‐up cross‐sectional imaging should be arranged for the biliary stricture. If there is progression of the biliary stricture on follow‐up imaging, tissue sampling by ERCP with cholangioscopy and/or EUS should be repeated.

CONCLUSION
Timely and accurate diagnosis of IDBS remains challenging. In patients with inconclusive results by ERCP‐based tissue sampling, cholangioscopy and EUS are the logical next step in clinical management. Because each modality has its own strengths and limitations, selection of cholangioscopy and EUS is best guided by the location of the biliary stricture and local expertise. Recent technological advances such as AI‐assisted diagnosis, biopsy forceps with improved design, contrast‐enhanced EUS, and dedicated FNB devices have the potential to further improve the diagnostic performance of cholangioscopy and EUS in patients with IDBS.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The author declares no conflicts of interest for this article.

FUNDING INFORMATION
None.

REFERENCES
Evaluation of indeterminate biliary strictures
Hepatic and extrahepatic malignancies in primary sclerosing cholangitis
Consensus guidelines on the role of cholangioscopy to diagnose indeterminate biliary stricture
Patients with obstructive jaundice and biliary stricture +/− mass lesion on imaging: Prevalence of malignancy and potential role of EUS‐FNA
Intraductal biliopancreatic imaging: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) technology review
Asia‐Pacific consensus recommendations for endoscopic and interventional management of hilar cholangiocarcinoma
Practical management of indeterminate biliary strictures
Comparative effectiveness of biliary brush cytology and intraductal biopsy for detection of malignant biliary strictures: A systematic review and meta‐analysis
Transpapillary tissue sampling of biliary strictures: Balloon dilatation prior to forceps biopsy improves sensitivity and accuracy
Comparison of tube‐assisted mapping biopsy with digital single‐operator peroral cholangioscopy for preoperative evaluation of biliary tract cancer
Clinical impact of a novel device delivery system in the diagnosis of bile duct lesions: A single‐center experience
A comparison of routine cytology and fluorescence in situ hybridization for the detection of malignant bile duct strictures
Routine brush cytology and fluorescence in situ hybridization for assessment of pancreatobiliary strictures
Triple modality testing by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography for the diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma
Role of fluorescence in situ hybridization in diagnosing cholangiocarcinoma in indeterminate biliary strictures
Role of fluorescent in situ hybridization, cholangioscopic biopsies, and EUS‐FNA in the evaluation of biliary strictures
Cholangiocarcinoma 2020: The next horizon in mechanisms and management
Integrating next‐generation sequencing to endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)‐obtained biliary specimens improves the detection and management of patients with malignant bile duct strictures
Peroral direct cholangioscopy (PDCS) using routine straight‐view endoscope: First report
Single‐operator cholangioscopy in patients requiring evaluation of bile duct disease or therapy of biliary stones (with videos)
Digital, single‐operator cholangiopancreatoscopy in the diagnosis and management of pancreatobiliary disorders: A multicenter clinical experience (with video)
Using single‐operator cholangioscopy for endoscopic evaluation of indeterminate biliary strictures: Results from a large multinational registry
Digital single‐operator peroral cholangioscopy‐guided biopsy sampling versus ERCP‐guided brushing for indeterminate biliary strictures: A prospective, randomized, multicenter trial (with video)
Therapeutic role of direct peroral cholangioscopy using an ultra‐slim upper endoscope
Prospective randomized trial of a new multibending versus conventional ultra‐slim endoscope for peroral cholangioscopy without device or endoscope assistance (with video)
Diagnostic performance of different cholangioscopes in patients with biliary strictures: A systematic review
Identification of endoscopic predictors of biliary malignancy during digital cholangioscopy
Single‐operator cholangioscopy and targeted biopsies in the diagnosis of indeterminate biliary strictures: A systematic review
Diagnostic performance of digital and video cholangioscopes in patients with suspected malignant biliary strictures: A systematic review and meta‐analysis
Digital cholangioscopic interpretation: When north meets the south
Reliability and accuracy of a novel classification system using peroral cholangioscopy for the diagnosis of bile duct lesions
Digital single‐operator cholangioscopy (DSOC) improves interobserver agreement (IOA) and accuracy for evaluation of indeterminate biliary strictures: The Monaco classification
Diagnostic accuracy and interobserver agreement of digital single‐operator cholangioscopy for indeterminate biliary strictures
Digital single‐operator cholangioscopy interobserver study using a new classification: The Mendoza classification (with video)
Artificial intelligence for automatic diagnosis of biliary stricture malignancy status in single‐operator cholangioscopy: A pilot study
Identification of patients with malignant biliary strictures using a cholangioscopy‐based deep learning artificial intelligence (with video)
A real‐time interpretable artificial intelligence model for the cholangioscopic diagnosis of malignant biliary stricture (with videos)
Machine learning based diagnosis of malignancy during bile duct stricture evaluation using cholangioscopy
Efficacy and safety of digital single‐operator cholangioscopy in the diagnosis of indeterminate biliary strictures by targeted biopsies: A systematic review and meta‐analysis
Histological assessment of new cholangioscopy‐guided forceps in ERCP biliary stricture sampling: A blinded comparative study
Optimizing outcomes of single‐operator cholangioscopy‐guided biopsies based on a randomized trial
Intraductal ultrasound substantiates diagnostics of bile duct strictures of uncertain etiology
Comparative analysis of ERCP, IDUS, EUS and CT in predicting malignant bile duct strictures
Use of EUS‐FNA in diagnosing pancreatic neoplasm without a definitive mass on CT
Endoscopic ultrasound: A meta‐analysis of test performance in suspected biliary obstruction
Endoscopic ultrasound/fine needle aspiration is effective for lymph node staging in patients with cholangiocarcinoma
Clinical evaluation of new diagnostic modalities of endoscopic ultrasound for pancreaticobiliary diseases
Characterization of small solid tumors in the pancreas: The value of contrast‐enhanced harmonic endoscopic ultrasonography
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography versus endoscopic ultrasound for tissue diagnosis of malignant biliary stricture: Systematic review and meta‐analysis
Diagnostic yield of EUS‐guided FNA for malignant biliary stricture: A systematic review and meta‐analysis
EUS tissue acquisition: From A to B
Comparison of fine‐needle aspiration and fine‐needle biopsy devices for endoscopic ultrasound‐guided sampling of solid lesions: A systemic review and meta‐analysis
Needle tract seeding after endoscopic ultrasound‐guided tissue acquisition of pancreatic tumors: A nationwide survey in Japan
The diagnostic accuracy of endoscopic ultrasound in suspected biliary obstruction and its impact on endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography burden in real clinical practice: A consecutive analysis
Same‐session endoscopic ultrasound‐guided fine‐needle aspiration and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography‐based tissue sampling in suspected malignant biliary obstruction: A multicenter experience
Endoscopic ultrasound‐guided fine‐needle aspiration and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography‐based tissue sampling in suspected malignant biliary strictures: A meta‐analysis of same‐session procedures
Tissue acquisition for diagnosis of biliary strictures using peroral cholangioscopy or endoscopic ultrasound‐guided fine‐needle aspiration