Differential Diagnosis of Rare Subtypes of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy and PSP-Like Syndromes—Infrequent Manifestations of the Most Common Form of Atypical Parkinsonism
Presently, there is increasing interest in rare PSP (progressive supranuclear palsy) variants, including PSP-PGF (PSP-progressive gait freezing), PSP-PI (PSP-postural instability), PSP-OM (PSP-ocular motor dysfunction), PSP-C (PSP-predominant cerebellar ataxia), PSP-CBS (PSP-corticobasal syndrome), PSP-SL (PSP-speech/language disorders), and PSP-PLS (PSP-primary lateral sclerosis). Diagnosis of these subtypes is usually based on clinical symptoms, thus thorough examination with anamnesis remains a major challenge for clinicians. The individual phenotypes often show great similarity to various neurodegenerative diseases and other genetic, autoimmune, or infectious disorders, manifesting as PSP-mimicking syndromes. At the current stage of knowledge, it is not possible to isolate a specific marker to make a definite ante-mortem diagnosis. The purpose of this review is to discuss recent developments in rare PSP phenotypes and PSP-like syndromes.

Introduction
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) has been known for more than half a century, but most of the reports are on PSP-Richardson syndrome (PSP-RS) and PSP-P (PSP-Predominant Parkinsonism). Growing interest is now associated with less common PSP phenotypes, including PSP-PGF, PSP-PI, PSP-OM, PSP-C, PSP-F, PSP-CBS, PSP-SL, and PSP-PLS. Most of them are included in The Movement Disorders Society (MDS) criteria, introduced in 2017. This results in a higher sensitivity in the diagnosis of PSP compared with the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and the Society for PSP (NINDS-SPSP) criteria issued in 1996 (87.9% for MDS criteria versus 45.5% for NINDS-SPSP criteria). The pathology of PSP is a 4-repeat tauopathy, and its phenotypic diversity is related to the accumulation of tau protein in different brain areas. On the other hand, many other diseases may clinically resemble PSP. Effective in vivo studies of rare PSP phenotypes and PSP-mimicking syndromes are not available. This paper presents an overview and differential diagnosis of these disorders.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Subcortical

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Progressive Gait Freezing
The main symptom of PSP-PGF is a gradual increase in difficulty with gait initiation that is levodopa-resistant. Imaging studies show deterioration limited to the basal ganglia, including atrophy in volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and increased tracer uptake in 18F-flortaucipir positron emission tomography (PET).
PSP-PGF most often causes difficulties in the differential diagnosis with PSP-RS, Parkinson’s disease (PD), and vascular Parkinsonism. Analysis of the rate of progression of symptoms may be useful in distinguishing between the aforementioned diseases. Early supranuclear gaze palsy, particularly combined with advanced executive dysfunction, is usually associated with PSP-RS; whereas, in PSP-PGF, oculomotor dysfunction often appears later, even about 9 years after the onset of the first symptoms. Freezing of gait (FoG) is an early symptom in PSP-PGF; whereas, in PD, it generally occurs in late stages, and it is susceptible to levodopa and coexists with slowness of movement, tremor, and rigidity. Pons to midbrain area ratio (P/M ratio) differs among PSP-PGF, PSP-RS, and PD, with the highest ratio value for PSP-RS, the lowest for PD, and at an intermediate ratio for PSP-PGF. However, the precision of differentiation estimated at about 70% based on the P/M ratio is insufficient. Pyramidal tract dysfunction, ischemic changes on imaging studies, and a history of stroke may lead the diagnosis to vascular Parkinsonism, because these features are generally not characteristic of PSP-PGF.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Postural Instability
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Postural Instability (PSP-PI) is associated with predominant falls and balance problems. Some studies present a correlation between the damage to the indirect locomotor pathway with its connections to the pedunculopontine nucleus and postural instability in PSP patients. Decreased 18F-FDG-PET metabolism is observed in the structures involved in this circuit compared to the group of healthy controls; however, increased metabolism is found within the precentral gyrus. Precuneus, sensorimotor gyrus, frontal cortex, and parietal cortex present an increased uptake of 18F-THK5351 in PSP patients with unjustified, repetitive falls within 3 years [P1 feature according to the MDS criteria compared to the patients without P1 feature ].
PSP-PI may cause difficulties in the differential diagnosis with PSP-RS. One study evaluated symptoms progression in PSP variants. Among the 18 patients with PSP-PI, there was no oculomotor dysfunction during the first year of the disease. In a group of 24 patients with PSP-RS, this symptom was common, affecting approximately 40% of patients. Therefore, the appearance of supranuclear gaze palsy in the first year of the disease may argue against the PSP-PI, although the diagnosis should not be based solely on this one premise.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Ocular Motor Dysfunction
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Ocular Motor Dysfunction (PSP-OM) is associated with predominant oculomotor dysfunction. There is no imaging data in PSP-OM, but one study presents a correlation between the degree of decreased fractional anisotropy (FA) index in the midbrain in MRI and the severity of abnormal vertical eye movements in PSP. In PSP patients with supranuclear gaze palsy [feature O1 according to the MDS criteria ], midbrain damage is greater compared to those with slow velocity of saccades [feature O2 according to the MDS criteria ]. It is also consistent with another PET study that shows an increased 18F-THK5351 uptake in midbrain, raphe nucleus, and red nucleus in PSP patients with ocular motor dysfunction compared with the group without oculomotor abnormalities. The anterior cingulate cortex may also be involved in the pathogenesis of downward gaze palsy in PSP, since one study presents bilateral hypometabolism in the anterior cingulate cortex in 18-FDG-PET studies in these cases.
The differential diagnosis mainly includes PSP-RS. In one study, among 7 patients with PSP-OM, no falls were documented within the first year of the disease. In a group of 24 patients with PSP-RS, this symptom was common, affecting approximately 80% of patients. Therefore, the appearance of falls in the first year of the disease may argue against PSP-OM. This can be a valuable clue, but should not be the single determining factor in the diagnosis.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Predominant Cerebellar Ataxia
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Predominant Cerebellar Ataxia (PSP-C) appears to be a common subtype of PSP only in Asia, but the exact factors contributing to the disproportionate occurrence of this variant worldwide have not yet been determined. Precise diagnostic criteria for PSP-C are not established due to its rarity. Falls are not a differentiating factor with other subtypes, but they occur in almost all patients with PSP-C. There is a case of one patient with advanced-stage PSP-C with widening of the pontocerebellar cistern in MRI. To date, early-stage PSP-C has been documented in PET studies using [18F]PM-PBB3 also in only one patient. Increased tracer uptake was found in the midbrain, subthalamic nucleus, and dentate nucleus.
PSP-C may cause difficulties in the differential diagnosis with multiple system atrophy-cerebellar type (MSA-C) and with genetic PSP-like syndromes. PSP-C is usually associated with later disease onset than MSA-C (approximately 68.8 years versus 58.3 years) and the lack of autonomic dysfunction. Suspicion of genetic PSP-like syndrome with ataxia should be aroused primarily by a rapid and abrupt course and uncharacteristic neurological (stimulus-sensitive myoclonus, migraine, cataplexy, neuropathy, seizures) and non-neurological symptoms (splenomegaly, psychiatric symptoms, hearing loss). Differential diagnosis should include familial Creutzfeld Jacob disease (CJD), mitochondrial diseases (including polymerase-gamma mutations), adult- onset Niemann Pick disease type C (NPC), and spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 and type 3.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Cortical

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Corticobasal Syndrome
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Corticobasal Syndrome (PSP-CBS) is suggested by the overlapping of impaired limb motor function with apraxia, alien limb syndrome, and the disorder of cortical sensory function. Volumetric MRI can show asymmetric changes in the supplemental motor and premotor area of the cortex or prefrontal cortex in addition to atrophy of the basal nuclei, midbrain, and superior cerebellar peduncle. Asymmetric reduced 18F-FDG uptake in PET, compared to the group of healthy controls, was also found in the caudate nucleus, the anterior and middle area of cingulate gyrus, middle frontal gyrus and precentral gyrus.
PSP-CBS may cause difficulties in the differential diagnosis with Alzheimer’s disease (AD), frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TAR-DNA binding protein (FTLD-TDP), and corticobasal degeneration (CBD). Analysis of phosphorylated tau protein and amyloid-β1-42 levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and an amyloid PET scan may be necessary to rule out AD as a major cause of CBS. Myoclonus is not a differentiating factor with other diseases, but it often occurs in patients with CBS-AD. CBS-AD patients shows as an asymmetric decreased tracer uptake in 18F-FDG-PET and asymmetric atrophy in the MRI in the temporo-parietal areas as opposed to the changes in the PSP-CBS described above. On the other hand, in CBS-TDP, atrophy is more pronounced in the prefrontal areas. Genetic testing can be used to rule out the presence of mutations suggestive of FTLD, regarding mainly GRN gene. Differential diagnosis of PSP and CBD based on clinical presentation is extremely difficult, so PSP-CBS is generally classified as “probable 4R-tauopathy”.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Frontal
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Frontal (PSP-F) is generally associated with frontal lobe damage resulting in behavioural and cognitive impairment. In volumetric MRI, the prefrontal cortex is affected, along with the midbrain, basal ganglia, and superior cerebellar peduncle. One study shows a correlation between the deficit of executive functions in PSP and the reduced perfusion of the posterior area of the midcingulate cortex in technetium-99m-hexamethyl-propylenamine-oxime single photon emission computed tomography (99mTc-HMPAO SPECT). Patients included in the study were diagnosed as PSP-RS based on NINDS-SPSP criteria.
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), psychiatric disorders, FTLD-TDP, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration with tau pathology (FTLD-tau) may cause problems in the differential diagnosis of PSP-F. Alzheimer’s disease should be ruled out using CSF biomarkers or amyloid PET (as in the CBS-AD described above). Low level of neurofilament light chains (Nfl) in cerebrospinal fluid excludes neurodegeneration with a high likelihood; therefore, it may probably be useful in differentiating PSP-F with psychiatric disorders. Genetic causes of FTLD, including MAPT, PGRN and C9orf72 genes, should be excluded; C9orf72 is particularly often related to behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia, with the presence of motor neuron disease symptoms, which are absent in PSP-F. Cognitive problems in frontotemporal dementia with tau pathology was associated with low perfusion within the anterior midcingulate cortex in 99mTc-HMPAO SPECT in one study, as opposed to the PSP changes described above.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Speech/Language Disorders
Even more than 50% of patients with isolated non-fluent/agrammatic primary progressive aphasia (nfPPA) or progressive apraxia of speech (AoS) develops other symptoms that could lead to a diagnosis of PSP-SL in subsequent years. Progression correlates with the advance of the patient’s age, atrophy of the midbrain, and it is more common in patients with AoS. According to, in AoS “the dorsolateral premotor cortex, motor cortex proper, and supplementary motor areas” can be affected, while nfPPA is often related to the anterior involvement of the Sylvian fissure regions and opercular regions of the dominant hemisphere. This is reflected in the volumetric MRI findings with the atrophy of the motor cortex and premotor cortex, and with brainstem structures involved to a lesser extent. PET studies using 18F-flortaucipir follow the same pattern with increased tracer uptake in cortical areas. Similarly, there is a case of one patient with PSP and non-fluent progressive aphasia with predominant increased 18F-THK5351 uptake in cortical frontal areas in PET studies. NfPPA in PSP in 18F-FDG-PET studies can be correlated with decreased metabolism in the area of the left frontal lobe (including dorsolateral and medial areas).
PSP-SL causes difficulties in the differential diagnosis with FTLD-tau, FTLD-TDP, AD, and other PSP subtypes. FTLD-tau group account for the majority of all causes of nfPPA. Alzheimer’s disease pathology should be excluded by amyloid PET and CSF biomarkers (as in the CBS-AD described above). The fractional anisotropy (FA) index, which assesses the integrity of the white matter, is significantly lower in patients with PSP-SL compared to PSP-RS and PSP-P within the body of the corpus callosum.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Primary Lateral Sclerosis
Reports concerning PSP-PLS are non-specific, and this variant is not included in the MDS criteria. The presence of symptoms of upper motor neuron damage is a predominant element in the clinical presentation of this phenotype, while it is possible, but not necessary, to find features typical for PSP, including the most characteristic ones—falls and downward gaze palsy. Data on PSP-PLS imaging are limited. In neuropathological studies, an unusual distribution of tau accumulation is noted, with damage concerning mainly the motor cortex area, while relevant involvement of basal nuclei and brainstem is not a constant feature. Damage to the corticospinal tracts is also common.
With regard to the very limited reports on PSP-PLS, the diagnosis of this subtype is extremely difficult. Reduced FA in MRI-DTI in the superior cerebellar peduncle and corticospinal tracts can be a valuable diagnostic clue, as PLS patients with overlapping of PSP features can show damage not only to the corticospinal tract, but also to the superior cerebellar peduncle.
A summary of the differential diagnosis of rare variants of PSP is shown in Figure 1.
Summary of the differential diagnosis of rare Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) subtypes with the indication of uncharacteristic features that lead to deeper diagnostics in the direction of specific disease entities.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy-Like Syndromes

Genetic Progressive Supranuclear Palsy
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) can be associated with MAPT mutations. Early onset of the disease, even before the age of 45, suggest a MAPT mutation, as sporadic PSP usually develops the first symptoms at the age of 63–65. The presence of neurodegenerative diseases in family history further increases the likelihood of genetic PSP. The association of LRRK2 mutations with PSP is still uncertain due to inconsistent study results, but according to some authors, it is considered an extremely rare cause of PSP.
Various genetic diseases can mimic PSP in their clinical picture, and these are called PSP-like syndromes. Most of these are adverted in other subsections (genetic forms of FTLD, familial CJD, adult-onset NPC, mitochondrial diseases, spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 and type 3), but Perry syndrome and Kukor-Rakeb disease are also worth mentioning. Perry syndrome associated with a DNCT1 mutation can be related to a younger age of onset (approximately 56 years of age) and often with respiratory depression that are not typically found in the sporadic PSP. On the other hand, Kufor-Rakeb syndrome (ATP13A2 mutations) is unique, both for its unusually early onset in young adults and for its response to levodopa treatment.

Paraneoplastic and Autoimmune Progressive Supranuclear Palsy
Progressive supranuclear palsy-like phenotype is potentially related to paraneoplastic syndromes, due to its demonstrated association with anti-Ma1 and anti-Ma2, anti-Hu, anti-CRMP5, and anti-Ri onconeuronal antibodies. The latter appear to be frequently correlated with breast cancer. Other neoplasms associated with the syndrome include B-cell lymphoma, small cell lung carcinoma, and tonsil carcinoma.
Progressive supranuclear palsy-like syndrome may be also related to an autoimmune process. The dynamics of the development of symptoms in autoimmune PSP is different than in neuropathological PSP with the coexistence of atypical features (Table 1). The association of anti-LGI1, anti-IgLON5, and anti-DPPX antibodies has been demonstrated, but many neuronal antibodies responsible for described phenotype have not yet been characterised. Of particular interest are cases of anti-IgLON5 disease with PSP- like presentation. In both anti-IgLON5 disease and PSP, abnormal vertical eye movements are found; however, upward gaze palsy can predominate in anti-IgLON5 disease, and mainly downward gaze abnormalities are observed in PSP. The disease can last longer than sporadic PSP, and atypical symptoms may occur (Table 1). On the other hand, the presence anti-LGI-1 antibodies may be associated with rapid development of symptoms (within months) and clinical improvement following the introduction of immunotherapy.
Comparison of paraneoplastic, autoimmune and vascular Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) with neurodegenerative PSP.
Neurodegenerative PSP	Paraneoplastic PSP	Autoimmune PSP	Vascular PSP	Infectious PSP	 	Disease course	Insidious onset and slow progression (years) 	Rapid progression (months) 	Rapid progression (months) or long disease duration (up to 18 years) 	Sudden onset and rapid, gradual progression 	Rapid progression 	 	Cerebrospinal fluid	No established markers 	Possible:-elevated protein -elevated IgG -pleocytosis (lymphocyte↑) -onconeuronal antibodies 	Possible:-normal or inflammatory 	Limited data	-Polymerase chain reaction (+) for Tropheryma whipplei - elevated IgG, (+) VDRL test (Veneral Diseases Research Laboratory) 	 	MRI	Midbrain atrophy 	Normal or uncharacteristic changes without midbrain atrophy 	Limited data	Ischaemic changes in white matter and in basal ganglia 	Group of enhancing lesions/single mass, without midbrain atrophy 	 	Additional symptoms associated with neoplastic disease	Limited data	Possible:-haemoglobin↓, cachaexia, fever -history of neoplastic disease -paraneoplastic neurological symptoms, e.g., polyneuropathy 	Limited data	Limited data	Limited data	 	Risk factors of cerebrovascular disease	Hypertension 	Limited data	Limited data	Present (hypertension, diabetes, smoking, prior stroke, stenosis of carotid arteries) 	Limited data	 	Non-characteristic features in the clinical picture	Not applicable	Possible, e.g.,-horizontal gaze palsy and anterocollitis 	Possible, e.g., -response to immunotherapy -sleep disorders, facial dyskinesia 	Possible, e.g., -pathologic reflexes, unilateral paresis, facial nerve palsy -loss of bladder control, asymmetric symptoms involving mainly the lower body 	Possible, e.g.,-response to antibiotics, pupillary dysfunction -gastrointestinal symptoms,lymphadenopathy,weight loss, oculomasticatory myrhythmia -lack of square wave jerks, more impaired upward than downward saccades

Vascular Progressive Supranuclear Palsy
Vascular PSP is a rare syndrome associated with multiple ischemic lesions in various brain regions, including the brainstem, the basal ganglia, thalamus, frontal lobe, and cerebellum, without tau deposits characteristic of neurodegenerative PSP. Clinical signs usually include falls, dementia, and other symptoms that mimic tau-related PSP, but a thorough physical examination additionally reveals atypical features (shown in Table 1). The key element of medical evaluation among this group of patients seems to be the assessment of cardiovascular risk factors and the demonstration of ischemic changes on imaging studies.

Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Associated With Infectious and Parasitic Diseases
Progressive supranuclear palsy-like syndrome is a rare presentation of bacterial diseases, including Whipple disease and neurosyphilis, both with potential response to antibiotics. Neurological manifestations in Whipple’s disease usually do not appear until the advanced stages of the disease; however, in some cases, neurological disorders are the first and only symptoms of the disease. In contrast to neurodegenerative PSP, neurological examination reveals the lack of square wave jerks, more impaired upward than downward saccades, and oculomasticatory myrhythmia in some cases. Imaging studies can show varied changes, but without midbrain atrophy characteristic of tau-related PSP. In neurosyphilis, the presence of pupillary dysfunction is an important feature that may help in the differential diagnosis with tau- related PSP. Single cases of PSP-like syndrome in the course of viral infections (HIV virus) and parasitic diseases (neurocysticercosis) are also described in the literature, but data about them are very limited.
The differential features of paraneoplastic, autoimmune, vascular, infectious, and neurodegenerative PSP are given in the Table 1.

Conclusion
This work highlights the clinical diversity of PSP subtypes. The lack of optimal tools to make a precise ante-mortem diagnosis of rare PSP variants, especially in the early stages, still remains a major difficulty for clinicians. The development of neuroimaging methods, mainly nuclear imaging techniques, gives clinicians a chance to change the standards of patient management. To date, most reports have been related to differences in 18-FDG, 18F-flortaucipir and 18F-THK5351 uptake in PET across PSP variants, but new radiotracers are also emerging, such as [18F]PM-PBB3. Determination of specific uptake patterns of individual markers is likely to make a breakthrough in the diagnostics of rare variants of PSP in cases where this is difficult or impossible on the basis of clinical features. The problem concerning the exclusion of PSP-like syndromes seems to be particularly important due to the overlapping of symptoms, the lack of consistent criteria, and biomarkers. Precise diagnosis could potentially be used to include patients in clinical trials for new PSP therapies, and it is also important from the point of view of implementing treatment for reversible causes of PSP syndromes, since it offers a chance to improve the prognosis and even to reduce the neurological deficit in some cases. Further research is needed to find suitable in vivo “biomarkers” for the different variants of the disease. Nevertheless, this work allows clinicians to accurately target the medical examination and the anamnesis, which currently still remain the basis for the diagnosis of the rare variants of this atypical Parkinsonism.

Author Contributions
PK involved in the study design, data analysis, review of the literature, writing – original draft preparation, and writing – review and editing. NM, AM, BM, and DJ involved in the review and editing. PA involved in the study design, writing – review and editing, supervision, and final acceptance. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher’s Note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

References
Narcolepsy, REM sleep behavior disorder, and supranuclear gaze palsy associated with Ma1 and Ma2 antibodies and tonsillar carcinoma.
Corticobasal degeneration: key emerging issues.
Sensitivity and specificity of diagnostic criteria for progressive supranuclear palsy.
Functional correlates of vertical gaze palsy and other ocular motor deficits in PSP: an FDG-PET study.
Progressive supranuclear palsy with predominant cerebellar ataxia.
Unravelling genetic factors underlying corticobasal syndrome: a systematic review.
Whipple’s disease mimicking progressive supranuclear palsy: thediagnostic value of eye movement recording.
Movement disorders with neuronal antibodies: syndromic approach, genetic parallels and pathophysiology.
Perry syndrome with progressive supranuclear palsy-like phenotype in a Portuguese family – long-term clinical follow-up.
Primary progressive aphasias and apraxia of speech.
New diagnostics and therapeutics for progressive supranuclear palsy.
[18F]-THK5351 PET correlates with topology and symptom severity in progressive supranuclear palsy.
Falls in progressive supranuclear palsy.
Midcingulate involvement in progressive supranuclear palsy and tau positive frontotemporal dementia.
Primary lateral sclerosis as progressive supranuclear palsy: diagnosis by diffusion tensor imaging.
Progressive supranuclear palsy: advances in diagnosis and management.
Paraneoplastic syndrome mimicking progressive supranuclear palsy.
The clinical spectrum of freezing of gait in atypical Parkinsonism.
Clinical manifestations of the anti-IgLON5 disease.
Neurologic presentation of Whipple disease: report of 12 cases and review of the literature.
Progressive supranuclear palsy.
Altered ioflupane single-photon emission computed tomography in anti-IgLON5 disease: a new case mimicking probable progressive supranuclear palsy and review of the literature.
The corticobasal syndrome–Alzheimer’s disease conundrum.
Moaning phenomenon and rapidly progressive dementia in anti LGI-1 associated progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome.
RNA binding proteins and the pathogenesis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration.
Clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy: the movement disorder society criteria.
Comparison of regional brain atrophy and cognitive impairment between pure akinesia with gait freezing and Richardson’s syndrome.
18F-THK5351 PET imaging in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy: associations with core domains and diagnostic certainty.
Alzheimer’s disease and corticobasal degeneration presenting as corticobasal syndrome.
Genetics of progressive supranuclear palsy.
A case of progressive supranuclear palsy with predominant cerebellar ataxia diagnosed by [18F]PM-PBB3 tau PET.
Diagnosis across the spectrum of progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal syndrome.
Reversible progressive supranuclear palsy-like phenotype as an initial manifestation of HIV infection.
Clinicopathological study of vascular progressive supranuclear palsy: a multi-infarct disorder presenting as progressive supranuclear palsy.
Atypical progressive supranuclear palsy with corticospinal tract degeneration.
A serial MRI study in a patient with progressive supranuclear palsy with cerebellar ataxia.
Cerebellar involvement in progressive supranuclear palsy: a clinicopathological study.
Early clinical features of patients with progressive supranuclear palsy with predominant cerebellar ataxia.
Autoimmune atypical parkinsonism — a group of treatable parkinsonism.
Prodromal and early bvFTD: evaluating clinical features and current biomarkers.
Atypical progressive supranuclear palsy presenting as primary lateral sclerosis.
When DLB, PD, and PSP masquerade as MSA.
Cerebellar ataxia in progressive supranuclear palsy: an autopsy study of PSP-C.
Distribution patterns of tau pathology in progressive supranuclear palsy.
An autopsy-confirmed case of progressive supranuclear palsy with predominant postural instability.
Epileptic seizure as a precipitating factor of vascular progressive supranuclear palsy: a case report.
Prospective characterization of cognitive function in typical and ‘brainstem predominant’progressive supranuclear palsy phenotypes.
ÜBERSICHTSARBEIT: differenzialdiagnose und therapie der atypischen Parkinson-syndrome.
Characteristics of progressive supranuclear palsy presenting with corticobasal syndrome: a cortical variant.
Clinical research criteria for the diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy (Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome): report of the NINDS-SPSP International Workshop.
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI).
Progressive supranuclear gaze palsy without parkinsonism: a case of neuro-Whipple.
18F-FDG PET in Parkinsonism: differential diagnosis and evaluation of cognitive impairment.
Neurosyphilis presenting as progressive supranuclear palsy.
Progressive supranuclear palsy presenting as primary lateral sclerosis but lacking parkinsonism, gaze palsy, aphasia, or dementia.
Diagnostic accuracy of MRI parameters in pure akinesia with gait freezing.
Subacute supranuclear palsy in anti-Hu paraneoplastic encephalitis.
The clinical spectrum and natural history of pure akinesia with gait freezing.
Clinic, neuropathology and molecular genetics of frontotemporal dementia: a mini-review.
Primary Whipple’s disease of the brain: characterization of the clinical syndrome and molecular diagnosis.
FDG-PET patterns associated with underlying pathology in corticobasal syndrome.
Primary Whipple disease of the brain: case report with long-term clinical and MRI follow-up.
Role of cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers and (18)F-florbetapir PET imaging in the diagnosis of primary progressive aphasia: a retrospective analysis.
Imaging counterpart of postural instability and vertical ocular dysfunction in patients with PSP: a multimodal MRI study.
Hypertension and progressive supranuclear palsy.
Recent advances in the molecular basis of frontotemporal dementia.
The phenotypic spectrum of progressive supranuclear palsy: a retrospective multicenter study of 100 definite cases.
Clinical/scientific notes: glucose metabolism in progressive nonfluent aphasia with and without parkinsonism.
Progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome presenting as progressive nonfluent aphasia: a neuropsychological and neuroimaging analysis.
Four-repeat tauopathies.
Clinicopathologic subtype of Alzheimer’s disease presenting as corticobasal syndrome.
Study of LRRK2 variation in tauopathy: progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration.
18F-flortaucipir tau PET distinguishes established progressive supranuclear palsy from controls and Parkinson’s disease: a multicenter study.
Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia.
Progressive supranuclear palsy like syndrome: neurocysticercosis an unusual cause.
Is the pathology of corticobasal syndrome predictable in life?
Clinical spectrum and diagnostic pitfalls of neurologic syndromes with Ri antibodies.
Typical and atypical pathology in primary progressive aphasia variants.
“Atypical” atypical parkinsonism: new genetic conditions presenting with features of progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, or multiple system atrophy—a diagnostic guide.
Progressive supranuclear palsy: a heterogeneous degeneration involving the brain stem, basal ganglia and cerebellum with vertical gaze and pseudobulbar palsy, nuchal dystonia and dementia.
Anti- RI antibody associated progressive supranuclear palsy like presentation in a patient with breast carcinoma.
Paraneoplastic progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome in a patient with B-cell lymphoma.
DPPX potassium channel antibody: frequency, clinical accompaniments, and outcomes in 20 patients.
Cerebrospinal fluid biomarker examination as a tool to discriminate behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia from primary psychiatric disorders.
Midcingulate cortex: structure, connections, homologies, functions and diseases.
Genetics of progressive supranuclear palsy: a review.
Imaging correlates of pathology in corticobasal syndrome.
An evaluation of the progressive supranuclear palsy speech/language variant.
Brain volume and flortaucipir analysis of progressive supranuclear palsy clinical variants.
Diffusion tensor imaging analysis in three progressive supranuclear palsy variants.
Characteristics of two distinct clinical phenotypes in pathologically proven progressive supranuclear palsy: Richardson’s syndrome and PSP-parkinsonism.
Kufor Rakeb disease: autosomal recessive, levodopa-responsive parkinsonism with pyramidal degeneration, supranuclear gaze palsy, and dementia.
Pure akinesia with gait freezing: a third clinical phenotype of progressive supranuclear palsy.
Vascular progressive supranuclear palsy.
Functional disturbance of the locomotor network in progressive supranuclear palsy.
Postural imbalance and falls in PSP correlate with functional pathology of the thalamus.