Development and psychometric evaluation of the faculty members research vitality instrument: Protocol for mixed methods study
BACKGROUND:
Academic institutions are not just sites of education but also centers of innovation and research. The academic faculty is the cornerstone of these establishments and plays a crucial role in the progress of knowledge via research. To understand the significance of faculty members’ research vitality, we must first analyze the concept itself. It is well acknowledged but not yet fully understood that university faculty members must participate in “research vitality” in order to do high-quality research. The creation and assessment of faculty members’ “Research Vitality Instruments” is the goal of this study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS:
This mixed methods study will be conducted to develop and validate an instrument to measure research vitality in faculty members in three consecutive phases. In the first phase, a scoping review will be conducted to conceptualize the research vitality construct that would be completed by the second and qualitative phase that aims to explore the opinions of faculty members using semi-structured interviews. In the third phase, the psychometric properties of the instrument would be evaluated based on the stands for Consensus-based Standards for the selection of health Measurement guideline.
DISCUSSION:
This study first explains the concept of research vitality and identifies its dimensions and then designs a tool to measure the research vitality of faculty members of medical sciences universities. This tool can be used to get a detailed understanding of the research vitality of faculty members, which is an important component of producing quality knowledge in the field of health.

Introduction
In the present day, with the rapid increase of information and competition, humans continue to rely on knowledge to deal with and solve problems. In the field of health, the achieved medical and health achievements are the result of conducting targeted and applied research – without such research, it would not have been possible to reach the current situation in terms of controlling diseases and increasing public health. In 2004, the World Health Organization chose the slogan “Knowledge for Better Health” to use the generated knowledge to improve the health of society. On the other hand, universities, as the most important educational and research centers, have a role in leading society toward social, economic, and cultural goals. Faculty members are considered to be the main components of the university system, responsible for many educational and research duties. The degree of success of universities and higher education centers in responding to the needs of society depends on the quantity and quality of the performance of academic faculty members. Through research-oriented activities and policy-making as well as creating a research-oriented attitude among university professors, many of the local needs of society can be addressed through university research conducted by academic faculty members.
In explaining the roles of faculty members, four specialized activities have been proposed under the title of scientific-creative activities: carrying out various types of research, publishing research results, and translating research findings. Every university has a special and internal normative system, which is one of the universal characteristics of scientific environments; this causes the university life and, accordingly, the scientific life of the faculty members to have normative characteristics. The stronger this normative system and the quality of academic life of faculty members are, the more academic functions will be developed. The presence of any environmental tension in the academic environment can threaten physical and mental health and quality of life and hinder the achievement of personal and social development goals. Conversely, the existence of happy and lively academic faculty members can make negative beliefs, fear, stress, and failure go away from them and improve their personal and social relationships; this increases their self-confidence, their individual goals align with the educational and research goals of the university, and they subsequently reach a high level of conscientiousness in education and research matters. Today, vitality is considered as one of the important elements of mental well-being in many research systems. Well-being includes three dimensions: vitality, happiness, and purposefulness. Vitality, growth, and mental vitality have always been the focus of researchers due to their significant impact on all aspects of human personality, especially mental health. Therefore, many experts believe that vitality has both a physical and psychological aspect, and at the same time, it brings great enthusiasm and vitality and has a great impact on people’s happiness and satisfaction with life. Vitality helps to increase the performance of self-control and creativity of people.
The vitality of faculty members entered the discourse of higher education in the second decade of the 1980s. Rice and Austin consider academic vitality as the capacity or amount of sustainable investment of a university to realize organizational strategies that seek to support the career vitality of professors to achieve university goals and missions.
Gils trap and his colleagues have defined research vitality as the capability, along with liveliness and energy, desire, and perseverance, that faculty member in scientific and academic organizations experience in maintaining the quantity and quality of their research over a long period of time.
Despite the very important role of vitality in professional growth and success in carrying out tasks, especially research tasks, conducted studies show that professors’ lack of motivation and interest in research activities and finding research boring are important obstacles to conducting high-quality research in universities. Therefore, to increase the productivity and quality of research activities, stay in the field of scientific competition, and reduce tensions, it is suggested to increase and strengthen the vitality of academic faculty members in scientific environments. A reliable method to measure the research vitality of academic faculty members in Iran and elsewhere has yet to be designed. This research aims to explain the concept of research vitality, identify the influencing factors for it, and determine the components of the research vitality measurement tool in the next step.
Explaining the concept of research vitality
Identifying the initial components of the research vitality measurement instrument
Determining the face validity of the research vitality measurement instrument
Assessing the content validity of the research vitality measurement instrument
Assessing the construct validity of the research vitality measurement instrument
Estimating the reliability of the research vitality measurement instrument.

Material and Methods

Study design and setting
This study is a mixed method that will be conducted to develop and validate an instrument to measure research vitality in faculty members in three consecutive phases. In the first phase, a scoping review will be conducted to conceptualize the research vitality construct that would be completed by the second and qualitative phase that aims to explore the opinions of faculty members using semi-structured interviews. In the third phase, the psychometric properties of the instrument would be evaluated based on the stands for Consensus-based Standards for the selection of health Measurement (COSMIN) guideline.

Ethical consideration
This mixed exploratory study was approved by the Ethical Committee of Isfahan University of Medical Sciences (IR.MUI.NUREMA.REC.1402.024).
All ethical principles have been taken into account, including that the participants will be informed about the purpose of the research and the steps of its implementation. Also, they are assured of the confidentiality of their information, written consent is obtained from the subjects, and they can leave the study whenever they want, and if they request, the research results will be provided to them.

Study participants and sampling
This study will be conducted with the aim of developing and validating a tool to measure the research vitality of academic staff members of Iranian medical sciences universities. The study has started from December 2023. The statistical community will be all basic and clinical faculty members.

Data collection tool and technique
This study will be done in three phases. In the first phase, a scoping review will be conducted to explain and identify the components of the research vitality. In the second phase, by using semi-structured interviews, the opinions of faculty members will be obtained. In the third phase, the validity and reliability of this instrument were assessed among 200 faculty members.
The data collection process for this research involves three steps. First, a thorough definition of the concept’s essence and components must be established using an acceptable approach, ensuring that the subject’s structural dimensions are explicit and unambiguous. Next, a suitable questionnaire should be created. Finally, a confirmatory-exploratory mixed-methods approach should be taken, which combines qualitative and quantitative phases. The qualitative phase examines theories, models, ideas, and phenomena using constructivism’s philosophy, while the quantitative phase identifies and measures variables and statistical trends guided by the positivist philosophy. Finally, three steps are considered for this as follows:

Phase I: A scoping review
A scoping review, also known as a mapping review, consists of six steps. The scoping review involves systematically updating the literature on a topic by identifying key concepts and definitions. In the current research, a scope review is done to explain the concept of research vitality and identify its components. In this section, the following steps are performed:
Determination of research questions: In the first part of the research questions, with the aim of identifying the main dimensions and components proposed in the design of tools related to research vitality, the initial questions are formed in the researcher’s mind and by searching related texts, the questions are formulated in a better way.
Determining the studies conducted in PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, Science Direct, and ProQuest; answering the main research question; and explaining the concept of research vitality.
Study selection: The review process includes the initial screening of the title and abstract and a full review of the identifiable text. In the current research, the entry and exit criteria such as language, topic, and target community and the type of research used in the documents will be checked by the research team (students, supervisors, and advisors), and if there is a consensus, qualified documents will be selected for the next stage.
Data mapping: This gives the bibliographic data in tabular form (author’s name, year of publication, place, aims, method, findings, indicator extract, and results).
Collecting, summarizing, classifying, and reporting the results: Providing an overview of all the materials reviewed and reviewing the potentially large amount of overlooked topics.
Consult with experts: At the end of this step, experts and specialist researchers are consulted for the development and scope of the research. In Figure 1 and Table 1, six steps of phase two and the search strategy are shown:
Research process flow chart (scoping review)
Search strategy
Result		Search strategy		Databases	 	ISI Result: 63		Results for (research Vitality) (Title) OR (academi* vitality) (Title) OR “facult* member” (Title) OR “university vitality” (Title) OR “Maintaining Vitality” (Title) OR “Job* vitality” (Title) OR “career vitality” OR” Education vitality”(Title) and Article or Review Article (Document Types) and English (Languages).		Web of Sciences	 	Pubmed rasult: 164		(“research Vitality”) OR ([Title/Abstract] OR “Academi* vitality”[Title/Abstract] OR “facult* member” “[Title/Abstract] OR “ university vitality” [Title/Abstract] OR “maintaining vitality”[Title/Abstract] OR “job*vitality”[Title/Abstract] OR “career* vitality”[Title/Abstract]) OR” Education vitality” [Title/Abstract] Filters: Books and Documents, Meta-Analysis Sort by: Publication Date		PubMed	 	Scopus: 553		(TITLE-ABS-KEY (“research Vitality”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“Academi* vitality”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“facult* vitality”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“ university “) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“maintaining vitality”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“job vitality”) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY (“career vitality”)) OR TITLE-ABS-KEY Education vitality”AND (LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, “ar”) OR LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, “re”) OR LIMIT-TO (DOCTYPE, “ch”)) AND (LIMIT-TO (LANGUAGE, “English”)) AND (LIMIT-TO (SRCTYPE, “j”) OR LIMIT-TO (SRCTYPE, “b”))		Scopus	 	Proquest result: 286		title (research Vitality) OR title (Academi* vitality) OR title (facult* vitality) OR title (maintaining vitality) OR title (job* vitality) OR title (career vitality) OR title(Education vitality) OR title (University vitality).		ProQuest

Phase II: Qualitative study
At this point, the purposeful sampling method will be used to conduct a semi-structured interview with the faculty members working in the medical sciences universities of the nation in order to finish the scope review stage and to gain deep insight into the elements of research vitality. The participants will coordinate the timing of the interviews, which will go on until all the data have been collected. The interviews will continue until no new information can be obtained and data saturation is reached. Data will be analyzed using conventional content analysis. First, the meaning units will be determined; then, the meaning units will be coded, and the codes will be condensed; finally, the codes will be categorized into sub-categories and main categories. The following seven stages will be used to complete this phase [Figure 2].
Research process flow chart (qualitative study)
Data collection process: Data collection tools in the complementary interview section will be semi-structured interviews. In this type of interview, general questions and issues are usually raised to build trust and communication between the interviewer and the interviewee. Also, the researcher prepares a large number of questions to be asked in the interview session in advance additionally; the researcher prepares a substantial number of questions in advance to ask during the interview session.
Research environment: In this study, the research environment is Iran’s universities of medical sciences.
Research community and sampling method: In this study, to identify and select the participants, a targeted sampling method with maximum diversity in terms of gender, academic rank, research performance, university level (types 1, 2, and 3), and educational group (clinical and basic sciences) will be used.
Inclusion criteria: The criteria for entering the study in the current research are being a member of the academic faculty of Iranian universities of medical sciences, having at least 4 years of experience, publishing at least four articles as the first or responsible author, and willing to participate in the research.
Exclusion criteria: Unwillingness of the participants to continue cooperation in the research.
The accuracy and strength of the data: Data accuracy will be obtained by Lincoln and Guba’s five criteria: credibility, dependability, conformability, transferability, and authenticity.
Analysis: The data analysis approach will be qualitative content analysis. Six steps of the framework analysis approach will be used to study the data: analysis, familiarization stages, identification of a theme framework, coding, diagramming, and last planning and interpretation.

Phase III Psychometric tool
Validity check (form, content, and structure) and tool reliability check are the two components of this step of the study, Figure 3.
Research process flow chart (psychometric tool)
Qualitative face validity: The research team reviews the questionnaire items to determine their comprehensibility, appropriateness, or any potential ambiguity in the meaning of the items, and experts are consulted to make changes to the questionnaire. The questionnaire items are rated on a 5-point Likert instrument (absolutely important, somewhat important, moderately important, somewhat essential, and not at all important), and the final score will be calculated using the following formula: Impact Score = Frequency (%) × Importance. Items with an impact score of equal to or >1.5 were retained, and other items were deleted.
Content validity index (CVI): Experts are asked to rate the three criteria of relevance or specificity, simplicity and fluidity, and clarity or transparency using a four-part Likert instrument. For example, to measure the relevance of the options, not relevant = 1, relatively relevant = 2, relevant = 3, and completely relevant = 4 are used. Then, the CVI is calculated using the CVI formula. Previous research indicates that the appropriate CVI value for each item (I-CVI) should be greater than 0.79. Any items whose CVI value is lower than this value are removed. Next, the average CVI of the entire instrument (Ave/CVI-S) is calculated based on the mean values of the CVI of all questionnaire items. Polite and Beck suggested a value of 0.9 or higher for approval.
Construct validity: To assess concept validity, factor analysis (exploratory and confirmatory) will be utilized.
Construct reliability: The internal and external consistency of the questionnaire will be assessed in this study to determine its reliability. Calculating internal consistency, which shows the agreement of the instrument’s various dimensions, yields internal dependability. Or, to put it another way, are the components of a tool conceptually consistent with one another? The stability evaluation method is also used to evaluate the external consistency. The stability of the questionnaire will be calculated over time.

Discussion
The presence of any tension in the academic environment can threaten physical and mental health and quality of life and prevent the achievement of personal and social development goals. On the contrary, the existence of happy and lively academic faculty members can reduce negative beliefs, fear, stress, and failure and improve their personal and social relationships. This can also boost the self-confidence of academic faculty members, providing them with the certainty that their individual goals will be realized in line with the educational and research goals of the university, leading to a high level of conscientiousness in education and research matters. Research vitality refers to the ability, energy, vitality, and perseverance experienced by faculty members in scientific organizations in maintaining their research quantity and quality over an extended period.
Vitality is considered an important element of mental well-being in many research systems. However, the research vitality of faculty members has not been sufficiently considered. Currently, there is no tool to measure the research vitality of faculty members. Thus, this study first explains the concept of research vitality and identifies its dimensions and then designs a tool to measure the research vitality of faculty members of medical sciences universities. This tool can be used to get a detailed understanding of the research vitality of faculty members, which is an important component of producing quality knowledge in the field of health.

Limitation and recommendation
Access to the interviewees and the panel of experts, the multi-stage nature of the research, and the long time of the stages are some of the limitations of this research. These solutions are used to solve these limitations: Using various data collection methods, maximizing available resources, and maximizing available resources by modifying research questions, narrowing the focus, or using technology (e.g., online surveys, remote interviews).

Conclusion
The result of this protocol study is envisioned to be the creation of a reliable and valid instrument that can be widely used to gauge and enhance research vitality among faculty members. Also, a protocol study article outlines the detailed methodology, procedures, and design of a research study before the actual data collection and analysis take place. It acts as a comprehensive plan or roadmap for the research, specifying the objectives, methodology, participant selection criteria, data collection tools, and analysis techniques that will be employed.

Ethics and dissemination
Ethical approval for this study was granted by the Research Ethics Committee of Isfahan University of Medical Sciences (IR.MUI.NUREMA.REC.1402.024) (https://ethics.research.ac.ir/EthicsProposalViewEn.php?id=337757) Researchers will consider all ethical considerations, such as loyalty to the scientific content of the papers included in this study. The study results will be disseminated to stakeholders, published in peer-reviewed journals.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

References
Lessons learned from the research performance of Tabriz University of Medical Sciences in the covid-19 pandemic
Comparison of models and frameworks for measuring the effect of medical research
Examining The Teaching Load Of Academic Staff Members In Mazandaran University
Examining the quality of working life of faculty members of Iran’s public universities and providing solutions to improve it
A Brief Mindfulness Intervention for Healthy College Students and Its Effects on Psychological Distress, Self-Control, Meta-Mood, and Subjective Vitality
The” what” and” why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-determination of behavior
Human relations in school
Investigating the relationship between organizational climate and happiness and vitality in the academic faculty members of Al-Zahra University
Vitality and vigor: Implications for healthy functioning
Emotional Vitality and Incident Coronary Heart Disease: Benefits of Healthy Psychological Functioning
Promoting Vitality in Health and Physical Education
Characterisation and measurement methods for author productivity and research vitality: A study of the R and D management field
Academic buoyancy in second level schools: insights from Ireland
Helpful self-control: Autonomy support, vitality, and depletion
Forced to be bad: The positive impact of low-autonomy vice consumption on consumer vitality
High faculty morale what exemplary colleges do right
Research vitality as sustained excellence: what keeps the plates spinning?
Examining the barriers to conducting research from the perspective of faculty members of Isfahan University of Medical Sciences
Examining the obstacles and challenges of research and science production in universities of medical sciences
Examining the obstacles and problems of research in the field of medical sciences in Iran from the perspective of the membersFaculty, research experts and students: a systematic review
Designing and conducting mixed methods research: Sage publications
Basics of instrumentation in health sciences
Building Tools For Measuring Research Variables In Psychology And Educational Sciences: Tests and Questionnaires
Principles of scale development in health science
Examining the obstacles and problems of research in the field of medical sciences in Iran from the perspective of the members. Faculty, research experts and students: A systematic review