Waste engine oil as a sustainable approach for asphalt rejuvenation and modification: A review
The significant growth in road infrastructure worldwide over the last decade has resulted in a notable increase in the demand for asphalt binder. However, the utilization of asphalt binder in the road industry poses challenges to environmental sustainability and economic standpoints. The application of vehicular loads and exposure to environmental factors throughout the service life of roads contribute to the deterioration of binder properties, such as hardening and aging, ultimately leading to premature road failure. Therefore, researchers have strived to explore further alternative materials to overcome these challenges, to improve the performance of flexible pavements. Waste Engine Oil (WEO) is one such material that has shown promising effects on asphalt binder. This review aims to conduct an in-depth analysis of previous literature to explore the potential utilization of WEO as a modifier and rejuvenator for asphalt binders. WEO effectively rejuvenates aged asphalt binders, however, the required quantity for rejuvenation varies depending on asphalt characteristics. It was found that the inclusion of the WEO as asphalt modifier significantly affects the high-temperature properties of the WEO-modified asphalt binder. Conversely, WEO addition enhances lower temperature properties, improving thermal and fatigue resistance. Furthermore, the compromise properties of WEO-modified asphalt are enhanced by incorporating various additional additives such as lignin, SBS, polyphosphoric acid and crumb rubber. It was revealed that composite modification can partially substitute 8–15 % asphalt binder, which would be a way forward in cost-effective sustainable construction in the pavement industry. However, additional research is necessary to explore futuristic advancements in WEO modification technology.

Introduction
The significant development since the last decade throughout the world infrastructure has led to more construction of roads. Flexible pavements are the major part of the road network system, which generally consists of asphalt binder and aggregates. Asphalt binder, derived from crude oil is vastly recognized as a non-renewable resource. The escalating cost of petroleum-based binders, driven by reduced petroleum reserves compels researchers to seek alternative materials. Presently, the worldwide trend is shifting towards a sustainable, cost-effective and environmentally friendly approach. The researchers are trying to explore various renewable materials to help sustainable construction as well as ensure the enhanced performance of roads under various conditions. The purpose of binder in asphalt mixture is to serve as an adhesive agent and to bind the different sizes of aggregates properly. The unmodified asphalt binder shows a premature failure of pavements and it is necessary to enhance the properties of asphalt binder. The advantage of using modifiers in asphalt binder is to increase the high and low-temperature properties and enhance the material performance to bear the weathering effects and dynamic vehicular loading. This process can overcome premature failures like rutting, and fatigue cracking, thereby extending the span life of the asphaltic pavement.
Over the past few decades, various forms of waste materials have been utilized to improve the characteristics of conventional asphalt binder. Currently, various types of oils have garnered researchers' interest in enhancing binder characteristics, thereby contributing to sustainable construction practices in the pavement industry. Numerous studies have investigated oil modifiers and rejuvenators, assessing their significant advantages in enhancing performance and extending the service life of asphaltic roads. The use of 30 % castor oil in aged asphalt binder tends to reduce the stiffness and enhance the ductility of the resulting binder. Research carried out on soybean oil suggested a notable rejuvenation effect and successfully reduced the stiffness and brittleness of reclaimed asphalt binder. Bio-oil produced from sawdust has resulted in reduced viscosity and complex shear modulus which ultimately reduced the rutting potential of asphalt binder. However, results showed improved impact on fatigue and thermal cracking resistance. A study done by Tarar et al. on sunflower oil modified asphalt binder claimed that 5 % quantity has shown significant improvement in high-temperature properties. Apart from using various types of bio-oils, waste engine oil has been studied by different researchers to contribute in the sustainable approach in the pavement industry while ensuring the improved performance of the resulting binder.
Engine oil is the production from the petroleum distillation process which has been used in automobile engines for their efficient work. Engine oil accumulates contaminants and various hazardous chemicals due to the prolonged operations of the vehicles. This engine oil is now changed with the new one and the contaminated engine oil is known as waste engine oil (WEO). Due to the global increasing trend of vehicles, the production of WEO has also increased. According to statistics, around 45 million tons of waste engine oil from the automobile industry is produced annually and only 40 % is handled and collected properly. The US Department of energy claimed that most of the WEO is utilized in the production of fuel. However, the combustion process generates air pollution that poses a serious threat to human health. Therefore, WEO can be a potential waste material to address the various challenges regarding waste management, environmental pollution and economic standpoints.
Several investigations have been carried out to determine the overall effectiveness of WEO-modified asphalt binders. Based on earlier research, it was suggested that WEO is a potential waste material in the pavement industry, particularly as a modified binder demonstrating a significant performance at intermediate and low temperatures. However, high-temperature characteristics of WEO-modified binders are compromised as the addition of WEO resulted in higher penetration and lower softening points, which makes the binder softer. Therefore, it is supposed that soft binders cannot work effectively, potentially leading to poor rutting resistance. In addressing challenges related to the high-temperature properties of WEO-modified asphalt binder, researchers utilized additional additives such as lignin, crumb rubber and styrene butadiene styrene (SBS). These studies concluded that WEO-modified binder with additional modifiers enhances its performance in high temperatures without compromising its low-temperature characteristics. This can improve the properties of asphaltic roads leading towards more durable and long-lasting pavement, which is beneficial in waste management and terms of economic concerns.
Structure of review article.
Fig. 1
Therefore, this review article emphasizes WEO modified/rejuvenated asphalt binder and focuses on possible solutions for the mentioned problems to contribute to the sustainable construction of roads. Thus, an overview of the development of pavement materials over the past several years has been outlined and discussed. Asphalt binder and mixture properties modified with WEO and WEO/additional additives were also reviewed. The structure of the review paper is illustrated in Fig. 1.

Methodology
Method adopted for literature review.
Fig. 2
A four-step sample selection procedure was used for the identification of related papers, i.e., selection of database, primary searching, sample selection and filtering the samples. The method adopted for the sample selection is illustrated in Fig. 2. Moreover, various data sources like Web of Science, Google Scholar, Scopus and Transport Research International Documentation (TRID) were used for the current review. Thus, following a primary comparison and analysis, it was revealed that the Web of Science contained the most related research and was utilized as the most key search database. Google Scholar with various keywords and strings was used i.e., Waste engine oil; Used engine oil; Recycled engine oil; Waste engine oil modified binder; and sustainability to enhance the sample refinement. After this process, many articles related to waste engine oil and asphalt binder were found. For relevant article selection, all irrelevant research was excluded by reviewing the title and abstract. Analysis of articles had been done comprehensively and 35 research articles which were significantly relevant to the current study were selected for further in-depth and detailed review.
Citation network.
Fig. 3
In the meanwhile, citation analysis was carried out to pinpoint the key research documents using VOSviewer software. The analysis was done to quickly understand the relationship between the included citations for this particular review article. This analysis focuses on identifying clusters based on citations received by researchers. For citation analysis, a minimum threshold of 15 citations per document was set as the requirement and 74 publications met the criteria. The analysis further verified that there are 11 clusters representing groups of documents that are frequently cited together, suggesting that these documents are related in terms of their research themes. The analysis also showed that there are 185 links which means that there are 185 citation connections between documents in the network. So overall, 11 clusters with 185 links show a complex structure, that provides insight into how these groups relate to each other in the citation network. The graphical representation of citation analysis was shown in Fig. 3.

Waste engine oil (WEO)

Physical and chemical properties of WEO
Physical properties of WEO.
Table 1
Viscosity (Pa s)	Density (g/cm3)	State	Flash point (°C)	References	 	0.093 (30 °C)	–	Liquid	195		 	0.039 (60 °C)	0.86	Liquid	190		 	–	0.88	Liquid	220		 	0.033 (60 °C)	–	Liquid	195		 	–	0.91	Liquid	185		 	0.033 (40 °C)	0.87	Liquid	–		 	0.038 (40 °C)	0.88	Liquid	215		 	0.052 (40 °C)	0.85	Liquid	197		 	–	0.88	Liquid	210		 	0.038 (50 °C)	0.89	Liquid	198
WEO is a dark brown or black liquid with varying properties depending upon type and utilization. The temperature determines its state, which is usually liquid and lighter than water. It contains hydrocarbon molecules and the flash and fire point are the key parameters to consider for its flammable behavior. Flash point corresponds to the lowest temperature at which a substance flashes and is an important factor in determining its fire-catching capability. Viscosity plays an important role in its overall performance. Table 1 summarizes the physical properties of the WEO.
Chemical components in WEO.
Table 2
Carbon (%)	Nitrogen (%)	Sulphur (%)	Oxygen (%)	Hydrogen (%)	References	 	83.14	0.28	1.03	1.88	13.67		 	85.13	0.29	0.38	0.15	14.05		 	83.18	–	0.408	–	13.91		 	77.79	1.19	3.16	0.67	17.19		 	81.7	0.1	0.8	2.1	15.1		 	83	0.11	0.8	2.8	13		 	79.21	0.17	3.73	4.14	8.74		 	82.95	0.43	2.46	0.75	13.41		 	81.14	1.45	0.16	4.03	13.22
WEO normally consists of hydrocarbons due to its source of petroleum. The most dominant compounds among these hydrocarbons are aromatic and aliphatic. The research claimed that the specific gravity of WEO is low due to lighter aromatic contents. WEO consists of various chemical compounds and the molecular weight of these elements is smaller than 200 g/mol, which suggests that WEO is comprised of lower molecular weight elements. WEO consists of alkylbenzene and alkanes ranging from C9 to C12 with the highest peak area at C12. The key chemical compounds of WEO are paraffin oil, polyolefin oil and aromatic solvents and these groups resemble asphalt aromatics to make it with good compatibility with asphalt binder. As of continuous operation of engine oil within engine components at high temperatures, WEO accumulates various types of metals and contaminants, whereas the impurities and ash contents are less than 1 %. Table 2 describes the different chemical elements present in waste engine oil.

Blending parameters
Waste Engine Oil (WEO) served as a rejuvenator for aged asphalt binder due to its low viscosity (high fluidity) characteristics. It has capability to retain the smaller molecular components that are depleted as a result of the extensive aging of the asphalt binder. Similarly, based on these attempts, researchers have started to explore WEO usage as a modifier to boost the performance of asphalt binders. Asphalt binder modification using WEO requires proper blending parameters for the production of a better homogeneous material. However, no standard blending parameters are available for WEO-modified asphalt. At present, shearing time, shearing rate and shearing temperature are the key parameters while preparing a modified asphalt binder. However, the influence of the shearing rate on asphalt binder modification is lower than the other mentioned parameters. When the shearing rate approaches the optimum level, further enhancement in the shearing rate has produced no significant effect on modified binder preparation and it will certainly consume more electrical energy. However, according to Ma et al., the optimum shearing temperature is a key parameter in the preparation process of modified asphalt binder. It was stated that too low-shearing temperature may cause the homogenization problem between the WEO and the asphalt binder, while the excessive shearing temperature can accelerate the oxidative reactions, leading to rapid aging of the binder. This can result in increased stiffness and brittleness over time, as WEO contains volatile components. Overall, excessive temperature degrades both the WEO and the binder, causing long-term performance issues like reduction in flexibility and increased susceptibility to thermal cracking. Similarly, shearing time also plays a significant role in the preparation of modified asphalt binders. Optimal shearing time must be selected for better homogenous material. As excessive shear time can increase the likelihood of oxidative aging due to continued exposure to air and elevated temperatures. This will certainly impact the long-term performance in terms of fatigue and thermal cracking resistance. On the other hand, too low shearing time causes insufficient mixing to uniformly distribute WEO throughout the bitumen matrix. This can result in phase separation, where WEO would not fully integrate with the asphalt binder. As a consequence, various portions of the binder might have variations in properties, leading to inconsistent performance.
Mixing parameters of WEO-modified asphalt binder.
Table 3
Shear temperature (°C)	Shear time (min)	Shear rate (rev/min)	Researchers	 	150	30	2000		 	145	10	–		 	160	60	1000		 	160	30	4000		 	160	60	–		 	150	30	500		 	135	15	2000		 	170	30	4000		 	150	20	1500		 	145	10	3500		 	135	40	4000		 	160	40	1500
Table 3 describes the blending parameters for the production of WEO-modified asphalt binder from different studies. Lu et al. suggested that a higher shear rate and mixing temperature could produce a homogeneous blend of WEO and asphalt binder. Similarly, Fakhri & Norouzi, employed a shear mixer operating at 4000 rpm and a mixing temperature of 140 °C for 15 min to produce asphalt binder modified with WEO. Based on collective findings in the literature, it is indicated that employing a shear rate of approximately 1000–4000 rpm at temperatures ranging from 135 to 170 °C for approximately 20–60 min could be advantageous for better blended WEO-modified asphalt binder.

Effect of WEO on physical and rheological properties of aged and neat asphalt binders
To assess the performance of WEO rejuvenated/modified binder, physical and rheological properties are basic criteria often utilized by researchers. The impact of WEO on aged and neat asphalt binders from previous studies has been summarized in this section in terms of both physical and rheological characteristics.

Conventional properties
Effect of WEO on conventional properties of aged asphalt binder.
Table 4
WEO Content (%)	Penetration (mm)	Softening point (C)	Ductility (cm)	Viscosity (Pa s)	Penetration Index (PI)	Reference	 	0,3,6,9	49.1-61.2-82-93.8	54.8-51.2-48.1-43.2	–	0.60-0.35-0.20-0.15	–		 	0,1,2,3,4,5	29-33-38-43-50-60	64.4-59.4-54.7-50.2-45.9-43.7	32-47-60-78-98-104	0.543-0.47-0.455-0.405-0.365-0.335	0.7,0,-0.6,-1.4,-2.2,-2.5		 	0,3,6,9	26.5-30.9-37.2-45	64-60.1-58.2-51.5	–	1.2-1.1-0.9-0.7	–		 	0,3,6,9,12,15	13-17-26-38-48-59	79.2-75.1-71-66.9-53.5-48.9	17-22-30-46-60-77	0.95-0.9-0.87-0.72-0.69-0.51	–		 	0,2,3,4,5,5.5,6	32.2-42.2-48.5-52.2-59.5-63-68.6	62.3-58.4-56.5-51.5-49.1-45.7-44.5	–	1.17-1.10-0.7-0.62-0.45-0.43-0.41	–		 	0,4	36.7–58.7	56.8–54	49–95	1.092-0.802	–		 	0,1,2,3,4	50-60.1-75.6-85.5-105.2	55.2-50.1-48.2-45.1-41.2	25-51.5-75.6-107-124.5	0.9-0.77-0.7-0.65-0.61	0.02,-0.74,-0.65,-1.22,-1.93
Effect of WEO on penetration of aged asphalt binder.
Fig. 4
The conventional characteristics of asphalt binder are commonly described using penetration, softening point, viscosity, and ductility. Researchers in the last decade have explored the utilization of WEO as a rejuvenator to enhance the conventional properties of aged asphalt binders. Table 4 outlines the influence of WEO on the conventional properties of aged asphalt binder. Arshad et al. have described the rejuvenation effect by using 3,6 and 9 % WEO in aged asphalt binder. Penetration test results implied that incorporating WEO leads to rise in the penetration value of aged asphalt binder. The aged asphalt binder has a penetration value of 30.8 dmm and increased to 93.2 dmm with an addition of 9 % WEO. However, neat asphalt binder has a penetration value of 87.8 dmm, which suggests that the addition of WEO from 6 to 9% tends to produce the same asphalt grade. Conversely, a similar effect was observed on the softening point with an increased value of 63 °C. Banerji et al. conducted a similar study by incorporating 1–5% WEO in aged asphalt binders with a penetration value of 29 dmm. The results suggested that the adding WEO makes the asphalt binder softer with an increasing penetration value of 33 dmm to 61.5 dmm on adding 1–5 % of WEO content whereas the softening point value has declined from 59.4 °C to 43.7 °C as illustrated in Fig. 4a. Similarly, El-Shorbagy et al. utilized the 2–6 wt % WEO in aged asphalt binder with penetration and softening points of 32.2 dmm and 62.3 °C respectively as depicted in Fig. 4b. The findings indicated that incorporating higher concentration of WEO showed an increased penetration value of 68.6 dmm and a reduced softening point of 44.5 °C. Hence, incorporating WEO can enhance the fluidity of aged asphalt binders. Similarly, in other studies by Ismael and Bilema et al., WEO possesses the capability to reinstate the physical characteristics of asphalt binder. However, the appropriate dosage depends on how much rejuvenation is required as well as on the properties of aged asphalt binder.
Research done by Al-Saffar et al., emphasized the issue of reduced fluidity in aged asphalt binder, which was attributed to increased viscosity. It was reported that 7.5 % WEO has decreased the viscosity of aged asphalt binder from 1.55 Pa s to 0.625 Pa s. Similarly, Ismael has studied the effect of viscosity with the addition of 3,6 and 9 % WEO in aged asphalt binder. Results revealed the declination in viscosity of aged asphalt binder from 1.2 Pa s to 0.7 Pa s with the addition of 9 % WEO. This implies that aged asphalt binder's viscosity problem can be overcome with the inclusion of WEO. Additionally extensive researches conducted by Banerji et al. and H. Li et al., described the improvement in ductility of aged asphalt binder with the inclusion of WEO, which suggested that adding WEO can enhance flexibility and thermal cracking potential at low temperatures. The findings indicate that the inclusion of 5 % WEO to aged asphalt binder, with an initial ductility of 32 cm, can potentially increase the ductility beyond 100 cm. The study also carried out the effect of WEO on 5-h to 15-h aged asphalt binder. It indicates that a 5-h aged binder's ductile behaviour was easy to recover as compared to 15-h aged time. Hence, the optimum dosage of WEO depends on the aged asphalt binder's characteristics and how much rejuvenation effect is required. However, according to the literature, it was noted that 4–7% WEO quantity can retain the characteristics of aged asphalt binder into neat asphalt binder.
Effect of WEO on conventional properties of neat asphalt binder.
Table 5
WEO Content (%)	Penetration (mm)	Softening point (C)	Ductility (cm)	Viscosity (Pa s)	Penetration Index (PI)	Reference	 	0,5,7.5,10	36-49.1-61.3-68.8	63.5-56.5-51.25-48	71-92-120-130	1.55-1.1-0.625-0.450	–		 	0,5,10	78.5-98-124.5	49-44-41	–	0.42-0.3-0.25	−0.32,-1.17,-1.48		 	0,2,4,6,8,10	75-83.8-95.5-116.4-132.5-150.2	50-48.5-46.2-44.3-42.1-38.7	–	–	−0.18,-0.27,-1.03,-0.53-1.56,-1.78		 	0,2,4.6	64-82-104-130	51-48.5-46.5-45	–	0.28-0.26-0.24-0.22	–		 	0,2,4,6,8,10,12,14	62-64-69-77-88-105-121-136	53.3-53.25-52.2-51.1-49.6-48.15-46.95-44.65	–	0.73-0.61-0.51-0.43-0.38-0.35-0.32-0.28	–		 	0,1,2,4,7	69-75-78-106-133	51.4-49.9-49-48.1-43.9	–	0.6-0.52-0.5-0.38-0.34	–		 	0,2,4,6,8	86.1-101.3-111.4-138.9-214	49.6-45-43.7-41.8-37.8	–	–	0.9,-0.9,-1.40,-2.10,-2.63
Effect of WEO on penetration and softening point of neat asphalt binder.
Fig. 5
In addition to utilizing WEO as a rejuvenator, some scholars have also explored the impact of WEO on the conventional properties of neat asphalt binder, which are presented in Table 5. It was stated that a higher concentration of WEO enhanced the penetration and decreased the softening point of neat asphalt binder. According to conclusions drawn by Borhan et al. penetration of neat asphalt binder was observed to increase from 78.5 to 124.5 dmm with the inclusion of 5–10 % of WEO. As a result, the softening point findings verified a same pattern with a reduction from 49 °C to 42 °C. Hence, 5 and 10 % WEO tends to increase the penetration by 24 and 57 % while the softening point was reduced up to 8 % and 14 % respectively. Another research was conducted by Peng et al. on 80/100 penetration grade binders with varying WEO content. The 18, 29, 61 and 148 % increments in penetration while 9, 12, 16 and 24 % reductions in softening point were observed with the inclusion of 2, 4, 6 and 8 wt% WEO respectively as illustrated in Fig. 5. The reason behind the reduction of softening point was due to the addition of a lighter aromatic component from WEO which produced a softening effect in neat asphalt binder.
Effect of WEO on viscosity of asphalt binder at 135 °C.
Fig. 6
Upon further examining the WEO-modified asphalt binder, its flow characteristics are notably important, as indicated by the viscosity of the asphalt binder. This aspect holds significance in determining compaction and mixing temperatures. Fakhri & Norouzi, explored the viscosity of WEO-modified binder and reported that rotational viscosity at 135 °C was determined as 0.22 Pa s with 4 % WEO inclusion, while neat asphalt binder viscosity was 0.35 Pa s. The same kind of results were reported by Yalcin & Yilmaz, as showed in Fig. 6a. Similar patterns were stated by Borhan et al. when incorporating the WEO at 5–10 % of 80/100 asphalt binder. At a higher WEO dosage, viscosity decreased to 0.25 Pa s, in contrast to the viscosity of neat asphalt binder (0.42 Pa s) as depicted in Fig. 6b. The findings verified that the incorporation of a higher amount of WEO has reduced the viscosity more significantly. However, from both economic and environmental perspectives, a slight decline in viscosity is advantageous for the reduction in compaction and mixing temperature and hence to make the process more economical and sustainable
Temperature sensitivity is another important characteristic while selecting the asphalt binder and is demonstrated by penetration index (PI), which depends on penetration and softening point of asphalt binder as outlined in Table 4, Table 5. A lower PI value of binder indicates higher susceptibility to temperature and vice-versa Research conducted by Dahunsi & Idusuyi, and Banerji et al., suggested that a higher dosage of WEO has shown a lower PI value, which shows the higher temperature susceptibility. The boundary condition for the PI value for suitable asphalt binder is between +1 and −1. Banerji et al. revealed that more than 2 % addition of WEO in asphalt binder does not satisfy the PI range criteria. Similarly, Peng et al. have concluded the PI values of −0.54 and −1.40 at 2 and 4 % WEO respectively. However, an improved PI value of asphalt binder with a higher concentration of WEO in conjunction with other additives has been recorded.

Rheological properties
Effect of WEO on rheological characteristics of aged asphalt binder.
Table 6
WEO Content (%)	High temperature properties	Intermediate temperature properties	Low temperature properties	Reference	 	4	–	/	/		 	2,4,6,8	–	+	/		 	5.5	–	+	+		 	3,6,9	–	/	/		 	3,6,9,12,15	–	+	/		 	3,6,9	–	/	/		 	5,7.5,10	–	+	+		 	5,7.5,10	–	/	+		 	1,2,3,4	–	/	/
Note: “-” refers to a reduction in properties, “+” refers to strengthen the properties, “/” refers to not performed.
The asphalt binder has demonstrated viscoelastic behavior and is primarily dependent on frequency and temperature variation. Dynamic shear rheometer (DSR) is extensively used to determine the shear resistance of asphalt binder. Complex shear modulus (G∗) and phase angle (δ) are generally governing parameters to characterize the rheological behavior of asphalt binder. Rutting factor (G∗/sinδ) states the high-temperature properties while fatigue factor (G∗sinδ) refers to intermediate temperature properties of asphalt binder. As outlined by Superpave criteria, G∗/sinδ must surpass 1 kPa and G∗sinδ value should fall within the range of less than or equal to 5000 kPa. A bending beam rheometer (BBR) is normally conducted to characterize the low-temperature properties of asphalt binder. Two governing parameters creep stiffness (S) and creep rate (m) value decide the thermal cracking potential of the respective asphalt binder. As per Superpave specifications, the acceptable criteria for binders at any low temperature require that creep stiffness (S) be below 300 MPa and the m-value be greater than 0.3. Table 6 outlines the WEO effect on the rheological characteristics of the aged asphalt binders.
Fatigue factor (G∗sinδ) of aged asphalt binder.
Fig. 7
A recent study by Ismael, showed that WEO has affected the rheological properties of aged asphalt binder based on complex modulus (G∗). Reduction in G∗ value from 4100 Pa to 2900 Pa is reported with the addition of WEO from 0 to 9 % at 64 °C. As aged asphalt binder gets harder due to the oxidation process, WEO acts as a softening agent to reduce the binder stiffness to retain the neat binder stiffness properties. This research suggested that 9 % WEO can retain the G∗ value of aged asphalt binder into neat asphalt binder. H. Li et al. indicated that the phase angle value of aged asphalt binder has slightly increased from 85.5° to 87° with the addition of WEO content from 1 to 4 %. This indicates that, from a phase angle perspective, there is a slight reduction in the elastic behavior of aged asphalt binder. This is attributed to the transition of the binder structure from elastic to viscous. A similar type of trend was observed by Kumar & Aggarwal, as the phase angle of aged asphalt binder increased from 66° to 75° with the inclusion of 15 % WEO at a high-temperature range. This would suggest that the addition of more concentration of WEO tends to reduce elastic characteristics of asphalt binder significantly as more aromatic contents of oil shifted the binder towards the viscous characteristics. The results implied that the overall deformation resistance of asphalt binder gets reduced with incorporation of a higher concentration of WEO. Mohi Ud Din et al. have used 5,7.5 and 10 % WEO with aged asphalt binder to study the rutting and fatigue factor. Results revealed that incorporating WEO softened the aged asphalt binder and tended to reduce the G∗/sinδ value which caused to reduce the permanent deformation potential of the aged asphalt binder. High temperature performance grade of aged asphalt binder has been reported as PG-88 which is reduced to PG-76 with 10 % addition of WEO. Similarly, the G∗sinδ value is declined with the inclusion of rejuvenator WEO in aged asphalt binder which suggested the enhancement in the fatigue life of asphalt binder. The outcome of the research implied that a 10 % addition WEO in aged asphalt binder has enhanced the fatigue life up to 26.5 % as illustrated in Fig. 7. Similarly, in another study by Kumar & Aggarwal, 15 % WEO tends to reduce the G∗sinδ from 4965 kPa to 4028 kPa of aged asphalt binder. This indictes that the stiffness and brittleness of aged asphalt binder have substantially improved as WEO acts as a softening agent which ultimately improves the fatigue cracking potential of aged asphalt binder.
El-Shorbagy et al. further investigated WEO-rejuvenated binder and identified that WEO can enhance the thermal cracking resistance at low temperatures. BBR test at four low temperatures (0,-6,-12,-18 °C) was performed to evaluate the creep stiffness and creep m-value at 5.5 % WEO content. It was stated that the inclusion of WEO tends to reduce the creep stiffness up to 15–25 % and increase the creep-m value up to 10–15 % at all temperatures, which suggested the improvement of thermal cracking resistance of aged asphalt binder. Similarly, other detailed researches by Al-Saffar et al. and Al-Saffar et al. supported similar kind of results at low temperatures. The lower temperature makes the aged binder more brittle and harder, while the light aromatic component in WEO has softened the binder which reduced the creep stiffness with improvement in m-value. This suggested that WEO could be a good rejuvenator to enhance the fatigue and thermal cracking resistance with a detrimental effect on permanent deformation resistance on aged asphalt binder.
Numerous studies have explored the impact of WEO rejuvenator on the performance of aged virgin binder. These studies revealed that incorporating WEO into an aged binder can effectively reduce the stiffness of aged binder, improving its thermal resistance but potentially decreasing its rutting resistance. However, the influence of WEO on characteristics of polymers like SBS aged binder must be analyzed. In this context, few studies corresponding to different rejuvenators effect on aged SBS binder were found in literature. As our focus is currently on the WEO rejuvenation mechanism on aged SBS binder characteristics. In the meanwhile, S.Liu et al. studied the rejuvenation effect of WEO on aged SBS modified binder. As expected, the rutting factor (G∗/sinδ) of aged binder is increased due to the hardness of the binder. The finding revealed that WEO clearly decreases the G∗/sinδ of aged asphalt binder. This inferred that WEO has negative impact on the high-temperature performance of aged SBS modified binder. Similarly, intermediate temperature characteristics of binder is governed by fatigue factor (G∗sinδ). As expected, the aging process causes enhancement in G∗sinδ due to high fractions of asphaltenes. However, at the same temperature, WEO causes a decrement in G∗sinδ for aged SBS modified binder. The findings verified that at 30 °C temperature, the G∗sinδ value decreased by 50.3 % and 71 % with incorporating 4 and 8 % WEO respectively. At the same time, the thermal cracking potential of the binder was governed by creep stiffness and m-value. It was observed that the creep stiffness of aged SBS binder is enhanced while the m-value showed a reduction, indicating poor thermal cracking resistance. However, incorporating WEO causes a reduced creep stiffness value with an enhancement of m-value. These results depicted that WEO blending improves the binder's low-temperature cracking resistance. This would be because maltenes in WEO soften the aged SBS asphalt, making the binder less viscous and releasing thermal stresses. As far as the above study, WEO produced the same rejuvenation effect on SBS aged binder as it produced to virgin aged binder as far as considering their conventional and rheological properties. However, some studies state that thermal cracking resistance and fatigue properties of aged SBS binder with various rejuvenators would be effectively restored but certain properties, such as adhesive qualities and high-temperature characteristics related to SBS modifiers, cannot be fully restored. So, for future prospects, rejuvenation of SBS aged modified binder through WEO requires a more thorough understanding while considering microstructure evaluation that can help to evaluate more in-depth analysis.
Effect of WEO on rheological characteristics of neat asphalt binder.
Table 7
WEO (%)	High-temperature properties	Intermediate temperature properties	Low-temperature properties	Reference	 	1,2,3,4,5,6	–	/	+		 	4	–	/	+		 	5,10	–	/	+		 	2,4,6,8,10	–	+	/		 	4,8	–	+	+		 	0,2,4,6	–	/	/		 	2,4,6,8,10,12,14	–	/	/
Note: “-” refers to reduction in properties, “+” refers to strengthen the properties, “/” refers to not performed.
Rutting factor of asphalt binder at various WEO contents.
Fig. 8
Apart from WEO usage as a rejuvenator, some researchers also analyzed the impact of WEO on the rheological properties of neat asphalt binder, which are summarized in Table 7. Yalcin & Yilmaz, explored the G∗ and δ of asphalt binder modified with WEO. They noted the reduction in G∗ value for the WEO concentration of 2–14 wt% of neat asphalt binder. At 64 °C, G∗ of the 14 % WEO-modified asphalt was decreased by 63 % in comparison to the unmodified binder. On the other hand, the δ approaches 90° with a higher amount of WEO, suggesting a transition toward the viscous characteristics of asphalt binder. S. Liu et al. have drawn a master curve with different percentages of WEO in a neat asphalt binder to study the overall effect on complex modulus and phase angle. The results from the master curve suggested that the complex modulus of WEO-modified asphalt binder at all concentrations was lower than the neat asphalt binder. The complex modulus of asphalt binder with 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 % were reduced up to 22.5, 38.8, 66.6, 74.6 and 78.3 % than neat asphalt binder. It was clearly judged that the inclusion of WEO from more than 2 % caused a significant decline in the G∗ value. Similarly, δ of waste engine oil-modified binder was increased with the inclusion of a higher concentration of WEO. The overall results demonstrated that WEO has caused the softening effect which tends to reduce the elastic characteristics of asphalt binder. In research carried out by S. Liu, Peng et al., the rutting factor (G∗/sinδ) was evaluated by adding 4 and 8 % WEO content in a neat asphalt binder. The results verified that a higher concentration of WEO has decreased the failure temperature of the modified asphalt binder as depicted in Fig. 8. This development is consistent with the earlier discussion of G∗ and δ as WEO addition makes the binder less elastic and more viscous.
In another investigation done by Siqing et al. they added 1–6% of WEO in asphalt binder to determine the G∗/sinδ of modified asphalt binder at different temperatures. A similar trend of decreasing failure temperature at higher content of WEO was observed. You et al. have studied to find the performance grade of asphalt binder modified with different concentrations of WEO. The findings verified that incorporating WEO into neat asphalt binder resulted in a reduction in high-temperature performance grade. However, it also led to substantial enhancement in the lower-temperature performance grade. Neat asphalt binder has failed at 76.7 °C while WEO-modified asphalt binder has shown a failure temperature of 72 °C. Results from the BBR test revealed that low-temperature failure was decreased from −26.8 °C to −35.7 °C with the increase in concentration of WEO. It was verified that WEO reduced the brittleness of the binder by increasing its ductility. The presence of aromatic oil fraction from WEO enhances bitumen's ability to relax stresses, preventing cracking during cold weather, which inferred the significant improvement in thermal cracking resistance. Similarly, in another study by Fakhri & Nourozi, creep stiffness (S) and creep rate (m-value) of WEO-modified binder were determined at −6 °C and −12 °C. The finding revealed that the inclusion of WEO lower the creep stiffness and enhanced the m-value. For instance, at −6 °C, the creep stiffness decreased from 60 MPa to 52 MPa, while the m-value suggested an increment from 0.4 to 0.46 at 4 % addition of WEO. This means that binder containing WEO are more resilient in absorbing thermal stresses and take a shorter time to come back to their original state upon applied stress. The possible reason behind this phenomenon is that WEO contains lighter components that disrupt the internal structure of the binder by diluting the asphaltenes, which corresponds to the hardness of the binder. This results in enhancement in flexibility of binder and WEO-modified binder can better recover from deformations caused by low temperature induced stresses.
Besides the high temperature (permanent deformation resistance) and thermal cracking resistance, intermediate temperature (fatigue characteristics) also affects the performance of WEO-modified asphalt binder. S. Liu et al. have reported G∗Sin δ and reported that as WEO content increases, the fatigue parameter decreases at intermediate temperature as compared to neat asphalt binder. A decrease in fatigue parameter (G∗Sin δ) for 2–10 % waste engine oil at 30 °C was observed up to 5–35 % respectively. Similarly in other studies by S. Liu et al. and Deef-Allah & Abdelrahman, WEO can enhance fatigue cracking resistance at medium temperatures and asphalt modified with WEO exhibits superior performance than a neat binder. Overall, the above studies constantly exhibited that WEO varies the viscoelastic properties of asphalt binder. The inclusion of WEO tends to reduce the complex shear modulus and rutting factor. Hence, based on outcomes of rheological tests, it can be concluded that WEO-modified binder has improved fatigue and thermal characteristics, which suggests the usage of binder in cold regions. However, rutting characteristics (high temperature) are still concerning, which might be improved by using WEO with a composition of additional additives such as styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS), polyphosphoric acid (PPA), crumb rubber and elvaloy.

Effect of WEO with additional additives on physical and rheological properties of asphalt binder
The performance of WEO-modified binders in conjunction with additional additives has been determined in previous studies. Variable effects on both physical and rheological properties have been seen, which depend on the type and concentration of additional additives. This section consists of a detailed investigation of composite-modified binder (WEO + additive) in terms of physical and rheological characteristics.

Conventional properties with additives
Effect of WEO and OMT on asphalt binder's softening point.
Fig. 9
The incorporation of WEO in asphalt binder has been investigated previously with varying effects on physical and rheological performance. Further development has been made by researchers when using other modifiers in conjunction with WEO such as SBS, elavaloy, PPA, crumb rubber and lignin. Abbas et al. determined the imapct of WEO and Elvaloy as a modifier on conventional characteristics of asphalt binder. The penetration resistance has shown an increment of 33 % by adding 6 % WEO in asphalt binder. The inclusion of WEO has softened the binder and caused a reduction in softening point by 26 %. However, a decline in conventional properties was enhanced by adding Elvaloy to the WEO-modified asphalt binder. A 9.6 % decline in penetration resistance and a 19 % increment in softening point were claimed when integrating 1 % elvaloy in WEO-modified asphalt binder. Similarly, Lu et al. examined the influence of organic montmorillonite (OMT) on the WEO-modified asphalt binder. The findings showed that incorporating 2 % OMT in WEO-modified asphalt in a reduction in penetration up to 23 %. The softening point trends were in the same way, as shown by the enhancement of 16 % in comparison with neat asphalt binder as depicted in Fig. 9. Another similar research by Huzaifa et al. analyzed the conventional properties of WEO-modified binder with further addition of rice husk ash (RHA) and wheat straw ash (WSA). The outcome matches the previous research as an additional modifier enhances the binder's physical characteristics.
Effect of WEO and lignin on viscosity of asphalt binder.
Fig. 10
In recent research by Xue et al., the influence of adding 3–5% WEO to asphalt binder incorporation with 4–6% lignin on rotational viscosity at varying temperatures was investigated. The findings suggested that the viscosity of WEO/lignin-modified binder increased with a higher dosage of lignin. Asphalt binder incorporating with 6 % lignin has shown an increment in viscosity with varying contents of WEO. Moreover, higher content of WEO in the lignin-modified binder has shown a reduction in viscosity from 0.46 to 0.42 Pa s, which implies that adding WEO has caused a reduction in mixing and compaction temperature. Another study by Fakhri & Norouzi, investigated the effect of a binder's viscosity by incorporating WEO and lignin. The results indicated that 10 % lignin-modified binder has resulted in enhanced rotational viscosity at different temperatures. The 4 % WEO and 10 % lignin showed a 20 % improvement in composite-modified asphalt's viscosity in comparison with neat asphalt at 135 °C (Fig. 10). Research conducted by S. Fernandes et al. to study the viscosity variation with WEO/SBS modified binder. The result demonstrated that 10 % WEO and 5 % SBS can improve the rotational viscosity by 60 % in comparison with neat asphalt binder. The phenomenon of adding SBS in WEO-modified asphalt has made the binder more viscous, which ultimately enhanced the overall effectiveness of the asphalt binder. Similarly, Lu et al. reported the improvement of viscosity with 6 % WEO in conjunction with 2 % OMT as compared to neat asphalt binder at various temperatures. Overall, it was stated that 8–15 % of bitumen could easily be partially substituted by composite materials, which would be helpful in sustainable and cost-effective construction in pavement industry.

Rheological properties with additives
Review of characteristics WEO/additives asphalt binder.
Table 8
Materials	Percentages	Findings	References	 	WEO/SBS	2,4,6	The incorporation of SBS in waste engine oil-modified asphalt binder has increased complex modulus and decreased phase angle. Multiple Stress Creep Recovery Test results suggested that non-recoverable creep compliance (Jnr) of SBS/WEO modified binder has decreased, suggesting the improvement of permanent deformation resistance		 	WEO/Lignin	45,10	Dynamic Shear Rheometer (DSR) and Bending Beam Rheometer (BBR) Tests were performed to determine high and low-temperature properties of waste engine oil-lignin modified asphalt binder. An increase in high failure temperature has been reported, which showed better rutting characteristics. The m-value obtained from the BBR test has shown a considerable increment in comparison with base asphalt binder. This means that low-temperature properties were also improved with WEO-lignin modified asphalt binder.		 	WEO/PPA	2,4,61,2	Rheological characteristics of asphalt binder were evaluated by using dynamic shear rheometer test (DSR). The results confirmed that a 2 % WEO/PPA addition in asphalt binder has increased the rutting factor (G∗/sin δ) by 31.2 % as compared to virgin asphalt binder. Research suggested that this modified asphalt binder can also perform well in hot regions due to improvement in deformation characteristics at higher temperatures.		 	UMO/Crumb Rubber	2,2.510	Motor Oil with crumb rubber in base asphalt was used to find the high and intermediate temperature properties of modified binder. The addition of used motor oil in crumb rubber tends to enhance the fatigue characteristics of the binder without compromising high-temperature properties.		 	WEO/Elvaloy/Hydrated lime	2,4,60.5,0.75,12,5,8	The master curve from the dynamic shear rheometer (DSR) test showed that 0.75 % Elvaloy and 5 % hydrated lime increased the rutting factor at all frequencies, which is an indication of better performance of both WEO-modified binders at higher temperature.		 	WEO/Crumb Rubber	5,10,15,208	The inclusion of WEO has resulted in a decrease in the viscosity of crumb rubber-modified bitumen. These benefits increase the workability and fluidity of composite modified binder. From the environmental point of view, this combined waste modified binder is very beneficial since fewer greenhouse gases will be produced during the production of modified asphalt mixtures and will reduce the carbon footprint.		 	WEO/OMT	3,6,90.5,1,1.5,2	Different ratios of WEO with OMT were used to find the rheological characteristics of the modified binder. At 3 % WEO and 2 % OMT, complex modulus and rutting factor values were increased as compared to all other percentages. The phase angle is reduced at above mentioned ratio which justifies the more elasticity of binder. Research suggested that WEO with OMT has increased the stiffness of binder which ultimately enhanced the high-temperature characteristics.		 	WEO/Crumb Rubber	35,15,25,35	Multiple Stress Creep Recovery (MSCR) tests was performed to determine the high-temperature characteristics of waste engine oil modified asphalt binder with different dosages of rubber contents. Two governing parameters non-recoverable creep compliance (Jnr) and percentage recovery (R%) were obtained. The findings suggest that as more crumb rubber content is added, there is a decrease in Jnr and an increase in percentage recovery. This shows that higher rubber content leads to less deformation and improved elastic recovery, signifying a notable enhancement in the rutting potential of the modified asphalt binder.		 	WEO/RHA/WSA	22,4,62,4,6	Study has been conducted to characterize the properties of WEO-modified asphalt binder with a composition of various concentrations of rice husk ash and wheat straw ash. The addition of 6 % rice husk ash and wheat straw ash with 2 % WEO has significantly improved the softening point of modified binder which was reported as a 31 % and 27 % increment respectively as compared to virgin asphalt binder. The subsequent findings confirmed that the incorporation of WEO with RHA and WSA has increased the stiffness characteristics of asphalt binder.		 	WEO/Organic rectorite	61,1.5,2	The inclusion of organic rectorite tends to increase the stiffness, elasticity and rutting resistance of WEO-modified asphalt binder. Research suggested that 2 % organic rectorite has the ability to enhance the high-temperature properties of asphalt binder significantly without negotiating thermal cracking resistance at low temperatures.		 	WEO/Crumb Rubber/PPA	5,10,1520,25,300.6,1.2,1.8	The outcome of the research claimed that composite modified asphalt with 5 % WEO, 30 % crumb rubber and 1.8 % PPA has improved the physical, rheological and adhesion characteristics of asphalt binder. The composite modification improves the rutting resistance of asphalt binder significantly at lower frequency (high temperature). It was concluded that up to 35 % of waste material could be used to partially substitute the non-renewable asphalt binder which would helpful in cost-effective and sustainable construction in the pavement industry.
Complex modulus of WEO and PPA-modified asphalt binder.
Fig. 11
The effect of WEO in conjunction with additional additives has been investigated by many researchers in terms of high and low-temperature characteristics. Table 8 reviews the findings of various studies while using WEO with other additives. Multiple stress creep recovery (MSCR) has been used extensively to determine the permanent deformation (rutting) resistance of asphalt binder. The non-recoverable creep compliance (Jnr) and percentage recovery (R%) are two significant parameters to estimate the rutting potential of the asphalt binder. The lower Jnr and higher R% are desirable for better rutting resistance. Fakhri & Norouzi, investigated that Jnr has shown variation with changes in concentrations of WEO and lignin. WEO-modified asphalt binder has responded to higher Jnr due to the softening effect of oil. However, a drop in Jnr value has been recorded with the increasing amount of lignin. Results suggested that 10 % lignin with 4 % WEO has shown a 61 % decline in Jnr value at 3.2 kPa in comparison with WEO-modified asphalt binder. On the contrary, R% has shown a 75 % increment which suggests the improvement in the rutting potential of WEO/lignin-modified binder. Similarly, Wang et al. revealed that WEO and SBS have shown an opposite effect of Jnr value, claiming that the negative impact of WEO on the asphalt binder's permanent deformation can be countered by the inclusion of SBS which makes the good cross-linked structure that helps to perform better at a higher temperature. Abbas et al. used Elvaloy in conjunction with WEO to determine the high-temperature performance grade of modified asphalt binder. The incorporation of 0.75 % Elvaloy in WEO has hit the high-temperature performance grade from PG-58 to PG-70. Z. Liu et al. have used polyphosphoric acid (PPA) with different concentrations of WEO to counter the negative effect produced by to addition of WEO. Rheological characteristics of the composite modified binder were judged based on complex modulus (G∗) and phase angle (δ). The results revealed that 2 % WEO and 2 % PPA have shown the complex modulus improvement from 21 % to 41 % while varying the temperature from 52 °C to 82 °C as compared to neat asphalt binder as illustrated in Fig. 11. Similarly, the phase angle value at 2 % PPA and 2 % WEO has shown a decreasing trend in comparison with conventional asphalt binder, which suggested an improvement in elastic behavior. At the same concentration of PPA, increased WEO content has reported the increment in phase angle, which indicated the reduction in elastic characteristics of the binder. However, by maintaining a constant quantity of WEO, the results implied that more inclusion of PPA tends to reduce the phase angle of asphalt binder. Similar research done by Abbas et al. with varying contents of WEO and PPA to explore the rheological characteristics of composite modified binder. Results implied that the combination of 4 % WEO with 1.3 % PPA has shown drastic improvement in complex modulus (G∗) and rutting factor (G∗/sinδ). The fact is that PPA tends to counterbalance the softening effect created by WEO in asphalt binder due to lighter aromatic content, which ultimately improves the permanent deformation resistance of composite modified binder.
Creep stiffness and creep rate (m) of WEO/lignin modified asphalt binder.
Fig. 12
Furthermore, Xue et al. investigated the lignin-modified asphalt binder outcomes with the addition of WEO. The low-temperature characteristics of composite modified binder did not show any significant improvement in terms of creep stiffness. However, lignin-modified binders can enhance rutting potential at higher temperatures. Thus, when 3 and 5 % WEO were blended with 4 and 6 % lignin, the Superpave criteria of creep stiffness less than 300 MPa and creep rate (m) more than 0.3 were both satisfied at −18 °C. Somehow, the creep rate (m) value shows a slight improvement of the WEO/lignin-modified binder in comparison with the neat asphalt binder (Fig. 12). These findings showed that the inclusion of WEO slightly increased the thermal relaxation stress at low temperatures. A similar finding was observed by Fakhri & Norouzi, Another research was done by Wang et al. with SBS/WEO modified asphalt binder to study the low-temperature characteristics. It was stated that higher WEO content with SBS has lower creep stiffness, whereas the m-value showed significant improvement. The addition of WEO has created an unstiffening effect to enhance lighter aromatic components in binders. As a result, WEO/SBS modified asphalt binder claimed a notable improvement in thermal cracking resistance at lower temperatures. It can be suggested that incorporating WEO into asphalt binder enhances its capability to resist low temperature deformation. However, the impact of creep stiffness and m-value varies depending on amount of WEO and other additives being used.
Different studies have been conducted to determine asphalt mixture's properties of WEO-modified binder and combination with other additives. The research was done by Borhan et al. to investigate the effect of WEO on the rutting potential of asphalt mixtures. It was stated that the permanent deformation resistance of asphalt mixtures showed declination with a higher concentration of WEO using a static creep load test. These outcomes match with the previous research by Yalcin & Yilmaz, and Tadele & Quezon, based on complex shear modulus, rutting factor and non-recoverable creep compliance (Jnr) of WEO-modified asphalt binder. On the contrary, various studies exhibited that composite modified binder (WEO + additive) can improve the permanent deformation resistance of asphalt mixtures.

Influence of waste engine oil on performance characteristics of asphalt mixtures

Rutting resistance
Stiffness modulus of WEO modified asphalt mixtures.
Fig. 13
Flexible pavement generally consists of two major components asphalt binder and aggregates. The asphalt binder plays a crucial role in the overall performance of flexible pavement. However, performance analysis of combined asphalt binder and aggregates (asphalt mixture) is very critical. Different types of distress are associated with asphaltic pavement, where rutting is a major criterion while determining the performance of asphalt mixture, which is normally caused by accumulated permanent deformation due to heavy traffic loading. In this context, various tests were performed to evaluate the rutting resistance of asphalt mixtures. Borhan et al. conducted static and dynamic creep tests to investigate the rutting characteristics of WEO-modified asphalt mixture with usage of 5–20 % WEO. This study revealed that plastic deformation has shown an increasing trend with higher dosages of WEO. The incorporation of WEO made asphaltic concrete more susceptible to permanent deformation. WEO tends to decrease the permanent deformation resistance due to the loss of bonding characteristics of asphaltic concrete. Asphalt mixture with WEO has shown larger strains indicating reduction against permanent deformation resistance. Similarly, Khurshid & Neeraj Kumar, performed the Marshall stability test to evaluate the strength characteristics of modified asphalt mixture by varying WEO content from 8 to 24 %. Results suggested the reduction of stability value from 16.3 kN to 14.73 kN with 8–24 % WEO content. It was stated that a conventional unmodified asphalt mixture has higher stability than any concentration of WEO which was reported as 17.5 kN. This results from the more presence of lighter oil components within the asphalt binder, consequently promoting fluidity and resulting in diminishing stiffness modulus and stability of the asphalt mixture. Furthermore, Abdullah et al. evaluated the stiffness modulus to examine the strength properties of WEO-modified asphalt mixtures as illustrated in Fig. 13. Conventional asphalt mixture showed better stiffness modulus in comparison with WEO-modified mixture as mentioned by Khurshid & Neeraj Kumar,.
Rutting resistance of WEO-lignin modified asphalt mixtures.
Fig. 14
Another study by Abreu et al., determined the rutting characteristics by using a wheel tracking test with unmodified and 5 % WEO-modified binder. The research concluded that unmodified asphalt mixture has shown less rut depth in comparison with WEO-modified mixture. However, research done by Xue et al. examined the permanent deformation resistance of WEO-lignin modified asphalt mixture. Two parameters dynamic stability and rut depth at 60 min at different quantities of WEO and lignin were attained. Dynamic stability is defined as the number of wheels passing on the slab surface till the rut depth approaches 1 mm. The more dynamic stability, the more the rutting resistance of asphalt mixtures and vice-versa. As depicted in Fig. 14, the dynamic stability of the unmodified asphalt mixture was reported at 2600 times/mm. The dynamic stabilities of 6 % lignin and 3–5% WEO were 2900 and 2850 time/mm, which increased by 11.5 % and 9.6 % in comparison with control asphalt mixtures respectively. This described that lignin inclusion could counterbalance the effect incorporated due to WEO. Hence, the combination of WEO-modified asphalt binder with lignin has demonstrated improvement in the mixture's permanent deformation characteristics.

Fatigue cracking resistance
Furthermore, the fatigue cracking resistance is another significant characteristic of asphalt mixtures that is normally associated with the effect of repeated traffic loading. Results drawn by Borhan et al., suggested that the inclusion of WEO has produced a negative impact on the fatigue life of modified asphalt mixtures. This suggests that as the amount of WEO in the asphalt mixtures rises, its fatigue resistance tends to diminish. On the other hand, research by S. Fernandes, Peralta et al., has used 10 % WEO in conjunction with 5 wt % SBS to base binder (35/50). Beam fatigue test results suggested that composite modified asphalt mixture (WEO + SBS) had a lower tensile failure strain (2000 με) as compared to WEO-modified asphalt mixture (4500 με). This demonstrated that WEO can enhance the deformation at intermediated temperature and addition of SBS to the mixture decreases the influence of WEO. It was reported that a higher dosage of WEO tends to reduce the cohesive property of asphalt binder, which ultimately causes in reduction of fatigue life. However, very few researches are available on fatigue characteristics of WEO-modified asphalt mixtures. In addition to rutting and fatigue resistance of WEO-modified asphalt mixtures, asphalt pavement having lower water damage resistance may undergo a stripping phenomenon, which ultimately reduces the pavement's performance.

Moisture susceptibility
Tensile strength ratio (TSR) of WEO-modified asphalt mixture.
Fig. 15
In the meanwhile, X. Li et al. conducted an indirect tensile strength test on asphalt mixtures containing 2.5,6 and 15 % WEO content. The addition of a higher amount of WEO in asphalt binder causes a reduction in both dry and wet indirect tensile strength. The tensile strength ratio (TSR) was determined to find the moisture susceptibility of WEO-modified asphalt mixtures. It was stated that all specimens containing WEO do not fulfil the AASHTO TSR minimum criteria of (>80 %) as shown in Fig. 15. This further implied that WEO-modified asphalt mixtures have higher moisture susceptibility, which ultimately shortens the span life of the asphaltic pavement. Eriskin et al. conducted an additional investigation to assess the moisture damage resistance of asphalt mixtures with varying content of WEO from 1 to 5 % by using an indirect tensile strength test. The findings depicted the reduction of TSR of modified asphalt mixtures as compared to conventional hot mixed asphalt. This implied that WEO inclusion tends to increase the water sensitivity of asphalt mixture. However, very few studies have been done so far on moisture damage resistance. It is worth mentioning that water sensitivity is highly dependent on adhesion between asphalt binder and aggregate surface. WEO-modified asphalt mixture showed a lower TSR value in comparison with conventional asphalt mixtures which indicates a poor bond between modified binder and aggregate. However, X. Li et al. suggested that anti-stripping agent utilization could be a viable approach to improve the moisture damage potential of WEO-modified asphalt mixture.

Microstructure evaluation

SARA components
Asphalt binder, a derivative of crude oil, is composed of a complex mix of organic compounds with various molecular structures. These compounds differ in size, molecular weight and polarity, and are generally classified into two main groups maltenes and asphaltenes. Maltenes can be further subdivided into saturates and aromatics. The molecular weight of maltenes is on the lower side, while asphaltenes correspond to higher molecular weight. Together these molecules form the four key components of asphalt recognized as SARA: saturates, aromatics, resins, and asphaltenes. These SARA components significantly impact the asphalt binder's physical and rheological characteristics. As the asphalt binder ages, the maltene content declines due to oxidation and volatilization, leading to a higher portion of asphaltenes. This imbalance between asphaltenes and maltenes results in a stiffer binder. Changes in SARA fractions are key factors influencing the binder's physical and rheological properties.
Luo et al. studied the SARA component analysis of virgin, aged, and WEO-rejuvenated binder. The results described that asphaltenes and resins portions are higher in aged binder. However, after rejuvenation with WEO, asphaltenes and resins decreased from 19.4 to 12.2 and 44.3 to 30.4 respectively, while aromatic content increased from 25.9 to 49.2. This shows that WEO acts as a softening agent and rejuvenates aged binder effectively, which certainly affects the binder's physical and rheological characteristics. A similar type of results were drawn by H. Li et al. and Siqing et al. as a rejuvenated and modified binder with WEO has a lower content of asphaltenes, which on a macro-level suggested the improvement of lower temperature characteristics and declination in high-temperature performance. These developments based on SARA analysis were alignment with earlier sections.

Microscopic morphology
AFM images of conventional binder.
Fig. 16
AFM images of WEO-modified binder.
Fig. 17
Various techniques have been employed to analyze the microscopic properties of asphalt binder. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) are commonly used to examine the microscopic morphology of bitumen. In this context, S. Liu et al. studied the rejuvenation mechanism of asphalt binder rejuvenated with 8 % WEO using the AFM technique. It was found that virgin asphalt has a homogenous structure shown in Fig. 16a. Meanwhile, the aged asphalt binder contains a more bee-like structure (Fig. 16b), which normally associates with asphaltene component and waxes. More bee-like structure refers to the decline in asphalt characteristics. The following study found that the length of the bee-like structure increased as aging time was prolonged as depicted in Fig. 16c and Fig. d. However, after rejuvenation with WEO, a bee-like structure of asphalt binder is very blurred revealed in Fig. 17(a and b,c,d). This will suggest that lighter component of WEO stick with core perimeter, which usually consists of asphaltenes. It will confirm that the microstructure of asphalt binder is altered after the introduction of WEO. Similar sort of results was verified by Fakhri & Norouzi, and Y. Wang et al., as WEO addition in aged binder alters the microstructure of asphalt binder. The later study suggested that the inclusion of WEO changes the size of the bee-like structure, reducing its length from 3.21μm to 1.27 μm. The reason behind this mechanism is that the lighter component of oil dissolves the asphaltene content and the bee-like structure is dispersed in a more proper manner.

Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR)
FTIR spectra of (a) WEO and (b) WEO-modified binder.
Fig. 18
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) is normally employed for analyzing and identifying the specific characteristics and functional groups within various samples. For this purpose, wave numbers spanning from 400 cm−1 to 4000 cm−1 are considered more suitable for determining the chemical structure of any desired sample. S. Liu, Peng et al. showed FTIR spectra of WEO and WEO-modified binder as illustrated in Fig. 18a. The absorbance peak in the area of 2850–2960 cm−1 represents C-H stretching in aliphatic chains. The peak around 1625 cm−1 and 1740 cm−1 correspond to C=C and C=O functional groups respectively, while the peak in the region of 1458 cm−1 belongs to C-H stretching indicating the CH2 and CH3 functional groups. Similarly, the peak around 1374 cm−1 corresponds to C-H symmetric deformation in CH3 vibration and the peak position at 725 cm−1 belongs to a long chain of methylene. Conclusively, matrix asphalt and WEO-modified asphalt binder have shown no major variations in the peak positions, but the intensity of some peaks may show minor variation, which means that there is no significant variance in functional groups after the incorporation of WEO into base asphalt as shown in Fig. 18b. This claims that WEO and asphalt binder have only physical reactions. The same sort of peak trends was observed by Peng et al. and Qurashi & Swamy, which further verified that WEO has functional groups and molecular structures that resemble asphalt binders. Besides this, a study carried out by Abbas et al. observed very little peak of C=O stretching with WEO/PPA modified asphalt as compared to WEO-modified binder. This type of bond is normally generated due to the oxidation phenomenon. This peak results in softening of the asphalt binder, rendering the WEO-modified binder more vulnerable to rutting. Hence, from the investigation of the above studies, it can be stated that usage of WEO in conjunction with PPA can reduce the C=O peak significantly, suggesting the improvement of physical and viscoelastic characteristics of composite modified binder (WEO + PPA), which eventually increases the performance of the asphaltic pavement.
Meanwhile, FTIR spectra were also utilized to evaluate the rejuvenation effect of WEO on aged binder. The spectrum of aged and WEO rejuvenated asphalt was used to identify functional groups by Al-Saffar et al.. The findings revealed that while certain characteristic peaks remained stable horizontally, their intensity however varied. This suggests a distinction between the rejuvenating agent and aged asphalt. Furthermore Peng et al. identified the various peaks in aged and rejuvenated binder. The peak at 2850 cm and 2923 cm−1 corresponds to the saturated C-H stretching. The absorption peak at 1600 cm−1 signified the presence of C=C functional group and the peaks at 1460 and 1375 cm−1 were linked to the bending deformation of CH2 and CH3 in aromatic hydrocarbons. Research by H. Li et al. described that characteristics peak at 1747 cm−1 of the carbonyl group and 1030 cm−1 peak of the sulfoxide group were changed with the inclusion of WEO. It was identified that C=O and S=O peaks, which correspond to aging, were shown a significant decrease as compared to the aged asphalt. Further, the rejuvenation mechanism was described by Al-Saffar et al. by determining two indices; carbonyl index and sulfoxide index. The findings revealed that the carbonyl index of WEO rejuvenated asphalt reduced from 0.027 to 0.0205, while the sulfoxide index showed a reduction from 0.25 to 0.091. The overall discussion proved that WEO has a promising effect on aged asphalt characteristics.

Storage stability and thermal stability
Storage stability is a significant aspect of evaluating the performance and quality of a modified/rejuvenated binder. The term refers to the ability of an asphalt binder to maintain uniform properties over time, especially when stored at elevated temperatures before being applied in road construction. Binder is often rejuvenated and modified with various materials with varying densities. This test ensures that these components don't separate during storage and transportation. If separation occurs, it can lead to inconsistent binder's performance across the pavement. In this context, Al-Saffar et al. performed the storage stability test on virgin, aged and WEO-rejuvenated binder. The test comprised of pouring the asphalt binder into an aluminum tube, heated in the oven for 48 h at 165 °C temperature, then these samples were placed in the freezer at −10 °C for solidification. Then samples were cut into three parts and a softening point test was performed on the top and bottom segments. The results suggested that all specimen's softening point differences don't cross the limit of 2.2 °C. It was verified that virgin asphalt has the best performance having a difference recorded of 0.25 °C, while aged asphalt reported a difference of 1 °C and WEO-rejuvenated asphalt has an improved difference of 0.5 °C. This low difference implies that the rejuvenated binder remained stable and homogenous at higher temperatures, identifying good compatibility between WEO and aged asphalt. The main reason behind this phenomenon is that WEO and asphalt binder both belong to the crude oil family. A similar effect was stated in another research by Al-Saffar et al. with hybrid rejuvenator WEO and maltene.
Thermal stability of binder using TGA.
Fig. 19
Furthermore, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) is used to evaluate the thermal stability of asphalt binder. Usually, heating range was set from room temperature to 550 °C. A. Chen et al. studied the thermal behavior of aged, virgin and WEO-rejuvenated binder by performing the TGA test. It can be seen that the curve of mass loss of bitumen can be differentiated into three temperature sections (30–257 °C, 257–500 °C, 500–550 °C). It was observed that, in the first zone, WEO-rejuvenated binder has a mass loss rate of just 0.4 % more than virgin asphalt and in the second zone, this value is about 1.48 % as depicted in Fig. 19. The mass loss in the third zone remains stable as most of the decomposition of the binder tends to be completed. The mass loss in the second zone is mainly due to volatilization of lighter components. The overall mass loss of WEO-rejuvenated binder is about 1.9 % higher than that of virgin asphalt. So overall thermal stability of WEO-rejuvenated binder is slightly lower than virgin binder, but the thermal stability of rejuvenated binder in temperatures less than 200 °C is observed nearly the same as that of virgin asphalt. The following research results were in alignment with another study by Al-Saffar et al.. However, very limited research has been done so far on the storage and thermal stability characteristics of WEO-modified/rejuvenated binders. Additional research in the future needs to be done in this area for more in-depth knowledge of binder behavior.

Elemental composition
The X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) technology was utilized to identify the chemical composition of asphalt material in a non-destructive manner. In the sector of pavement materials, it is commonly employed to assess the elemental composition of asphalt modifiers and additives. Additionally, XRF can detect the presence of certain harmful elements and evaluate their negative impact on binders such as Zinc (Zn), Phosphorus (P), Chromium (Cr), Lead (Pb), Arsenic (Ar) and other elements. Waste engine oil (WEO) is also a material that often contains undesirable elements. In this context, Woszuk et al. studied the elemental components of virgin asphalt and WEO-rejuvenated binder. The analysis revealed that the asphalt's chemical composition consisted primarily of hydrocarbons, making up 99 % and none of the undesirable elements referenced earlier were detected. However, when testing asphalt rejuvenated with WEO, an increase in zinc and tin levels was observed as WEO content increased. The trace amounts ranged from 30 to 60 ppm for tin and 50–60 ppm for zinc. The level of these unwanted heavy metallic elements are considerably low and not expected to have any significant negative effect on the binder's performance as suggested by Fakhri and Norouzi,. However, regardless of the small amounts of heavy metals in the current study, WEO and WEO-modified/rejuvenated binder's elemental composition must be examined properly to avoid a negative impact on asphalt's performance. Further, refining WEO prior to usage in asphalt may be considered in the future to reduce the heavy metallic elements and develop better sustainable asphalt material.

Conclusions and recommendations
WEO has proved to be a good rejuvenator for aged asphalt binder to reinstate the binder's properties reduced due to excessive aging. However, the quantity of WEO required for rejuvenation depends on aged asphalt characteristics as well as how much rejuvenation is required.
The amount of WEO significantly influences the characteristics of WEO-modified asphalt. The inclusion of WEO in incremental doses produces additional lighter aromatic oil contents, which greatly affects the high-temperature's binder performance in terms of both physical and rheological characteristics. However, the addition of WEO has enhanced the lower temperature properties, which tends to increase the thermal and fatigue resistance.
Various additives, including lignin, SBS, PPA, crumb rubber, and Elvaloy have been introduced in the WEO-modified binder to examine their impact. Improvement in physical and rheological properties were noted depending on types and amount of additional modifiers along with WEO concentration. It was revealed that composite modification can partially substitute 8–15 % asphalt binder, which would be a way-forward in cost-effective sustainable construction in the pavement industry.
The asphalt mixture's performance of WEO-modified binder has shown declination, whereas WEO-modified asphalt mixture along with additional additives has improved rutting and fatigue resistance.
The chemical study using the FTIR technique revealed that no additional peaks were generated in WEO-modified asphalt binder, which suggested the asphalt binder and WEO correspond to only physical reactions.
Asphalt binder is the most significant constituent in the construction of flexible pavement. Hence, it is essential to explore alternative approaches that reduce reliance on non-renewable petroleum-based asphalt. This pursuit aims to develop eco-friendly, economically viable, widely accessible and technically sound pavement. Different studies have been done in recent years to look if WEO can be used in pavement industry in terms of both rejuvenating and modifying the asphalt binder. This article reviewed the WEO background regarding its physical and chemical properties, the influence of WEO on asphalt binder's physical and rheological characteristics, and asphalt mixtures performance of WEO-modified binder along with additional additives. The subsequent conclusions may be derived based on the previous research being carried out.
Future research should be carried out to focus on the usage of higher content of WEO while ensuring the adequate performance of modified asphalt binder. Therefore, refined WEO through various existing technologies can be utilized before incorporating into asphalt binder.
The combination of WEO with plastomeric polymers such as waste plastics to balance the softening effect to perform better in warmer climates is worthy of future studies.
More extensive research is required to identify the optimal mixing parameters for achieving homogeneous blending of WEO with asphalt binder also in combination with additional modifiers.
Further comprehensive investigation of WEO-modified asphalt mixtures with various additives and gradations is essential to fully understand the behavior of asphalt mixtures in terms of rutting, fatigue and susceptibility to moisture.
The investigation of the bond between WEO and additional additives should be studied at a micro level, further in-depth research in this area will be helpful to evaluate the true compatibility of the material.
WEO has captured the interest of researchers to contribute to the road industry in recent times. Its application has shown several benefits for highway pavement construction. However, WEO usage is still in the empirical stages, perhaps due to insufficient research and a mixed trend of results. Therefore, this study can assist in addressing these limitations and proposing future studies for more effective utilization of WEO in asphalt binder to help in sustainable construction.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Raza Mehmood: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Fauzan Mohd Jakarni: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Conceptualization. Ratnasamy Muniandy: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision. Salihudin Hassim: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Nik Norsyahariati Nik Daud: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Anwaar Hazoor Ansari: Writing – review & editing, Validation.

Data availability statement
Data will be made available on request.

Funding
The research received no external funding.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Sustainability assessment of green asphalt mixtures: a review
A review on partial Replacement of bitumen by waste oil, plastic and tire in flexible pavement
Assessment of sugar cane bagasse bio-oil as an environmental friendly alternative for pavement engineering applications
Influence of anti stripping agents on performance of binders and asphalt mixtures containing Crumb Rubber and Styrene-Butadiene-Rubber
Assessment of mechanical properties of rice husk ash modified asphalt mixture
Mechanical performance of asphaltic concrete incorporating untreated and treated waste cooking oil
Rheology of virgin asphalt binder combined with high percentages of RAP binder rejuvenated with waste vegetable oil
Formulation and aging resistance of modified bio-asphalt containing high percentage of waste cooking oil residues
Development of sustainable asphalt pavement mixture using polymers and waste engine oil
Laboratory evaluation of asphalt binders containing styrene-butadiene-styrene (SBS) and processed oil
Performance evaluation of rapeseed oil-based derivatives modified hard asphalt binders: towards greener and more sustainable asphalt additives
Bitumen improvement with bio-oil and natural or organomodified montmorillonite: structure, rheology, and adhesion of composite asphalt binders
Influence of six rejuvenators on the performance properties of Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement (RAP) binder and 100% recycled asphalt mixtures
Investigation of the impacts of aging and RAP percentages on effectiveness of asphalt binder rejuvenators
Laboratory evaluation on residue in castor oil production as rejuvenator for aged paving asphalt binder
Quantifying the rejuvenation effects of soybean-oil on aged asphalt-binder using molecular dynamics simulations
The impact of bio-oil as rejuvenator for aged asphalt binder
Compatibility of sunflower oil with asphalt binders: a way toward materials derived from renewable resources
Evaluation of the effects of waste engine oil on the rheological properties of asphalt binders
Effect of chlorination on the assessment of waste engine oil modified asphalt binders
Mechanical, surface and environmental evaluation of stone mastic asphalt mixtures with advanced asphalt binders using waste materials
Waste oil management: analyses of waste oils from vehicle crankcases and gearboxes
Evaluation of rheological characteristics of asphalt modified with waste engine oil (WEO)
Recycling of waste engine oil for diesel production
Waste engine oil influences on chemical and rheological properties of different asphalt binders
Performance, combustion and emission characteristics of diesel engine fuelled with waste cooking oil bio-diesel/diesel blends with additives
Infrared spectra and rheological properties of asphalt cement containing waste engine oil residues
Effect of catalytic-reactive rejuvenator on structure and properties of aged SBS modified asphalt binders
Characteristics of bituminous binders modified with waste oils: physical, chemical, and rheological properties
Technical properties and potential application of waste engine oil as bitumen modifier in pavement construction
Performance evaluation of asphalt binders modified with waste engine oil and various additives
A study investigating the impact of waste cooking oil and waste engine oil on the performance properties of RAP binders
Fatigue performance of re-refined engine oil bottom-modified asphalt
Physical and rheological properties of aged bitumen rejuvenated with waste engine oil
Rheology of asphalt binder modified with 5W30 viscosity grade waste engine oil
Evaluation of high-temperature and low-temperature performances of lignin–waste engine oil modified asphalt binder and its mixture
Rheological and ageing properties of asphalt bio-binders containing lignin and waste engine oil
Characteristics of asphalt modified by waste engine oil/polyphosphoric acid: conventional, high-temperature rheological, and mechanism properties
Effect of waste engine oil and waste cooking oil on performance improvement of aged asphalt
Viscoelastic properties of recycled asphalt binder containing waste engine oil
T. Bai et al., “Rejuvenation of Short-Term Aged Asphalt-Binder Using Waste Engine Oil.” [Online]. Available: www.nrcresearchpress.com.
Recycling of waste engine oil through pyrolysis process for the production of diesel like fuel and its uses in diesel engine
Microwave-heated pyrolysis of waste automotive engine oil: influence of operation parameters on the yield, composition, and fuel properties of pyrolysis oil
The synergistic effect of waste engine oil and organic montmorillonite on properties of bitumen: conventional, high-temperature rheological, and self-healing
Recycling of waste engine oils using a new washing agent
A novel route to utilize waste engine oil by blending it with water and coal
Co-pyrolysis of waste polyolefins with waste motor oil
Investigation of the rheological properties of bitumen modified with different waste oils under various frequencies and temperatures
Production and characterization of pyrolytic oils by pyrolysis of waste machinery oil
Pyrolysis of used motor oil for production of diesel fuel
Catalytic hydropyrolysis and co-hydropyrolysis of algae and used engine oil for the production of hydrocarbon-rich fuel
Dual function intensified cracking of waste engine oil to produce alkane-rich oil: study on the synergistic effect of Fe-Co/MCM41 catalyst and microwave
Rubber asphalt modified with waste cooking oil residue: optimized preparation, rheological property, storage stability and aging characteristic
Evaluation of the ageing behaviour of waste engine oil-modified asphalt binders
Asphalt modification with used lubricating oil
The effect of waste engine oil and waste polyethylene on UV aging resistance of asphalt
Performance of aged asphalt binder treated with various types of rejuvenators
Evaluation of asphalt binder properties modified with biomass ashes and waste engine oil
Characterization of waste cooking oil and waste engine oil on physical properties of aged bitumen
Investigation of waste oils as rejuvenators of aged bitumen for sustainable pavement
Chemical and rheological properties of reclaimed asphalt binders modified by waste engine oil
Characteristics of waste oil-rejuvenated RAP bitumen: an experimental study
Evaluating the chemical and rheological attributes of aged asphalt: synergistic effects of maltene and waste engine oil rejuvenators
The effects of used cylinder oil on asphalt mixes system on planning and design of cycle lane in urban environment view project phytoremediation of hydrocarbons from wastewater view project the effects of used cylinder oil on asphalt mixes
S. Abbas, S. Bilal, and A. Zaidi, “Evaluation of Asphalt Binder Properties Modified with Waste Engine Oil and Various Additives Use of industrial waste in Asphalt View project Use of hydrated lime in UK View project Evaluation of Asphalt Binder Properties Modified with Waste Engine Oil and Various Additives 1) Email address: a) 14-CE-07@uettaxila.” [Online]. Available: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/356987627.
Effect of re-aging on chemical and rheological properties of waste engine oil rejuvenated asphalt binder
Physical, rheological and chemical features of recycled asphalt embraced with a hybrid rejuvenating agent
Rutting and fatigue cracking performance of SBS-RAP blended binders with a rejuvenator
Investigation of low-temperature properties of recycling of aged SBS modified asphalt binder
Physical-chemical properties of aged asphalt rejuvenated by bio-oil derived from biodiesel residue
High temperature properties of rejuvenating recovered binder with rejuvenator, waste cooking and cotton seed oils
Laboratory performance of asphalt mixtures containing re-refined engine oil bottoms modified asphalt binders
The effects of using waste engine oil bottom on physical, rheological properties and composite modification mechanism of SBS-modified asphalt
Effect of used motor oil as a rejuvenator on crumb rubber modifier's released components to asphalt binder
Effect of incorporating different waste materials in bitumen
The multiple stress creep-recovery test: a detailed analysis of repeatability and reproducibility
High temperature property and modification mechanism of asphalt containing waste engine oil bottom
Multiple stress creep recovery (MSCR) test for determination of waste engine oil modified asphalt binder as pavement material
Optimized preparation and high-temperature performance of composite-modified asphalt binder with CR and WEO
Research on highly dissolved rubber asphalt prepared using a composite waste engine oil addition and microwave desulfurization method
Effect of an organic rectorite on the properties of a waste engine oil-modified asphalt
Study on replacement of bitumen partially with waste cooking oil and engine oil in bituminous concrete study on replacement of bitumen partially with waste cooking oil and engine oil in bituminous concrete view project study on replacement of bitumen partially with waste cooking oil and engine oil in bituminous concrete
Recycled asphalt mixtures produced with high percentage of different waste materials
Improving asphalt mixture performance by partially replacing bitumen with waste motor oil and elastomer modifiers
The effects of gilsonite and crumb rubber on moisture damage resistance of stone matrix asphalt mixtures
Performance evaluation of REOB-modified asphalt binders and mixtures
E. Eriskin, S. Karahancer, S. Terzi, and M. Saltan, “J. Innovat. Transport. Treatment of hazardous waste engine oil as bitumen modifier for sustainable hot mix asphalt pavement.”.
Analysis of relationship between component changes and performance degradation of Waste-Oil-Rejuvenated asphalt
Segregation and crystallization of waxes on the surface of asphalt binders as observed by atomic force microscopy
Physical properties and microstructures of organic rectorites and their modified asphalts
Storage stability and compatibility of asphalt binder modified by SBS graft copolymer
Investigation on the mechanism and performance of asphalt and its mixture regenerated by waste engine oil
Study on combustion mechanism of asphalt binder by using TG-FTIR technique
Research on the pyrolysis process of crumb tire rubber in waste cooking oil
Influence of waste engine oil addition on the properties of zeolite-foamed asphalt