Cut Short: Evaluation, Management, and Prevention of Pediatric Lawnmower-Related Injuries
Lawnmower-related injuries in children have serious costs and consequences. Every year, thousands of children sustain injuries to various parts of their bodies, including burns, lacerations, and fractures secondary to lawnmowers which are also the leading cause of amputation in children under 10 years of age. This review emphasizes the importance of thorough trauma assessment, early antibiotic administration, and repeated, careful irrigation and debridement. For limbs that can be preserved, current research supports soft-tissue preservation and stabilizing bones with external fixators. The decision to amputate depends on factors like blood flow, the extent of skeletal and soft-tissue damage, hemodynamic stability, and other considerations. The goal of amputation should be to create a well-padded stump with sufficient length to improve prosthesis fit, leverage, and function. After the initial treatment, long-term sequelae include bone overgrowth, psychological impacts, and financial burdens that affect patients and families for years. Therefore, this review compiles strategies from current research to assist in properly evaluating, managing, and preventing pediatric lawnmower injuries.
Key Concepts
Lawnmower injuries in children are common, affect all ages and all body parts, and range from burns and lacerations to fractures and amputations.
Acute management includes a complete trauma evaluation, antibiotics, irrigation and debridement, and skeletal and soft-tissue stabilization.
Amputation principles balance the removal of nonviable, contaminated tissue with the preservation of adequate length for soft-tissue coverage, prosthetic fit, and mechanical function.
Both short- and long-term complications include residual pain, infection, osseous overgrowth, reperfusion injury, mental health disorders, and economic costs.
Preventive strategies include situational awareness, age limitations, product safety designs, and protective gear, which can save children’s limbs and lives.

Introduction
Approximately 10,000 children are injured in lawnmower accidents annually in the United States. Despite the well-known health risks and prevention guidelines, long-term database studies show no significant decrease in pediatric lawnmower-related injuries over the past 40 years, highlighting the failure of current prevention strategies.
Injuries disproportionately affect young children under 6 years of age and teenagers, with boys being injured about 4 times as often as girls. Most injuries happen during spring and summer months. Common injuries in these accidents include lacerations, soft-tissue injuries, burns, and fractures. According to the Consumer Product Safety Commission, about 800 children are run over by riding lawnmowers or small tractors each year, with approximately 600 resulting in amputations and 15 in death. Most injuries occur when a child runs behind the mower as it runs in reverse as the operator is unaware of the child behind them.
Notably, lawnmowers are a leading cause of traumatic pediatric limb loss—the primary cause among children under 10 years of age. A recent 25-year study of 142 children who were hit by a lawnmower or fell off showed that 68% sustained an open fracture and 38% required amputation. Another systematic review indicated that up to 46% of lawnmower amputations involve fingers or toes, and up to 13% result in below-knee amputations (BKAs). Many injured children need multiple surgeries, extended hospital stays, and complex reconstruction, creating a significant financial strain. In 2003, the average hospital charge for a child requiring a lower limb amputation exceeded $120,000. Additionally, the cost of prosthetics from the time of injury to age of 18 years was found to be up to $116,000. These costs only partially cover the expenses of rehabilitation, caregiver time, and the severe psychosocial impact on the child and family—especially considering that the parent often operates the lawnmower.
Given the severe morbidity and steady incidence over decades, it is essential to understand the epidemiology, mechanisms, and risk factors of these injuries. The goal of this review is to synthesize current data on the prevalence, severity, and burden of pediatric lawnmower-related injuries, as well as current evidence-based management strategies and prevention efforts, including mower design, policy, and education.

Initial management
Upon acute management, evaluating neurologic status and neurovascular exams of extremities can be difficult in young children who lack communication skills at baseline. While these are the first steps, it is important to continue to re-evaluate and resuscitate as injuries declare themselves.
Patient A was a 3-year-old boy whose leg was run over by a lawnmower in reverse and sustained (A) open soft-tissue injuries around his tibia as well as a traumatic trans-metatarsal amputation, (B) confirmed by radiographs of the tibia and ankle.
Figure 1
The most important step is antibiotic administration, ideally within 3 hours of injury, since antibiotic timing is independently and directly proportional to the risk of infection. For open and grossly contaminated lawnmower injuries (Fig. 1), cefazolin and gentamicin should be administered and continued for 24 h after irrigation and debridement (I&D) and definitive wound closure. For soil contamination and risk of Clostridium infection, penicillin should be added to the antibiotic regimen. In addition, tetanus prophylaxis must be administered to patients who are not up to date with the tetanus vaccine.
Next, I&D should be performed within 24 h to avoid infection. Other factors significantly associated with a greater incidence of infection include after-hours surgery, multiple operations, and time to definitive wound closure. Specifically, gravity flow irrigation with 9 liters of saline has proven as effective as higher-pressure pulse lavage for preventing infections but without concerns of bone or soft-tissue damage, bacteria spreading deeper into the wound, or immune response interference that high-pressure irrigation might cause.
Primary debridement aims to remove all contaminants and dead tissue, followed by a second procedure with wound inspection approximately 24–48 h later to differentiate salvageable from nonsalvageable tissue. Additional visits will likely reveal gross contamination observed during subsequent washouts. Since contaminated wounds carry a significantly higher risk of infection, it is crucial to irrigate and debride as early as possible and to continue washing and reinspecting over the following days.
Patient B was a 7-year-old male who was riding a lawnmower, fell off, and was run over, (A) sustaining significant soft-tissue injuries to his calf and heel pad, including the calcaneus. He was initially stabilized with an external fixator (B).
Figure 2
In addition, skeletal fixation strategies should aim to restore vascularity, protect soft tissue, and prevent further damage from unstable bone fragments (Fig. 2). Restoring the length, alignment, and rotation of fractures can also help eliminate dead space and reduce infection risk. External fixation is recommended for cases with severe contamination, soft-tissue damage, and physiological instability. U-shaped frames with thin wire fixation of the foot can also be effective for restoring length when there is segmental bone loss.
If possible, wound coverage should be performed within 7 days to reduce the risk of infection. If primary closure is not feasible, skin and tissue flaps can be used to close the wound. Local and free flaps, including muscle, subcutaneous tissue, and skin from other parts of the body, have been described for preserving soft tissue after traumatic amputations. If concurrent or future tissue transfers are necessary, negative pressure dressings are supported to help maintain a healthy tissue bed.
The most recent American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines cite high-level evidence for implementing collaboration between orthopaedic and plastic surgeons to reduce hospital stay length, risk of deep infections, and the number of additional procedures, as well as to improve wound and bone healing times. It is often beneficial to involve plastic surgeons early in the process and to take serial clinical photographs to optimize planning for coverage or tissue transfers.

Limb salvage versus amputation
Patient B initially underwent (A) limb salvage with a free flap due to intact anterior structures and distal perfusion. (B) Along with part of his calcaneus, his Achilles tendon and heel pad were removed by the lawnmower blades.
Figure 3
With extensive extremity injuries, a pivotal question is whether the limb can be saved (Fig. 3). The Mangled Extremity Severity Score (MESS) is a popular scoring system that accounts for skeletal and soft-tissue damage, limb ischemia, shock, and age to assess the need for amputation. A significant limitation is that the MESS and other scores are designed for adults. While an MESS of 7 has been considered the cutoff for limb salvage, some have suggested a threshold score of 10 for children. No reliable scoring system has been developed for the pediatric population.
Remove all nonviable and infected tissue to lower the risk of infection.
Consider age and growth plate potential when planning amputation length
Terminal overgrowth is common in children, so consider biologic capping or an Ertl procedure.
Ensure adequate residual limb length for prosthetic fit and function. More length provides a longer lever arm and greater mechanical advantage for prostheses.
Cover the bone sufficiently with soft tissue and taper the bone ends to avoid sharp edges that could cause bony skin penetration.
Multiple flap designs and methodologies have been described in the literature.
Shape the residual limb cylindrically, not conically, for the best prosthesis fit.
Retract nerve endings into the stump to reduce distal pain and neuroma formation.
Minimize edema and hematoma formation to facilitate better soft-tissue healing.
Control postoperative pain.
Expect primary wound healing to occur in 3–5 weeks
If the decision is made to proceed with amputation, it is imperative to remember that this is permanent surgery—there are important principles to consider: After antibiotics, irrigation, and days of wound reinspection, the remaining limb can be revised to a variety of levels.
For above-knee amputations, the goal is to preserve as much length as possible because less than 15% of growth comes from the remaining physis. Ideally, the amputation ends approximately 12 cm above where the knee will be at skeletal maturity to ensure sufficient length and leverage for the prosthesis. Both soft-tissue coverage and muscular balance can be achieved by the adductor magnus, as well as the quadriceps anteriorly, hamstrings posteriorly, and tensor fascia latae or iliotibial band laterally.
Compared to transfemoral amputations, knee disarticulations offer greater leverage for prosthetic function and protect the distal femoral physis, allowing the limb to grow at about 9 mm per year. Patients with knee disarticulations have similar morbidity and mortality rates to transfemoral amputees but demonstrate better weight-bearing ability, increased stability due to preserved adductors, and enhanced prosthetic comfort.
Compared to knee disarticulations and transfemoral amputations, BKAs or transtibial amputations have similar pain levels but provide better cosmetic and functional results, along with less energy expenditure. Ideal BKAs usually produce a stump about 15 cm below the medial joint line at skeletal maturity. The gastrocnemius muscle, through Achilles tenodesis, is used to cover the distal bone. While proximal amputations offer more room for the prosthesis and soft-tissue coverage, a longer limb length allows for a stronger lever arm and a smaller wound to heal.
Patient B had persistent pain and difficulty with ambulating due to insufficient heel padding and loss of his Achilles tendon for plantar flexion. He was subsequently revised to a transtibial amputation with the Ertl procedure. Due to the loss of his posterior structures, an anteriorly based flap was developed and rotated posteriorly. (A). Anterior Posterior and Lateral radiographs demonstrate a transtibial amputation and fibula autograft strut with adequate soft-tissue coverage (B).
Figure 4
Patient B recovered well after the Ertl procedure, which used a distal fibular strut to prevent osseous overgrowth and facilitate cylindrical stump formation.
Figure 5
Notably, the Ertl procedure involves a fibular autograft strut at the distal ends of the tibia and fibula, followed by myodesis of the tibialis anterior muscle and Achilles tendon for tissue coverage and sagittal plane balance (Fig. 4). The Ertl technique has been shown to shape the stump cylindrically, prevent bony overgrowth, and support prosthetic weight bearing (Fig. 5). If this is not possible, an epiphysis harvested from the amputated part (distal fibula or first metatarsal head) can be transplanted to fill the distal tibia canal, provide a cartilaginous end-bearing surface, and prevent stump overgrowth.
Patient A underwent multiple I&Ds before undergoing a Syme amputation 10 days after injury. Radiographs demonstrate soft-tissue envelope distally over the ankle disarticulation on both Anterior Posterior and Lateral views.
Figure 6
At the foot and ankle level, the Syme, Boyd, and Chopart amputations use the heel pad for coverage. Compared to transtibial amputations, the Syme preserves more length and is thought to better support weightbearing without a prosthesis, while also reducing the risk of osseous overgrowth (Fig. 6). However, fitting a prosthesis may be difficult due to limited space between the stump and the floor. Additionally, hindfoot and midfoot amputations may require Achilles tendon lengthening and possibly tibialis anterior tendon transfer to prevent equinus deformities.
Overall, studies have shown that ankle-level amputees outperform knee-level amputees in sports and physical functioning, with transtibial patients falling somewhere in between, indicating better functional outcomes with more distal amputations. Additionally, patients with lower-level amputations such as the Syme, transtibial, and knee disarticulation have exhibited oxygen costs, heart rates, and walking velocities that were not significantly different from controls, unlike transfemoral and hip disarticulations, which had higher oxygen consumption and heart rates, and slower walking velocities.
Through the foot, amputation levels include the Lisfranc, transmetatarsal, metatarsophalangeal, interphalangeal, ray, and isolated great toe. The level of amputation depends on the extent of soft tissue and bone that can be salvaged. The great toe bears up to 60–80% of body weight during toe-off in the gait cycle. The remaining toes also bear about 60% of body weight. Therefore, even toe amputations can significantly impact gait and function. For traumatic amputations, the damage has already been done, so the goal is to save as much of the limb as possible while creating a stump with the best functional outcomes.

Complications and consequences

Chronic pain
Neuromas are painful lesions that develop from abnormal axonal growth into scar tissue. Phantom limb pain has also been found in pediatric amputees but usually disappears with time and regular use of prostheses, as well as pain management strategies, nerve stimulation, and counseling. Specifically, targeted muscle reinnervation and regenerative peripheral nerve interface techniques have been described to treat and prevent neuromas or phantom limb pain.

Infection
Large soft-tissue defects, exposed bone, and delays in definitive coverage contribute to reported infection rates of approximately 7–16%. When infections occur, they are usually polymicrobial, consistent with soil inoculation by gram-negative rods (e.g., Serratia, Enterobacter, Pseudomonas, and Aeromonas), gram-positive cocci, anaerobes, and occasionally fungi. In salvaged limbs requiring fixation or complex reconstruction, infection can progress to chronic osteomyelitis and nonunion, similar to limb-threatening trauma cases where wound infection and osteomyelitis are among the most common late complications and main causes of rehospitalization.

Vascular and reperfusion complications
The lawnmower mechanism can produce arterial transection or segmental loss in a mangled extremity. Fairman et al. (2024) and Lyons et al. (2025) demonstrate that most lower-extremity arterial injuries require operative repair and carry a risk of amputation when revascularization is not feasible or fails. In young children, management is complicated by small vessel caliber, pronounced vasospasm, and limited conduit options. Even after revascularization, ischemia reperfusion may contribute to muscle necrosis, compartment syndrome, and systemic metabolic derangements. In reconstructive lawnmower-injury series, microvascular free flaps have been performed successfully even in toddlers, but outcomes depend on careful vascular handling and postoperative surveillance to prevent thrombosis, flap loss, and secondary ischemic complications.

Societal costs
Regardless of management or outcome, these injuries impose a significant financial burden on society, the patient, and their family. A nationwide retrospective analysis of pediatric lawnmower injuries from 2006 to 2013 revealed that, during this period, the average cost per emergency department (ED) visit was $2482, leading to total annual ED expenses of $14.1 million. While most patients were discharged from the ED, many needed hospital admission for further treatment, some were transferred to other facilities or discharged with home health care, and a few cases resulted in death. Among the admitted patients, the study showed that the average inpatient stay was 4 days, with an average inpatient charge of $36,987, culminating in a total of $22.1 million annually nationwide.
In particular, amputations incur significant ongoing costs, especially in skeletally immature patients who require subsequent prostheses as they grow. A study analyzing national insurance claims in 2021 found that pediatric patients with prostheses had an average of 4 prosthetic-related appointments each year, with average annual prosthetic costs of $2778. Another 20-year retrospective review from 2004 estimated the yearly cost of prosthetic care to be up to $116,000 per patient. Costs are expected to rise as advancements in secondary prostheses accommodate activities requiring skill and strength. In the United States, only 20 states limit exclusions for prostheses, with some insurance plans covering only 1 or 2 devices from the time of injury until the patient reaches skeletal maturity. This limited coverage often forces families to depend on fundraising and financial aid to cover out-of-pocket expenses.

Psychosocial burden
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and other psychological challenges are also common. A 12-month prospective study of 57 children after mutilating injuries saw that 98% had evidence of PTSD, depression, or anxiety within 5 days of injury. Initially, 84% met diagnostic criteria for PTSD, which decreased to 39% after 1 month, but even 20% continued to have symptoms after a year. A recent review by Herge et al. (2024) summarizes the importance of psychological support needed for children undergoing limb salvage.
Specifically for amputations, early involvement of a prosthetist can help the family look beyond the immediate injury. It may also be beneficial to have another amputee in similar circumstances speak to the child and family about their experience. Psychiatry and chaplain services can also support the grieving process that follows traumatic loss, including parental guilt.
Caregivers may also be impacted. Since parents are usually the operators of lawnmowers, this situation places a particular burden on the family. A specific kind of awareness, support, and follow-up is necessary, especially considering parental guilt and the child’s lifelong adjustments. Surgeons have a distinct and influential role in promoting a positive recovery. Children and families should have early access to specialists in psychiatry, physical medicine and rehabilitation, prosthetics, plastic surgery, and physical therapy.

Prevention strategies
Key risk factors include young age, riding lawnmowers, and bystanders. Data from a Pennsylvania trauma center from 2002 to 2014 show that children under 6 years of age had higher injury severity scores than those aged 13 to 17 years.3. The authors found that 69% of these accidents could have been avoided if children under 6 years of age were not near operating lawnmowers and if children under 12 years of age were not the ones operating them. Another decade-long review in 2017 confirmed that children aged 2 to 5 years tend to have more severe injuries, have higher amputation rates, and require more surgeries, emphasizing young age as a major risk factor for both injury occurrence and severity.
Multiple studies have identified riding lawnmowers as the most dangerous type, involved in 92–96% of injuries. A survey of 140 victims or their parents in a support group for affected families since 2000 found that 69% of the children were “bystanders” standing or running near the lawnmowers, and nearly a quarter were “passengers” riding on them. Notably, almost 60% of these injuries occurred while the lawnmower was in reverse.
Compared to passengers and operators, bystanders are at the highest risk of injury, accounting for up to 80% of victims. Another epidemiological study of pediatric lawnmower-related injuries in the US from 1990 to 2014 found that projectile objects caused 49.8% of injuries among bystanders. Even being nearby can increase the risk of injury, so it is important for children to stay clear of the lawnmower’s path or stay indoors while it is in use.
Multiple studies published in the early 2000s recommended safety modifications, including no-mow-in-reverse features, backup sensors, and shields or guards designed to prevent injuries to feet and toes beneath the mower. While voluntary safety standards included the recommendations, many older lawnmowers do not have them, and newer models often have override switches that allow continued blade operation in reverse. Studies have suggested that override switches should be placed on the rear of lawnmowers so operators are forced to look behind them and ensure they will not injure anyone. Additionally, self-propelled push mowers should include control switches to stop forward motion when the handle is released. Besides raising public awareness, product safety standards should require protective designs and clear warning labels to prevent injuries.
Orthopaedists are almost always part of care teams and will follow and manage sequelae for years, if not decades. They can play an essential role in preventing lawnmower accidents, primarily by educating the public about proper safety measures. Volunteering for public service announcements, collaborating with stores that sell and service lawnmowers to place safety flyers, and engaging other stakeholders (insurance companies, hospitals, scouting organizations, schools, and pediatric offices) can significantly reduce these injuries. At the very least, remembering key data points can help orthopaedic surgeons advocate for increased safety for children.
The 6-12-16 mnemonic adapted from the American Academy of Pediatrics recommendations offers a clear and memorable way to communicate the core principles to prevent lawnmower injury in kids:
“6-12-16 to Save Lives and Limbs:
All children under 6 years old should stay inside.
No mowing until 12 years of age.
No riding mowers until age 16”.
We have included information sheets in the appendix of this article. We recommend you distribute this annually in your pediatric and family medicine departments, as well as through hospital social media, especially during the spring and summer months when these injuries are apt to occur. Even preventing 1 additional injury would make this public health campaign worthwhile.

Summary
Pediatric lawnmower-related injuries are highly impactful and occur more often than expected. Acute treatment involves prompt antibiotics, I&D, and stabilization of skeletal and soft-tissue structures. The choice between amputation and limb salvage should be made on a case-by-case basis, in consultation with specialists in plastic surgery, infectious disease, physical and rehabilitation medicine, physical therapy, prosthetics, and psychiatry. If amputation is necessary, the aim should be to preserve as much of the limb as possible while balancing the need to prevent complications such as overgrowth, infection, and multiple surgeries. We have a valuable opportunity to promote preventive measures. To support this, provide signage—customizable with your practice and hospital logos—that health care providers can share, highlighting the importance of keeping children safe.

Author contributions
Hannah Lee: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Conceptualization. Quinn Kirkpatrick: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Data curation. Hance Wilbert: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Data curation. Joseph Torkieh: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Data curation. Thomas McPartland: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Resources.

Ethics approval and consent
The author(s) declare that no patient consent was necessary as no images or identifying information is included in the article.

Declaration of competing interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
University of Iowa Injury Prevention Research Center. Serious child injuries from lawn mowers. University of Iowa Injury Prevention Research Center blog. Published April 4, 2024. Accessed August 1, 2025. https://iprc.public-health.uiowa.edu/2024/04/04/serious-child-injuries-from-lawn-mowers/.
Pediatric riding lawn mower-related injuries and contributing factors for bystander injuries
Lawnmowers versus children: the devastation continues
Epidemiology of lawn mower-related injuries to children in the United States, 1990–2004
Felix A. Epidemiology of lawnmower-related injuries in children: a 10-year review
Pediatric lawnmower injuries: a 25-year review
Incidence, distribution, and cost of lawn-mower injuries in the United States, 2006-2013
Pediatric lawnmower injuries and strategies for prevention: a systematic review
Long-term lower extremity prosthetic costs in children with traumatic lawnmower amputations
Antimicrobial prophylaxis in open lower extremity fractures
Factors influencing infection rate in open fracture wounds
Update to practice management guidelines for prophylactic antibiotic use in open fractures
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Administering diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis (DTaP, tdap, td) vaccines. CDC. Accessed August 11, 2025. https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/vpd/dtap-tdap-td/hcp/administering-vaccine.html.
Is operative debridement greater than 24 hours post-admission associated with increased likelihood of post-operative infection?
Wound irrigation in orthopedic open fractures: a review
Pulsatile lavage for wound debridement in compound fractures of the leg. Int J Orthop Res Innov 2016; 2(4), 263–268. Published October 24, 2016 https://www.ijoro.org/index.php/ijoro/article/view/152. [Accessed 1 August 2025].
Fluid lavage in patients with open fracture wounds (FLOW): an international survey of 984 surgeons
S. Current updates in management of extremity injuries in polytrauma
Treatment principles in the management of open fractures
Management algorithm of external fixation in lower leg arterial injury for limb salvages
Essential pearls on external fixation application
Case report: staged treatment of ankle deformity and first metatarsal deficiency after motorcycle spoke injury with taylor external frame combined with fibular head grafting
Tissue expansion: a method to preserve bone length and joints following traumatic amputations of the leg--a follow-up of five legs amputated at different levels
Free flaps to preserve below-knee amputation stumps: long-term evaluation
Orthoplastic surgical collaboration is required to optimise the treatment of severe limb injuries: a multicentre, prospective cohort study
Ability of lower-extremity injury severity scores to predict functional outcome after limb salvage
The mangled extremity score and amputation: time for a revision
The functional outcome of lower-extremity fractures with vascular injury
Amputation surgery
The optimal below knee amputation flap
Functional outcomes following trauma-related lower-extremity amputation
Effect of amputation level on quality of life and subjective function in children
Effect of amputation level on energy expenditure during overground walking by children with an amputation
Osteomyoplastic transtibial amputation: the ertl technique
Comparison of gait after syme and transtibial amputation in children: factors that may play a role in function
Reporting and management of equinus deformity after partial foot amputation: a scoping review
Management of symptomatic neuromas: a narrative review of the most common surgical treatment modalities in amputees
Fiks VF. Do you have phantom limb pain? Advanced pain management center (blog). Published August 2020. Accessed August 19, 2025. https://www.apmconline.org/blog/do-you-have-phantom-limb-pain.
The prevalence of phantom sensation and pain in pediatric amputees
Targeted muscle reinnervation and regenerative peripheral nerve interfaces for pain prophylaxis and treatment: a systematic review
Pediatric lower extremity lawnmower injuries and reconstruction: retrospective 10-Year review at a level 1 trauma center
Infectious complications following pediatric lawnmower injury: a case series
Complications following limb-threatening lower extremity trauma
Thorson CM, et al. Management of lower extremity vascular injuries in pediatric trauma patients: 20-year experience at a level 1 trauma center
Management of pediatric traumatic lower extremity vascular injuries
Traumatic forefoot amputation in a 3-year-old boy caused by a lawnmower injury
Microsurgical foot reconstruction in children affected by lawnmower injury
The prevalence of lower limb loss in children and associated costs of prosthetic devices: a national study of commercial insurance claims
Essentials of pediatric prosthetics: current concept review
Open enrollment for health insurance coverage. Amputee coalition. Published February 23, 2025. https://amputee-coalition.org/resources/open-enrollment-for-health-insurance-coverage/.
Psychological adjustment in children after traumatic disfiguring injuries: a 12-month follow-up
The role of psychology in emergent pediatric limb salvage and reconstruction
Pediatric limb amputation: aspects of coping and psychotherapeutic intervention
Hidden posttraumatic stress disorder in the mother of a boy with traumatic limb amputation
Children treated for lawnmower-related injuries in US emergency departments, 1990-2014
Characteristics of pediatric traumatic amputations treated in hospital emergency departments: united States, 1990-2002
Lawnmower-related injuries to children

Supplementary material
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary material related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jposna.2026.100375.