Evaluation of the potential efficacy of the nitric oxide donor molsidomine for the treatment of schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a chronic devastating psychiatric disease characterized by a high recurrence rate. Pharmacological management of this disorder appears disappointing since it is associated with a lack of efficacy for negative symptoms and cognitive deficits, typical features of schizophrenia, and the presence of severe undesired side effects. Thus, novel molecules with high efficacy and low toxicity for the treatment of schizophrenia are urgently needed. The involvement of the gaseous molecule nitric oxide in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia is well documented since low concentrations of nitric oxide are associated with this psychiatric disease. Therefore, chemicals able to normalize nitric oxide levels, such as nitric oxide donors, might be useful for the management of this type of schizophrenia. Molsidomine is a nitric oxide donor and is under investigation as a novel antischizophrenia agent. The aim of this review is to critically evaluate the potential efficacy of this molecule for the treatment of schizophrenia.

Introduction
Schizophrenia is a chronic, heterogeneous, and devastating mental disease. Epidemiological evidence indicates that almost 1% of the world’s population is affected by this psychiatric disease. Schizophrenia consistently impairs the quality of life of patients. This disease usually manifests in former youth or early maturity. The symptoms of this illness can be divided into three distinct groups: positive symptoms, negative symptoms and cognitive impairments. Positive symptoms are correlated with exaggerated behaviors that are absent in healthy individuals [e.g., hallucinations (auditory and visual), delusions, thought disorders, hyperactivity, bizarre behaviors]. Conversely, the presence of negative symptoms indicates a downregulation of normal behavior. The typical domains of negative symptoms are blunted affect (flat expressions), asociality (social withdrawal), anhedonia (inability to feel pleasure), alogia (poverty of speech) and avolition (lack of motivation). Disturbances in cognition (e.g., in attention, executive functioning and memory) are the first and most noteworthy symptoms of schizophrenia.
The etiology and pathophysiology of schizophrenia have not yet been clarified. Even so, schizophrenia is considered a complex neurodevelopmental disorder in which genetic and environmental components have crucial repercussions. In this context, it has been shown that monozygotic siblings of schizophrenia patients have a 50–80% risk of developing the illness. Furthermore, incomplete maturation of the brain along with irregular synaptic connections between different brain regions have also been detected. Additionally, oxidative stress seems to be a key factor for the pathogenesis of schizophrenia.
Malfunctioning of various neurotransmitters, such as dopamine (DA), glutamate and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), is also correlated with the genesis of schizophrenia. The upregulation of DAergic neurotransmission in the striatum is linked to the appearance of positive symptoms, whereas negative symptoms and cognitive impairments are associated with the downregulation of DAergic activity in the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Reduced glutamatergic transmission induces secondary DAergic dysfunction in the striatum and PFC and is associated with the appearance of negative symptoms and cognitive impairments. The GABAergic system inhibits DAergic transmission in the PFC and is correlated with the manifestation of some of the clinical symptoms observed in schizophrenia patients.
The results of clinical research indicate that conventional neuroleptics (both typical and atypical) mitigate positive symptoms but are unable to relieve negative symptoms and cognitive deficits in schizophrenia patients. Importantly, therapy with antipsychotics is associated with important negative consequences that reduce their efficacy. The development of parkinsonism (motor deficits) is linked with long-term treatment with traditional (typical) antipsychotic drugs (e.g., chlorpromazine and haloperidol). In contrast, the administration of atypical antipsychotics (e.g., clozapine, olanzapine, and risperidone) does not cause parkinsonism but increases the risk of metabolic syndrome. Interestingly, 30% of patients do not respond to any pharmacological treatment. Taken together, these results suggest that there is an urgent need to discover and develop novel molecules that can alleviate the negative symptoms and cognitive deficits typical of schizophrenia patients.
Among the different alternative strategies for the treatment of schizophrenia, modulators of the gaseous molecule nitric oxide (NO) have recently been proposed as novel antischizophrenia agents. In the present analysis, I intend to evaluate critical feelings of the potential beneficial action of the NO donor molsidomine for the management of schizophrenia. Literature search was performed via the PubMed database without limits concerning the publication data for eligible papers via the following terms: “nitric oxide,” “nitric oxide synthase,” “nitric oxide donor,” “molsidomine,” and “schizophrenia.”

Nitric Oxide
NO is a soluble, unstable, particularly diffusible gas with an exceptionally short life (4 seconds). NO is an important intra- and intercellular messenger in the brain. NO is synthesized by the conversion of L-arginine to L-citrulline. NO synthase (NOS), a calcium/calmodulin-dependent enzyme, is responsible for NO formation. NO is formed as a consequence of the stimulation of the NMDA receptor.
The main target of NO is soluble guanylyl cyclase. Its stimulation produces cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP), which subsequently activates a cGMP-dependent protein kinase that phosphorylates different proteins. NO is broken down by the enzyme phosphodiesterase, which neutralizes cGMP.
NO influences the activities, expression levels and cellular localization of various epigenetic modulatory enzymes, suggesting that NO may act as an endogenous epigenetic regulator of gene expression and the cell phenotype. NO seems to modulate histone posttranslational modifications, DNA methylation and microRNA levels.
NO is involved in several physiological processes, including cellular immunity, vascular tone and neurotransmission. NO plays crucial roles in synaptic plasticity, learning and memory. NO appears to influence the release of various neurotransmitters, such as acetylcholine, GABA, glutamate, DA and serotonin. Additionally, NO promotes neuronal survival and differentiation and has enduring effects through the regulation of transcription factors. The literature indicates that NO, at low concentrations, is neuroprotective and can control physiological processes such as neurotransmission or vasorelaxation, whereas elevated concentrations promote neurotoxicity.

Nitric Oxide and Schizophrenia
Consistent experimental evidence suggests that NO is involved in schizophrenia. Its precise role in this psychiatric disease has not been fully elucidated. In this framework, it has been shown that either high or modest concentrations of NO are correlated with schizophrenia even though the direction of the irregularities is still uncertain.
Genetic studies have proposed that polymorphisms in the neuronal NOS gene might be associated with schizophrenia. Abnormal arrangement of nitrergic neurons in the frontal and temporal lobes of schizophrenia patients has been observed. Postmortem examinations revealed a decrease in nitrergic neurons in the striatum and in hypothalamic neurons expressing the enzyme NOS. NOS activity has also been reported to be consistently reduced in the postmortem prefrontal cortices of schizophrenia patients.
The results of these biochemical studies also corroborate the involvement of NO in schizophrenia. Low concentrations of NO metabolites were detected in the plasma and serum of first-episode, drug-naïve schizophrenia patients. Given that cognitive impairments are a characteristic feature of schizophrenia, lowering NO quantities might have serious consequences for schizophrenia patients. In addition, the reduction in NO metabolite concentrations revealed in the biological fluids of schizophrenia patients has been associated with the pathophysiology of negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Moreover, it should be mentioned that displaced NOS-containing gray and white matter cortical and possibly hippocampal interneurons support an early neurodevelopmental constituent of schizophrenia.
Collectively, the findings described above indicate that the underproduction of NO might be a key factor for the pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Adjusting NO levels by normalizing NO production in patients’ brains might be beneficial in this regard. Accordingly, molecules able to induce NO production, such as NO donors, might be potential new candidates for the treatment of this severe psychiatric disease.
Among the various NO donors, molsidomine and sodium nitroprusside have been extensively studied in this context. In contrast, there is inconsistent information regarding the effects of other NO donors, such as S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine, glyceryl trinitrate and 4-methyl-5-(2-nitroxyethyl) thiazole, in animal models of schizophrenia. Finally, the role of sodium nitroprusside in schizophrenia has been assessed in a previous review. On the basis of the above findings, the author chose to evaluate the potential efficacy of molsidomine as an antischizophrenia agent.

Molsidomine
Molsidomine (N-ethoxycarbonyl-3-morpholinosydnonimine) is a NO-releasing prodrug and is a representative of the sydnonimine family, a class of heterocyclic NO donors. Its chemical structure is illustrated in Figure 1. Molsidomine is quickly metabolized by enzymatic hydrolysis and decarboxylation in the liver to its active metabolite SIN-1 (3-morpholino-sydnonimine). Molsidomine is considered a slow NO releaser, and the highest NO plasma levels are reached within 2 hours. This molecule is largely utilized in clinical practice for the management of various coronary artery disorders, such as myocardial ischemia, since it possesses strong vasodilatory properties. It has also been shown that molsidomine is a potent antioxidant agent and enhances long-term potentiation (LTP), which is considered the electrophysiological correlate of memory.
Chemical structure of molsidomine.

Molsidomine and Schizophrenia

Preclinical studies
The preclinical literature concerning the effects of molsidomine in patients with schizophrenia is provided in Table 1. Molsidomine (2 and 4 mg/kg, acutely) attenuated different psychotomimetic effects (stereotypies, ataxia, but not hypermotility) induced by the NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801 (0.2 mg/kg, acutely). Furthermore, the application of the same dose range of molsidomine reversed the nonspatial recognition memory impairments caused by MK-801 (0.1 mg/kg).
Effects of MOLS on preclinical rat models of schizophrenia
Study	Agent	Dose(s)	Route	Behavior task	Effect	 	Pitsikas et al.	MOLS	2, 4 mg/kg	i.p. acute	Activity cage	No effect on MK-801-induced hypermotility	 		MK-801	0.2 mg/kg	i.p. acute		Reversed MK-801-induced sterotypies and ataxia	 		MOLS	2, 4 mg/kg	i.p. acute	ORT	Reversed MK-801-induced recognition memory deficits	 		MK-801	0.1 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 	Gourgiotis et al.	MOLS	2, 4 mg/kg	i.p. acute	ORT	Reversed apomorphine-induced recognition memory deficits	 		Apomorphine	1 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 	Katsanou et al.	MOLS	2, 4 mg/kg	i.p. acute	SIT	Reversed ketamine-induced social withdrawal	 		Ketamine	8 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 		MOLS	2, 4 mg/kg	i.p. acute	OLT	Reversed ketamine-induced spatial recognition memory deficits	 		Ketamine	3 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 		MOLS	1 mg/kg	i.p. acute	ORT	Combination of subeffective doses of molsidomine and clozapine reversed ketamine-induced recognition memory deficits	 		Ketamine	3 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 		Clozapine	0.1 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 	Vartzoka et al.	MOLS	2, 4 mg/kg	i.p. acute	OLT	Reversed apomorphine-induced spatial recognition memory deficits	 		Apomorphine	0.5 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 		MOLS	2, 4 mg/kg	i.p. acute	PAT	Attenuated apomorphine-induced emotional memory deficits	 		Apomorphine	0.5 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 		MOLS	1 mg/kg	i.p. acute	ORT	Combination of subeffective doses of molsidomine and clozapine/risperidone reversed apomorphine-induced recognition memory deficits	 		Apomorphine	0.5 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 		Clozapine	0.1 mg/kg	i.p. acute			 		Risperidone	0.03 mg/kg	i.p. acute
i.p.: Intraperitoneally; MOLS: molsidomine; OLT: object location test; ORT: object recognition test; PAT: passive avoidance test; SIT: social interaction test.
A subsequent study revealed that molsidomine given acutely (2–4 mg/kg) reversed nonspatial recognition memory deficits induced by the D1/D2 DAergic receptor agonist apomorphine (1 mg/kg), as evidenced in the object recognition task in the rat.
The object location test and social interaction test were utilized to evaluate the ability of molsidomine to counteract the detrimental effects of the NMDA receptor antagonist ketamine on spatial recognition memory and social withdrawal in rats, with the latter being a model of negative symptoms of schizophrenia. Acute administration of molsidomine (2–4 mg/kg) abolished the spatial recognition memory deficits induced by ketamine (3 mg/kg). Additionally, molsidomine (2–4 mg/kg) attenuated the social isolation produced by subchronic treatment with ketamine (8 mg/kg). Moreover, the impact of the combination of subthreshold doses of molsidomine (1 mg/kg) with the atypical antipsychotic clozapine (0.1 mg/kg) on memory was assessed via the object recognition test. This combination was shown to be effective in compensating for delay-dependent and ketamine (3 mg/kg)-induced nonspatial recognition memory deficits.
In addition, it has recently been reported that the same treatment schedule of molsidomine attenuated the disruption of spatial recognition and emotional memory caused by apomorphine (0.5 mg/kg), as evidenced in the object location test and the passive avoidance test, respectively. Finally, the joint administration of inactive doses of molsidomine (1 mg/kg) with those of the atypical neuroleptics clozapine (0.1 mg/kg) and risperidone (0.03 mg/kg) attenuated nonspatial recognition memory deficits caused by apomorphine (0.5 mg/kg).
Overall, molsidomine appears to attenuate psychotomimetic effects and cognitive disturbances in different preclinical pharmacological models of schizophrenia related to abnormalities of the glutamatergic and DAergic systems, respectively. In addition, the effectiveness of the joint administration of inactive doses of molsidomine with those of atypical antipsychotics (clozapine or risperidone) on memory disturbances was shown. These findings support the study of the clinical utility of molsidomine as a supplementary approach to neuroleptics. Furthermore, a potential usefulness of the concomitant treatment schedule is that the decrease in drug doses might prevent their undesired effects, as mentioned above.
Nonetheless, the information is inconsistent since researchers have not yet tested whether a potential antipsychotic profile of molsidomine could also be revealed from preclinical pharmacological models (e.g., neurodevelopmental, genetic). Another limitation of the findings reported in Table 1 is the lack of information concerning the effects of molsidomine following chronic treatment since, in all these experiments, the acute treatment schedule was used. Furthermore, research aimed at resolving these issues is needed.

Clinical studies
To date, there is no information concerning the clinical efficacy of molsidomine in patients with schizophrenia. Preclinical findings, although limited, appear interesting, and clinical studies should be designed and carried out to clearly establish whether molsidomine is an appropriate candidate and could offer a benefit in the treatment of schizophrenia.

Potential Mechanisms of Action of Molsidomine in Schizophrenia
There is a lack of information concerning the mechanisms by which molsidomine might alleviate psychotic symptoms. Further studies (e.g., molecular, neurochemical, and electrophysiological) are needed to elucidate this essential topic. In this context, the NMDA/neuronal NOS/cGMP signaling pathway is impaired in patients with schizophrenia. Treatment with molsidomine has been shown to enhance the memory abilities of neuronal NOS knockout mice, as evaluated via the contextual fear conditioning test, and to normalize their cGMP levels, which were downregulated in their vehicle-treated cohorts.
Furthermore, it has been reported that either NMDA receptor antagonists or apomorphine disrupt LTP, which is considered an electrophysiological marker reflecting synaptic plasticity. Interestingly, previous research has shown that molsidomine enhances LTP. Since molsidomine was found to counteract cognitive deficits in animal models of schizophrenia, these data might support its presumed anti-schizophrenia-like action.
A different supposition that might account for the results presented here is based on the consistent association between schizophrenia and oxidative stress. A series of studies revealed the pro-oxidant profiles of ketamine and apomorphine. Therefore, the antioxidant properties of molsidomine, as revealed in different experimental models, might constitute an alternative explanation for the beneficial effects of this NO releaser.
The potential mechanisms through which the joint administration of subeffective doses of molsidomine with those of clozapine and risperidone attenuated recognition memory deficits caused by ketamine and apomorphine has not yet been clarified. Research has shown that both clozapine and risperidone enhance DA production in the PFC and hippocampus in rats. This tonic effect might be crucial for their ability to alleviate cognitive impairments related to schizophrenia. Sodium nitropyride has been shown to enhance the anti-schizophrenia-like effects of risperidone by stimulating the risperidone-mediated outflow of DA in the PFC, a brain region critically involved in cognition.
An additional explanation for the effects of the concomitant administration might be associated with the ability of molsidomine and clozapine to stimulate acetylcholine release from different brain areas. Importantly, acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter that is consistently involved in learning and memory processes. Moreover, the ability of molsidomine and clozapine to promote LTP should also be taken into consideration when interpreting the joint administration results. Finally, the well-known antioxidant properties of molsidomine, clozapine and risperidone could also play a role in this regard. The potential mechanisms of action of molsidomine in schizophrenia are summarized in Table 2.
Resume's potential mechanisms of action of molsidomine in schizophrenia
Adjustment of the functionality of the N-methyl-D-aspartate/neural nitric oxide synthase/cyclic guanosine monophosphate pathway	 	Enhancement of synaptic plasticity	 	Normalization of the functionality of glutamatergic, cholinergic and dopaminergic neurotransmission	 	Powerful antioxidant properties

Molsidomine versus Sodium Nitroprusside
Sodium nitroprusside is a fast NO releaser and is a member of the prusside family. Sodium nitroprusside possesses strong antioxidant and vasodilatory properties and is thus widely used in clinical practice as an antihypertensive agent and for the treatment of heart failure.
Interestingly, intense research has been conducted to evaluate the potential of sodium nitrprusside as a novel antischizophrenia agent. Although these studies are limited to pharmacological models of schizophrenia, they are promising and encourage the performance of clinical studies aimed at assessing its efficacy in patients with schizophrenia. Conflicting findings concerning the efficacy of this NO donor in relieving schizophrenia symptoms in patients have been reported. An assessment of available data revealed that sodium nitropyride might be beneficial in specific subclasses of schizophrenia patients, such as young individuals and nonsmokers, in the initial stage of the disease. In contrast, the efficacy of sodium nitroprusside is inconsistent when it is administered to older chronic patients. Even so, the good safety profile of sodium nitroprusside, as evidenced in all clinical trials, should be recognized. On the other hand, the clinical research presented important limitations related to the small sample size of participants recruited and to the evaluation of the effects of a single dose of sodium nitropusside.
Independent of the lack of clinical information regarding the potential antischizophrenia-like profile of molsidomine, some pharmacological results should not be underestimated. Although sodium nitroprusside and molsidomine are both NO-releasing molecules, important differences underlie their pharmacological profiles. Sodium nitroprusside is a rapid NO releaser and has a very short half-life (4 minutes). Conversely, molsidomine is a slow NO releaser and has a longer half-life (2 hours) than sodium nitroprusside does, which might be an advantage for its pharmacological action. Furthermore, tolerance development, a typical feature of nitrates, has been observed following repeated treatment with sodium nitroprusside but not with molsidomine. Finally, severe blood disorders, such as methemoglobinemia, are associated with treatment with sodium nitroprusside but not with molsidomine. Collectively, the above reported results indicate that molsidomine has a favorable pharmacological profile compared with that of sodium nitroprusside and further support the results of human studies.

Conclusions
Careful evaluation of the relative preclinical literature available, although limited, suggests a role for molsidomine as a potential antischizophrenia-like agent. In contrast, to date, there is no clinical information confirming the above-described promising preclinical findings. The latter suggests that intensive clinical research is mandatory to definitively establish whether molsidomine might be a suitable candidate and provide a benefit in the treatment of schizophrenia. To this end, multicenter human studies (double-blind, placebo-controlled trials) using a broad range of doses and recruiting an appropriate number of participants should be conducted. A list of some future research clinical activities is provided in Table 3.
Summary of future clinical studies designed to evaluate the role of molsidomine in schizophrenia
Multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled studies	 	Studies of the efficacy and safety of molsidomine alone in schizophrenia patients	 	Studies of the effects of molsidomine in combination with atypical neuroleptics in schizophrenia patients	 	Utilization of a wide dose range of molsidomine	 	Appropriate number of participants
Finally, it is important to consider the narrow therapeutic window of NO-related compounds. Small changes in local NO levels and the time of administration may thus be critical factors in determining their biological effects.
Conflicts of interest: The author declares no competing interests.

Data availability statement
All relevant data are within the paper.

References
The epidemiology and global burden of schizophrenia
Towards a unified theory of the aetiology of schizophrenia
Subunit-selective modulation of GABA type A receptor neurotransmission and cognition in schizophrenia
The environment and schizophrenia
Genetic diversity in schizophrenia: developmental implications of ultra-rare, protein-truncating mutations
Implications of normal brain development for the pathogenesis of schizophrenia
Oxidative stress in schizophrenia: an integrated approach
Drug models of schizophrenia
Glutamate and schizophrenia: phencyclidine, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, and dopamine-glutamate interactions
Altered GABA neurotransmission and prefrontal cortical dysfunction in schizophrenia
Neurostructural, neurofunctional, and clinical features of chronic, untreated schizophrenia: a narrative review
Endothelium-derived relaxing factor release on activation of NMDA receptors suggests role as intercellular messenger in the brain
Nitric oxide synthases in mammals
Nitric oxide activates guanylate cyclase and increases guanosine 3’:5’-cyclic monophosphate levels in various tissue preparations
Phosphodiesterases in the central nervous system
Epigenetics: the third pillar of nitric oxide signaling
Current understanding on the role of nitric oxide and therapeutic potential of NO supplementation in schizophrenia
Nitric oxide: a cytotoxic activated macrophage effector molecule
Nitric oxide release accounts for the biological activity of endothelium-derived relaxing factor
Nitric oxide as modulator of neuronal function
The role of nitric oxide in the object recognition memory
Nitric oxide induces neurotransmitter release from hippocampal slices
Regulation of striatal dopamine neurotransmission by nitric oxide: effector pathways and signaling mechanisms
The effects of nitric oxide on striatal serotoninergic transmission involve multiple targets: an in vivo microdialysis study in the awake rat
Nitric oxide in the central nervous system: neuroprotection versus neurotoxicity
The many faces of nitric oxide in schizophrenia. A review
Nitric oxide and schizophrenia: present knowledge and emerging concepts of therapy
A neuronal nitric oxide synthase (NOS-I) haplotype associated with schizophrenia modifies prefrontal cortex function
Altered distribution of nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide phosphate-diaphorase cells in frontal lobe of schizophrenics implies disturbances of cortical development
Morphological abnormalities in nitric-oxide-synthase-positive striatal interneurons of schizophrenic patients
Nitric oxide synthase-containing neurons in the human hypothalamus: reduced number of immunoreactive cells in the paraventricular nucleus of depressive patients and schizophrenics
Decreased calcium-dependent constitutive nitric oxide synthase (cNOS) activity in prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia and depression
Plasma nitrate levels in deficit versus non-deficit forms of schizophrenia
Reduced plasma nitric oxide metabolites before and after antipsychotic treatment in patients with schizophrenia compared to controls
Association between plasma nitric oxide metabolites levels and negative symptoms of schizophrenia: a pilot study
Elevated endogenous nitric oxide synthase inhibitor in schizophrenic plasma may reflect abnormalities in brain nitric oxide production
Nitric oxide, free radicals and polyamines may have a role in the membrane pathology of schizophrenia
Low concentration of nitrite and nitrate in the cerebrospinal fluid from schizophrenic patients: a pilot study
Interstitial white matter neurons express less reelin and are abnormally distributed in schizophrenia: towards an integration of molecular and morphologic aspects of the neurodevelopmental hypothesis
GABAergic interneurons: implications for understanding schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
Cingulate white matter neurons in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
The role of nitric oxide donors in schizophrenia: basic studies and clinical applications
The nitric oxide (NO) donor sodium nitroprusside (SNP) and its potential for the schizophrenia therapy: lights and shadows
Clinical pharmacokinetics of molsidomine
Nitric oxide donors as neuroprotective agents after an ischemic stroke-related inflammatory reaction
Nitric Oxide Donor Prevents Neonatal Isoflurane-induced Impairments in Synaptic Plasticity and Memory
Nitric oxide donor molsidomine attenuates psychotomimetic effects of the NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801
Nitric oxide modulates apomorphine-induced recognition memory deficits in rats
The nitric oxide (NO) donor molsidomine counteract social withdrawal and cognition deficits induced by blockade of the nmda receptor in the rat
The nitric oxide (NO) donor molsidomine attenuates memory impairments induced by the D1/D2 dopaminergic receptor agonist apomorphine in the rat
Ketamine inhibits glutamate-, N-methyl-D-aspartate-, and quisqualate-stimulated cGMP production in cultured cerebral neurons
Repeated application of ketamine to rats induces changes in the hippocampal expression of parvalbumin, neuronal nitric oxide synthase and cFOS similar to those found in human schizophrenia
Rapid improvement of acute schizophrenia symptoms after intravenous sodium nitroprusside: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
Pharmacological modulators of nitric oxide signaling and contextual fear conditioning in mice
Some distorted thoughts about ketamine as a psychedelic and a novel hypothesis based on NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic plasticity
Apomorphine effects on the hippocampus
Different sub-anesthetic doses of ketamine increase oxidative stress in the brain of rats
Oxidative damage in brains of mice treated with apomorphine and its oxidized derivative
Effects of antipsychotic drugs on extracellular dopamine levels in rat medial prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens
Clozapine increases both acetylcholine and dopamine release in rat ventral hippocampus: role of 5-HT1A receptor agonism
Enhancement of the antipsychotic effect of risperidone by sodium nitroprusside in rats
Atypical, but not typical, antipsychotic drugs increase cortical acetylcholine release without an effect in the nucleus accumbens or striatum
Effects of antipsychotic D2 antagonists on long-term potentiation in animals and implications for human studies
Antioxidant properties of second-generation antipsychotics: focus on microglia
Pharmacological modulation of nitric oxide release: new pharmacological perspectives, potential benefits and risks
Possible site of the in vivo disposition of sodium nitroprusside in the rat
Molsidomine potentiates the protective activity of GYKI 52466, a non-NMDA antagonist, MK–801, a non-competitive NMDA antagonist, and riluzole against electroconvulsions in mice
Dynamics of irreversible NO release from photoexcited molsidomine
Nitric oxide generation, tachyphylaxis and cross-tachyphylaxis from nitrovasodilators in vivo
Explaining the phenomenon of nitrate tolerance
Methemoglobinemia after sodium nitroprusside therapy
Brain nitric oxide and its dual role in neurodegeneration/neuroprotection: understanding molecular mechanisms to devise drug approaches