A multidisciplinary approach to eosinophilic esophagitis management
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic inflammatory condition of the esophagus in which allergic, gastrointestinal, and psychiatric comorbidities are common. As such, multidisciplinary approaches to EoE management may provide an opportunity to centralize EoE care and ensure that all aspects of the patient’s condition and comorbidities are being managed in a comprehensive, unified approach to optimize patient outcomes. This collaborative approach has been shown to improve the likelihood of clinical and histologic remission in patients with EoE. Allergists, gastroenterologists, registered dietitians, and mental health providers all bring unique skills and expertise needed to improve the care of patients with EoE. In this article, we discuss the individual roles of each team member at the Dallas Eosinophilic GI Disease and Esophagitis Program at Children’s Health in Dallas, Texas, and how they work together to provide comprehensive care to patients with EoE.

Clinical Vignette
A 9-year-old boy presents to a pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) multidisciplinary clinic for a second opinion with regard to management of his EoE. He initially presented to a gastroenterologist with concerns of epigastric pain, constipation, and dysphagia. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed furrowing and white plaques throughout the esophagus, with up to 80 eosinophils per high-power field on histologic examination, which confirmed the diagnosis of EoE. He was referred to an allergist who recommended a six-food elimination diet (avoiding the “top 8” allergen groups: milk, egg, wheat, soy, peanut, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish). In the clinic, his parents expressed frustration with regard to the elimination diet. His diet is already limited due to his previously identified immunoglobulin E (IgE) mediated food allergies to peanuts, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish. They mention that he had an IgE-mediated egg allergy in early childhood, which has now resolved. His current diet consists of only a few foods, including milk products, wheat and other grains, a few fruits, and ground meat. The six-food elimination diet would further limit his diet, and parents are concerned about this impacting his weight gain. Parents have also noticed his increasing anxiety about eating dense foods such as steak and trying new foods that could potentially worsen his symptoms. Although pharmacologic therapy has been discussed with the family, they are hesitant to start medications because he is already on inhaled corticosteroids for asthma and cetirizine for allergic rhinitis, and intermittently uses topical corticosteroids for atopic dermatitis. They worry about potential adverse effects of the medications and polypharmacy. The family has never met with a dietitian for guidance on the elimination diet or a mental health provider for his growing anxiety. They are hoping to find a multidisciplinary care center to address all these issues at once, with all providers working closely together.

INTRODUCTION
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is an increasingly prevalent chronic inflammatory condition of the esophagus, characterized by intraepithelial eosinophilia and mediated by type 2 cytokines, including interleukin 4 and interleukin 13, which leads to esophageal dysfunction. The disease impact, as illustrated in the vignette above, can be quite profound because eating is a central biologic and social function. Given that EoE is often co-managed by gastroenterologists and allergists, there has been interest in multidisciplinary approaches to EoE in recent years. The published multidisciplinary approach at the University of Virginia includes a gastroenterologist, allergist, and dietitian working together to implement a treatment and follow-up plan for each patient. In our pediatric EoE multidisciplinary clinic, we use a similar structure, with each patient seeing an allergist and gastroenterologist at every visit. If an elimination diet is implemented or if there are concerns about poor weight gain, then a registered dietitian meets with the patient and caregivers as well. We have also found the assistance of mental health professionals to be helpful in a subset of our patients with anxiety about eating, medications, and health care in general. In our multidisciplinary clinic, providers typically discuss the patients and their tentative treatment plans before each clinic session. The patients then see each team member sequentially. Each team member updates the others on any change in the plan throughout the session. When needed, multiple providers meet with patients and caregivers at once to discuss difficult treatment decisions. This approach allows for fully informed shared decision-making. The costs associated with our multidisciplinary approach are similar to the costs of seeing an allergist and gastroenterologist separately, with Current Procedural Terminology codes for new patient or follow-up visits or initial consultation from each provider and a single facility fee (as opposed to two facility fees if seeing an allergist and a gastroenterologist on separate clinic days). Dietitian billing is based on time, and reimbursement is lower than the billed amount for dietitian consultation. We acknowledge that many patients with EoE are well cared for by private practice allergists or gastroenterologists but would like to highlight the benefits of multidisciplinary care for patients with complicated concerns and who have multiple comorbidities or who have been refractory to initial treatment. Some characteristics of patients who may benefit from this approach to care compared with those who may prefer a simpler approach led by a single provider are listed in Table 1. How the expertise of each specialist involved combines to provide comprehensive multidisciplinary care is illustrated in Fig. 1. Here we will explain the rationale for a multidisciplinary approach, highlighting the approach used at the Dallas Eosinophilic GI Disease and Esophagitis Program at Children’s Health in Dallas, Texas, and how the expertise of multiple specialties can come together to provide personalized care for patients with EoE.
Multiple specialists combine to provide comprehensive multidisciplinary care.
Characteristics of patients who may benefit from an eosinophilic esophagitis multidisciplinary clinic
Disease characteristics	 	 High severity of disease	 	 Lack of response to initial therapy	 	Atopic comorbidities	 	 Persistent asthma	 	 Moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis	 	 Immunoglobulin E–mediated food allergy	 	 Severe environmental allergies	 	Gastroenterological comorbidities	 	 Refractory gastroesophageal reflux disease	 	 Irritable bowel syndrome	 	 Gastritis	 	 Motility disorders	 	Nutritional concerns	 	 Failure to thrive	 	 Extensive elimination diet	 	 Vitamin and micronutrient deficiency	 	Psychological concerns	 	 Anxiety related to eating	 	 Anxiety affecting adherence to therapy	 	 Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder

ROLE OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL PHYSICIAN
The role of the gastroenterologist in the EoE multidisciplinary clinic focuses on diagnosis and management of gastrointestinal comorbidities, endoscopic stricture treatment, disease surveillance, and nutrition management. The diagnosis of EoE is clinicopathologic, requiring the presence of esophageal dysfunction symptoms and histologic evidence of inflammation. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy is particularly important in determining whether symptoms in young children are due to EoE or alternative diagnoses because patients in this age group often present with nonspecific symptoms, including vomiting, feeding problems, and poor growth. This is illustrated by a recent study that found higher EoE symptom scores among children with non-EoE esophageal dysfunction than those with EoE.
Patients with EoE often have coexisting gastrointestinal comorbidities, including failure to thrive, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), irritable bowel syndrome, constipation, gastritis, and celiac disease. GERD is one of the most common comorbidities and occurs in ∼54% of patients with EoE. EoE and GERD are distinct but often overlapping disorders. They both share similar symptoms, including dysphagia, vomiting, heartburn, and abdominal pain. In addition, esophageal eosinophilia can be seen on histologic examination in both EoE and GERD, which can further complicate the diagnosis. The gastroenterologist must consider the patient’s history and endoscopic and histologic findings to make a definitive diagnosis.
Food impactions and esophageal foreign bodies can be presenting symptoms of EoE. In some patients, these complications are due to esophageal strictures. Treatment of strictures involves endoscopic dilation of the esophagus. Many patients with EoE and with strictures may require multiple endoscopic dilations every few weeks until the desired esophageal diameter is achieved.
A small number of patients with EoE are classified as having failure to thrive and may require a feeding tube (nasogastric tube or gastrostomy tube) to meet daily caloric needs. Failure to thrive most often occurs in patients < 5 years of age. The pediatric gastroenterologist along with the dietitian follow growth closely, manage feeding tubes, and adjust feeding regimens as needed. The procedural and nutritional expertise of the gastroenterologist are essential in providing an accurate diagnosis, effective management, and improved quality of life in patients with EoE.

ROLE OF THE ALLERGIST
Patients with EoE are diagnosed with allergic comorbidities, including IgE-mediated food allergy, food protein–induced enterocolitis syndrome, asthma, atopic dermatitis, and allergic rhinitis at much higher rates than the general population. Several of these comorbidities and their therapies may directly impact EoE. For example, introduction of a food after resolution of IgE-mediated food allergy may trigger active EoE. Conversely, a food previously tolerated on a regular basis may result in immediate IgE-mediated symptoms after a long period of strict avoidance for the purpose of treating EoE. Inhaled corticosteroids prescribed for asthma may be inadvertently swallowed and, therefore, may influence the outcome of esophageal biopsies. Although the overall risk for adrenal suppression with swallowed topical corticosteroid use for EoE is low, various forms of corticosteroids may be used to treat multiple atopic conditions, and the cumulative dose may increase the risk for adrenal suppression. However, biologic therapies, e.g., dupilumab, may allow for a single medication to control multiple atopic conditions. Allergists are ideally equipped to assess and manage the full spectrum of atopic comorbidities that patients with EoE may have and ensure that all allergic diatheses are considered in treatment decisions.
IgE-mediated food allergy and EoE often occur together, with ∼40% of patients with EoE diagnosed with comorbid IgE-mediated food allergy, whereas the rate of EoE among patients with IgE-mediated food allergy may be quadruple that of individuals with other forms of atopy. The interplay between EoE and IgE-mediated food allergy becomes even more complex when oral immunotherapy (OIT) is considered. EoE is a known complication of OIT,, and active EoE has generally been considered a contraindication to proceeding with OIT. A new diagnosis of EoE during OIT typically leads to discontinuation of OIT. However, some patients and caregivers may place a higher value on the treatment of IgE-mediated food allergy and reduction of anaphylaxis risk, and, therefore, choose to continue OIT and medically treat the resulting EoE with a proton-pump inhibitor, swallowed topical corticosteroids, or dupilumab. Furthermore, discontinuation of OIT does not always guarantee resolution of EoE. The picture is further complicated by evidence that peanut OIT may be associated with new-onset asymptomatic esophageal eosinophilia, which may resolve spontaneously without discontinuation of OIT. The complex considerations involved in such decisions are discussed in great detail in a recent review article. With its recent documented efficacy in IgE-mediated food allergy and resulting U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval, omalizumab may be increasingly prescribed for IgE-mediated food allergy. Omalizumab is ineffective for treating EoE, however. If omalizumab therapy is widely used to facilitate the introduction of allergenic foods into the diet, it follows that a proportion of such patients may develop EoE, and similar discussions will be needed to determine the best individualized management of these patients.
Currently available tests for food allergy do not accurately identify EoE food triggers. Although T-cell–based assays have shown promise in identifying EoE food triggers, they are currently limited to research use. Although the limitations of food allergy testing for EoE are known, inappropriate food allergy testing is widely available. These tests may lead to confusion, unnecessarily restrictive diets, and unintended consequences, e.g., new IgE-mediated food allergy. Allergists can play a critical role by determining when food allergy testing is appropriate and by counseling against inappropriate testing. Food allergy testing may be needed after long periods of food avoidance to facilitate safe food reintroduction while minimizing the risk of IgE-mediated reactions. If sensitization is present, then allergists may still be able to facilitate introduction through oral food challenge. Although food triggers underlie the pathophysiology of EoE, there is also evidence that aeroallergens can deposit in the esophagus and exacerbate EoE., Aeroallergen testing may help determine the best timing for repeated endoscopies to accurately reflect the efficacy of prescribed therapies while limiting any effect of aeroallergen-induced exacerbation on the results. The clinical benefit of aeroallergen immunotherapy for the treatment of EoE remains unproven but may still be indicated and beneficial for atopic comorbidities such as allergic rhinitis or asthma in patients with EoE. For all these reasons, the allergist plays a crucial role in the management of all patients with comorbid EoE and other forms of atopy.

ROLE OF THE REGISTERED DIETITIAN
Elimination diets have been a treatment option for EoE since the efficacy of an elemental diet based on amino-acid formula was shown in a case series published in 1995. The six-food elimination diet (elimination of the top eight allergen groups: milk, egg, wheat, soy, peanut, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish) emerged in the 2000s as a popular treatment option. More recently, step-up approaches beginning with less-restricted two-food (milk and wheat/gluten) or single-food (milk) elimination diets have been increasingly implemented in attempts to balance efficacy with the burden of treatment while limiting the need for repetitive esophagogastroduodenoscopies and biopsies., Although less-restrictive diets may be more appealing to patients and families, the ubiquity of foods such as milk and wheat makes even single-food elimination a daunting task. The 2011 consensus recommendations for management of EoE strongly recommend consultation with a registered dietitian for patients following elimination diets “to ensure that proper calories, vitamins, and micronutrients are maintained.” Furthermore, dietitians can provide resources and education to ensure that food elimination is actually implemented as intended. Doing so can avoid unnecessary procedures and ensure that biopsy results reflect treatment response rather than possible nonadherence to the prescribed elimination diet. In our multidisciplinary clinic, dietitians educate on food elimination, assess for adherence to planned dietary elimination, and ensure nutritional needs are met, which allow for adequate growth.

ROLE OF MENTAL HEALTH PROVIDERS
EoE, as with other chronic diseases, can lead to psychologic comorbidities in patients and parents. More than one in seven children with EoE have a psychiatric condition, highlighting the importance of mental health providers as members of a multidisciplinary team. Psychological comorbidities include feeding difficulties, anxiety, depression, sleep disturbances, and social issues. One of the most common comorbidities is anxiety related to swallowing, which leads patients to develop adaptive eating behaviors such as extensive chewing, taking smaller bites, drinking frequently, and avoiding specific foods to manage symptoms. These behaviors can result in social isolation because patients are unable to participate in food-centered activities with family and friends.
EoE therapies can often be burdensome and add stress to families. Although diet elimination therapy can be very effective, it is difficult to initiate and implement. In addition, the avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder can develop while on elimination diets. In these cases, cognitive-behavioral approaches have been found to be beneficial. Not all patients with EoE in an multidisciplinary clinic may require involvement of a medical health professional. In a previous study, more severe symptoms in patients with EoE negatively impacted patients’ quality-of-life scores, which support the potential benefits of frequent psychological support for patients with EoE who present with more severe symptoms.

CHALLENGES THAT FACE A MULTIDISCIPLINARY APPROACH
Although we have found the multidisciplinary approach described above to be effective for our patient population, we do recognize a variety of challenges to this approach. The logistics of seeing multiple providers in a single clinic visit can be difficult, so the volume of patients seen in each clinic session needs to be limited. The duration of the clinic visit may be quite long, especially for new patients or those facing difficult treatment decisions. Some patients may prefer shorter visits separately with the allergist and gastroenterologist, especially for follow-up care. We do use telemedicine visits with a physician assistant who specializes in gastroenterology for select follow-up visits in stable patients on a steady treatment plan.
Resource limitations are another barrier. Whereas our clinic initially included a full-time psychologist, we no longer have this luxury due to limited availability of mental health resources, so we now reach out to mental health providers as needed. Although we aim to include the providers most essential to the care of our patients with EoE, there are inevitably other providers (e.g., primary care providers, psychiatrists, pulmonologists) who are not included in our approach. As always, clear communication with the patient’s entire health-care team is needed to optimize patient outcomes.
Another daunting obstacle that faces patients with EoE is the transition from pediatric to adult care. We do not have an adult multidisciplinary clinic, so we aim to follow up patients in the pediatric clinic until we have achieved remission of EoE and the patient is on a stable treatment plan. This helps ensure that the transition to adult providers is as seamless as possible.

CONCLUSION
Management of EoE can be optimized through cooperative management by gastroenterologists, allergists, registered dietitians, and psychologists. A multidisciplinary approach that promotes collaboration should ensure that EoE and all comorbid conditions are addressed appropriately. Such an approach is increasingly being implemented at centers throughout the country. Further data are needed to provide conclusive evidence that such an approach results in improved outcomes and is cost-effective

Clinical Pearls and Pitfalls
Allergists, gastroenterologists, dietitians, and mental health providers all bring unique expertise to the care of patients with EoE.
Comorbid gastrointestinal conditions can have overlapping symptomatology as that of EoE, and the gastroenterologist’s expertise can be essential in appropriate identification and management.
Comorbid atopy is very common in EoE, and treatment of these conditions may overlap, resulting in polypharmacy and increased adverse effects. Conversely, biologic agents may allow treatment of multiple atopic conditions with a single therapeutic agent. Allergists are well equipped to navigate this complexity.
Consultation with a registered dietitian is recommended for optimal implementation of elimination diets.
Anxiety and other psychiatric conditions are common in EoE. They may negatively impact quality of life and act as barriers to therapy; involvement of a mental health providers may help address these issues.
This multidisciplinary approach to EoE may be best reserved for patients with relevant comorbidities or refractory disease.
C.P. Parrish reports research support (funds to the institution) from National Institutes of Health-National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, and DBV Technologies; consulting fees from Magellan Rx; speaking fees from Sanofi Genzyme; and advisory board participation for Sanofi Genzyme and Takeda Pharmaceuticals. J. Thomas has no conflicts of interest to declare pertaining to this article
No external funding sources reported

REFERENCES
Eosinophilic esophagitis: examining the impact of disease
As easy as EoE: a novel and effective multidisciplinary approach to care of patients with eosinophilic esophagitis in the age of biologics
Multidisciplinary approach to the management of adult eosinophilic oesophagitis in the United Kingdom
Multidisciplinary eosinophilic esophagitis care: a model for comprehensive patient-centered care through shared decision making between gastroenterology, allergy, and nutrition
Eosinophilic esophagitis: updated consensus recommendations for children and adults
Eosinophilic esophagitis symptom scores are high in children without eosinophilic disease
Phenotypic characterization of eosinophilic esophagitis in a large multicenter patient population from the consortium for food allergy research
Distinguishing GERD from eosinophilic oesophagitis: concepts and controversies
Histopathology of eosinophilic esophagitis
The prevalence and diagnostic utility of endoscopic features of eosinophilic esophagitis: a meta-analysis
Esophageal dilation in eosinophilic esophagitis: not just for adults anymore
Dilation of pediatric eosinophilic esophagitis: adverse events and short-term outcomes
Feeding tube placement, complications, and treatment responses in a large eosinophilic esophagitis patient population
Eosinophilic esophagitis and allergic comorbidities in a US-population-based study
Resolution of acute IgE-mediated allergy with development of eosinophilic esophagitis triggered by the same food
New IgE immediate hypersensitivity reactions on reintroduction of food restricted for treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis
Low detection of adrenal suppression secondary to swallowed steroids for eosinophilic esophagitis in a quality improvement project
Patterns in the development of pediatric allergy
Relation between eosinophilic esophagitis and oral immunotherapy for food allergy: a systematic review with meta-analysis
Eosinophilic esophagitis and symptoms possibly related to eosinophilic esophagitis in oral immunotherapy
Eosinophilic esophagitis may persist after discontinuation of oral immunotherapy
Baseline gastrointestinal eosinophilia is common in oral immunotherapy subjects with IgE-mediated peanut allergy
Management of eosinophilic esophagitis during oral immunotherapy
Omalizumab for the treatment of multiple food allergies
Eosinophilic esophagitis in adults is associated with IgG4 and not mediated by IgE
Efficacy of atopy patch testing in directed dietary therapy of eosinophilic esophagitis: a pilot study
Allergy tests do not predict food triggers in adult patients with eosinophilic oesophagitis. A comprehensive prospective study using five modalities
Allergy-test-based elimination diets for the treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis: a systematic review of their efficacy
Peripheral markers of allergen-specific immune activation predict clinical allergy in eosinophilic esophagitis
A review of food allergy panels and their consequences
The role of the allergist in the management of eosinophilic esophagitis
Local antigen deposition in eosinophilic esophagitis: implications for immune activation
Penetration of the esophageal epithelium by dust mite antigen in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis
Subcutaneous immunotherapy in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis
Eosinophilic esophagitis attributed to gastroesophageal reflux: improvement with an amino acid-based formula
Effect of six-food elimination diet on clinical and histologic outcomes in eosinophilic esophagitis
Step-up empiric elimination diet for pediatric and adult eosinophilic esophagitis: the 2-4-6 study
A single-food milk elimination diet is effective for treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis in children
Psychiatric comorbidities and psychiatric medication use are highly prevalent in patients with eosinophilic esophagitis and associate with clinical presentation
Psychosocial dysfunction in children and adolescents with eosinophilic esophagitis
Health-related quality of life over time in children with eosinophilic esophagitis and their families
Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder in diet-treated children with eosinophilic esophagitis