Sarcopenic Obesity: A Comprehensive Approach for Postmenopausal Women
Sarcopenic obesity, characterized by the concurrent presence of muscle loss and obesity, poses significant health challenges, especially in the elderly. This review explores the impact of sarcopenic obesity on disability, metabolic health, comorbidities, and potential management strategies. With the aging global population, the prevalence of sarcopenic obesity is expected to increase, necessitating a comprehensive management approach. Early screening, prevention, and ongoing research on its underlying mechanisms and therapeutic options are crucial for promoting healthy aging.
Graphical Abstract

INTRODUCTION
According to the 2022 United Nations report, the global proportion of the elderly population is estimated to reach 1.5 billion by 2050, marking a substantial increase from the current 12.3% to 22.0%. In South Korea, life expectancy is steadily increasing, with an expected peak at 86.7 years by 2030. The global demographic trends in the 21st century indicate the simultaneous aging of the population and a rapid increase in the obese population. These demographic shifts play a significant role not only in the changes in body composition but also in the emergence, exacerbation, and increased mortality rates of chronic diseases associated with these changes. Studies on sarcopenic obesity are crucial for anticipating future needs, encompassing efforts to alleviate the rising healthcare costs associated with population aging and developing healthcare models tailored for an aging society.

BIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS OF AGING IN WOMEN AND HORMONAL ASSOCIATIONS
As aging progresses, the body’s physiological functions decline by an average of up to 2% per year, leading to muscle loss and a reduction in other bodily capabilities. In healthy young adults in a state of homeostasis, the synthesis and breakdown of skeletal muscle proteins occur dynamically, maintaining muscle mass without significant quantitative changes. In young adults, muscle mass accounts for 30% of the overall protein turnover in the body; in older adults, it decreases to less than 20% of the total protein turnover. The rate of age-related muscle decline persists at approximately 1%–2% per year until the age of 50 years. As aging progresses, significant changes occur, such as an increase in body fat and loss of muscle mass. On average, adults gain approximately 0.45 kg of fat and lose approximately 0.23 kg of muscle annually between the ages of 30 years and 60 years. These changes in body composition reach an equilibrium when 15 lb of muscles are lost and 30 lb of fats are gained. In women, estrogen levels decline markedly during the pre and postmenopausal phases, leading to the redistribution of subcutaneous fat to the abdominal region. Visceral fat, on average, increases from 5%–8% of the total body fat before menopause to 15%–20% after menopause. Middle-aged women are disproportionately affected by major cardiovascular risk factors such as obesity. According to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) dataset, the prevalence of obesity in women (40.4%) is significantly higher than that in men (35.0%) in the United States. A previous study reported that weight gain during menopausal transition was considered a result of chronological aging. However, a longitudinal study involving 3,300 women, the Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation, investigated the physical, biological, and psychological changes associated with aging and menopause. Notably, the study revealed that hormonal changes, such as the decline in estrogen levels during menopause, are linked to alterations in body composition, including increased body fat.

DEFINITION OF SARCOPENIC OBESITY
Sarcopenic obesity, a concept gaining increasing attention, combines sarcopenia and obesity and represents a geriatric syndrome with a multifactorial pathogenesis that becomes more prevalent with age. The coexistence of both conditions not only gives rise to obesityrelated comorbidities, but also to non-specific symptoms such as fatigue, weakness, and frailty attributed to muscle loss.
The 2010 European Working Group definition of sarcopenia considers not only low muscle mass but also a decrease in muscle function (muscle strength or physical performance) physical performance. Presarcopenia refers to low muscle mass alone, sarcopenia includes both low muscle mass and reduced physical performance, and severe sarcopenia involves a reduction in all three parameters. Sarcopenic obesity is characterized by low muscle mass and high fat mass. Various studies have employed dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) to measure muscle mass, defining values below two standard deviations from the mean of a young group with height correction as indicative of sarcopenia. Obesity is often defined using body mass index (BMI), with the World Health Organization classifying overweight and obesity as a BMI of 25.0–29.9 kg/m2 and a BMI of ≥ 30.0 kg/m2, respectively. However, BMI has limitations, especially as it does not account for muscle mass, and the definition of sarcopenia often lacks consideration for muscle strength or physical performance, leading to an ongoing debate. The absence of a universally agreed-upon goal in managing sarcopenic obesity further contributes to this debate, in contrast to conditions such as osteoporosis, where the reduction of fracture risk provides a clear objective for establishing the bone density criteria. As studies regarding the impact of sarcopenia on health progress, a consensus on guidelines for addressing sarcopenic obesity may eventually emerge.

DEFINITION OF SARCOPENIC OBESITY IN VARIOUS CLINICAL STUDIES
The assessment methods and diagnostic criteria for sarcopenic obesity used in each study are summarized in Table 1. The body composition measurement methods in the included studies used either bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) or DXA. DXA indirectly estimates appendicular skeletal muscle mass (ASM) by using lean mass excluding bone and is well-validated as a standard method for assessing muscle mass in many studies. In terms of diagnostic indicators for sarcopenia, ASM/weight was used when muscle mass relative to body weight was considered, while some studies used muscle mass relative to height squared or set the criteria for sarcopenia based solely on reduced muscle strength and physical performance without reference to muscle mass. DXA indirectly estimates ASM by using lean mass excluding bone and is well-validated as a standard method for assessing muscle mass in many studies. However, a drawback is that the measurement values may vary depending on the manufacturer’s brand, calibration methods, and post-processing techniques. BIA, on the other hand, estimates body fat and lean mass indirectly by using the difference in electrical conductivity between fat tissue and water. It has the advantages of being cost-effective, portable, easy to use, and safe as it does not involve radiation exposure.
The European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism and the European Association for the Study of Obesity jointly released a Consensus Statement in 2022 regarding the definitions and criteria for diagnosing sarcopenic obesity. This statement outlines a three-step approach for screening the diagnostic staging of sarcopenic obesity. Obesity is assessed using factors such as BMI or waist circumference, while sarcopenia is assessed based on clinical symptoms or responses to surveys such as SARC-F. Once the criteria align with racial standards, a diagnosis is established. Subsequently, functional decline is assessed using relevant tests such as handgrip strength and chair stand, and body composition evaluations such as DXA or BIA are performed. The guidelines set a body fat threshold of 40% and recommend the assessment of muscle mass reduction.
Based on this, clinical complications were stratified into stage 1 for patients without complications and stage 2 for those with complications related to alterations in body composition and skeletal muscle function. These complications include metabolic diseases, functional disabilities, and cardiovascular and respiratory diseases.

PREVALENCE
Despite limitations in accurately estimating the prevalence of sarcopenic obesity due to various constraints, a prospective 14-year study by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention using NHANES data of adults aged 60 years and older reported a sarcopenic obesity prevalence of 18.1% in women (BMI ≥ 38%). Analysis of data from the 5th Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey revealed a prevalence of sarcopenic obesity of 9.1% in Korean women.

PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL CONSEQUENCES
The pathogenesis of sarcopenic obesity is multifactorial, involving aging, sedentary lifestyles, reduced physical activity, unhealthy dietary habits, insulin resistance, and interactions between systemic inflammation and oxidative stress. These factors contribute to quantitative and qualitative decreases in muscle mass and function. Progressive fat-free mass reduction, primarily in muscles, occurs from the 20s to the 70s, with an approximately 40% decrease accompanied by an increase in fat mass. Peripheral fat-free mass reduction became more pronounced; after the age of 70 years, both muscle and fat mass declined. Changes in fat distribution also occur with an increase in the visceral fat content, particularly in women.
The hormonal changes associated with aging affect the muscles and fat, with skeletal muscles possessing specific estrogen receptors at the fiber level. Estrogen stimulates satellite cell proliferation and promotes muscle regeneration. The decline in postmenopausal estrogen levels significantly contributes to increased visceral fat and reduced muscle strength. Obesity triggers an inflammatory response involving macrophages, mast cells, and T lymphocytes, leading to the secretion of tumor necrosis factor, leptin and growth hormone (GH). This cascade, in turn, increases insulin resistance and promotes fat accumulation and muscle loss. Ultimately, this cycle of reduced physical activity, sarcopenia, insulin resistance, oxidative stress, and obesity increases the risk of bone fractures and cardiovascular disease (CVD).

HEALTH CONSEQUENCES OF SARCOPENIC OBESITY

Disability or impairments
In a prospective cohort study focusing on elderly women in a local community, those exhibiting pure sarcopenia encountered fewer challenges in rising from a chair or bed. By contrast, women with pure obesity had a 44%–79% higher likelihood of experiencing difficulties in various bodily functions. Sarcopenic obese women were 2.6 times more likely to experience difficulties in climbing stairs, 2.4 times more likely to encounter difficulties descending stairs, and 1.5 times more likely to experience mobility issues than women with healthy body composition. Ultimately, obesity and muscle loss exacerbate difficulties in certain physical functions.

Metabolic impairments
Obesity is a well-established risk factor for metabolic disorders, such as CVD and diabetes, which affect life expectancy and quality of life. Visceral fat plays a crucial role in the onset of metabolic disorders, including hypertension, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, CVD, and diabetes. Sarcopenia is also associated with metabolic disorders such as insulin resistance and CVD risk factors. Previous studies suggest that older adults with sarcopenic obesity may have higher rates of cardiovascular events and increased mortality risk; however, these findings are subject to ongoing debate, underscoring the need for further mechanistic studies.

Comorbidities
A large-scale longitudinal cohort study revealed an association between obesity and sarcopenic obesity and the risk of knee osteoarthritis; however, sarcopenia alone did not significantly increase this risk. In a cross-sectional study from the Korea National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, sarcopenic obesity showed a closer relationship with radiographic knee osteoarthritis than with non-sarcopenic obesity, with a risk ratio of 2.38 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.80–3.15). Furthermore, a meta-analysis investigating the relationship between sarcopenic obesity and mortality suggested an integrated hazard ratio of 1.21 (95% CI: 1.10–1.32, P < 0.001) for overall cause-specific mortality, indicating sarcopenic obesity as a significant predictor of all-cause mortality in adults.

Public health implications
The association between obesity and mental health remains unclear. Epidemiological studies on the psychological impact of sarcopenic obesity indicate that reduced muscle mass is associated with depressive symptoms, particularly pronounced in sarcopenic obese individuals, who have a 1.79 times higher risk of depression symptoms than normal individuals. Moreover, a decrease in grip strength over 4 years was linked to an increased risk of depressive symptoms, especially in obese participants.

Management
Various approaches are currently being explored to address the multiple health risks associated with sarcopenic obesity.

Diet
Strategies for managing sarcopenic obesity often involve interventions incorporating calorie restriction and lifestyle modifications, including physical activity. Intentional weight loss in older adults improves comorbidities and enhances physical function, with a meta-analysis of randomized trials on weight loss in obese individuals reporting a 15% reduction in mortality. However, implementing energy restriction, with or without exercise, through a low-calorie diet can lead to an approximately one-fourth reduction in lean body mass per unit weight, potentially exacerbating muscle and bone loss. In 33 intervention studies lasting 8–24 weeks, caloric restriction without resistance training resulted in a maximum 4.6% loss of muscle mass and a 1.7 kg decrease in grip strength.
Although some experts advocate for supplementation with essential amino acids (e.g., leucine, arginine, and cysteine), the optimal quantity and quality of protein supplementation specifically for individuals with sarcopenic obesity have not been conclusively established. Sufficient protein intake is important for individuals with sarcopenic obesity. For healthy older adults, the recommended daily protein intake is 1.2–1.6 g/kg/day, divided across meals. Therefore, it is essential to consider renal function. For individuals with acute or chronic conditions, a higher adjusted protein intake of 1.2–1.5 g/kg/day is recommended.

Vitamin D
Although specific studies evaluating the benefits of vitamin D therapy in sarcopenic obesity are lacking, recent meta-analyses suggest that supplementation with at least 700–1,000 IU/day or achieving a serum 25(OH) D level of at least 24 ng/mL is associated with a reduced risk of falls in older adults.

Pharmacologic management
Due to the current lack of available data on the impact of anti-obesity drugs on sarcopenic obesity, making recommendations is not yet feasible. Studies that investigated various methods for preventing the rapid loss of muscle mass, particularly concerning the rate of weight loss, remain insufficient. LY2495655 (landogrozumab, Eli Lilly and Company), a myostatin inhibitor, has shown effectiveness in reducing body fat, increasing skeletal muscle mass, and improving physical function in older individuals prone to falls during a 6-month randomized controlled trial.
Tesamorelin, a GH-releasing hormone analog, has potential benefits for sarcopenic obesity, as observed in young obese patients. It influences glucose homeostasis without affecting body fat or increasing lean mass.
However, caution is warranted when conducting clinical trials of novel drugs, especially when considering the different side effects associated with these medications in an aging population.

Hormone replacement therapy
Studies examining the impact of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) on muscle loss in postmenopausal women present conflicting results, with some indicating improved muscle satellite cell proliferation and enhanced mobility and strength.
However, in observational studies conducted among non-obese groups, no significant difference was found in the prevalence of sarcopenia between individuals undergoing HRT and those who did not, fueling an ongoing debate on whether HRT can prevent age-related muscle loss. Despite the widespread perception among patients that HRT increases weight in postmenopausal women, actual research results have demonstrated no significant weight gain. In the Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions study involving 875 women, a comparison of weight gain between the placebo group and the hormone therapy group showed a significant difference in the first year, with the placebo group gaining 0.8 kg and the hormone therapy group gaining 0.2 kg. However, after 3 years, no significant difference was found between the two groups.
Moreover, this study reported that the use of HRT had no significant effect on visceral obesity. Conversely, other studies have reported a significant reduction in central obesity. The effect of HRT on abdominal fat accumulation varies depending on the timing of therapy. The postmenopausal waist-to-hip ratio was lower in patients who received hormone therapy immediately after menopause than in those who did not receive such therapy. However, in elderly women, no difference was observed several years after menopause, suggesting that HRT may delay abdominal fat accumulation.

CONCLUSION
As the aging population continues to grow, the escalating issue of sarcopenic obesity is expected to worsen. Given its multifactorial nature, the management of sarcopenic obesity requires a comprehensive approach that considers various contributing factors. Weight loss alone can exacerbate muscle loss, emphasizing the importance of concurrent protein intake and exercise. Studies examining the mechanisms and pharmacological possibilities are warranted, highlighting the significance of screening and early prevention of a healthy aging process.
FUNDING: This study was supported by research fund of Seoul St. Mary’s Hospital, the Catholic University of Korea.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
Healthy aging: the ultimate preventative medicine
Future life expectancy in 35 industrialised countries: projections with a Bayesian model ensemble
The continuing epidemics of obesity and diabetes in the United States
Kinetics of human aging: I. Rates of senescence between ages 30 and 70 years in healthy people
Age-related changes in protein oxidation and proteolysis in mammalian cells
Effects of aging on in vivo synthesis of skeletal muscle myosin heavy-chain and sarcoplasmic protein in humans
Basal muscle amino acid kinetics and protein synthesis in healthy young and older men
Amino acids and proteins in relation to the nutrition of elderly people
Cross-sectional age differences in body composition in persons 60+ years of age
Longitudinal changes in adult fat-free mass: influence of body weight
Estrogen deficiency and the origin of obesity during menopause
Association of mid-life changes in body size, body composition and obesity status with the menopausal transition
Trends in obesity among adults in the United States, 2005 to 2014
The menopause transition and women’s health at midlife: a progress report from the Study of Women’s Health Across the Nation (SWAN)
Fat tissue, aging, and cellular senescence
Sarcopenic obesity: time to meet the challenge
Definition and diagnostic criteria for sarcopenic obesity: ESPEN and EASO consensus statement
Sarcopenia: European consensus on definition and diagnosis: report of the European Working Group on Sarcopenia in Older People
Frailty and sarcopenia as a geriatric syndrome in community-dwelling older adults
Sarcopenic obesity, insulin resistance, and their implications in cardiovascular and metabolic consequences
Limits of body mass index to detect obesity and predict body composition
The diagnosis of osteoporosis
Sarcopenic obesity is associated with lower indicators of psychological health and quality of life in Koreans
Association between sarcopenic obesity and bone mineral density in middle-aged and elderly Korean
Body composition and its association with cardiometabolic risk factors in the elderly: a focus on sarcopenic obesity
Prevalence rate and associated factors of sarcopenic obesity in Korean elderly population
Dynapenic abdominal obesity as a predictor of worsening disability, hospitalization, and mortality in older adults: results from the InCHIANTI study
Association between sarcopenia, sarcopenic obesity, muscle strength and quality of life variables in elderly women
The role of muscle mass and body fat on disability among older adults: a cross-national analysis
Sarcopenia, sarcopenic obesity and mortality in older adults: results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III
Prevalence of sarcopenia and sarcopenic obesity in the Korean population based on the Fourth Korean National Health and Nutritional Examination Surveys
The association between sarcopenic obesity and hypertension, diabetes, and abnormal lipid metabolism in Chinese adults
The critical role of oxidative stress in sarcopenic obesity
Physical activity, cardiorespiratory fitness, and adiposity: contributions to disease risk
Obesity in older adults: technical review and position statement of the American Society for Nutrition and NAASO, The Obesity Society
Sarcopenic obesity and endocrinal adaptation with age
Understanding sarcopenia as a geriatric syndrome
17β-estradiol and testosterone in sarcopenia: role of satellite cells
Adipokines in inflammation and metabolic disease
Difficulties with physical function associated with obesity, sarcopenia, and sarcopenic-obesity in community-dwelling elderly women: the EPIDOS (EPIDemiologie de l’OSteoporose) study
Obesity and cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association
Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of the International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Association; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis Society; and International Association for the Study of Obesity
Sarcopenia
Epidemiology and consequences of sarcopenia
Sarcopenic obesity in older adults: aetiology, epidemiology and treatment strategies
Sarcopenic obesity in ageing: cardiovascular outcomes and mortality
Health consequences of sarcopenic obesity: a narrative review
Association of sarcopenic obesity with the risk of all-cause mortality among adults over a broad range of different settings: a updated meta-analysis
Sarcopenic obesity as a determinant of cardiovascular disease risk in older people: a systematic review
Risk of knee osteoarthritis with obesity, sarcopenic obesity, and sarcopenia
Sarcopenic obesity is more closely associated with knee osteoarthritis than is nonsarcopenic obesity: a cross-sectional study
Overweight, obesity, and depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies
Body weight and psychological distress in NHANES I
Sarcopenic obesity and risk of new onset depressive symptoms in older adults: English Longitudinal Study of Ageing
Exercise and nutrition strategies to counteract sarcopenic obesity
Intentional weight loss and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials
Weight loss composition is one-fourth fat-free mass: a critical review and critique of this widely cited rule
Effect of diet-induced weight loss on muscle strength in adults with overweight or obesity - a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical trials
Sarcopenic obesity
Sarcopenic obesity: an appraisal of the current status of knowledge and management in elderly people
The effects of protein and supplements on sarcopenia in human clinical studies: how older adults should consume protein and supplements
Independent and combined effects of exercise and vitamin D on muscle morphology, function and falls in the elderly
Myostatin antibody (LY2495655) in older weak fallers: a proof-of-concept, randomised, phase 2 trial
Metabolic effects of a growth hormone-releasing factor in obese subjects with reduced growth hormone secretion: a randomized controlled trial
Delay in post-ovariectomy estrogen replacement negates estrogen-induced augmentation of post-exercise muscle satellite cell proliferation
Postmenopausal hormone replacement therapy modifies skeletal muscle composition and function: a study with monozygotic twin pairs
Prevalence of sarcopenia and predictors of skeletal muscle mass in nonobese women who are long-term users of estrogenreplacement therapy
Effect of postmenopausal hormone therapy on body weight and waist and hip girths
Effects of estrogen or estrogen/progestin regimens on heart disease risk factors in postmenopausal women. The Postmenopausal Estrogen/Progestin Interventions (PEPI) Trial
Effects of hormone replacement therapy on weight, body composition, fat distribution, and food intake in early postmenopausal women: a prospective study
Effect of postmenopausal estrogen therapy on diastolic blood pressure and bodyweight
Reproductive history in relation to relative weight and fat distribution
Definition and results of studies of sarcopenic obesity
Author (y)	SO definition	Diagnostic criteria (parameters)	Diagnostic criteria (cutoff)	Methods for diagnosis (procedures)	Outcome	 	Cho Y et al. (2015) 	Coexistence of obesity and sarcopenia (distinct diagnosis)	Sarcopenia: ASM/weight Obesity: WC	Sarcopenia: ASM/weight values of < 23.8% for female < 30.3% for male (< 1 SD below the anthropometry, DXA mean value of the reference group)	Anthropometry, DXA	Association with adverse psychological health and lower QoL	 	Obesity: WC values of ≥ 90 cm for male and ≥ 85 cm for female	 	Chung JH et al. (2016) 	Coexistence of obesity and sarcopenia (distinct diagnosis)	Sarcopenia: ASM/height2Obesity: FM%	Sarcopenia: ASM/height2 values of < 7.26 kg/m2 for male and < 5.45 kg/m2 for female (< 2 SDs below the sex-specific DXA mean of a young reference group)	DXA	Association with osteoporosis	 	Obesity: FM values of > 30% for male and > 40% for female	 	Chung JY et al. (2013) 	Coexistence of obesity and sarcopenia (distinct diagnosis)	Sarcopenia: ASM/weight Obesity: BMI	Sarcopenia: ASM/weight values of < 32.5% for male and < 25.7% for female (1 SD below the anthropometry and DXA mean of a reference group)	Anthropometry, DXA	Association with insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular disease risk factors	 	Obesity: BMI of ≥ 25 kg/m2	 	Hwang B et al. (2012) 	Coexistence of obesity and sarcopenia (distinct diagnosis)	Sarcopenia: ASM/weight Obesity: WC	Sarcopenia: ASM/weight 2 SD below the sex-specific mean value of young normal people	Anthropometry, DXA	Prevalence of SO and association with medical conditions such as insulin resistance, inappropriate nutrition, and low physical activity	 	Obesity: WC values ≥ 90 cm for male and ≥ 85 cm for female	 	Rossi AP et al. (2017) 	Dynapenic obesity	Dynapenia: HGS	Dynapenia: HGS values of < 33 kg for male and < 19 kg for female (lowest tertile)	Anthropometry, dynamometer	Association with disability and hospitalization	 	Obesity: WC values of > 99 cm for male and 95 cm for female	 	Silva Neto LS et al. (2012) 	Sarcopenic obesity	SO: prediction equation for AFFM	 	AFFM = −14.529 + (17.989 × h) + (0.1307 × FM)	Cutoff point: residual value (the measured AFFM minus the AFFM predicted by the equation) ≤ −3.4 (2 SD from the mean of the reference group)	DXA	Association with low QoL	 	A residual value of ≤ −3.4 was classified as having inadequate FFM for their body area, which indicates sarcopenic obesity	 	Tyrovolas S et al. (2015) 	Coexistence of obesity and sarcopenia (distinct diagnosis)	Sarcopenia: ASM/BMI, HGS, and GS	 	Obesity: BMI	Sarcopenia: ASM/BMI in the lowest quintile (cutoff points differ per country) plus GS in the lowest quintile or HGS values of < 30 kg for male and < 20 kg for female	Anthropometry, dynamometer, and 6-m GS test	Association of low muscle mass with disability	 	Obesity: BMI of ≥ 30 kg/m2
SO: sarcopenic obesity, ASM: appendicular skeletal muscle mass, WC: waist circumference, SD: standard deviation, DXA: dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, QoL: quality of life, FM: fat mass, BMI: body mass index, HGS: hand grip strenght, AFFM: appendicular fat-free mass, FFM: fat free mass, GS: gait speed.