Development and validation of the Iranian Minimum Data Set for Epidermolysis Bullosa: A mixed method approach
Minimum Data Set (MDS) enables integration in data collection, uniform data reporting, and data exchange across clinical and research information systems. The current study was conducted to determine a comprehensive national MDS for the Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB) information management system in Iran. This cross-sectional descriptive study consists of three steps: systematic review, focus group discussion, and the Delphi technique. A systematic review was conducted using relevant databases. Then, a focus group discussion was held to determine the extracted data elements with the help of contributing multidisciplinary experts. Finally, MDSs were selected through the Delphi technique in two rounds. The collected data were analyzed using Microsoft Excel 2019. In total, 103 data elements were included in the Delphi survey. The data elements, based on the experts’ opinions, were classified into two main categories: administrative data and clinical data. The final categories of data elements consisted of 11 administrative items and 92 clinical items. The national MDS, as the core of the EB surveillance program, is essential for enabling appropriate and informed decisions by healthcare policymakers, physicians, and healthcare providers. In this study, a MDS was developed and internally validated for EB. This research generated new knowledge to enable healthcare professionals to collect relevant and meaningful data for use. The use of this standardized approach can help benchmark clinical practice and target improvements worldwide.

1. Introduction
Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB) is a group of rare diseases that cause blisters to form in the area of the skin between the outer and middle layers, known as the basement membrane. This disease makes the skin and mucous membranes fragile and prone to blistering. There are different types of EB, depending on which layer of the skin is affected and how severe the symptoms are infections, hair loss, and breathing problems can also occur. In severe cases, a child with EB often dies during the first year of life.. This disease is caused by pathogenic mutations in 20 distinct genes that affect cellular integrity and adhesion. The diagnosis of EB requires correlating clinical, electron microscopic, and immunobiological features with mutational analyses, and treatment aims to minimize blistering, provide wound care, relieve symptoms, and address specific complications. It affects all racial and ethnic groups without a specific gender predominance. Symptoms usually appear at or near birth and persist throughout life. However, the onset of lesions in some individuals may not occur until adolescence or early adulthood, and in certain types of EB, blisters may improve with age. EB affects 1 out of every 20,000 births in the United States, meaning approximately 200 children are born with EB each year. According to the latest reports, the prevalence and incidence rates (per million) are 22.4 and 41.3 in the Netherlands, and 11.1 and 19.6 in the United States, respectively. The prevalence rates (per million) are 10.3 in Australia, 19.5 in New Zealand, and 6.7 in Iran.
This disease affects about half a million people worldwide, many of whom are children. According to the National Registry of EB patients, 50 out of every 1 million live births in the United States are affected by this disease. Children with EB can experience extensive and complex problems such as persistent itching, frequent painful grooming, and fragile skin. They may also face complications such as anemia, malnutrition, growth delays, deformities, scarring, skin cancer, and eye problems. People with EB may encounter emotional and mental challenges such as depression, anxiety, low self-esteem, isolation, and stigma. They may also have difficulties in school, work, relationships, and hobbies due to their physical limitations and appearance. Individuals with EB require frequent and specialized medical care to prevent and treat their skin problems. They may need to use various products such as bandages, dressings, creams, ointments, and supplements to protect and heal their skin. Additionally, they may need to undergo surgeries or procedures such as skin grafts or gene therapy to improve their condition. Consequently, the cost of care for people with EB can be very high and may not be covered by insurance or public health systems.
In a study conducted in 2021 at the Burn Hospital of Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 538 patients with bullous dermatitis were registered in the Iranian EB registry between January 2017 and September 2017. The youngest patient was 10 days old, while the oldest patient was 64 years old. Among them, the dystrophic type (75.7%) was the most common. Most EB patients were of school age. Regarding the family relationships of the patients, all patients with the bonded type had a family relationship between their parents. However, this rate was 84.4% for dystrophic EB, 50% for simplex EB, and 67% for Kindler-type EB. The patients also exhibited varying degrees of dysphagia, dental disease, contractures in the upper and lower limbs and fingers, ophthalmological issues, seizures, and mental disorders. Accordingly, the prevalence of EB in Iran is lower than in other countries, which is likely to increase with improved screening services. Most patients lived in the four provinces of Tehran, Isfahan, Khuzestan, and Fars, making it essential to provide facilities for patients in these regions. Additionally, the dystrophic type of EB was more common in Iran than in other countries. For this reason, disease prevention through genetic analysis and testing during pregnancy is of considerable importance. Accurate diagnosis of the disease type using immunofluorescence tests and electron microscopy helps determine the exact prevalence of each type. The number of simplex cases is gradually increasing with the complete registration of almost all patients. The calculation of the economic burden of disease in Iran showed that 12% of the total costs are related to direct medical costs, 10% to direct non-medical costs, and 78% to indirect costs.
According to the World Health Organization, accurate, timely, and accessible information for healthcare providers plays an essential role in planning, developing, and supporting healthcare services. In other words, healthcare providers need accurate and timely information to perform their professional and specialized activities. Therefore, the first step in the information management of a disease is the design and implementation of a minimum data set (MDS) in health and treatment centers, which can improve the quality of care and disease control.
Information technology is perceived as an important tool for healthcare organizations and institutions to manage and improve services in the face of increased demand.
The MDS is a standardized approach to data collection that provides accurate access to health data. With the development of public health surveillance, it advances systematic collection, interpretation, comparison, and integration of data, providing solutions regarding health-related threats. MDS can provide valuable information for various aspects of EB, such as its prevalence, incidence, distribution, trends, patterns, and risk factors in different populations and regions. It can also enhance the understanding, diagnosis, treatment, and quality of life for people with EB, as well as their families and caregivers. Furthermore, it can facilitate research and development of new therapies and interventions for EB while raising awareness and support for individuals with EB in society.
Essential datasets for EB have been developed in some countries around the world, but the existence of certain differences highlights the need to create indigenous datasets for disease management. Elements such as nationality, residency status, race and culture, and medical and family history are determined based on the indigenous needs of each country and are among the most important differentiators in various MDSs. Many international efforts are underway to develop MDS in most countries, and these initiatives are designed to improve the comparability of disease data across national borders.
From 1986 to 2002, the National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry (NEBR) in the USA was a major source of epidemiological data on EB. The NEBR enrolled more than 3,000 EB patients and collected information on their demographic, clinical, genetic, and quality-of-life characteristics. The NEBR also tracked the prevalence, incidence, natural history, and complications of EB across different types and subtypes of the disease. The international DEB Patient Registry was established to collect and share phenotypic and genotypic data on dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (DEB) patients from various countries. Akker’s study showed that the registry facilitated the diagnosis and genetic counseling of DEB patients while providing novel insights into the rare phenotypes of DEB that are poorly understood.
Given that information on the different types of EB has direct clinical applications in terms of revised classification, improved genetic counseling, and the development of DNA-based prenatal testing for families with EB, the need for MDS in this disease is critical. It is necessary to develop MDS to provide the infrastructure for EB disease registration systems, report the incidence and prevalence of the disease, evaluate the quality of care, improve research, and regularly report health information for these patients. The combination of this data within the therapeutic field is significant and considered one of the most important foundations for advancing health and social improvement.
Studies were also conducted to provide clinical epidemiological data from EB disease registries in Australia and the Netherlands, focusing on data collection in both administrative and clinical sections.
Considering the importance of these cases and the lack of a MDS for EB in the country, which can limit the understanding, diagnosis, management, and research of EB in Iran, it seems necessary to develop a MDS for this disease. Providing a local dataset for EB in Iran, which ensures access to accurate and unambiguous data, offers a standard tool to facilitate communication between individuals and organizations involved in surveillance. It will also enable the comparison and analysis of activities by developing documentation methods.
Therefore, the aims of this study were to develop and validate the Iranian MDS for EB. In this regard, by systematically reviewing the scientific literature, we will identify essential data elements. Using the Delphi decision-making technique, subject matter experts will determine the degree of necessity of these data elements.

2. Material and methods
Several methods can be used to determine and develop a MDS, such as interviewing experts in each area, reviewing literature and documents, and examining available systems and datasets. This research is a descriptive cross-sectional study performed in 2023. A literature review and expert consensus were used to retrieve relevant data resources.
The EB minimum data set was developed through a three-step process, as outlined below: comprehensive literature review, classification of data elements, and validation of data elements using the Delphi technique.

2.1. Step I: Comprehensive literature review
The present study adopted the framework of the PRISMA guidelines to conduct a systematic review. This systematic review was conducted using the PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases without any time limitation until June 28, 2022. The websites of the National Health Service (NHS), the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD), the National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD), and Debra of America were also searched. A keyword search of these databases was performed using terms related to minimum data set concepts (minimum data set, dataset, common data elements, data elements, data recording, data utilization, common data, data collection, national data set, core data set) and keywords related to epidermolysis bullosa (Epidermolysis Bullosa, Acantholysis Bullosa, Epidermolysis Bullosa in children). The search strategy was designed by two researchers [AS & SP] by combining two groups of keywords: "minimum dataset" and "epidermolysis bullosa" (Table 1). The keywords from the first group were retrieved from all fields, while the keywords from the second group were retrieved from the title and abstract. Based on the following inclusion and exclusion criteria, a decision was made regarding the inclusion of studies in this systematic review.
Search strategies in three different databases.
Database	Search strategy syntax	Number of studies	 	PubMed	(("Minimum Data Set"[All fields] OR "Dataset" [All fields] OR "Common data elements" [All fields] OR "Data elements" [All fields] OR "Data recording" [All fields] OR "Data utilization" [All fields] OR "Common data" [All fields] OR "Data collection" [All fields] OR "national data set" [All fields] OR "Core data set" [All fields] OR "Dataset"[Mesh terms] OR "Common data elements" [Mesh terms] OR "Data collection" [Mesh terms]) AND ("Epidermolysis Bullosa" [Mesh terms] OR ("Epidermolysis Bullosa"[Title/Abstract] OR “Acantholysis Bullosa”[Title/Abstract] OR “Epidermolysis Bullosa children”[Title/Abstract]))	400	 	Scopus	(ALL ("Minimum Data Set") OR ALL (datasets) OR ALL ("common data elements") OR ALL ("data elements") OR ALL ("data recording") OR ALL ("data utilization") OR ALL ("common data") OR ALL ("data collection") OR ALL ("national data set") OR ALL ("core data set") AND TITLE-ABS-KEY ("epidermolysis bullosa") OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ("Epidermolysis Bullosa children") OR TITLE-ABS-KEY ("acantholytic bullosa"))	53	 	Web of sciences	((ALL = (“Minimum Data Set”) OR ALL = (“Dataset”) OR ALL = (“Common data elements”) OR ALL = (“Data elements”) OR ALL = (“Data recording”) OR ALL = (“Data utilization”) OR ALL = (“Common data”) OR ALL = (“Data collection”) OR ALL = (“national data set”) OR ALL = (“Core data set”) OR ALL = (“Minimum Data Set”) OR ALL = (“Dataset”) OR ALL = (“Common data elements”) OR ALL = (“Data elements”) OR ALL = (“Data recording”) OR ALL = (“Data utilization”) OR ALL = (“Common data”) OR ALL = (“Data collection”) OR ALL = (“national data set”) OR ALL = (“Core data set”)) AND (TS = (“Epidermolysis Bullosa”) OR TS = (“Acantholytic Bullosa”) OR TS = (“Epidermolysis Bullosa children”)))	69
Inclusion criteria included all articles published in English that focused on establishing an EB disease registry and developing a minimum dataset for epidermolysis bullosa. Exclusion criteria were (1) conference abstracts, letters to the editor, dissertations or theses, and review articles or meta-analyses; (2) unavailability of full text for data extraction; (3) studies unrelated to the aim of the study; and (4) languages other than English.
The retrieved studies were imported into EndNote version 20 software. First, duplicates were identified and removed using the relevant software. Then, the titles and abstracts of all studies were evaluated according to the inclusion criteria, followed by an assessment of the full text of the articles to ensure that both inclusion and exclusion criteria were considered.
Two authors (HE & SP) manually screened the titles and abstracts of all articles to identify those relevant to the research objectives. Disagreements were resolved through discussion or consultation with a third reviewer (AS). The process of data extraction was carried out manually by a single reviewer (ShP) in Excel (Microsoft, 2019) and was subsequently verified by another reviewer (FA). Methodological quality was assessed independently by two reviewers using standardized tools for critical appraisal based on the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guidelines. The STROBE checklist was selected because the included studies were observational. The quality score was classified into six sections across three categories, from Category A to Category C. Any discrepancies were resolved through discussion and consensus among the authors.

2.2. Step II: Validation of data elements using the Delphi technique
Data elements were validated using the Delphi method in two rounds to reach a consensus on the data elements. In the first round, the researchers designed a questionnaire. The measurement scale for the questions was Likert. The five-point Likert scale included "very important," "important," "moderately important," "slightly important," and "not important." The scoring method corresponded to 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1, respectively. A blank space was also provided at the end of each section for the experts to express their reasons and/or suggest modifications. The research sample in the first round was selected using purposive non-random sampling. Participants included dermatologists (n = 20) and health information management experts (n = 5), all with at least 5 years of experience and affiliated with universities of medical sciences (demographic information of the participants is presented in Fig 1). The sample size was determined to be 25 individuals based on the research team’s opinion. The questionnaire was divided into two parts: an administrative section for health information management experts and a clinical section for dermatologists. The researcher-made questionnaire was distributed among the research population via e-mail or in person upon prior coordination.
Demographic information of the participants in the Delphi technique.
The criteria used to determine the inclusion of data elements in the final MDS were based on the level of expert agreement. Data elements with an agreement level of over 75% were accepted in the first Delphi round, while those with an agreement level of 50% to 75% moved to the second round. Elements with an agreement level of less than 50% were removed in the first round. Items that received 50% to 75% approval from the experts in the first round, along with the suggested items, entered the second round for further review.
In the second round, the same questionnaire as that used in the first Delphi round was developed. Only elements with 50% to 75% agreement from the first round and any suggested by experts were included. As in the first round, elements that achieved 75% agreement from the experts were selected for inclusion in the MDS. The remaining elements were excluded. The participants in the second round of the Delphi technique were the same as those in the first round (five health information management experts and 20 dermatologists).
The final data elements for the MDS were determined through these two rounds, each lasting five weeks. The validity of the questionnaire was assessed through content validity. Six experts in health information management, medical informatics, and dermatology provided their opinions to confirm its relevance to the research. The reliability of the questionnaire was measured using Cronbach’s alpha coefficient, which was found to be 0.837. For the Delphi study phase, data analysis was conducted using Microsoft Excel 2019, employing descriptive statistics such as numbers and frequency percentages.

2.3. Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee at Birjand University of Medical Sciences (Code: IR.BUMS.REC.1402.033). We obtained written informed consent from participants before their involvement in the focus group discussions and Delphi surveys. The consent form explicitly outlined the purpose of the study, its benefits, and the procedures for data collection, storage, and analysis. No personally identifiable information was collected, and all data were anonymized prior to analysis.

3. Results

3.1. Comprehensive literature review
A total of 522 articles were retrieved from three databases. After removing duplicate articles (n = 27) and reviewing the titles and abstracts of the primary articles identified, 495 articles were selected for final review. After applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the study, 16 of these articles were considered for data extraction (For details see S1 Table). Data extracted from the websites of the National Health Service (NHS), The American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) Association, National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) and Debra of American were also included in the study. Details of the search for articles are presented in Fig 2.
The systematic review flowchart based on PRISMA protocol.
The oldest and most recent studies were conducted in 1991 and 2021, respectively (Fig 3). Most of the studies were conducted in the United States (n = 10, 62%). The remaining studies were conducted in Australia (n = 2, 13%), England (n = 2, 13%), Norway (n = 1, 6%), and the Netherlands (n = 1, 6%).
The distribution of included studies based on publication years.

3.2. Classification of data elements
In the focus group meeting, eight sections were identified, which were classified into two categories: Administrative Data and Clinical Data. Administrative Data included 11 data elements in two sections: demographic data and residential address data. Clinical Data included 87 data elements across six sections: clinical symptoms, complications due to EB disease, diagnostic procedures, treatment procedures, death due to EB disease, and personal and family medical history.

3.3. Validation of data elements using the Delphi technique
Demographic information of the participants is presented in Fig 1. In the first Delphi round, 91 data elements were approved out of 98 items that could be assessed. Seven data elements (complete address of residence, esophagostenosis, bladder hypertrophy, chronic renal failure, constipation, vitamin D, and renal failure) received 50–75%.
Moreover, the experts suggested seven items (oral lesions, upper GI tract involvement, nasal mucosal lesions, airway obstruction, milia, pigmentation, and psychotherapy) as the items to be included in the second Delphi technique round. In the second round of the Delphi, of 14 elements that could be score, 12 items were confirmed and two data elements of chronic renal failure from the group of complications caused by EB disease and renal failure from the group of death caused by EB disease were rejected (Tables 2 and 3).
Administrative data category for the MDS for EB, Delphi technique.
Data Sections	Number of DataElements	First Round of Delphi	Second Round of Delphi	Final Number ofDataElements	 	<50%	50–75%	75%<	Suggested Data Elements	<50%	50–75%	75%<	 	Demographic data	5	0	0	5	None	0	0	0	5	 	Residential address data	6	0	1	5	1	0	0	1	6
Clinical data category for the MDS for EB, Delphi technique.
Data Sections	Number of DataElements	First Round of Delphi	Second Round of Delphi	Final Number ofData Elements	 	<50%	50–75%	75%<	Rejected Data Elements	Suggested Data Elements	<50%	50–75%	75%<	Rejected	 	Clinical symptoms	 	Anatomical site	11	0	0	11	0	0	0	0	11	0	11	 	Type of EB	4	0	0	4	0	0	0	0	4	0	4	 	Skin manifestations	6	0	0	6	0	0	0	0	6	0	6	 	Disease severity	3	0	0	3	0	0	0	0	3	0	3	 	Age of disease onset	1	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	1	0	1	 	Complications caused by EB disease	 	Eye	9	0	0	9	0	0	0	0	0	0	9	 	Gastrointestinal system	2	0	1	1	0	3	0	0	3	0	4	 	Genitourinary system	10	0	3	7	0	3	1	0	2	1	9	 	Respiratory system	2	0	0	2	0	2	0	0	2	0	4	 	Growth retardation	1	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	 	Anemia	1	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	 	Musculoskeletal system	2	0	0	2	0	0	0	0	0	0	2	 	Nervous system	1	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	 	Skin complications	3	0	0	3	0	2	0	0	2	0	5	 	Carcinoma	1	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	 	Data of diagnostic procedures	 	Biopsy or sampling data	3	0	0	3	0	0	0	0	0	0	3	 	Molecular genetic testing	1	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	 	Data of treatment procedures	 	Complementary and alternative medicines	2	0	1	1	0	1	0	0	1	0	2	 	Medicines	4	0	0	4	0	0	0	0	0	0	4	 	Palliative procedures	4	0	0	4	0	0	0	0	0	0	4	 	Rehabilitation procedures	3	0	0	4	0	1	0	0	1	0	4	 	Death data from EB disease	 	Cause of death	5	0	1	4	0	1	1	0	0	1	4	 	Date of death	1	0	0	1	0	0	0	0	0	0	1	 	Personal and family medical history data	 	History of the person’s disease	4	0	0	4	0	0	0	0	0	0	4	 	Family history of EB disease	3	0	0	3	0	0	0	0	0	0	3
Finally, the MDS for EB disease was divided into administrative data and clinical data. The administrative data section was classified into two main categories, comprising 11 data elements. Of these 11 data elements, 5 were demographic data, and 4 pertained to residential address data.
The clinical data section was organized into seven main categories, with a total of 92 data elements. These data elements were distributed across the following sections: clinical symptoms (n = 25), complications caused by EB disease (n = 37), diagnostic procedures (n = 4), treatment procedures (n = 14), causes of death due to EB disease (n = 5), and personal and family medical history (n = 7). In total, the MDS for EB disease included 103 data elements. The classification of these data elements is presented in Table 4. (For details see S2 Table).
Final administrative & clinical data elements for EB.
Main class	Subclass	Data elements	 	Administrative data	Demographic data	national code, gender, date of birth, ethnicity, race	 	Address data of residence	province, city, village, full address of residence, telephone and mobile phone number	 	Clinical data	Clinical symptoms	Anatomical site involved (genitalia, anus, hand, feet, elbow, knee, lips, face, oral mucosa, eyes and neck)	 	Type of EB disease (simplex, junctional, dominant dystrophic, recessive dystrophic)	 	Skin manifestations (blister, erosion, crust, scar, milia, exuberant granulation tissue)	 	Disease severity (Localized, Intermediate, Severe)	 	Age of disease onset	 	Complications caused by EB disease	Eye (corneal blister, corneal scar, corneal corrosion or abrasion, symblepharons, blepharitis, ectropion, blockage of tear ducts, reduced vision and blindness)	 	Gastrointestinal system (esophagostenosis, abnormality or tooth decay, oral lesions and upper GI tract involvement)	 	Genitourinary system (ureteral stricture, urinary retention, bladder hypertrophy, hydronephrosis, ureteral stricture, pyelonephritis, cystitis, acute renal failure and constipation)	 	Respiratory system (upper respiratory system failure, lower respiratory systemfailure, nasal mucosa lesions and airway obstruction)	 	Growth retardation	 	Anemia	 	Musculoskeletal system (deformity of hands, and legs)	 	Nervous system (muscular dystrophy)	 	Skin complications (alopecia, hair loss, nail dystrophy, milia, pigmentation)	 	Carcinoma and neoplasms	 	Diagnostic procedures	Biopsy or sampling data (skin, Chorionic Villus Sampling, amniocentesis)	 	Molecular genetic testing	 	Treatment procedures	Complementary and alternative drugs (iron, vitamin D)	 	Medicines (antibiotics, antidepressants, pain reliever, epilepsy drugs)	 	Palliative procedures (using protective and non-adhesive dressings, draining blisters, reducing skin friction, keeping the skin cool)	 	Rehabilitation procedures (physiotherapy, ergotherapy, hydrotherapy, psychotherapy)	 	Death data from EB disease	Cause of death from EB disease (death from sepsis, failure to thrive, airway obstruction, and squamous cell carcinoma)	 	Date of death	 	Personal and family medical history data	History of the person’s disease (underlying disease, name of the underlying disease, duration of the underlying disease, treatments provided)	 	Family history of EB disease (family relationship, type of disease, history of infection)
As shown in Fig 4, the classification and number of elements in the clinical data category can be seen briefly. Most elements in this framework belong to complications caused by EB disease (n = 38, 40%), while the fewest are related to diagnostic procedures (n = 4, 4%).
The RADAR diagram of dispersion of data elements in the EB disease information system framework.

4. Discussion
Given that the develop of MDS is an important prerequisite for collecting standard, integrated, and uniform data about diseases, the current research was conducted to develop MDS for epidermolysis bullosa. The increasing number of EB patients and limited financial resources in healthcare have made it necessary to establish an information management system or registry to fully collect all relevant data. This will help identify populations at risk, design programs for control and prevention, and promote health.
The results of the present study in the systematic review phase showed that most studies were conducted in the United States. Tang’s study, which aimed to review the disease burden in patients with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB), reported an analysis of the United States (US) National Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB) Registry. This registry, funded and operated from 1986 to 2002, reported an RDEB incidence of 3.05 cases per one million live births and a prevalence of 1.35 cases per one million live births. It’s essential that future research includes more studies from low- and middle-income countries to provide a more global perspective on EB.
As shown in the results section, based on expert agreement and consensus, the MDS for EB disease was ultimately modified to include 103 data elements divided into two main sections: administrative and clinical. Given the significant disparity between administrative and clinical data, numerous studies have organized data elements in this manner. For instance, in the research focused on developing and utilizing a poisoning registry, the data elements extracted from various sources were classified into two primary categories: administrative data and clinical data. Ninety-eight data elements within the administrative data category were further divided into three sections: general information, admission details, and discharge information. In the clinical data category, one hundred thirty-one data elements were categorized into five sections: clinical observation records, clinical assessment records, medical history records, diagnostic information, and treatment plan details.
Nevertheless, in various other studies, alternative classifications have been employed based on the characteristics of the diseases. For instance, in the research titled "development of a national consensus minimum data set for the diagnosis and treatment of oral cancer," the proposed framework was divided into six sections: management data with four axes, historical data with four axes, paraclinical indicators with two axes, clinical indicators, data about therapeutic measures, and mortality statistics.
In 1986, the US National Institutes of Health launched the National EB Registry to better characterize this disease at the epidemiologic, clinical, ultrastructural, and molecular levels. The data elements in this registry are divided into two main sections. The demographic information section includes gender, race, ethnicity, age, past and present medical records, family history, and socio-economic parameters. In contrast, the clinical information section contains physical examination findings and diagnostic laboratory studies. Clinical symptoms include types of EB, skin manifestations (desquamation, scarring, severe granulomatous tissue, milia), complications caused by the disease (carcinoma, renal complications, eye complications, digestive complications, respiratory complications, musculoskeletal complications, growth retardation), causes of death (sepsis, non-infectious respiratory failure, carcinoma, and pneumonia), and age at death. In the current study, the data set is defined in two main classes: administrative and clinical. Regarding renal failure, which was present in the American registry but excluded from the data collection of this study, the reason for this difference is that kidney or renal involvement is rare in EB patients but usually occurs in those with severe forms. Therefore, from the experts’ perspective, it was considered less important and was removed from the MDS.
In the study by C. Has et al., which aimed at the practical management of epidermolysis bullosa, clinical data elements included types of EB, anatomical complications (such as blisters and skin wounds, pain and itching, oral lesions, and tooth decay), diagnostic methods (skin biopsy and genetic testing), drug treatments (antibiotics), causes of death due to the disease (sepsis, lack of growth, severe anemia, and cancer), family history, and laboratory findings. In this study, within the group of diagnostic procedures, in addition to skin biopsy, placental villi of the fetus and amniocentesis were also discussed and agreed upon by experts. Placental villi and amniocentesis are important in EB because they can be used to diagnose this disease during pregnancy and to identify the genetic mutations that cause it.
Additionally, in the drug data, in addition to the antibiotics mentioned in the above study, antidepressants, pain suppressants, and epilepsy medications were also identified for these patients. These drugs are important in the treatment of EB because they can help improve the quality of life for patients with this disease. Since depression and anxiety are common in patients with EB and can affect their physical and mental health as well as their adherence to treatment, experts considered antidepressants to be important in the category of drug information. Furthermore, because EB patients experience pain caused by blisters, wounds, infections, and surgery, the use of pain suppressants helps to enhance their quality of life. In addition, in the current study, experts considered epilepsy medications to be important in the medication information category for EB patients because these drugs can help prevent or treat seizures that may occur in some forms of EB.
Yong CK et al., in a study aimed at providing clinical epidemiological data from the EB disease registry in Australia, developed the MDS according to the present study. The MDS was classified into two groups: administrative data, which includes the demographic characteristics of the patient (age, sex, ethnicity, and geographic distribution), and clinical data. Clinical data includes the type of disease, past and current medical history, family history, diagnostic laboratory studies, blister or erosion areas (legs and thighs, arms and forearms, inside the mouth, abdomen, fingers, armpits, face, neck, trunk, hands, elbows, cornea, scalp), complications caused by the disease (including complications of annular trachea; gastrointestinal complications; weight growth; findings related to hair, teeth, and nails; eye complications; and complications of the reproductive system), and causes of death due to the disease.
In relation to management data, race has been considered in some studies; however, this data item has been removed in Iran due to the lack of racial discrimination. Given that, in EB disease, family history is important in addition to individual medical history, it was also agreed upon by the experts’ panel that family history should be included, as it is accepted in other similar registries. In the current study, the anatomical location involved in the genital organs was also proposed and agreed upon. Additionally, regarding the data on complications caused by EB disease, the musculoskeletal system, nervous system, carcinoma, and anemia were identified as elements that were not mentioned in the previous study among the clinical class.
In the study by Baardman & Bolling, which aimed to evaluate the epidemiological data of EB in the Netherlands using the EB patient registry, administrative data elements included demographic information (age, race, sex) and clinical data, such as types of EB, age at death, causes of death due to the disease, complications of the nervous system (muscular dystrophy), diagnostic measures (genetic testing), skin manifestations (blisters, mechanical fragility), and medical records of patients. In the current study, all the data presented in the above study received the necessary points from the experts. In addition to the above, palliative and rehabilitation measures were also identified as part of the treatment data. According to the findings of the present study, palliative and rehabilitation measures are among the basic interventions for EB patients. While these measures were not mentioned in previous studies, they received necessary points from experts. Therefore, they were classified in the clinical data category under the treatment subsection.
It seems that several data elements in some of the above registries are not in accordance with the purposes of registry development. In other words, they can be obtained from the hospital information system (HIS). Additionally, the existence of a large amount of data can cause confusion and waste time; therefore, the researchers approved the afore mentioned classes and subclasses to develop the MDS, which was validated by experts.

4.1. Strengthen and limitation
The MDS for EB did not exist in Iran until now. The standard developed in this study allows for the global comparison of Iranian data. The quality of the designed MDS lies in its development based on recognized publications through a systematic review, rather than a preliminary review of the literature. As a clinical instrument, this MDS is fundamental not only to encourage EB registry design but also to assist in the collection of high-value clinical information essential for building a modern and superior clinical knowledge repository.
The primary function of the MDS is to deliver high-quality data to healthcare professionals to improve their care administration processes and facilitate informed decision-making. However, it is vital to recognize some limitations of this study. First, restricting our literature search to English may have led us to overlook numerous registries in other countries. Some countries may not provide information on the presentation, structure, and evaluation of their EB registries and databases, especially in low- and middle-income settings. Consequently, these were excluded from our investigation. The lack of extensive research on EB registries was one of the main limitations of this study.

5. Conclusion
Considering the increase in the number of EB patients in Iran, it seems necessary to establish a registry for EB patients in order to manage their care effectively. The first step in creating a disease registry is to identify information elements as part of an integrated and comprehensive framework, along with a suitable data dictionary. The use of standard elements in the MDS leads to improved understanding and interpretation of data. The MDS identified in this study, with the approval of experts, can be an effective step toward integrating the information of these patients in Iran and provides valuable approaches to improving the management of their information. Moreover, during their research, the researchers did not find clear guidelines for the development of registries. Given the increasing number of registries being developed, it is suggested that health researchers and policymakers focus on preparing these guidelines in future research.

Supporting information

References
Stairways to Advanced Therapies for Epidermolysis Bullosa
A nutrition-based approach to epidermolysis bullosa: Causes, assessments, requirements and management
Inherited epidermolysis bullosa: update on the clinical and genetic aspects
Epidermolysis bullosa: Advances in research and treatment
Epidermolysis bullosa
Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB): Oral manifestation and management rules in oral surgery: A case report
Our experience of using losartan for esophageal stenosis in children with dystrophic form of congenital epidermolysis bullosa
Heterogeneity of Reported Outcomes in Epidermolysis Bullosa Clinical Research: A Scoping Review as a First Step Towards Outcome Harmonisation
Stem Cell Therapies for Epidermolysis Bullosa Treatment
34728 Epidermolysis bullosa in the pediatric population: Analysis of the KID database
Epidemiological, clinical, pathological and genetic characteristics of epidermolysis bullosa in New Zealand
Eye Involvement and Management in Inherited Epidermolysis Bullosa
Novel insights into the epidemiology of epidermolysis bullosa (EB) from the Dutch EB Registry: EB more common than previously assumed?
The importance of accurate epidemiological data of epidermolysis bullosa
Epidermolysis bullosa registry data in Iran
Consensus guidelines for diagnosis and management of anemia in epidermolysis bullosa
Financial burden of epidermolysis bullosa on patients in the United States
Patients’ and parents’ experiences during wound care of epidermolysis bullosa from a dyadic perspective: a survey study
Psychosocial impact of epidermolysis bullosa on patients: a qualitative study
Clinical practice guidelines for laboratory diagnosis of epidermolysis bullosa
Recommendations on pregnancy, childbirth and aftercare in epidermolysis bullosa: a consensus‐based guideline
Economic burden of epidermolysis bullosa disease in Iran
Digitalization of routine health information systems: Bangladesh, Indonesia, Pakistan
The Minimum Data Set for Rare Diseases: Systematic Review
Digital disruption and big data in healthcare-opportunities and challenges
Information technology solutions, challenges, and suggestions for tackling the COVID-19 pandemic
The epidemiology of epidermolysis bullosa in England and Wales: data from the national epidermolysis bullosa database
A comparative study of minimum data set of speech therapy: A systematic literature review
A Comparative Study Of The Athlete Health Records’ Minimum Data Set In Selected Countries And Presenting A Model For Iran
Epidemiology of inherited epidermolysis bullosa based on incidence and prevalence estimates from the National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry
Itch in recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa: findings of PEBLES, a prospective register study
Review of the latest methods of epidermolysis bullosa and other chronic wounds treatment including BIOOPA dressing
Epidemiology of epidermolysis bullosa in the antipodes: the Australasian Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry with a focus on Herlitz junctional epidermolysis bullosa
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
A step-by-step researcher’s guide to the use of an AI-based transformer in epidemiology: an exploratory analysis of ChatGPT using the STROBE checklist for observational studies
Strengthening the reporting of observational studies in epidemiology using Mendelian randomization: the STROBE-MR statement
Delphi technique in health sciences: a map
National Health System. Epidermolysis Bullosa 2022. Available from: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/epidermolysis-bullosa/.
American Academy of Dermatology Association. Epidermolysis Bullosa: Overview 2022. Available from: https://www.aad.org/public/diseases/a-z/epidermolysis-bullosa-overview.
National Organization for Rare Disorders. Epidermolysis Bullosa 2022. Available from: https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/epidermolysis-bullosa/.
Debra of American. EB in Depth 2022. Available from: https://www.debra.org/about-eb/eb-depth.
A systematic literature review of the disease burden in patients with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa
A Framework for Neonatal Prematurity Information System Development Based on a Systematic Review on Current Registries: An Original Research
Minimum data set for a poisoning registry: a systematic review
Development of a National Consensus Minimum Data Set for the diagnosis and treatment of oral Cancer: towards Precision Management
Eye involvement in inherited epidermolysis bullosa: experience of the National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry
Tracheolaryngeal complications of inherited epidermolysis bullosa: cumulative experience of the national epidermolysis bullosa registry
Practical management of epidermolysis bullosa: consensus clinical position statement from the European Reference Network for Rare Skin Diseases
Immunofluorescence analysis of villous trophoblasts: a tool for prenatal diagnosis of inherited epidermolysis bullosa with pyloric atresia
Emerging drugs for the treatment of epidermolysis bullosa
Congenital pyloric atresia and junctional epidermolysis bullosa: a report of long-term survival and a review of the literature
Epidemiology of inherited epidermolysis bullosa in Germany
10.1371/journal.pone.0316791.r001

Decision Letter 0
Hosseini Farash
Bibi Razieh
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
11 Oct 2024
PONE-D-23-32911Development and validation of the Iranian Minimum Data Set for Epidermolysis Bullosa: A mixed method approachPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Sabahi,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Nov 25 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Bibi Razieh Hosseini Farash
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Note from Emily Chenette, Editor in Chief of PLOS ONE, and Iain Hrynaszkiewicz, Director of Open Research Solutions at PLOS: Did you know that depositing data in a repository is associated with up to a 25% citation advantage (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230416)? If you’ve not already done so, consider depositing your raw data in a repository to ensure your work is read, appreciated and cited by the largest possible audience. You’ll also earn an Accessible Data icon on your published paper if you deposit your data in any participating repository (https://plos.org/open-science/open-data/#accessible-data).
3. We note that your Data Availability Statement is currently as follows: “All relevant data are within the manuscript and in Supporting Information files.”
Please confirm at this time whether or not your submission contains all raw data required to replicate the results of your study. Authors must share the “minimal data set” for their submission. PLOS defines the minimal data set to consist of the data required to replicate all study findings reported in the article, as well as related metadata and methods (https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/data-availability#loc-minimal-data-set-definition). For example, authors should submit the following data: - The values behind the means, standard deviations and other measures reported; - The values used to build graphs; - The points extracted from images for analysis. Authors do not need to submit their entire data set if only a portion of the data was used in the reported study. If your submission does not contain these data, please either upload them as Supporting Information files or deposit them to a stable, public repository and provide us with the relevant URLs, DOIs, or accession numbers. For a list of recommended repositories, please see https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/recommended-repositories. If there are ethical or legal restrictions on sharing a de-identified data set, please explain them in detail (e.g., data contain potentially sensitive information, data are owned by a third-party organization, etc.) and who has imposed them (e.g., an ethics committee). Please also provide contact information for a data access committee, ethics committee, or other institutional body to which data requests may be sent. If data are owned by a third party, please indicate how others may request data access.
4. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
Additional Editor Comments:
Major Issues:
Lack of Clarity in Methods:
The manuscript states the use of the Delphi technique, but the detailed methodology lacks clarity. There is no comprehensive explanation of the number of participants in each Delphi round, nor a clear rationale for why two rounds were sufficient. This leaves questions about the robustness of the Delphi process used.
Limited Generalizability:
While the study is focused on developing a Minimum Data Set (MDS) for Epidermolysis Bullosa in Iran, the manuscript does not discuss how the findings can be generalized or applied beyond Iran. Considering PLOS ONE's international audience, it is critical to emphasize how the developed MDS may have broader applications.
Inconsistent Structure:
There are several instances of structural inconsistency in the presentation of sections. For instance, the transitions between the "Methods" and "Results" sections are not smooth. The "Discussion" could have linked the results better with the broader global context and existing literature.
Insufficient Statistical Analysis:
The manuscript does not provide sufficient detail on the statistical analysis used to validate the data set. While descriptive statistics are mentioned, there is no mention of more robust statistical methods to ensure the reliability and validity of the identified data elements.
Ethical Considerations:
The ethical section mentions consent and ethical approval but lacks detail on how data confidentiality and privacy were maintained during the focus group discussions and Delphi surveys.
Minor Issues:
Language and Grammar:
The manuscript contains several minor grammatical errors and awkward sentence structures that can hinder comprehension. For example, the abstract and introduction sections have some overly long sentences that can be difficult to follow.
Figures and Tables:
The presentation of figures and tables is somewhat unclear. For example, Figure 2's flowchart is not described in detail, and Table 1 lacks clear labels and explanations. Improving their clarity would enhance the readability of the manuscript.
References and Citations:
While the references seem to be comprehensive, there is an over-reliance on older studies in the discussion section. Including more recent studies would strengthen the manuscript and make it more relevant to current research.
Recommendations for Improvement:
Clarify the methodology, particularly the Delphi technique, and provide detailed participant numbers and the rationale for the rounds.
Discuss the potential international relevance of the Iranian MDS and how it can inform global standards.
Improve the flow between sections, particularly by connecting the findings to broader literature in the discussion section.
Ensure that the ethical considerations are more thoroughly explained, especially in regard to data privacy and confidentiality.
Revise the manuscript for language clarity and structure, and improve the presentation of figures and tables.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Comments
Let me congratulate the authors for taking the time to research such an important phenomenon. I find the following comments useful for enriching the content of the manuscript.
Abstract
• Under the abstract on line 33 page 1, the first statement is not clear.
Introduction
• The authors need to provide some background information on Epidermolysis bullosa in Iran
• The authors should also indicate the specific objectives of the study.
• An outline of the study should also be provided at the end of the introduction to give readers the direction of the study.
Methods
• Line 169 page 8, in case of disagreement, how many authors review the papers? The authors need to state the number of authors who review the papers in case the two researchers disagree.
• The sentence on lines 186 to 191 on page 9 is too long.
Results
• The authors should adopt the format (n=..., %) for their results presentation for lines 224 to 226 on page 10 as this (n=..., %) was done on page 16.
Discussion
• I suggest the authors give a title such as “Strengths and limitations of the study”.
• Apart from the validation of data elements using the Delphi method, has the minimum data set tool been tested? If not, can that be captured under the limitation?
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0316791.r002

Author response to Decision Letter 0
5 Dec 2024
Dear Editor;
Thank you very much for considering our manuscript and the opportunity for revision. We would like to express our appreciation for the constructive and valuable comments and suggestions offered by the reviewers. We considered all issues mentioned in the reviewers' comments carefully to improve the quality of our manuscript. All modifications are highlighted in yellow in the revised manuscript.
Thank you for updating your data availability statement. You note that your data are available within the Supporting Information files, but no such files have been included with your submission. At this time we ask that you please upload your minimal data set as a Supporting Information file, or to a public repository such as Figshare or Dryad.
Authors’ Answer:
Minimal data set added as Supporting Information files and cited in manuscript.
Major Issues:
1. Lack of Clarity in Methods:
The manuscript states the use of the Delphi technique, but the detailed methodology lacks clarity. There is no comprehensive explanation of the number of participants in each Delphi round, nor a clear rationale for why two rounds were sufficient. This leaves questions about the robustness of the Delphi process used.
Authors’ Answer:
To enhance the clarity of the methodology, we will provide a more detailed explanation of the Delphi technique, the number of participants involved in each round of the Delphi technique and the reason for the two rounds in Step III (Validation of data elements using the Delphi technique) of section method.
2. Limited Generalizability:
While the study is focused on developing a Minimum Data Set (MDS) for Epidermolysis Bullosa in Iran, the manuscript does not discuss how the findings can be generalized or applied beyond Iran. Considering PLOS ONE's international audience, it is critical to emphasize how the developed MDS may have broader applications.
Authors’ Answer:
The generalizability dimension of the study is the possibility of Iran's presence in comparing endemic disease data between different countries, which was added to the introduction according to the opinion of the respected referee.
3. Inconsistent Structure:
There are several instances of structural inconsistency in the presentation of sections. For instance, the transitions between the "Methods" and "Results" sections are not smooth. The "Discussion" could have linked the results better with the broader global context and existing literature.
Authors’ Answer:
The method was edited and presented based on three phases and the results are presented in the order of these three phases. Discussion was revised based on results.
4. Insufficient Statistical Analysis:
The manuscript does not provide sufficient detail on the statistical analysis used to validate the data set. While descriptive statistics are mentioned, there is no mention of more robust statistical methods to ensure the reliability and validity of the identified data elements.
Authors’ Answer:
We have explained both in the method section and in the findings section that the validity of the data was based on the Delphi technique. In this part, the percentage and frequency were important for us to decide whether the data elements should be approved, rejected, or asked again in the second stage.
5. Ethical Considerations:
The ethical section mentions consent and ethical approval but lacks detail on how data confidentiality and privacy were maintained during the focus group discussions and Delphi surveys.
Authors’ Answer:
Details of this section were added.
Minor Issues:
1. Language and Grammar:
The manuscript contains several minor grammatical errors and awkward sentence structures that can hinder comprehension. For example, the abstract and introduction sections have some overly long sentences that can be difficult to follow.
Authors’ Answer:
According to the reviewer's opinion, the manuscript was grammatically edited.
2. Figures and Tables:
The presentation of figures and tables is somewhat unclear. For example, Figure 2's flowchart is not described in detail, and Table 1 lacks clear labels and explanations. Improving their clarity would enhance the readability of the manuscript.
Authors’ Answer:
We improved the clarity of figures and tables. Details of Fig 2 explained in result section (3.1. Comprehensive literature review). Details of Table 1 explained in method section (Comprehensive literature review).
3. References and Citations:
While the references seem to be comprehensive, there is an over-reliance on older studies in the discussion section. Including more recent studies would strengthen the manuscript and make it more relevant to current research.
Authors’ Answer:
According to the reviewer's opinion, references reviewed.
Reviewer 1
Abstract
• Under the abstract on line 33 page 1, the first statement is not clear.
Authors’ Answer:
According to the reviewer's opinion, the desired corrections were made.
Introduction
• The authors need to provide some background information on Epidermolysis bullosa in Iran
Authors’ Answer:
According to the reviewer's opinion, background information on Epidermolysis bullosa in Iran was added to the introduction.
• The authors should also indicate the specific objectives of the study.
Authors’ Answer:
According to the reviewer's opinion, the specific objectives of the study was added to the introduction
• An outline of the study should also be provided at the end of the introduction to give readers the direction of the study.
Authors’ Answer:
According to the reviewer's opinion, an outline of the study was added to the end of the introduction
Methods
• Line 169 page 8, in case of disagreement, how many authors review the papers? The authors need to state the number of authors who review the papers in case the two researchers disagree.
Authors’ Answer:
The items mentioned in the method section were added. (line 163-167)
• The sentence on lines 186 to 191 on page 9 is too long.
Authors’ Answer:
The sentence was revised.
Results
• The authors should adopt the format (n=..., %) for their results presentation for lines 224 to 226 on page 10 as this (n=..., %) was done on page 16.
Authors’ Answer:
Mentioned format applied for all results.
Discussion
• I suggest the authors give a title such as “Strengths and limitations of the study”.
Authors’ Answer:
This section is in the manuscript and was highlighted.
• Apart from the validation of data elements using the Delphi method, has the minimum data set tool been tested? If not, can that be captured under the limitation?
Authors’ Answer:
The data set was extracted through a systematic review of scientific literature and validated by subject matter experts using the Delphi decision-making technique. This is a standard method for determining MDS and is not a limitation. Several studies have been published using this method, for example:
1. Development and validation of the Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome Minimum Data Set (NAS-MDS): a systematic review, focus group discussion, and Delphi technique.
2. Defining the content of a minimal dataset for acquired brain injury using a Delphi procedure.
10.1371/journal.pone.0316791.r003

Decision Letter 1
Hosseini Farash
Bibi Razieh
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
17 Dec 2024
Development and validation of the Iranian Minimum Data Set for Epidermolysis Bullosa: A mixed method approach
PONE-D-23-32911R1
Dear Dr. Azam Sabahi,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Bibi Razieh Hosseini Farash
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Abstract and Introduction:<o:p></o:p>
The abstract is well-structured, covering all key components of the study.<o:p></o:p>
The introduction clearly outlines the research problem and the significance of the study.<o:p></o:p>
Methodology:<o:p></o:p>
The methodology section provides a detailed description of the processes, including the use of the Delphi technique and systematic review.<o:p></o:p>
Data selection criteria and inclusion/exclusion parameters are well-defined.<o:p></o:p>
Results:<o:p></o:p>
Tables and figures are clearly organized, and changes based on reviewer comments have been incorporated.<o:p></o:p>
Data categorization into administrative and clinical data aligns well with the study's objectives.<o:p></o:p>
Discussion and Conclusion:<o:p></o:p>
The discussion effectively analyzes the findings and compares them with previous studies.<o:p></o:p>
The conclusion is concise, clear, and aligned with the research objectives.<o:p></o:p>
References:<o:p></o:p>
The references are up-to-date, relevant, and properly formatted.<o:p></o:p>
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0316791.r004

Acceptance letter
Hosseini Farash
Bibi Razieh
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
26 Dec 2024
PONE-D-23-32911R1
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Sabahi,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Bibi Razieh Hosseini Farash
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE