Disruption of estrogen signaling by developmental exposure to BPA and TBT causes long term functional deficits in zebrafish retina
Bisphenol A (BPA) and tributyltin (TBT) are two endocrine disrupting compounds (EDC) that have opposite effects on estrogen signaling. BPA is an estrogen agonist that binds to all estrogen receptor types. TBT is an aromatase inhibitor that binds to the enzyme aromatase, preventing the synthesis of estrogen from testosterone. Both estrogen receptors and aromatase are localized to the retina and estrogen signaling is required for proper eye and retinal neurogenesis. Abnormal eye growth and retinal changes are reported immediately after developmental exposure to either EDC consistent with the role of estrogen in proper neurogenesis. In this review, we examine the impact of BPA and TBT exposure on the development and function of the visual system. We focus primarily on zebrafish but include data from other species to show trends across vertebrates. We discuss a case study designed to determine if a transient developmental exposure to BPA or TBT has persistent effects that are evident in adults and if these latent outcomes reflect the opposite impact of these compounds on estrogen signaling. Surprisingly, although some opposing outcomes were observed, most differences in adult retinal function were similar between the two compounds, with varying effects noted by concentration and exposure age. Overall, we conclude that developing zebrafish retina is sensitive to EDCs that target estrogenic pathways. However, these findings cannot be explained by estrogenic modulation alone, suggesting additional mechanisms beyond their current established roles.

Introduction
Endocrine disrupting compounds (EDCs) are natural or synthetic compounds structurally similar to natural hormones. EDCs can influence the synthesis, action, and/or downstream signaling pathways of hormones by either blocking enzyme activity, antagonizing receptors, or mimicking endogenous ligands. Exposure is a significant public health concern as EDCs are linked to certain cancers and cardiovascular problems, as well as metabolic, reproductive, and neurological disorders. Early life/developmental stages are the most sensitive to EDC exposure, with both immediate and latent/later life effects reported. Research has shown that neurodevelopment is particularly vulnerable to EDC exposure.
EDCs are prevalent and persistent contaminants in aquatic environments with landfills, wastewater effluent, and agricultural/road/roof runoff serving as primary sources. Human exposure occurs significantly via ingestion and inhalation; fetal exposure also occurs as many EDCs can cross the placenta. Non-human animal exposure occurs through ingestion, inhalation, and/or uptake across the gills. Importantly, low doses of EDCs are reported to have significant effects on both humans and animal models, suggesting non-linear and non-monotonic effects of these compounds.
Many of the identified EDCs target estrogen signaling pathways, resulting in significant effects on both development and adult reproductive physiology. Some EDCs specifically interfere with estrogen synthesis; while others bind estrogen receptors, resulting in aberrant downstream signaling and gene transcription. Outside the reproductive axis, proper estrogen signaling is important for neurogenesis and EDCs affecting estrogen pathways have both overt and subtle effects on the visual system.
In this review, we focus on the impact of EDC exposure on development and function of the visual system. We discuss two well-known compounds–bisphenol A and tributyltin–which have opposite effects on estrogen signaling. Bisphenol A (BPA) is a weak estrogen agonist that increases estrogen-dependent signaling. Tributyltin (TBT), on the other hand, prevents the synthesis of estrogen (estradiol or E2) from testosterone. Given their contrasting effects, we examine if developmental exposure to environmentally relevant levels of BPA and TBT cause opposing functional differences in the visual system. We have structured our review to provide background on both BPA and TBT, discuss estrogen signaling within retina, summarize reported effects of EDC exposure on retinal development and function, and then review our recent findings as a case study. Though our work focuses on zebrafish (Danio rerio), we also include data from other species to show trends across vertebrates.

Bisphenol A (BPA)
BPA is a synthetic compound widely used in the manufacturing of industrial/household plastics, epoxy resin, and the lining of food and drink containers. As an environmental pollutant, BPA leaches into aquatic environments from industrial and material waste, leading to long term consequences to the local environment’s food web. On top of the environmental impact, human exposure to BPA is common. There are several recent, comprehensive reviews of BPA’s negative effects on human health.
Human exposure to BPA can occur via inhalation, ingestion, or dermal contact, though the primary pathway is through ingestion, as BPA leaches from food containers, canned goods, and thermal papers into food products. Human exposure is significant, with over 90% of people worldwide showing measurable levels of BPA in their tissues and recent estimates suggest the world average daily human intake of BPA is 2.53 µg/p/day. BPA is readily absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract due to its lipophilicity and undergoes metabolism in the liver, forming BPA-glucuronide and BPA-sulfate. Although these conjugates are traditionally considered inactive, deconjugation can occur via tissue-specific enzymes or gut microbiota, regenerating biologically active BPA. BPA and its metabolites can cross the placenta, with detectable levels in the fetal circulation, amniotic fluid, breast milk, and neonatal urine, highlighting particular risk during early development. Humans exposed to BPA before birth show increased anxiety and depression as children and in utero exposure, particularly during the third trimester, is associated with an increased risk of preterm births.
A central concern regarding BPA toxicity is the substantial evidence that low concentrations can induce significant biological effects and the life stages that are most sensitive are embryonic and early postnatal periods. Low-dose BPA exposure has been linked to altered neurobehavior, metabolic disturbances, reproductive tract abnormalities, and long-term physiological deficits across numerous vertebrate models and in humans. These outcomes identify a non-monotonic dose response relationship for BPA. Importantly, environmentally relevant BPA exposures often fall within the low-dose range where non-monotonic responses are most prominent, increasing ecological and human-health relevance.
Although BPA is not as persistent as legacy contaminants like polychlorinated bisphenols (PCB), another EDC, continuous release from wastewater, plastic degradation, and landfill leachate has resulted in widespread and persistent environmental contamination. BPA concentrations in streams range from 0.14 to 12 μg/L. BPA levels measured in human urine samples range widely (0.4–149 μg/L) with a geometric mean of 2.6 μg/L. BPA accumulates in aquatic systems, where it affects both micro- and macro-organisms by altering growth, reproduction, and endocrine function. In fish and amphibians, for example, chronic BPA exposure has been associated with disrupted gonadal development, abnormal steroidogenesis, impaired reproductive behavior, and long-term physiological deficits. These findings suggest that BPA poses significant risk not only to individual organisms but also to broader ecosystem structure and function.

Tributyltin (TBT)
TBT has industrial uses in antifouling paints, lumber and textile production, and as a stabilizer in PVC production. Its use on marine structures and ship hulls allows it to readily leach into the water, where it quickly settles and adheres to marine sediment, creating a bioavailable sink. This sequestration prevents degradation and increases the risk of chemical resuspension, especially around major ports where there is increased ship traffic. In 2008, the International Convention of the Control of Harmful Antifouling Systems on Ships (AFS Convention–International Maritime Organization) banned the use of TBT on registered ships worldwide. Despite global restrictions, regulations are not strictly enforced, and TBT based paints are still being produced and are available for purchase. Measurable TBT levels have been found along the coasts of several different countries. Major ports are especially susceptible, but alarmingly, some environmentally protected areas are just as contaminated. Researchers found that 77% of samples collected from marine protected areas along the Latin American coast had TBT levels ranging from 0.002–0.05 μg/g. TBT levels collected from the surface waters of India and China, reached 0.342 and 0.977 μg/L respectively. In Brazil, sediment samples collected from Vitoria range from 0.006–0.0211 µg Sn/g dry weight and in Ceará, samples collected after dredging activities reached 0.0526 µg Sn/g dry weight.
Out of all organotin compounds, TBT is regarded as the most toxic due to its slow degradation, environmental persistence, bioaccumulation potential, and ability to cross the blood brain barrier. Human exposure to TBT occurs through dietary intake, direct exposure to treated products, and dust inhalation. Cohort studies examining human placentas obtained after birth have detected measurable levels of TBT in Scandinavian countries. A Danish study specifically discovered that the human placental concentration of TBT was inversely associated with thyroid hormones, which are critical for fetal development. Exposure to TBT during gestation in humans has been linked to reduced fetal weight and placental abnormalities. And more recently, the impact of TBT on mammalian cells was reviewed by.

Estrogen receptor types and signaling mechanism
Estrogen is present in three forms in vertebrates: E1 (estrone), E2 (estradiol; 17β-estradiol), and E3 (estriol). E2 is the major biological form in reproductively active females. All estrogens are synthesized from cholesterol, with the final step in E2 synthesis being the aromatization of testosterone by the enzyme aromatase. Circulating E2 binds to one of several intracellular estrogen receptors (ER), which are ligand-activated transcription factors. Activated (ligand-bound) ERs then dimerize and bind to estrogen response elements (ERE) on DNA, affecting gene transcription and/or rapidly altering membrane potentials. In mammals and birds, there is a single aromatase gene (cyp19a1); whereas, in zebrafish there are two aromatase genes, cyp19a1a (aromatase A, gonadal aromatase) and cyp19a1b (aromatase B, brain aromatase). Estrogen binds to two ER isoforms in mammals: ERα and ERβ. In zebrafish, there are three ER isoforms, one for ERα (esr1) and two for ERβ (ERβ1 or esr2b and ERβ2 or esr2a) and zebrafish ERs have high sequence homology with mammalian ER. E2 can also bind to a membrane-bound G-protein coupled estrogen receptor (GPER), triggering different intracellular cascades involving MAPK/ERK and P13K/AKT signaling pathways. All vertebrates have a single copy/isoform of GPER.
Most of the circulating E2 is synthesized in the ovaries. However, local synthesis can also occur. The aromatase enzyme is present in brains of mammals, birds, fish, and amphibians. In mammals and birds aromatase is localized to nerve cells; in fish, particularly zebrafish, aromatase is localized to radial glial cells in the brain. Aromatase-positive radial glial cells are progenitor cells that proliferate throughout life in the fish and developmental aromatase expression is estrogen-dependent.

BPA and TBT have opposite effects on estrogenic mechanisms
BPA binds to both ERα and ERβ, mimicking endogenous estrogen, though BPA is reported to have greater affinity for ERβ. Overall, for both ERs, the affinity for BPA is weak compared to E2, though BPA binding can induce transcription of estrogen responsive genes. Beyond this classic genomic pathway, BPA can also bind GPER, initiating rapid non-genomic responses. The ability of BPA to interact with estrogen receptors is suggested to be causal for some adverse effects in humans.
The aromatase enzyme binds testosterone and catalyzes the formation of E2. Aromatase is also able to synthesize E1 from androstenedione, with the resulting E1 being converted to E2. Thus, EDCs that bind aromatase disrupt E2 synthesis. TBT is one of these compounds. As an aromatase inhibitor, TBT reversibly binds to the active site on aromatase, preventing substrate (testosterone) binding. Consequently, E2 levels are reduced and testosterone levels are increased after TBT exposure which causes masculinization in gastropods and zebrafish. TBT concentrations as low as 0.003–0.005 μg/L have deleterious consequences for marine and freshwater organisms. Filter and sediment feeding organisms are especially at risk and TBT has been detected in both target and non-target organisms.

Estrogen in retina
The general structure and function of the vertebrate retina is highly conserved. Rod and cone photoreceptors have their cell bodies in the distal outer nuclear layer (ONL) and synapse onto second-order bipolar and horizontal cells in the outer plexiform layer (OPL). Bipolar cell somata are in the inner nuclear layer (INL) and these cells are presynaptic to amacrine and ganglion cells in the inner plexiform layer (IPL). Ganglion cell axons leave the eye, forming the optic nerve. Signaling from photoreceptors to bipolar cells to ganglion cells is direct and glutamatergic; horizontal and amacrine cells, with cell bodies in the INL, are local circuit neurons that provide inhibitory feedback to the photoreceptor-bipolar-ganglion cell pathway in the OPL and IPL, respectively. Primate retinas, including humans, have three cone types (L, Long wavelength sensitive or “red” cones | M, Mid-wavelength sensitive “green” cones | S, Short wavelength sensitive or “blue” cones), non-primate mammals have two cone types (M and S), and zebrafish have four cone types (L, M, S, and a UV sensitive cone). Multiple bipolar, horizontal, amacrine, and ganglion cell types are reported in all species, contributing to complex and diverse levels of processing within the retina.
While circulating E2 can reach the retina through the blood, it is also locally synthesized. In rats, aromatase is found in distal retinal neurons (photoreceptors, horizontal and bipolar cells) within the ONL, OPL, and INL. Goldfish retina contains aromatase-positive horizontal, bipolar, and amacrine cells, as well as aromatase-containing ganglion cell axons. Aromatase transcripts have been identified in zebrafish, along with esr1 and esr2b. Inhibition of aromatase changes the thickness of the IPL, INL, and OPL in both zebrafish and rats.
E2 exposure affects photoreceptor gene expression, suggesting ER are present in that retinal layer. ERα, ERβ, and GPER are present in mouse retina, with GPER and ERβ expressed on ganglion cells. In rat and human retinas, ERα is expressed in the OPL and in amacrine and ganglion cells in inner retina and ERβ is expressed in the IPL, with colocalization of these ER types observed on some amacrine and ganglion cell types. GPER has been identified in the retinas of zebrafish and goldfish.
While estrogen is present in both males and females, the higher circulating E2 levels in females are suggested to underlie sex-differences in retinal function. ERG recordings from female Sprague-Dawley rats (age 2–6.5 months) are larger in amplitude than age-matched males. Similarly, multifocal ERGs recorded from men and women <50 years of age identified shorter implicit times in women participants. Increased E2 levels in female Tungara frogs during the reproductive season is associated with an increase in retinal sensitivity. Estrogen is also neuroprotective in retina. E2 helps regulate the blood-retinal-barrier and protect photoreceptors from glutamate-induced damage. In a mouse retinopathy of maturity model, activation of GPER on ganglion cells and astrocytes decreased endoplasmic reticulum stress response to hypoxia and decreased apoptosis. Activation of GPER on mouse ganglion cells was also protective against NMDA-mediated neurotoxicity; while activation of ERβ was protective after optic nerve crush. In vitro, cultured mouse Muller glial cells were protected from oxidative stress by E2 treatment. Given this latter role of E2, it is not surprising that age-related changes in estrogen levels are associated with neurodegenerative retinal diseases in humans and rodents or that estrogen modulation as a breast cancer treatment has been associated with a variety of retinal complications.

EDC exposure and retinal development
Retinal development has been extensively studied in zebrafish because their rapid external development and transparent eggs allow a real-time observation of events which are difficult to do in mammals. The initial work documenting photoreceptor development, followed by electron microscopic analysis, identified that zebrafish retinal development begins at 24 hpf (hours post fertilization). At 32 hpf ganglion cell axons project to the brain and by 72 hpf, the larvae have hatched and all retinal layers are present. One day later (96 hpf), optokinetic responses, a retina-based response where the eyes track a moving stimulus, can be recorded. By 7 dpf, zebrafish have exhausted their yolk sac, begin feeding, and visually guided optomotor responses can be recorded.
Development of estrogen signaling occurs in parallel with zebrafish retinal development. Zygotic synthesis of ER mRNA begins ∼24–48 hpf. Cyp19a1b is detected at 32 hpf in larvae with expression upregulated by E2 treatment at ∼25 hpf. All zebrafish ER types are expressed and functional in brain at 24–26 hpf. GPER mRNA can be identified in the eye ∼24–26 hpf. At 5 dpf, aromatase protein can be detected in ganglion cells and in the INL using immunocytochemistry.
There is a similar overlap of estrogen and eye development in mammals. In mice, ER expression begins at E (embryonic day) 9.5 when ERα is identified in the heart. ERβ is identified in the brain beginning at E10.5 and remains the only ER expressed in that tissue until E16.5 when ERα expression was identified. The presumptive neural retina is distinguished in the optic cup at ∼E9.5. From E11 to E18 neurogenesis of retinal ganglion cells, horizontal cells, amacrine cells, and cone photoreceptors occurs and the first ganglion cell axons leave the eye ∼ E11.5. A second wave of retinal neurogenesis occurs from postnatal day (P) 0 – P7 when rods, bipolar cells, and Muller glia are formed. In humans, the presumptive neural retina forms around 4–5 weeks of gestation and retinal differentiation begins ∼47 days with rods and cones evident at weeks 10–15. At 9 weeks, the placenta is the major source of fetal estrogen; fetal ERα and ERβ transcripts are identified at 13 weeks.
Given the overlap in timing, it is not surprising that developmental disruption of estrogen signaling either by blocking aromatase activity or antagonizing estrogen receptors has adverse effects on retinal/eye development. Exposure to aromatase inhibitors from 24 to 120 hpf thins ONL, IPL, and GCL in zebrafish. Morpholino knockdown of aromatase B (cyp19a1b) decreased overall eye and optic nerve development, reduced thickness of the INL and the IPL, increased apoptosis in the eye, and caused deficits in visual based behaviors. These effects were mediated by ERβ. Aberrant activation of GPER causes concentration-dependent effects on survival and morphology during zebrafish embryogenesis. Larval exposure to 4-OH-A, an aromatase inhibitor, reduced the thickness of retinal layers and caused visual deficits in adults. In another teleost, medaka, adult exposure to EE2, a potent estrogenic EDC, caused generational effects that delayed eye pigmentation in larvae and changed expression of the genes associated with synaptic structure, synaptic transmission, and eye structure and development.
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are another well-known EDC that are estrogenic, able to bind ER, and effect eye development. Examination of retina morphology and ultrastructure in zebrafish larvae exposed to PCB1254 from 0 to 96 hpf revealed delayed retinal layer development and smaller photoreceptor outer segments at 72 hpf and irregularly arranged photoreceptors and larger photoreceptor and ganglion cell layers at 96 hpf. Zebrafish larvae exposed to PCB1254 until 7 dpf displayed concentration-dependent decreases in optomotor responses and in the expression of photoreceptor-specific genes. Adult female offspring of pregnant Long-Evans rats fed either PCB77 or PCB47 showed decreased scotopic ERG b-wave amplitudes at high illuminance levels (for PCB77) and increased b-wave latency at low illuminance levels (for PCB47). Immunocytochemical analysis of brains of adult offspring of pregnant Sprague Dawley rats fed a mix of 14 different PCB congeners during pregnancy and lactation revealed region-specific reductions in endothelial cell size, increases in GAD67 immunoreactivity, and decreased lipofuscin autofluorescence.

Specific effects of BPA, TBT, and related compounds on retinal development
Developmental exposure to both BPA and TBT cause immediate effects on neurogenesis, with many of the studies performed in zebrafish. Early BPA exposure reduces zebrafish eye diameter and affects retinal layer thickness. Zebrafish larvae exposed to BPA showed changes to red (L) and UV cones within the retinal mosaic. Chronic 8 days BPA exposure thinned the IPL and impaired responses to red and green (M cone) light. Similarly, adult male zebrafish exposed to BPA for 7 weeks showed altered color preference. BPA increased ERα and ERβ expression, but decreased locomotor behavior in larvae. BPA analogs also alter visual function. Chronic BPS exposure until 6 dpf reduced thickness of the ganglion cell layer and BPS exposure for 120 days disorganized the ONL, thinned the IPL and GCL, and altered adult spectral sensitivities. BPS exposure from 2 to 5 dpf disrupts spacing and alters signaling of red and UV cones; differences in optic nerve structure were noted in a separate study that chronically exposed larvae until 6 dpf. Exposure to TBBPA until 5 dpf decreased both eye size and optokinetic responses in zebrafish.
TBT exposure during early life stages causes abnormal and delayed eye development, thinning of the cornea, and retina-specific defects.Chronic 5 days TBT exposure (0–120 hpf) increased apoptosis in zebrafish retina, with the greatest difference observed at 60 hpf when there was a 2× increase in macrophages. In tropical guppies, a 7 days exposure to TBT decreased retinal pigment epithelium, disorganized the photoreceptor layer, and caused vacuoles in the IPL. In minnows, embryonic-larval exposure to TBT similarly reduced the amount of pigment and disrupted retinal layering and a 7 days exposure decreased retinomotor responses in tiger perch. TBT exposure increased oxidative stress in the eyes of medaka juveniles and disrupted the blood-brain-barrier in rats. Eyes of neonatal ICR mice exposed to trimethyltin (TMT), a related organotin compound, until P14 had thinner retinal layers, increased apoptosis, increased overall glutamate levels, and decreased micro-ERG b-wave amplitude, consistent with neurotoxicity. TMT exposure during zebrafish development caused concentration-dependent effects that reduced vision-based behaviors, thinned retinal layers, formed pyknotic nuclei, and distorted the boundaries of the IPL and OPL. A 14-day exposure to Triphenyltin (TPT) altered expression of genes involved in polarity during retinal development in zebrafish.

Case study: Does transient early life BPA/TBT exposure cause persistent effects in zebrafish

Premise and experimental design
Most published reports of BPA and TBT induced effects typically occurred immediately after exposure, and exposure was often chronic, lasting multiple days. In contrast, our approach assessed whether a transient, 24 h developmental exposure to either compound was sufficient to cause long-term changes in adult retinal function and anatomy. We also sought to determine if these compounds have opposite sequelae in retina, given their contrasting effects on estrogen signaling.
Compound exposure occurred when larvae were either 3 dpf or 7 dpf because these ages represent key time points in both visual system and estrogen pathway development, as noted above. Exposure lasted for 24 h. The concentrations used for each compound are environmentally relevant and in agreement with previous studies. Our BPA concentrations were 0.228 μg/L (0.001 µM) and 22.8 μg/L (0.1 µM), with DMSO (0.0003%) as the vehicle control; TBT concentrations were 0.04 μg/L (0.12 nM) and 0.4 μg/L (1.2 nM), with 0.1% ethanol as the vehicle control. After the 24 h exposure, treated larvae were returned to system water and allowed to grow undisturbed until adulthood (≥3–4 months of age). In adults, we examined retinal anatomy (using H&E staining of retinal sections) and function [using electroretinograms (ERGs)] to identify if there were persistent outcomes resulting from transient developmental exposure.

Early life exposure to either BPA or TBT altered adult retinal function
To determine if developmental exposure to BPA or TBT altered retinal function, we used ERGs. The ERG response components include an initial negative a-wave (photoreceptor response) at light ON, followed by a positive b-wave (ON-bipolar cell response), and a positive d-wave (OFF-bipolar cell response) at the end of the light pulse. We decided to focus on ERGs as differences in b- and d-waves (reflecting ON and OFF bipolar cell responses) have been associated with retinal diseases in animal models and in the clinic.
ERGs were recorded from adult zebrafish that had been developmentally exposed to either BPA or TBT when they were 3 dpf or 7 dpf. ERGs were recorded as described in. Briefly, eye cups, with the cornea and lens removed, were placed onto a piece of 0.45 µm black filter paper in the recording chamber and perfused (0.3 mL/min inflow; 4 mL/min outflow) with MEM solution that had been equilibrated with 95%O2/5%CO2. A tungsten recording electrode was placed into the eye cup to record responses to 300 ms flashes of white light presented individually at 7 different brightness levels (ND 3.0 – ND 6.0 in 0.5 ND increments) on an infrared background (RG780 filter). Each flash was presented 4 times for each brightness level, and the entire protocol was repeated 10 times for a total of 280 retinal responses per eye. Recordings were amplified using a DAM80 amplifier (WPI) and Digidata 1440A (Axon Instruments). Data was collected using pCLAMP software (Axon) and analyzed in Origin. For each recording, b-wave amplitudes were measured from the a-wave trough to the peak of the b-wave (50–200 ms after stimulus onset); d-wave amplitude was measured as the peak occurring within 25–300 ms after stimulus offset. Technical replicates were excluded from analysis if b-waves were negative or the response occurred outside the time intervals. Amplitudes and implicit times (= time to peak amplitude) were analyzed using SPSS or R software, and graphs were made in Excel. One-way ANOVAs were used to assess differences in b- and d-wave responses for each age and compound. Results were considered significant if the p-value was ≤0.05.
For both compounds, exposure to the lower concentration (0.228 μg/L BPA; 0.04 μg/L TBT) at 3 dpf had greater effects than the higher concentrations (Figure 1), revealing non-monotonic effects. Exposure to 0.04 μg/L TBT at 3 dpf increased b-wave response amplitude (Figure 1A, p < 0.001) and b-wave peak time (Figure 1B, p = 0.019) compared to vehicle controls and 0.4 μg/L TBT exposed tissue. However, TBT exposure at 3 dpf did not alter OFF-bipolar d-wave responses (Figures 1C,D; N’s for the different groups: vehicle = 6 | 0.04 μg/L TBT = 6 | 0.4 μg/L TBT = 6). Exposure to 0.228 μg/L BPA at this age increased ON-bipolar cell b-wave (Figure 1E; p < 0.001) and OFF-bipolar cell d-wave (Figure 1G; p = 0.003) response amplitudes; d-wave response time was also faster than vehicle controls (Figure 1H; p = 0.005; vehicle = 10 | 0.228 μg/L BPA = 6 | 22.8 μg/L BPA = 18). Exposure to 22.8 μg/L BPA at 3 dpf decreased b-wave amplitude (p < 0.001).
BPA or TBT exposure at 3 dpf enhances ON-bipolar responses. Electroretinograms (ERGs) were recorded from adult eyecups to assess retinal function. Zebrafish larvae were exposed to bisphenol A (BPA) at either 0.228 μg/L or 22.8 μg/L, (control = 0.0003% DMSO) or tributyltin (TBT) at 0.04 μg/L or 0.4 μg/L (control = 0.1% ethanol) for 24 h when they were 3 days postfertilization (dpf). Larvae were then placed into system water and allowed to grow to adulthood (≥3–4 months pf) when ERGs were recorded. ERGs were elicited in response to a white light stimulus at 7 different brightness levels. Responses shown are from the brightest stimulus level (ND3.0) as that is the largest response. Representative mean ERGs at the brightest stimulus level are shown in the center of the figure. ERG b-wave amplitude and peak time and d-wave amplitude and peak time were quantified. (A) b-wave amplitude, (B) b-wave peak time, (C) d-wave amplitude, and (D) d-wave peak time measured in adults developmentally exposed to TBT (blue bars). (E) b-wave amplitude, (F) b-wave peak time, (G) d-wave amplitude, and (H) d-wave peak time measured in adults developmentally exposed to BPA (orange bars). Significant differences (asterisks) were determined for each parameter using a one-way ANOVA evaluated at α = 0.05. (Parts of this figure are taken from and.
Exposure to 0.04 μg/L TBT at 7 dpf also affected adult ERG responses (Figure 2). This TBT concentration increased b-wave (Figure 2A; p ≤ 0.001) and d-wave response amplitudes (Figure 2C; p ≤ 0.001) and delayed d-wave peak time (Figure 2D; p ≤ 0.001; vehicle = 4 | 0.04 μg/L TBT = 7 | 0.4 μg/L TBT = 5). For all three variables, responses measured after 0.04 μg/L TBT exposure were significantly different from both vehicle controls and the 0.4 μg/L treatment group. In contrast to TBT, it was the higher BPA concentration (22.8 μg/L) that significantly altered ERG responses in adult retinas when exposure occurred at 7 dpf. ERG b-wave amplitude was increased (Figure 2E; p < 0.001) compared to the 0.228 μg/L treatment group, whereas d-wave response amplitude was decreased (Figure 2E; p < 0.001) compared to both 0.228 μg/L BPA and vehicle controls. Exposure to 22.8 μg/L BPA at 7 dpf also quickened (reduced) the response time of the d-wave peak compared to the 0.228 μg/L BPA treatment group (Figure 2H; p = 0.02; vehicle = 6 | 0.228 μg/L BPA = 13 | 22.8 μg/L BPA = 5). Time to b-wave peak was not affected by either BPA (Figure 2F) or TBT exposure at 7 dpf (Figure 2B).
BPA or TBT exposure at 7 dpf affects OFF-bipolar cell responses. Electroretinograms (ERGs) were recorded from adult eyecups to assess retinal function. Zebrafish larvae were exposed to bisphenol A (BPA) at either 0.228 μg/L or 22.8 μg/L, (control = 0.0003% DMSO) or tributyltin (TBT) at 0.04 μg/L or 0.4 μg/L (control = 0.1% ethanol) for 24 h when they were 7 days postfertilization (dpf). Larvae were then placed into system water and allowed to grow to adulthood (≥3–4 months pf) when ERGs were recorded. ERGs were elicited in response to a white light stimulus at 7 different brightness levels. Responses shown are from the brightest stimulus level (ND3.0) as that is the largest response. Representative mean ERGs at the brightest stimulus level are shown in the center of the figure. ERG b-wave amplitude and peak time and d-wave amplitude and peak time were quantified. (A) b-wave amplitude, (B) b-wave peak time, (C) d-wave amplitude, and (D) d-wave peak time measured in adults developmentally exposed to TBT (blue bars). (E) b-wave amplitude, (F) b-wave peak time, (G) d-wave amplitude, and (H) d-wave peak time measured in adults developmentally exposed to BPA (orange bars). Significant differences (asterisks) were determined for each parameter using a one-way ANOVA evaluated at α = 0.05. (Parts of this figure are taken from and.

Developmental exposure to TBT or BPA caused age-dependent differences in retinal anatomy
To determine if the observed physiological differences reflected compound-induced changes in retinal anatomy, we measured the thicknesses of the different layers in H&E stained adult retinal sections (Figure 3). The only retinal layer found to be sensitive to compound exposure was the IPL, where axon terminals of ON- and OFF-bipolar cells are located. The anatomical change in retinal layer thickness for the IPL was different for the two compounds. BPA exposure at 3 dpf, but not 7 dpf, significantly decreased IPL thickness in adult retinas (Figure 3A; p = 0.042). In contrast, TBT exposure at 7 dpf significantly increased IPL thickness (Figure 3B; p = 0.002).
Effects of BPA and TBT on retinal anatomy are age dependent. Retinal sections taken from adults developmentally exposed to either BPA (A,B) or TBT (C,D) to determine if there are changes in retinal structure. Measurements of individual retinal layers (at the right) identified significant differences in the inner plexiform layer (IPL) only. Adults exposed to BPA when they were 3 days postfertilization (dpf) (A,B) showed a significant reduction in IPL thickness. In contrast, adults exposed to TBT when they were 7 dpf (C,D) showed a significant increase in IPL thickness. Measurements were made from 3 different retinas per treatment group per age. Significant differences (asterisks) were determined for each parameter using a one-way ANOVA evaluated at α = 0.05. (Parts of this figure are taken from and.

Developmental EDC exposure altered protein and mRNA expression of estrogen signaling components
We recently reported changes in estrogen signaling components in adult retinas following exposure to BPA at either 3 dpf or 7 dpf. Retinal homogenates collected from adults exposed to 0.228 μg/L BPA at 3 dpf showed a significant increase in mRNA expression of aromatase (cyp19a1b), and a significant decrease in protein levels of ERβ, p-ERK and p-JNK indicating effects on genomic/nuclear signaling and the activation of either membrane bound ER or GPER. In contrast, retinal homogenates from adult fish exposed when they were 7 dpf did not show differences in aromatase, esr1, or esr2a expression though ERβ protein levels were increased. Exposure to 0.228 μg/L BPA at 7 dpf decreased p-ERK levels, while exposure to 22.8 μg/L BPA increased p-JNK levels. The two BPA concentrations also differentially effected p-AKT levels, with increased p-AKT protein observed in retinas treated with 22.8 μg/L BPA but decreased protein levels observed in the 0.288 μg/L treatment group. BPA-induced changes in AKT levels are important to note, as this pathway is associated with GPER activation and neuroprotection in mouse retina.
We have not completed a similar molecular analysis of retinal homogenates from adults developmentally exposed to TBT, and no similar analysis is reported in the literature. However, we can anticipate TBT-induced effects on estrogen signaling components, as a transcriptomic analysis of whole zebrafish embryos exposed from 2 to 5 dpf revealed TBT exposure altered genes involved in development and immune and inflammatory responses. Further, given that TBT is an aromatase inhibitor and that aromatase and ER are present in zebrafish retina, it is likely that estrogen levels/signaling will be reduced by early life TBT exposure, as reported in juvenile Atlantic salmon.

ERGs reveal persistent effects of BPA and TBT that were concentration and age dependent
Our data suggests similarities in functional outcomes to early life EDC exposure in zebrafish retina with respect to age of exposure and effective concentration for both BPA and TBT. ERG recordings from adult retinas following developmental exposure to BPA or TBT, identified age-dependent effects (Figure 4). In general, the ON-bipolar cell b-wave was sensitive to both compounds, regardless of exposure age. The OFF-bipolar d-wave, in contrast, appeared more sensitive to compound exposure at the later exposure age. Exposure to either 0.228 μg/L BPA or 0.04 μg/L TBT at 3 dpf enhanced adult b-wave amplitudes. This TBT concentration also delayed b-wave peak time but had no effect on d-wave responses. BPA, on the other hand, increased and delayed OFF-bipolar d-wave responses. These effects of TBT and BPA exposure at 3 dpf are evident in the mean traces shown in Figure 1. Thus, only ON-bipolar cells appear sensitive to TBT exposure at 3 dpf; while both ON and OFF-bipolar cells are sensitive to BPA. Exposure to either compound at 7 dpf affected both the b-wave and d-wave components of the adult ERG, with all OFF-bipolar response components showing significant differences. Adult retinas exposed to 0.04 μg/L (the lower concentration) TBT showed increased and delayed d-wave responses, as did ERG b-waves. In contrast, significant differences in adults previously exposed to BPA were only observed in the high (22.8 μg/L) treatment group which decreased d-wave amplitude compared to vehicle controls but increased b-wave amplitude. These age-dependent effects were also evident in the anatomical data. BPA exposure at 3 dpf also reduced the thickness of the retinal IPL; while TBT exposure at 7 dpf increased IPL thickness.
Developmental exposure timeline for BPA and TBT and resulting long-term retinal functional outcomes in zebrafish. This timeline illustrates the experimental design used to assess the long-term effects of early life exposure of BPA and TBT at our two exposure timepoints. Embryos were maintained in an incubator from 0 days post fertilization (dpf) to 10 dpf, before being transferred in the aquatic care facility, where they remained until 3 months post fertilization (mpf). Both BPA and TBT had 24 h exposures beginning at either the 3 dpf or the 7 dpf. Electroretinography (ERG) was performed at 3+ mpf to quantify long-term change in bipolar cells. High concentrations of BPA (0.1 μM) at 7 dpf result in an increase in b-wave amplitude and a decrease in d-wave time. While low concentration (0.228 ug/L) at 3 dpf BPA exposure increase b-wave amplitude and d-wave amplitude, with a decrease in d-wave time. High concentration of TBT (0.4 μg/L) at 7 dpf showed an increase in b-wave amplitude, d-wave amplitude, and d-wave time. As opposed to high concentration at 3 dpf which showed a decrease in b-wave amplitude.
We also identified concentration-dependent effects. Developmental exposure to 0.04 μg/L TBT appears more deleterious than 0.4 μg/L as all ERG components were enhanced by the lower concentration, regardless of exposure age. Similarly, exposure to the lower 0.228 μg/L BPA concentration at 3 dpf consistently enhanced all ERG responses. These results describe nonmonotonic responses, as exposure to the lower dose caused more effects. We did observe changes in ERG responses in adults exposed to the 22.8 μg/L BPA treatment, however, with this dose enhancing b-wave amplitudes but reducing d-wave responses when exposure occurred at the later age. Nonmonotonic effects of EDC’s have been reported including in retina. The suggested mechanisms underlying these responses include different affinities for/differential activation of receptors and differences in pathway activation between central EDC effects, which would trigger regulatory negative feedback, and peripheral EDC effects, which would be stimulatory. G-protein coupled receptors can be desensitized, where continued exposure to an EDC inactivates the receptor, causing larger concentrations to be less effective. In contrast, nuclear receptors can be downregulated as EDC concentration increases, decreasing the effects of higher doses. These mechanisms all describe the impact of the EDC binding to a receptor, which is the case for BPA and ER. In fact, nonmonotonic responses of BPA are well reported, occurring in ∼20% of reports. Given that BPA is known to have differential affinities for ERα/β and that BPA can bind GPER, we suggest that differential binding to these receptors and/or receptor desensitization may underlie the BPA-induced nonmonotonic effects observed here. Determining the mechanisms of TBT’s nonmonotonic effects is more difficult, as TBT does not bind ER. Here, the observed responses may reflect competition between TBT and the natural substrate for the enzyme active site. Further, the ability of both BPA and TBT to bind thyroid receptors, and influence other cellular mechanism, must also be considered, as nonmonotonic responses can also occur when a single outcome (such as retinal function) is influenced by more than one pathway.
The increase in b-wave amplitude in response to the lower concentrations of both BPA and TBT reveals similar, not opposite effects on retina function (Figure 5). While unexpected, we identified three studies with similar results. Antagonistic effects were not observed in neonatal (PN 1–16) female rats after co-exposure to a BPA/TBT mixture. Chronic (2–5 dpf) exposure to BPA and TBT in zebrafish revealed only concentration dependent effects, with higher doses of TBT needed to produce the same effects as low BPA. Finally, a metabolomic analysis of zebrafish larvae exposed to either compound from 48 to 120 hpf revealed some overlap with regard to which metabolites/metabolic pathways were altered. These reports, together with our data, suggest that BPA and TBT may be differentially targeting the same and/or different pathways. These pathways, which include estrogen disruption, are described below.
Summary diagram comparing the effects of developmental BPA and TBT exposure. Items on the left (orange text) were observed only in adult retinas developmentally exposed to BPA. Items on the right (blue text) were observed only in adult retinas developmentally exposed to TBT. Items in the center (black text) are common to both. Differences were in comparison to the relative vehicle control. For BPA: low conc = 0.228 μg/L; high conc = 22.8 μg/L; control = 0.0003% DMSO. For TBT: low conc = 0.04 μg/L; high conc = 0.4 μg/L; control = 0.1% ethanol. ↑, increase in amplitude or time; ↓, decrease in amplitude or time; Dpf, days postfertilization; IPL, inner plexiform layer.

Possible mechanisms of long-term functional effects resulting from acute developmental EDC exposure

Developmental exposure to BPA or TBT alters estrogen signaling pathways in retina causing latent physiological changes
Exposure to BPA and TBT, if only transiently, likely had a direct effect on retinal estrogen signaling. All estrogen receptor types are present in vertebrate retinas and aromatase is found in rat INL and OPL where bipolar cells and their dendrites are located. Importantly, estrogen signaling components are present in zebrafish retina at our exposure ages, including nuclear ER, aromatase and GPER. Developmental BPA exposure reduces eye size and affects brain development in zebrafish. Similarly, developmental TBT exposure delays eye development and has retina-specific effects.
Our molecular analysis identified aromatase (cyp19a1b) and ER (esr1, esr2a) mRNA and/or protein (ERβ) in adult zebrafish retinal homogenates and found that developmental BPA exposure altered expression of some of these estrogen responsive genes. We also observed differences in MAPK and AKT pathway activation (phosphorylation) suggesting BPA was also binding to GPER. In mammalian retina activation of GPER and/or ERβ is neuroprotective to retinal ganglion cells. BPA exposure (0.228 μg/L) at 3 dpf decreased ERβ, but increased p-ERK and p-JNK levels; while exposure to the same concentration at 7 dpf increased ERβ protein and decreased p-ERK, suggesting age-dependent differences ER/GPER activation by 0.228 μg/L BPA. BPA concentration-dependent effects were also observed for AKT pathway activation, with an increase in p-AKT (associated with pathway activation) found in retinas treated with 22.8 μg/L at 7 dpf and decreased levels in the 7 dpf 0.228 μg/L group. GPER activation associated with PI3K/AKT pathway activation is neuroprotective, suggesting a possible effect of BPA exposure. Together, this data suggests that a brief early life BPA exposure can cause latent effects on estrogen pathways in retina, with BPA concentration determining which specific ER/GPER is/are activated.
With regard to TBT, the presence of aromatase in zebrafish and mammalian retinas suggests a direct effect on estrogen synthesis. In his review of estrogenic signaling in mammalian retina, indicates the retinal INL is the layer where most local E2 is synthesized. Goldfish retina contains aromatase-positive bipolar, horizontal, and amacrine cells in the INL, suggesting E2 synthesis also occurs in the INL in fish retina. Importantly, the INL is where bipolar cells are located. The changes in ERG b- and d-waves, which reflect bipolar cell responses, in reponse to TBT exposure suggest the INL may be targeted by compound exposure. Inhibition of aromatase changed the thickness of the IPL and INL in zebrafish and rats in support of this hypothesis. The IPL is where ERβ is located in mammals and our anatomical data indicates that the IPL is sensitive to TBT (and BPA) exposure, suggesting that TBT may selectively target the inner retina.

Long-term retina-specific effects of developmental BPA/TBT exposure are estrogen independent
While BPA and TBT are classified as EDCs, both compounds have a variety of effects. TBT exposure induces oxidative stress and increases levels of glucose and creatine kinase in the blood. TBT exposure increased permeability of the blood brain barrier, lipid peroxidation, glial activation and autophagy in rats. TBT exposure also causes apoptosis in isolated mammalian cells and disrupts thyroid signaling in mice, rats and zebrafish. BPA can binding to thyroid receptors and to thyroid hormone transport proteins such as transthyretin, displacing thyroxine (T4). BPA working through thyroid hormone receptor β (thrb), in particular, is required for proper development of cone photoreceptors in zebrafish and mice.
Other reports indicate BPA and TBT exposure alter levels of the neurotransmitters glutamate, dopamine, and GABA. BPA and TBT impact these neurotransmitter systems by either blocking compound synthesis or binding to receptors. In Xenopus oocytes and dissociated rat CA3 neurons, BPA had concentration dependent effects on GABAA receptor mediated responses. In rodent brain, BPA decreased TH-immunoreactivity. GABA and dopamine synthesis decreased, and glutamate synthesis increased, in zebrafish larvae exposed to BPA from 5 to 8 dpf. Similarly, adult male zebrafish exposed to TBT had decreased expression of genes involved in dopamine, GABA and serotonin synthesis. Developmental TBT exposure blocked ligand (glutamate) binding to NMDA receptors in rodent brain membrane preparations.
As in the rest of the brain, retinal signaling depends on the release of neurotransmitters. Photoreceptor synapses onto bipolar and horizontal cells are glutamatergic, with glutamate release decreasing in response to light stimulation–the basis for ON and OFF bipolar cell responses (i.e., ERG b- and d-waves, respectively). Zebrafish retinal bipolar cells also express GABA and dopamine receptors. In zebrafish retina, GABA is localized to horizontal cells in outer retina and amacrine cells in inner retina. Dopamine is present in retinal amacrine and interplexiform cells. Amacrine and interplexiform processes are found in the IPL, the retinal layer found to be sensitive to BPA and TBT exposure. Thus, BPA/TBT exposure could be impacting bipolar cell responses by changing modulatory (GABA, dopamine) inputs or altering photoreceptor glutamate release.
Dopamine is synthesized in a 3-step sequence from the amino acid phenylalanine, with tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) the rate limiting enzyme in the pathway. GABA is synthesized from glutamate via the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD). We observed changes in the protein levels of both enzymes in adult retinal homogenates that were exposed to 0.228 μg/L BPA exposure at 3 dpf. TH protein levels were increased, while GAD levels were decreased. These enzymes are the rate limiting enzymes in the synthesis of dopamine and GABA, respectively, suggesting a direct BPA-induced effect on neurotransmitter synthesis in exposed retinas. Exposure to the higher BPA concentration (22.8 μg/L) at 3 dpf increased GAD levels in the same homogenates, identifying concentration dependent effects.
In amphibian retina, blocking GABAA receptors increased ERG b- and d-wave amplitudes. We observed a thinner IPL and a decrease in GAD protein levels in adult retinal homogenates developmentally exposed to 0.228 μg/L BPA at 3 dpf, suggesting a BPA-induced decrease in GABA synthesis, which may contribute to the enhanced b- and d-wave responses that were observed. Adult retinas treated with the higher concentration of BPA (22.8 μg/L) at 3 dpf displayed reduced b-wave amplitude but increased GAD protein levels, consistent with an increase in GABAergic inhibition. Both concentrations of BPA increased TH protein levels in retinal homogenates exposed at 3 dpf, suggesting a BPA-induced increase in dopamine levels. Elevated dopamine levels reduce gap junctional coupling of and block GABA release from retinal horizontal cells, contributing to the observed ERG responses. TBT exposure similarly influences both dopamine and GABA. We observed an increase in IPL thickness due to TBT exposure at 7 dpf. This could suggest an increase in GABA and/or dopaminergic inner neurons and their synaptic connections or an increase in bipolar cell synaptic contacts. TBT is reported to increase dopamine levels in zebrafish but decrease GABA levels. The increase in ERG response amplitudes we observed in retinas exposed to the 0.04 μg/L TBT treatment suggest a decrease in inhibition, consistent with these reports.
Alternatively, BPA/TBT could be targeting photoreceptor responses, causing a downstream effect on the postsynaptic bipolar cells which would alter b- and d-wave responses. Examining ERG a-wave response amplitudes and timing suggest this possibility. For example, exposure to 0.228 μg/L BPA at 3 dpf increased both b-wave and d-wave amplitudes. Photoreceptor a-wave amplitude was also increased in this BPA treatment group, suggesting a downstream effect. Similarly, exposure to 22.8 μg/L BPA at 7 dpf quickened both a-wave and d-wave implicit times. Exposure to the higher TBT concentration (0.4 μg/L) at 3 dpf similarly quickened b-wave and a-wave peak times. The lower TBT concentration (0.04 μg/L) at 7 dpf increased and delayed adult a-wave and d-wave responses. These similarities suggest that, for some of the outcomes measured, the change in bipolar cell responses may be indirect and downstream of a direct impact on photoreceptors. BPA exposure in zebrafish larvae altered red (L) and UV cone morphology and disrupted the retinal cone mosaic, suggesting a direct effect of BPA on photoreceptors. Photoreceptor sensitivity to TBT is highly likely, given the localization of aromatase to the ONL in some vertebrate retinas and the identification of aromatase (cyp19a1b) in zebrafish retina.ERG.
Taken together, the changes in ERG b- and d-wave responses in adult retinas from fish developmentally exposed to BPA or TBT could be due to EDC-induced changes in neurotransmitter release/levels within the retina.

BPA and TBT-induced changes in retinal function are due to a direct effect on retinal bipolar cells
Finally, both BPA and TBT are known to directly alter neuronal activity, suggesting that the ERG differences observed may reflect a direct effect of these EDCs on retinal bipolar cells. TBT application can increase calcium levels in isolated DRG neurons and reduce Na+/K+ pump activity in brain. BPA inhibited L-, N-, and T-type Ca+2 channels in isolated GH3 cells and reduced L-type Ca+2 channel amplitude in cardiac myocytes and rat aortic smooth muscle. These actions of BPA are due to the compound binding to and stabilizing calcium channels in the resting state. BPA application increases the amplitude of BK potassium channels in AD 293 cells by binding to both intracellular and extracellular sites on the channel, and inhibits TTX-sensitive and TTX-insensitive Na+ channels in DRG neurons via PKA and PKC dependent pathways. Zebrafish bipolar cells express depolarization elicited calcium (T-type or L-type) and potassium (sustained IK or transient IA) channels. Patch clamp analysis of adult zebrafish bipolar cells revealed BPA-induced effects. Developmental BPA exposure reduced L-type Ca+2 current amplitude regardless of exposure age; whereas outward rectifying K+ currents (IK) were reduced when developmental BPA exposure occurred at 3 dpf but increased when exposure occurred at 7 dpf. These differences in voltage gated currents measured in tissue collected from adults at the later age were mostly observed in response to 22.8 μg/L BPA exposure, suggesting concentration-dependent effects, as reported in other preparations. In isolated pancreatic β-cells, concentration dependent effects of BPA on R-type Ca+2 channels were reported, with exposure to a low (1 nM) dose of BPA decreasing current amplitude. In this preparation, BPA did not directly interact with the Ca+2 channel, but induced effects through differential activation of ERβ and ERα.
Changes in voltage gated currents across a population of retinal cells would affect ERG responses. Increases in b-wave amplitude, for example, could reflect increased internal calcium levels, as reported to occur after TBT exposure. A reduced current through voltage-gated calcium channels coupled with a reduced outward rectifying K+ current would lower overall bipolar cell responses. Alternatively, a reduced calcium current and enhanced outward K+ current would reduce and delay neuronal responses. These latter options were observed in BPA treated adult retinas.

Translational implications and future directions
Endocrine disrupting compounds are a public health concern worldwide because of persistent exposure, diverse point sources, and the presence of significant low dose effects. Two well-known EDCs, BPA and TBT, are of primary concern and were the focus of this review. BPA is ubiquitous as it is still continually used for industrial and household products. The effect of BPA on animals is well-reported and recent reports show effects of early life BPA exposure in humans. In contrast, while TBT use has been banned for almost 20 years, the slow degradation of this chemical coupled with recent increases in environmental concentrations and measurable levels in humans keep TBT a chemical of concern.
Our goal was to review estrogen signaling in retina and identify how BPA and TBT exposure alter these pathways. These compounds have opposite effects on estrogen signaling pathways. Interestingly, it does not appear that exposure to these compounds cause opposite outcomes. Developmental exposure to either compound showed similar effects on adult retinal ERG responses, with enhancement of ON-bipolar cell b-wave responses observed for the lower concentrations used. While we did observe a few contrasting outcomes, they depended on age of exposure (i.e., IPL thickness) and/or concentration (i.e., d-wave responses). It is important to note that while environmentally relevant levels of both compounds were used, these levels were several orders of magnitude different from each other. Nonetheless, both compounds displayed developmental effects. While bath application of the compounds likely resulted in systemic differences, our focus on the retina identifies specific effects on neuronal signaling in this tissue. Current experiments are continuing to elucidate the long-term effects of these compounds by examining changes in gene expression, individual neuronal responses, and larval differences.
Overall, our findings suggest that the retina is extremely sensitive to EDCs, and that adverse outcomes due to BPA and/or TBT exposure should include analysis of long-term developmental effects focused on the visual system.
Edited by: Alejandra M. Pacchioni, Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Argentina
Reviewed by: Mingzhe Yuan, Ningbo University, China
Vessy Yancheva, University of Plovdiv Paisii Hilendarski, Bulgaria

Author contributions
JJ: Conceptualization, Formal Analysis, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing. LO: Conceptualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing. RH: Formal Analysis, Methodology, Writing – review and editing. PO: Formal Analysis, Methodology, Writing – review and editing. VC: Conceptualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.

Conflict of interest
The author(s) declared that this work was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Generative AI statement
The author(s) declared that generative AI was not used in the creation of this manuscript.
Any alternative text (alt text) provided alongside figures in this article has been generated by Frontiers with the support of artificial intelligence and reasonable efforts have been made to ensure accuracy, including review by the authors wherever possible. If you identify any issues, please contact us.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

References
Legacy and emerging antifouling biocide residues in a tropical estuarine system (Espirito Santo state, SE, Brazil)
Effects of in utero tributyltin chloride exposure in the rat on pregnancy outcome
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals and disease endpoints
Assessment of tributyltin and triphenyltin compounds and their main degradation products in Saudi Coastal waters
Bisphenol A: food exposure and impact on human health
Effects of bisphenol A and its derivatives on the response of GABAA erceptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes
ERG responses to high-frequency flickers require FAT3 signaling in mouse retinal bipolar cells
Understanding the retinal basis of vision across species
Characterization of oestrogen receptors in zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Thyroid disruption in zebrafish (Danio rerio) larvae: different molecular response patterns lead to impaired eye development and visual functions
Estrogenic actions in the brain: estrogen, phytoestrogens, and rapid intracellular signaling mechanisms
Xenoestrogens: the emerging story of bisphenol A
Endocrine‐disrupting chemicals
Estrogen receptor signaling during vertebrate development
Transformation of tributyltin in zebrafish eleutheroembryos (Danio rerio)
Low doses of bisphenol A promote human seminoma cell proliferation by activating PKA and PKG via a membrane G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor
The development of photoreceptors in the zebrafish, Brachydanio rerio. I. Structure
A historical reflection on scientific aadvances in understanding thyroid hormone action
Screening estrogenic activities of chemicals or mixtures in vivo using transgenic (cyp19a1b-GFP) zebrafish embryos
Transporter mediated GABA release in the retina: role of excitatory amino acids and dopamine
The goldfish as a model for studying neuroestrogen synthesis, localization, and action in the brain and visual system
Environmental effects of BPA: focus on aquatic species
Estrogenic effects of several BPA analogs in the developing zebrafish brain
The estrogenic retina: the potential contribution to healthy aging and age-related neurodegenerative diseases in retina
How protected are marine protected areas: a case study of tributyltin in Latin America
NTP-CERHR expret panel report on the reproductive and developmental toxicity of bisphenol A
Notch activity levels control the balance between quiescence and recruitment of adult neural stem cells
Differences in retinal structure and function between aging male and female Sprague-Dawley rats are strongly influenced by estrus cycle
A theoretical study of organotin binding in aromatase
Characterization of duplicated zebrafish cyp19 genes
Use of visual electrophysiology to monitor retinal and optic nerve toxicity
Multiple effects of bisphenol A, and endocrine disruptor, on GABAA receptors in acutely dissociated rat CA3 pyramidal neurons
Effects of bisphenol A and triclocarban on brain-specific expression of aromatase in early zebrafish embryos
The role of estrogen and thyroid hormones in zebrafish visual system function
Loss of adult visual resonses by developmental BPA exposure is correlated with altered estrogenic signaling
Bipolar cells in the zebrafish retina
Differential expression of voltage-gated K+ and Ca+2 currents in bipolar cells in the zebrafish retinal slice
Immunocytochemical localization of excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitters in the zebrafish retina
Retinal electrophysiology in central nervous system disorders. A review of human and mouse studies
The electroretinogram in the genomics era: outer retinal disorders
Global assessment of bisphenol A in the environment
Tributyltin induces apoptosis in mammalian cells in vivo: a scoping review
Zebrafish optomotor response and morphology are altered by transient, developmental exposure to bisphenol-A
The invisible influence: can endocrine disruptors reshape behaviors across generations?
Tyrosine hydroxylase and regulation of dopamine synthesis
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals: associated disorders and mechanisms of action
Histological and behavioral toxicity of tributyltin in the tropical guppy Poecilia vivipara
Human exposure to bisphenol A by biomonitoring: methods, results and assessment of environmentale exposures
Bisphenol A inhibits voltage-activated Ca+2 channels in vitro: mechanisms and structural requirements
Endocrine disruption of brain sexual differentiation by developmental PCB exposure
Retinal neuronal cells is a toxicological target of tributyltin in developing zebrafish
Critical review of the toxicity mechanisms of bisphenol F in zebrafish (Danio rerio): knowledge gaps and future directions
The regulation of endocrine-disrupting chemicals to minimize their impact on health
Breast cancer medications and vision: effects of treatments for early-stage disease
Retinal hemorrhages in anastrozole users
Study of the accumulation of tributyltin and triphenyltin compounds and their main metabolites in the sea bass, Dicentrachus labrax, under laboratory conditions
Inhibition of L-type calcium channels by bisphenol A in rat aorta smooth muscle
Tributyltin-induced effects on early life stages of minnows Phoxinus phoxinus
Tributyltin alters calcium levels, mitochondrial dynamics, and activates calpains within dorsal root ganglion neurons
Activation of estrogen response element dependent transcription by thyroid hrmone with increase in estrogen receptor levels in a rat pituitary cell line, GH3
Distribution of butyltins in the waters and sediments along the coast of India
A review of dietary and non-dietary exposure to bisphenol-A
Immunocytochemical and biochemical evidence for aromatase in neurons of the retina, optic tectum and retinotectal pathways in goldfish
Androgen receptor gene expression in the developing and adult zebrafish brain
Acute developmetnal exposure to 4-hydroxyandrostenedione has a long term effect on visually-guided behaviors
Eye development
Neurobehavioral effects of bisphenol S exposure in early life stages of zebrafish larvae (Danio rerio)
Occurrence of butyltin compounds in the waters of the selected lakes, rivers and costal environments from China
Sex hormone receptors in the human eye
The effects of aromatase inhibitors and selective estrogen receptor modulators on eye development in the zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Tributyltin causes abnormal development in embryos of medaka, Oryzias latipes
Identification of estrogen target genes during zebrafish embryonic development through transcriptomic analysis
The effect of the aquatic contaminants bisphenol-A and PCB-95 on the zebrafish lateral line
Eye development and retinogenesis
GABAergic and glycinergic systems regulate ON-OFF electroretinogram by cooperatively modulating cone pathways in the amphibian retina
Organotin compounds in the environment - an overview
Masculinization of female gastropod mollusks induced by organotin compounds, focusing on mechanisms of action of tributyltin and triphenyltin for development of imposex
Bisphenol A (BPA) and neurological disorders: an overview
Mesencephalic neurodegeneration in the orally administered bisphenol A-caused hyperactive rats
Disruption of adult expression of sexually selected traits by developmental exposure to bisphenol A
Abberant ligand-induced activation of G-protein couopled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER) results in developmental malformations during vertebrate embryogenesis
Early life tributyltin exposure has long term physiological effects on the zebrafish (Danio rerio) visual system
The neuroprotective effecs of novel estrogen receptor GPER1 in mouse retinal ganglion cell degeneration
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals: implications for human health
Exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances and age-related macular degeneration in the U.S. middle-aged and older adults
Exposure to bisphenol A appears to impair hippocampal neurogenesis and spatial learning and memory
Trimethyltin chloride induces reactive oxygen species-mediated apoptosis in retinal cells during zebrafish eye development
Neurochemical and behavioral analysis by acute exposure to bisphenol A in zebrafish larvae model
Postnatal exposure to trimethyltin chloride induces retinal developmental neurotoxicity in mice via glutamate and its transporter related changes
Stages of embryonic development of the zebrafish
Low-dose exposure to bisphenol A and replacement bisphenol S induces precocious hypothalamic neurogenesis in embryonic zebrafish
Estrogen and xenoestrogens upregulate the brain aromatase isoform (P450aromB) and perturb markers of early development in zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Pharmaceuticals, hormones, and other organic wastewater contaminants in US streams, 1999– 2000: A national reconnaissance
Effect of tributyltin compound on N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors in brain of preweanling mice
Sex-dependent effects of maternal PCB exposure on the electroretinogram in adult rats
Environmental endocrine-disrupting chemical exposure: role in non-communicable diseases
Non-monotonic dose-response relationships and endocrine disruptors: a qualitaqtive method of assessment
Genomic structure and embryonic expression of estrogen receptor beta a (ERBa) in zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Neuroendocrine effects of endocrine disruptors in teleost fish
Expression of estrogen receptor alpha and beta during mouse embryogenesis
Estrogenic modulation of retinal sensitivity in reproductive female Tungara frogs
Tributyltin induces the tissue-specific stresses in zebrafish, a study in various tissues of muscle, gill and intestine
Toxicity evaluation of triphenyltin in zebrafish larvae by embryonic malformation, retinal development and GH/IGF axis
Effects of the trybutyltin on the blood parameters, immune responses and thyroid hormone system in zebrafish
Chronic exposure to tributyltin induces brain functional damage in juvenile common carp (Cyprinus carpio)
Impact of low-dose chronic exposure to bisphenol A (BPA) on adult male zebrafish adaptation to the environmental complexity: disturbing the color preference patterns and reliving the anxiety behavior
Association of in utero persistent organic pollutant exposure with placental thyroid hormones
Mechanisms involved in tributyltin-enhanced aggressive behaviors and fear responses in male zebrafish
A thyroid hormone antagonist that inhibits thyroid hormone action in vivo
Exposure to bisphenol A associated with multiple health-related outcomes in humans: an umbrella review of systematic reviews with meta-analysis
Cone-to-Muller cell ratio in the mammalian retina: a survey of seven mammals with different lifestyle
Identification of a membrane estrogen receptor in zebrafish with homology to mammalian GPER and its high expression in early germ cells of the testis
Long-term exposure to bisphenol S damages the visual system and reduces the tracking capability of male zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Maternal exposure to tributyltin during early gestation increases adverse pregnancy outcomes by impairing placental development
Assessment of steroidogenesis and steroidogenic enzyme functions
Brain cytochrome P450 aromatase gene isoforms and activity levels in Atlantic Salmon after waterborne exposure to nominal environmental concentrations of the pharmaceutical ethynylestradiol and antifoulant tributylin
PCBs exert an estrogenic effect through repression of the Wnt7a signaling pathway in the female reproductive tract
GPER/GPR30, a membrane estrogen receptor, is expressed in the brain and retina of a social fish (Carassius auratus) and colocalizes with isotocin
A molecular phenotype atlas of the zebrafish retina
Morphometric signatures of exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals in zebrafish eleutheroembryos
Transcriptomic effects of tributyltin (TBT) in zebrafish eleutheroembryos. A functional benchmark dose analysis
Critical appraisal of the evidence for tributyltin-mediated endocrine disruption in mollusks
Early life exposure to environmental levels of the aromatase inhibitor tributyltin causes masculinisation and irreversible sperm damage in zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Elucidating the mechanisms of action of tributyltin (TBT) in zebrafish
Modulation of electrical synaptic transmission in zebrafish retinal horizontal cells
From neurotransmission to retinal pathophysiology: unraveling the role of GABA receptors in retinal disease progression
Exposure to environmental endocrine disruptors and child development
Molecular characterization of three estrogen receptor forms in zebrafish: binding characteristics, transactivation properties, and tissue distributions
Analysis of the estrogen regulation of the zebrafish estrogen receptor (ER) reveals distinct effects of ERa, ERb1, and ERb2
Expression and estrogen-dependent regulation of the zebrafish brain aromatase gene
Diethylstilbesterol exposure in utero: a paradigm for mechanisms leading toa dult disease
Tributyltin induces oxidative damage, inflammation and apoptosis via disturbance of blood-brain barrier and metal homeostasis in cerebral cortex of rat brain: an in vivo and in vitro study
C-phycocyanin protects against acute tributyltin chloride neurotoxicity by modulatin glial cell activity along with its anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory property: a comparative efficacy evaluation with N-acetyl cysteine in adult rat brain
Dredging impacts on the toxicity and development of sediment quality values in a semi-arid region (Ceara state, NE Brazil)
Macular oedema due to letrozole: a first case report
Androgens upregulate cyp19a1b (Aromatase B) gene expression in the brain of zebrafish (Danio rerio) through estrogen receptors
Early regulation of brain aromatase (cyp19a1b) by estrogen receptors during zebrafish development
Structure of cone photoreceptos
Bisphenol A: human exposure and neurobehavior
Forward genetic analysis of visual behavior in zebrafish
Murine neocortical histogenesis is perturbed by prenatal exposure to low doses of bisphenol A
Effects of 17B-estradiol (E2) on aqueous organisms and its treatment problem: a review
A spectral model for signal elements isolated from zebrafish photopic electroretinogram
Behavioral genetic approaches to visual system development and function in zebrafish
Endocrine disruptors
Sex hormones and their effects in ocular disorders and pathophysiology: current aspects and our experience
Gonadal hormones and retinal disorders: a review
Zebrafish larvae as a model for the evaluation of inorganic arsenic and tributyltin bioconcentration
Channeling of red and green cone inputs to the zebrafish optomotor response
Assessment of endocrine disruptors effects on zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos by untargeted LC-HRMS metabolomic analysis
Differences in neuroretinal function between adult males and females
Relationships between aromatase and estrogen receptors in the brain of teleost fish
The electroretinogram: ERG. Webvision: the organization of the retina and visual system [Internet]
Zebrafish models in translational research: tipping the scales toward advancements in human health
G protein-coupled estrogen receptor expression in postnatal developing mouse retina
Microplastics in the environment: intake through the food web, human exposure and toxicological effects
Estrogen biology: new insights into GPER function and clinical opportunities
A global overview of endocrine disrupting chemicals in the environment: occurrence, effects, and treatment methods
Embryo developmental toxicity in marine medaka (Oryzias melastigma) due to parental and embryonic 17alpha-ethinylestradiol exposure
Actions of bisphenol A and bisphenol S on the reproductive neuroendocrine system during early development in zebrafish
Mechanism of bisphenol S exposure on color sensitivity of zebrafish larvae
Comparative the effect of bisphenol A and bisphenol S on the development and spectral sensitivity of cone photoreceptors in zebrafish larvae (Danio rerio)
Association of placenta organotin concentrations with congenital cryptorchidism and reproductive hormone levels in 280 newborn boys from Denmark and Finland
Association of placental organotin concentrations with growth and ponderal index in 110 newborn boys from Finland during the first 18 months of life: a cohort study
Estradiol and bisphenol A stimulate androgen receptor and estrogen receptor gene expression in fetal mouse prostate mesenchyme cells
Making the gradient: thyroid hormone regulates cone opsin expression in the developing mouse retina
Zebrafish ultraviolet visual pigment: absorption spectrum, sequence, and localization
Bisphenol A and human health: a review of the literature
Subacute and low-dose tributyltin exposure disturbs the mammalian hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis in a sex-dependent manner
Neuroprotection of retinal ganglion cells by agonism of the beta but not the alpha oestrogen receptor in the axotomized retina of male and female mice
Bisphenol A activates BK channels through effects on alpha and beta 1 subunits
Uptake of waterborne tributyltin in the brain of fish: axonal transport as the proposed mechanism
Female sex hormones exacerbate retinal neurodegeneration
Bisphenol A: an endocrine disruptor with widespread exposure and multiple effects
Develomental polychlorinated biphenyl mixture exposure promotes selective neural alterations: an immunohistochemical study in adult rat offspring
Neurodevelopmental low-dose bisphenol A exposure leads to early life-stage hyperactivity and learning deficits in adult zebrafish
Sexual dimorphism and aromatase in the rat retina
BPA-induced deregulation of epigenetic patterns: effects on female zebrafish reproduction
Estrogens counteract the masculinizing effect of tributyltin in zebrafish
Real-time PCR analysis of cytochrome P450 aromatase expression in zebrafish: gene specific tissue distribution, sex differences, developmental programming, and estrogen regulation
Xenobiotic substances such as PCB mixtures (Aroclor 1254) and TBT can influence swimming behavior and biotransformation activity (GST) of carp (Cyprinis carpio)
Impact of PCB mixture (Aroclor 1254) and TBT and a mixture of both on swimming behavior and body growth ane enzymatic biotransformation activities (GST) of young carp (Cyprinis carpio)
Early eye morphogenesis in the zebrafish, Brachydanio rerio
Early retinal development in the zebrafish, Danio rerio: Ligth and electron microscopic analysis
Disruption of thyroid hormone functions by low dose exposure of tributyltin: an in vitro and in vivo approach
G-protein-coupled estrogen receptor1 is involved in brain development during zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryogenesis
Oral exposure to tributyltin induced behavioral abnormalities and oxidative stress in the eyes and brains of juvenile Japanese medaka (Oryzias latipes)
Interference with systematic negative feedback as a potential mechanism for nonmonotonic dose-responses of endocrine-disrupting chemicals
Aromatase - a brief overview
Endocrine disrupting chemicals and sexual behaviors in fish - a critical review on effects and possible consequences
History on organotin compounds, from snails to humans
Retinotopic organizaiton of the developing retinotectal projection in the zebrafish embryo
Cone photoreceptor types in zebrafish are generated by symmetric terminal divisions of dedicated precursors
Estrogen, via ESR2 receptor, prevents oxidative stress-induced Muller cell death and stimulates FGF2 production independently of NRF2, attenuating retinal degeneration
Expression patterns of three estrogen receptor genes during zebrafish (Danio rerio) development: evidence for high expression in neuromasts
Systematic review: impact of bisphenol-A (BPA) exposure on human health
Early embryogenesis in zebrafish is affected by bisphenol A exposure
Subacute administration of tributyltin chloride modulates neurotransmitters and their metabolites in discrete brain regions of maternal mice and their F1 offspring
Tributyltin enhanced anxiety of adult male zebrafish through elevating cortisol level and disruption of serotonin, dopamine and gamma-aminobutyric acid neurotransmitter pathways
An absurd scenario in 2021: banned TBT-based antifouling products still available on the market
Developmental toxicity of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs): a systematic review of experimental data
Estrogen produced in the retina by brain aromatase plays a significant role in zebrafish eye development
Role of gonadal steroid hormones in the eye: therapeutic implications
Non-monotonic dose reponses in studies of endocrine disrupting chemicals: bisphenol A as a case study
Low dose effects and nonmonotonic dose responses for endocrine disruptors
Human exposure to bisphenol A (BPA)
Bisphenol-A and the great divide: a review of controversies in the field of endocrine disruption
Urinary, circulating, and tissue biomonitoring studies indicate widespread exposure to bisphenol A
Hormones and endocrine-disrupting chemicals: low-dose effects and nonmonotonic dose responses
Molecular mechanisms involved in the non-monotonic effect of bisphenol-a on Ca+2 entry in mouse pancreatic B-cells
Bisphenol A alters retinal morphology, visually guided behavior, and thyroid hormone levels in zebrafish larvae
17α−ethinylestradiol disrupts the ontogeny of the forebrain GnRH system and the expression of brain aromatase during early development of zebrafish
TBT (tributyltin) toxicity to the visual and olfactory functions of tigerperch (Terapon jarbua Forsskal)
Inhibition of voltage-gated sodium channels by bisphenol A in mouse dorsal root ganglion neurons
Effects of embryonic exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls on zebrafish (Danio rerio) retinal development
Bisphenol A affects axonal growth, musculature and motor behavior in developing zebrafish
Human exposure to bisphenol A and its analogues: understandings from human urinary excretion data and wastewater-based epidemiology
Bisphenol A exposure during early development induces sex-specific changes in adult zebrafish social interactions
Estrogen signaling in development: recent insights from the zebrafish
Comparative toxicological pathology in mammals and fish: some examples with endocrine disruptors
Endocrine disruption in the context of life cycles: perception and transduction of environmental cues
A pilot study on polycystic ovarian syndrome caused by neonatal exposure to tributyltin and bisphenol A in rats
Dopamine blocks carrier-mediated release of GABA from retinal horizontal cells
Neurochemical anatomy of the zebrafish retina as determined by immunocytochemistry
Tributyltin exposure causes brain damage in Sebastiscus marmoratus
Mouse retinal development: a dark horse model for systems biology research
PCB1254 exposure contributes to the abnormalities of optomotor responses and influence of photoreceptor cell development in zebrafish larvae
RNA-sequencing and pathway analysis reveal alteration of hepatic steroid biosynthesis and retinol metabolism by tributyltin exposure in male rare minnow (Gobiocypris rarus)
Insights and progress on the biosynthesis, metabolism, and physiological functions of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA): a review
Deficits in development of synaptic plasticity in rat dorsal striatum following prenatal and neonatal exposure to low-dose bisphenol A