Comparative Analysis of Posterior Approach Versus Anterior Approach for Posterior Tibial Plateau Fractures
Background:
Posterior tibial plateau fractures can lead to significant posttraumatic instability if not treated properly. It remains unclear which surgical approach achieves better patient outcomes. The objective of this systematic review and meta-analysis was to assess postoperative outcomes in patients undergoing anterior, posterior, or combined approach for posterior tibial plateau fractures.
Methods:
The PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, The Cochrane Library, and Scopus were searched for studies published before October 26, 2022, comparing anterior, posterior, or combined approaches for posterior tibial plateau fractures. This study followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses guidelines. Outcomes included complications, infections, range of motion (ROM), operation time, union rates, and functional scores. Significance was set at p < 0.05. Meta-analysis was conducted with STATA software.
Results:
In total, 29 studies with a total of 747 patients were included for quantitative and qualitative analysis. Compared with other approaches, the posterior approach for posterior tibial plateau fractures was associated with a better ROM and shorter operative time. The complication rates, infection rates, union time, and hospital for special surgery (HSS) scores were not significantly different between surgical approaches.
Conclusions:
The posterior approach for posterior tibial plateau fractures offers advantages such as improved ROM and shorter operative time. However, there are concerns regarding prone positioning in patients with medical or pulmonary comorbidities and indications in polytrauma cases. Further prospective studies are needed to determine the optimal approach for these fractures.
Level of Evidence:
Therapeutic Level III. See Instructions for Authors for a complete description of levels of evidence.
Tibial plateau fractures involving the posterior column are associated with high-energy injury and inherent instability. A thorough understanding of the fracture pattern is essential for surgical planning. The Schatzker classification is based on plain radiography. It does not encompass the posterior quadrant of the tibial plateau. Luo et al. developed the 3-column theory in 2010, as seen in computed tomography (CT) axial plane images and 3-dimensional reconstructions with a better understanding of the posterior column. The posterior column of the tibial plateau is further divided into 2 subcolumns, the posteromedial and posterolateral. These types of fractures may cause significant posttraumatic instability of the knee if not treated well.
Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) remains the gold standard of definitive treatment for posterior tibial plateau fractures; however, conventional reduction techniques are difficult to implement because of fracture location, morphology, and associated soft tissue injuries. The goals of surgical intervention are to restore joint congruence, achieve mechanical axis, improve function, and achieve mobilization. Yet, current recommendations still need to be made concerning the most effective surgical approach.
Posterior tibial plateau fractures can be challenging to treat because of difficulty in reducing the fracture and maintaining proper displacement using anterior approaches because the knee is in a flexed position. However, posteromedial and posterolateral surgical approaches often require extensive dissection, which can result in scarring, inflammation, and limited range of motion (ROM).
By contrast, the posterior approach allows for direct visualization of the fracture, leading to a more anatomic reduction and improved joint congruity. However, the posterior approach requires the patient to be in a prone position, which can present challenges in exposure and protection of the posterior neurovascular structures. The unfamiliar anatomy and the risk of injury to the popliteal artery and other structures make this approach more challenging and require experienced surgeons.
Previous literature has proposed additional surgical techniques, including femoral or fibular osteotomy approaches, both of which aim to increase visualization of both posterolateral fracture fragments and intraarticular pathologies such as meniscal tears. Some studies also suggested arthroscopic-assisted techniques during the procedure. No current recommendations exist regarding the optimal surgical approach to address these complex fracture patterns. Therefore, this systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to compare anterior approaches vs. posterior approaches in patients with posterior tibial plateau fractures.

Methods

Research Protocol and Search Question
The search protocol was based on the following PICO question: For patients with posterior column tibial plateau fractures (population of interest), does the anterior approach, compared with the posterior approach (comparator), have lower complication rates and better functional outcomes (outcome)? The review protocol was developed as indicated by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) statement guidelines and was registered with PROSPERO in October 2022 (CRD42022367689).

Search Strategy and Study Selection
We searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, The Cochrane Library, and Scopus for articles in a systematic approach using the combination of keyword and medical subject heading adjusted for each database. The most recent search was performed on October 26, 2022. A recursive search using bibliographies of obtained articles was performed additionally. We added and contact the original authors if the study was relevant.
We performed a 2-step review of all articles. Initially, 2 reviewers independently evaluated titles and abstracts by the search for eligibility. Second, 2 independent reviewers assessed the full text of relevant articles for qualification. All disagreements between reviewers were resolved through discussion.

Data Collection and Quality Assessment
Two reviewers extracted the following data: study characteristics (author, year of publication, region of study, data source, study design, and period of study), study arms, sample size, and patient characteristics. Data on preoperative displacement, fracture patterns, fracture dislocations, associated soft tissue injuries, quality of reduction (assessed using the radiographic Rasmussen score), secondary procedures, and surgeon experience level were collected.
The risk of bias and study quality was assessed by 2 reviewers independently using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale, while the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluations (GRADE) assessment was performed to evaluate confidence in effect estimates. All discrepancies were resolved by discussion.

Statistical Analysis and Quantitative Data Synthesis
Dichotomous outcomes, including complication and infection rates, were summarized using the pooled proportion of events, with corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) calculated by the Wilson method. The Freeman-Tukey transformation was used to stabilize variance to include studies with a zero event rate. Continuous outcomes, including the ROM, operative time, and union time, were calculated using the weighted averages with standard deviations. The effect size from each study and the 95% CIs are displayed in forest plots.
Data from each study were pooled using the DerSimonian-Laird random-effects model. The random-effects model provides more conservative estimates with wider CIs than fixed-effects models because it assumes that the analysis includes only a sample of all possible studies. In addition, the model accounts for both within-study variability (random error) and between-study variability (heterogeneity). Heterogeneity is a concern with meta-analyses and refers to a high degree of variability in study results. Heterogeneity was detected using χ2 and I2 tests. All analyses were conducted in Stata SE, version 17 (StataCorp LLC).

Results

Literature Search and Selection Process
A total of 139 articles were identified through database searching, and there were 4 additional records identified through other sources. After the removal of duplicates and screening for titles and abstracts, 33 full-text articles were reviewed for eligibility, with 29 studies included in the meta-analysis (Fig. 1).
Flow of identification, screening, eligibility, and inclusion.

Study Characteristics
Our meta-analysis included 12 case series and 17 cohort studies (5 prospective, 12 retrospectives) with a total of 747 patients. Table I reports the characteristics of included studies. All studies reported fracture pattern and classification type. All studies, except one, reported the follow-up duration, with the longest follow-up being 87 months. Four studies reported information on preoperative displacement. Seven studies reported information on fracture dislocation or associated soft tissue injuries. Eleven studies reported the quality of reduction with the radiographic Rasmussen score. Sixteen studies reported surgeon or institutional experience level. Figure 2 demonstrates the different incisions and approaches to the posterior tibial plateau with the detailed descriptions.
Study Characteristics Including Study Design, Location, Patient Characteristics, and Follow-up Time*
Author, Year	Country	Study Design	Fracture Pattern	AO or Schatzker Classification	Preoperation Displacement (mm)	Involve Fracture Dislocations or Soft Tissue Injury (Yes or No)	No. of Patients (n)	Anterior Approach (Method, Number)	 	Rodriguez-Buitrago et al., 2021	United States	Case series	Isolated medial tibial plateau fracture	Schatzker IV-AO/OTA 41B	Joint line depression > 1 cm (1.3 ± 0.6; range, 0.3-2.3) in 12/17 (63%) cases	Yes, lateral column impaction, 10; meniscal injury, 10; ligament injury, 11	16	Anterior midline incision, 16	 	Cheng et al., 2023	Taiwan	Retrospective study	Complex tibial plateau fracture	AO/OTA 41C, C1, 20; C2, 21; C3, 51	Nil	No	92	Arthroscopic anterior approach, 92	 	Chen and Wu, 2015	China	Case series	Posteromedial fractures, 7/posterolateral fractures, 8/posteromedial and posterolateral fractures, 6	Nil	Nil	Yes, avulsion of anterior cruciate ligament and tibia crest, 5; injury in meniscus, 4	21	Nil	 	Chouhan et al., 2019	India	Prospective cohort study	Sustained closed bicondylar tibial plateau fractures (AO/OTA 41-C3) involving the posterior column fragment and reversed sagittal slope	AO/OTA 41-C3	Nil	No	4	Nil	 	Gavaskar et al., 2016	India	Case series	Split depression lateral tibial plateau fractures (AO: 41-B3) with extension into the posterior column	AO/OTA 41-B3	Nil	No	21	Nil	 	Guo et al., 2022	China	Case series	Three-column tibial plateau fractures	Schatzker V, 69; Schatzker VI, 51	Nil	No	120	Anterior median incision, 60	 	He et al., 2013	China	Case series	X-rays and CT scans: posterior bicondylar tibial plateau fractures	Nil	Nil	No	8	Nil	 	Liang et al., 2018	China	Retrospective study	Posterolateral tibial plateau fractures	Nil	Nil	No	26	Arthroscopic anterior approach, 26	 	Lin et al., 2015	Taiwan	Case series	Posterior column tibial plateau fractures, 8 isolated PM fractures, 4 isolated PL fractures, and 4 PM and PL fractures	Nil	Nil	Yes, knee dislocation, 10	16	Nil	 	Lin et al., 2012	China	Case series	Complex 3-column fractures of tibial plateau	Schatzker V, 5; Schatzker VI, 7	Nil	Yes, collateral ligament injury, 2; cruciate ligament injury, 1; meniscus injury, 2	12	Nil	 	Lin et al., 2016	China	Case series	Three-column fractures of the tibial plateau	AO, 41-C3 Schatzker V, 6; Schatzker VI, 8	Nil	Yes, collateral ligament injuries, 2	14	Nil	 	Liu et al., 2021	China	Case series	Three-column fractures	7 cases of 3-column fractures	Nil	No	7	Nil	 	Luo et al., 2010	China	Prospective cohort study	Three-column fractures	Schatzker V and VI	Nil	No	29	Nil	 	Mao et al., 2021	China	Case series	Tibial plateau fractures involving the posterolateral column	Schatzker type V/VI, Schatzker type II	Nil	No	28	Extended anterolateral approach, 16; extended anterolateral combined with a medial approach, 12	 	Row et al., 2018	The United States	Retrospective cohort study	Multicolumnar tibial plateau fracture	AO/OTA 41C; C1, 2; C2, 2; C3, 24, Schatzker V and VI	Nil	Yes	28	Nil	 	Shen et al., 2019	China	Retrospective cohort study	Lateral tibial plateau fractures involving the posterolateral column	Schatzker type II	Bone separation and displacement, and the collapse depth is >12 mm	Yes, anterior cruciate ligament tibial insertion avulsion, 1; anterior cruciate ligament injury, 5; posterior cruciate ligament injury, 2; avulsion and rupture of medial collateral ligament of femoral medial condyle, 1	11	Anterolateral Transfibular neck osteotomy approach, 4	 	Sim et al., 2021	South Korea	Retrospective cohort study	Isolated posterolateral tibial plateau fractures	AO/OTA 41B	Nil	No	18	Extended anterolateral approach, 9; anterolateral transfibular approach, 3; transfibular approach and extended anterolateral approach, 2	 	Sinha et al., 2019	Indian	Prospective cohort study	Posterior tibial plateau fractures	AO/OTA 41C; C1, 6; C2: 34; C3: 20	Nil	No	60	Anterolateral approach, 30	 	Söylemez MS 2022	Turkey	Retrospective cohort study	Tibia plateau fractures associated with the posterior column	AO/OTA 41 C1, 7; C2, 3; C3, 5; B2.3, 1; B3.3, 9; Schatzker IV, 10; Schatzker V, 6; Schatzker VI, 9	Nil	No	25	Anterolateral approach with a medial midline incision, 25	 	Sun et al., 2015	China	Prospective cohort study	Tibial plateau fractures involving the posterolateral column	Schatzker II; AO/OTA 41-B3	Nil	No	41	Nil	 	Sun et al., 2017	China	Prospective cohort study	Tibial plateau fractures involving the posterolateral column	Schatzker II, 16	Nil	No	16	Extended lateral approach, 16	 	Tarng and Lin, 2019	Taiwan	Case series	Complex 3-column tibial plateau fracture with posterolateral articular injury	AO/OTA 41C; C1, 2; C2, 7; C3:7	Nil	No	16	Nil	 	Yao et al., 2020	China	Retrospective cohort study	Posterior column of tibial plateau fractures involve both posterolateral and posteromedial columns	Nil	Nil	Yes, anterior cruciate avulsion fracture, 2	13	Nil	 	Yin et al., 2020	China	Case series	Posterior column of tibial plateau fractures involve both posterolateral and posteromedial columns	AO/OTA 41-B3.1, 4; C1.2, 3; C2.2, 2; C2.3, 1; C3.1, 2; C3.3, 3	Nil	No	15	Nil	 	Yu et al., 2012	China	Retrospective cohort study	Posterolateral fracture of tibial plateau	AO/OTA 41-B1.1.4, 3; B2.2.4, 6; B3.1.2, 6	Limited preoperation displacement	No	14	Nil	 	Zhang et al., 2018	China	Retrospective cohort study	Flexion-valgus unicondylar tibial plateau depression	AO/OTA 41B	Nil	No	22	Novel lateral surgical approach, 22	 	Zhao et al., 2018	China	Retrospective cohort study	Tibial plateau involved the posterolateral fracture	Schatzker II, 9; Schatzker V, 6; Schatzker VI, 1, AO/OTA 41B, 9; AO/OTA 41C, 7	Nil	No	16	Extended anterolateral approach, 16	 	Chan et al., 2008	Taiwan	Prospective cohort study	Complex tibial plateau fractures involving posterior columns	Schatzker V, 8; Schatzker VI, 10	Preoperative fracture depression was 13.7 mm (range, 6-25 mm)	No	18	Arthroscopic anterior approach, 18	 	Chiu et al., 2013	Taiwan	Retrospective cohort study	Complex tibial plateau fractures involving posterior columns	Schatzker IV, 5; Schatzker V 2; Schatzker VI 18	Nil	No	25	Arthroscopic anterior approach, 25
Posterior Approach (Method, Number)	Combined Approach (Method, Number)	Sex (M/F)	Mean Age (Range)	Follow-up (mo)	Outcome	Radiographic Rasmussen Score (Quality of Reduction)	Secondary Surgical Procedures	Level of Experience of Surgeons or the Level of Hospitals	 	Nil	Nil	Nil	45.8 (19-67)	8.4 (3.9-15.25)	Mean articular step-off, radiographic union weeks, mean MPTA, posterior PA, condylar width, mean knee articular ROM, fWBT	Nil	No patients required a revision surgery or lysis of adhesions for knee stiffness; hardware was removed in 4 of 16 (25%) patients because of residual medial knee pain	Academic Level 1 trauma center	 	Nil	Nil	43/49	46.9	74.8 (24-180)	TPA, PA, Rasmussen score, complication	Mean score: 16.41 (39 cases were excellent, 51 cases were good, and 2 cases were fair)	Yes, debridement was performed in 2 cases because of deep wound infections	All surgical procedures were performed by a single surgeon (Y.-S.C.)	 	Posterior approach, 21	Nil	12/9	39.5 (28-68)	16.2 (12-24)	Time to union, Rasmussen score, whether collapse after reduction	Mean score: 15.6 (10-18)	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Nil	 	Posterior approach, 4	Nil	2/2	31 (22-43)	12	Radiographic union weeks, time for bony union, PPTA, MPTA, mean knee flexion, ROM, whether articular malreduction, knee society score, mOPT	Nil	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Tertiary-level referral center catering to most of the patients with trauma from all of Northern and Central India	 	Posterolateral approach (fibular neck osteotomy alone, 15; Gerdy tubercle osteotomy, 6)	Nil	14/7	39 (26-54)	32 (24-41)	Radiological fracture union, MPTA, LPSA, FTA, LPTA, condylar width, Tegner-Lysholm score, ROM	Nil	Yes, removal of K wire in 1 case because of loose of wire	Nil	 	Nil	Anterior median incision + posterior L-shaped approach incision, 60	65/55	39.3 (34.4-44.6)	Nil	Rasmussen score, knee function scores, postoperative ambulation time, fWBT SF-36, CR, HSS score, mOPT, intraoperative blood loss, postoperative drainage volume	L-shaped approach incision group: 27.0 ± 2.5; anterior median incision group: 21.0 ± 2.1	Nil	Grade-A Tertiary Hospital	 	Posterior inverted L-shaped approach, 8	Nil	5/3	46.4 (36-56)	28.1 (24-36)	Radiographic bony union time, full weight-bearing time, operation time, blood loss, range of motion, FTA, TPA, PA	Nil	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Nil	 	Nil	Nil	10/16	47.3 ± 2.7 (35-64)	24	Full weight-bearing time, operative time, hospital stay, complication	Mean score: 17.85	No, no secondary surgery was performed	All operations were performed by the same experienced surgeons	 	Direct posterior approach in the prone position, 16	Nil	10/6	41.5 ± 14.3	34.4 ± 9.6	Median extension and flexion degree, Lysholm score and Tegner activity score, ROM, Kellgran and Lawrence grade	Nil	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Academic medical center	 	Nil	Anterolateral approach combined with the posteromedial approach, 12	9/3	37.6 (25-63)	>12	Mean radiographic bony union time, PA, TPA, Rasmussen score, mFBT, ROM, HSS score, mOPT, mean intraoperative blood loss	Nil	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Grade A Tertiary Hospital	 	Nil	Anterolateral approach combined with the posteromedial approach, 14	14/0	37.3 (25-60)	13.6 (12-24)	Radiographic union weeks, PA, TPA, Rasmussen score, ROM, HSS score, mOPT, mean intraoperative blood loss, complications	16.0 ± 0.8	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Nil	 	Nil	Anterolateral + posteromedial incision, 7	Nil	Nil	25.7 (12-24)	Fracture healing time, fracture healing time, mOPT, intraoperative blood loss, ROM, HSS score	16.01 ± 0.27	Nil, 1 patient with traumatic arthritis was given symptomatic treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and pain symptoms were relieved after reduced weight-bearing activities	Nil	 	Nil	Anterolateral approach + posterior reversed L-shaped approach, 29	23/6	46.8 (22-62)	27.3 (24-36)	Mean articular step-off, mOPT, blood loss, quality of reduction and alignment, fracture healing, HSS score, the average radiographic bony union time, fWBT, SF-36, HSS score, lower-extremity measure, medial posterior slope angle (PAM), lateral posterior slope angle (PAL), FTA, TPA, ROM, complication	Nil	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Level 1 trauma center	 	Nil	Nil	13/15	48.78 (28-68)	22.5 ± 3.7	TPA, PA, Rasmussen radiological criteria, HSS score, ROM, mOPT, mean intraoperative blood loss, hospital stay, Lachman and knee valgus (varus) stress tests, fracture healing time	Schatzker II group: 16.00 ± 2.06Schatzker V/VI group: 84.91 ± 3.51	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Nil	 	Nil	Lobenhoffer approach and anterior lateral approach, 28	Nil	43 (19-62)	16.6 (12-34)	Radiographic union weeks, MPTA, PA, condylar width, ROM, average knee injury and osteoarthritis outcome score, complications	Nil	Yes, 1 patient required late bone graft, and exchange plating due to the nonunion in the medial side	3 level 1 academic trauma facility	 	Nil	Anterolateral + posterolateral approach, 7	8/3	40.5 ± 12.5 (19-61)	17.5 ± 5.0	Rasmussen score, ROM, HSS score, mOPT, mean intraoperative blood loss, knee valgus (varus) stress tests, Lachman test, pivot-shift test complication	Combined anterolateral and posterolateral group: 16.00 ± 2.56Transfibular neck osteotomy approach group: 15.25 ± 3.77	No, no secondary surgery was performed	No information	 	Posteromedial approach, 1	Transfibular approach and extended anterolateral approach and posteromedial 1, posteromedial + extended anterolateral  approach, 1	12/6	52.1 (19-69)	19.8	Mean articular step-off, MPTA, Tegner-Lysholm score, ROM, MFTA, posterior tibial slope angle, Lysholm scores, ROM	Nil	Nil	All surgeries were performed by 1 experienced orthopedic surgeon	 	Nil	Posteromedial approach and anterolateral approach, 30	54/6	42.15 ± 11.83	12	Radiographic union week, knee society score functional outcome, knee society score clinical outcome, mOPT, mean intraoperative blood loss, hospital stay, IKDC score, complications	Nil	Yes, 3 deep wound infections treated with antibiotics and regular debridement and 1 wound dehiscence treated with oral antibiotics	Tertiary level trauma center	 	Nil	Nil	21/4	41.5 (19-66)	15.9 (12-25)	Radiographic union weeks, Knee society score, ROM, mOPT, time to surgery, loss reduction, collapse of the reduced articular surface, complications	Nil	No, no secondary surgery was performed	All operations were performed by the same senior surgeon	 	Nil	Anterolateral approach and a posteromedial inverted L-shaped approach, 41	29/12	42.19 ± 3.54 (24-67)	52.5 ± 10.3	Radiographic union weeks, PA, FTA, TPA, ROM, HSS score, fWBT, SF-36, mOPT, mean intraoperative blood loss, complication	Nil	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Nil	 	Nil	Nil	10/6	46.31 ± 3.68 (34-60)	14.2 ± 1.3	Radiographic union weeks, PSA, TPA, ROM, HSS score, fWBT, mean intraoperative blood loss	Nil	No, no secondary surgery was performed	Single Level I trauma centre	 	Nil	A combined prone and supine approach, 16	5/11	53 (38-70)	34 (24-48)	Radiographic union weeks, MPTA, PA, condylar width, ROM, average knee Injury and osteoarthritis outcome score, complications	Nil	Yes, 3 surgical site superficial infection treated with debridement and oral antibiotics use	Nil	 	Posterior popliteal fossa S-shaped incision, 13	Nil	9/4	46.5 (33-64)	16 (12-18)	ROM, HSS score, fracture healing time, complications	Nil	Yes, 1 fat liquefaction and dehiscence of incision treated with expanding the wound	Nil	 	Posterior midline approach, 15	Nil	9/6	51.9 ± 7.1 (40-68)	20.9 ± 1.8	Mean articular step-off, radiographic union weeks, PA, TPA, HSS score, complications	Nil	Yes, medial plate was removed in 1 case because of implant irritation	All operations were performed by the same experienced surgeon and his group	 	Posterolateral prone approach, 14	Nil	10/4	53.3 (36-78)	35.1 (24-48)	Radiographic union weeks, MPTA, PA, ROM, HSS score, hospital stay, complications, hardware removal	Nil	Yes, 1 superficial wound infection treated with wound debridement	Nil	 	Nil	Nil	17/5	47.6	14	The mean distance from the tibial plateau rim to the most posterior screw, the mean angle between the plateau rim to the most posterior screw	Nil	No, no secondary surgical procedures	All operations were performed by the same physician (S.L.J.)	 	Nil	Nil	11/5	47 ± 12 (25-71)	13.1 (12-16)	PA, TPA, Rasmussen score, Tegner-Lysholm score, mean flexion degree and extension degree, knee valgus (varus) stress tests	17 ± 1.5	Nil	Nil	 	Nil	Nil	10/8	46.6 (22-83)	87 (28-128)	Rasmussen clinical score, ROM, complications	Mean score: 16.1 (12-18)	No, no secondary surgical procedures	All preoperative evaluations and surgical procedures were performed by a single surgeon (Y.-S.C.)	 	Nil	Nil	15/10	45.2 (21-79)	86 (60-108)	Rasmussen score, complications	Mean score: 15.8 (10-18)	No, no secondary surgical procedures	All preoperative evaluations and surgical procedures were performed by a single surgeon (Y.-S.C.)
FTA = femoral tibial angle, fWBT = full weight-bearing time, HSS = hospital for special surgery, IKDC = International Knee Documentation Committee, LPSA = lateral posterior slope angle, LPTA = lateral patella tilt angle, mOPT = mean operation time, MPTA = medial proximal tibial angle, OTA/OA = Orthopaedic Trauma Association/Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen, PA = proximal tibial angle, PSA = posterior slope angle, ROM = range of motion, and SF-36 = the short form (36) health survey.
The approaches for posterior tibial plateau fractures: Left section. Figs. 2-A and 2-B Posterolateral incision was made. The common peroneal nerve should be safely protected. This approach can be combined with the fibular head or Gerdy tubercle osteotomies followed by a submeniscal arthrotomy to expose the lateral plateau. Figs. 2-C and 2-D Anterior midline incision was made medial to the patella. Dissection to the medial parapatellar area was made to gain access to the medial spike of the fracture. Figs. 2-E through 2-H Anterolateral combined with posteromedial incision can be made to allow visualization of hyperextension 3-column fractures. The incision of anterolateral starts from the anterior edge of biceps femoris, approximately 5 cm above the crease of the knee joint and extend down to the level of the fibular head, approximately 3 cm outside the tibial tubercle. Arthroscopic inspection of a joint can be used to remove debris, examine structures, and assess lesions. A tool is used to elevate the joint while the surgeon observes: Right section. Figs. 2-A and 2-B Reverse L-shaped incisions for the posteromedial approach of the posterior column. The medial gastrocnemius was retracted laterally with the popliteal neurovascular bundle retracted and protected. Figs. 2-C and 2-D Direct posterior midline approach can be made just below the joint line. When the incision is extended across the joint line, it should be curved. The 2 heads of the gastrocnemius can be split. Figs. 2-E and 2-F Reverse L-shaped incisions for the posterolateral approach of the posterior column. The lateral gastrocnemius was retracted medially. It is crucial to identify the common peroneal nerve and protect with a loop. Figure 2 was drawn by Lo Ching.
The included studies were conducted in the United States (2 studies, n = 44), China (17 studies, n = 413), India (3 studies, n = 85), Taiwan (5 studies, n = 162), South Korea (1 study, n = 18), and Turkey (1 study, n = 25). Fourteen studies used the anterior approach (10 open surgery, 4 arthroscopic surgery), 9 studies used the posterior approach, and 11 studies used the anterior combined posterior approach.

Methodological Quality and Assessment of Risk of Bias
According to the ROBINS-1 assessment tool, 5 studies were with a moderate risk of bias, 11 studies were rated with a serious risk of bias, and 13 studies were rated with a critical risk of bias (Appendices 1 and 2; http://links.lww.com/JBJSREV/A970). Twelve studies did not report the underlying diseases of the patients, which raises some concerns about adjusting confounding factors. This was rated as raising some concerns. In addition, 12 studies excluded patients with open fractures, which may decrease the risk of selection bias. Five studies did not report the reasons for participant dropout, which could result in a moderate to serious risk of bias. The GRADE assessment is summarized in Appendix 3 http://links.lww.com/JBJSREV/A970.

Complication Rate
Figure 3 reports the result of complication rates in this study. The complication rate of the anterior approach group was 8% (95% CI, 0.02-0.16). The complication rate of the posterior approach group was 15% (95% CI, 0.05-0.29). The complication rate of the anterior combined posterior approach group was 13% (95% CI, 0.03-0.26). The overall complication rate was 11% (95% CI, 0.06-0.17, I2 = 74.17%). There were no significant differences in the 3 groups (p = 0.298). The detailed description of complications is reported in Appendix 4 (http://links.lww.com/JBJSREV/A970). No studies included reported popliteal artery nor other vascular injuries associated with the approach. The combined group had 1 case of common peroneal nerve injury reported, whereas none were reported in the other groups included in the study.
Forest plot comparing the complication rates of different approaches to posterior tibial plateau fractures. CI = confidence interval and ES = effect size.

Infection Rate
Figure 4 reports the result of infection rates in this study. The infection rate of the anterior approach group was 2% (95% CI, 0.00-0.04). The infection rate of the posterior approach group was 2% (95% CI, 0.00-0.08). The infection rate of the anterior combined posterior approach group was 3% (95% CI, 0.00-0.07). The overall infection rate was 2% (95% CI, 0.01-0.04, I2 = 0.00%). There were no significant differences in the 3 groups (p = 0.885).
Forest plot comparing the infection rates of different approaches to posterior tibial plateau fractures. CI = confidence interval and ES = effect size.

Range of Motion
Figure 5 reports the result of the range of motion (ROM) in this study. The ROM of the anterior approach group was 127.31° (95% CI, 121.09-133.52). The ROM of the posterior approach group was 130.25° (95% CI, 125.52-134.98). The ROM of the anterior combined posterior approach group was 121.45° (95% CI, 117.67-125.23). The overall ROM was 126.00° (95% CI, 123.05-128.94, I2 = 13.82%). There were significant differences between the 3 groups (p = 0.01).
Forest plot comparing the range of motion of different approaches to posterior tibial plateau fractures. CI = confidence interval.

Operation Time
Figure 6 reports the result of operation time in this study. The operation time of the anterior approach group was 143.48 minutes (95% CI, 133.42-153.54). The operation time of the posterior approach group was 70.92 minutes (95% CI, 41.66-100.18). The operation time of the anterior combined posterior approach group was 129.71 minutes (95% CI, 119.0-140.42). The overall operation time was 124.22 minutes (95% CI, 108.47-139.96, I2 = 61.05%). There were significant differences in the 3 groups (p < 0.01).
Forest plot comparing the operation time of different approaches to posterior tibial plateau fractures. CI = confidence interval.

Time to Union
Figure 7 reports the result of time to union in this study. The time to union of the anterior approach group was 13.40 weeks (95% CI, 11.96-14.84). The time to union of the posterior approach group was 13.02 weeks (95% CI, 11.86-14.19). The time to union of the anterior combined posterior approach group was 15.06 weeks (95% CI, 13.32-16.80). The overall time to union was 13.92 weeks (95% CI, 13.03-14.80, I2 = 48.23%). There were no significant differences in the 3 groups (p = 0.16).
Forest plot comparing the union time of different approaches to posterior tibial plateau fractures. CI = confidence interval.

Discussion
This systematic review and meta-analysis aimed to compare the effectiveness of anterior and posterior approaches in treating posterior tibial plateau fractures. The study found that the posterior approach resulted in greater postoperative ROM and shorter operative times compared with the anterior approach. However, there were no significant differences in complications, infections, union time, or HSS scores between the approaches. This is the first meta-analysis to compare various approaches for treating posterior tibial plateau fractures.
Posterior tibial plateau fractures are complex periarticular fractures that require restoration of the bone anatomy of the proximal tibia to avoid joint incongruence and limit joint mobilization. Posterior tibial plateau fractures may result in severe injury to the soft tissue structures and neurovascular bundles. Dissection of soft tissue structure around the knee is complicated with neurovascular structures, knee capsule, meniscus, ligaments, and tendinous attachments. To properly treat these fractures, it is important to restore the anatomy and limit movement of the knee joint to prevent further damage and promote healing. However, due to the complex nature of the soft tissue around the knee, surgical repair or reconstruction may be necessary to fully address the injury and ensure proper ROM after surgery. Our results showed that the posterior approach led to better ROM compared with other methods. This may be due to the ability to better preserve the soft tissue structures and neurovascular bundles during the surgery, resulting in less scarring and inflammation, and therefore allowing for a greater ROM postoperatively. In addition, the posterior approach may be better suited for addressing the specific anatomy and patterns of injury that can occur in posterior tibial plateau fractures. This approach allows for better visualization of the articular surface and allows for a more anatomic reduction of the fracture, which in turn leads to improved stability and better joint congruity. These factors may contribute to the improved ROM seen with the posterior approach. However, it is important to note that the decision on the surgical approach should be individualized and based on the specific characteristics of the fracture, the patient's condition, and surgeon experience.
Our research revealed that posterior approaches resulted in shorter surgical duration. There are several potential reasons why a posterior approach may have less operative time than an anterior or combined approach for posterior tibial plateau fractures. One reason is that the posterior approach allows for more direct access to the fracture site, which can make the surgery more efficient. In addition, the posterior approach generally requires less needed reduction with clamps or bone tamps of surrounding tissue due to the gravity while in the prone position, which can also contribute to a shorter operative time. Furthermore, the posterior approaches may require more experience compared with anterior approaches, and the results may be influenced by the learning curve. The increased operative time observed in anterior approaches could be attributed to less experienced surgeons selecting the approach that offers limited visualization, resulting in longer operative times with increased soft tissue dissection. Anatomical reconstruction and stable fixation of the articular surface in comminuted tibial plateau fractures can be challenging, particularly in anterior approaches where visualization may be poor. Although extending the anterolateral or anteromedial approach with an osteotomy of the femoral epicondyle has been suggested by some authors, it may not be sufficient in certain cases. In such cases, dissecting the meniscocapsular fibers can allow for central subluxation of the meniscus, significantly improving articular visualization and enabling anatomical reduction even in highly complex fractures.
A posterior combined anterior approach for the treatment of posterior tibial plateau fractures can lead to longer union time compared with an isolated posterior or anterior approach. This is because the surgery is more extensive and can cause more trauma to the tibial plateau and the surrounding soft tissues, which can lead to a longer recovery time. In addition, the posterior combined anterior approach may require more extensive fixation, which can also contribute to a longer healing time. Healing time may vary based on the main driving risk factors including patient baseline comorbid status, fixation technique, and vascular/soft tissue injury.
Bullock and Norris analyzed the current incidence of postoperative infections for Orthopaedic Trauma Association/Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen type C fractures of the tibial plateau. They showed a 6% of deep infections in these types of fractures. Norris et al. found that surgical site infections were more common around the proximal tibia than other knee injuries, possibly due to the thin soft tissue in that area. Henkelmann et al. demonstrated double the infection rate of 12.3% for postoperative proximal tibial fractures in their meta-analysis. Yet, the study included open fractures and did not specifically identify the presence of posterior column fracture or surgical approach. The most common bacteria culture was Staphylococcus aureus with or without resistance, followed by Pseudomonas, and Staphylococcus epidermidis, which correlates with the literature. Our study found an overall infection rate of 2% for posterior tibial plateau fractures, with a higher rate of 3% for combined anterior and posterior approaches. This may be explained by the possibility of prolonged surgery among the combined approaches and the need to shift from supine to prone or prone to supine surgery. The posterior approach may have the advantage of direct exposure, easy reduction of the fracture site, and maintenance of a generous posterior soft tissue envelope. Still, it needs the protection of the neurovascular structure. These structures include the common peroneal nerve, tibial nerve, popliteal artery, and vein. Therefore, developing an ideal approach to expose the posterior tibial plateau is challenging. Chan, Chiu, and Cheng et al. suggested using arthroscopic-assisted reduction and internal fixation as a surgical method for treating posterior tibial plateau fractures. The advantages of this technique include improved visualization and access to the fracture site, potentially reducing the risk of complications such as malunion or nonunion. It also allows for more accurate reduction and fixation of the fracture, which can lead to better outcomes and faster recovery. However, the disadvantages of this technique include the need for specialized equipment and training, as well as the potential for increased surgical time and cost. In addition, it may not be suitable for all types of posterior tibial plateau fractures. Luo and Sun et al. introduced the posteromedial inverted L-shaped approach for the posterior column tibial plateau fractures. The fracture site was exposed by elevating the medial head of the gastrocnemius, popliteus, and soleus, with the neurovascular bundle retracted laterally for protection. Although the disadvantage of this approach was the limited visualization in obesity or muscular patients. A direct posterior midline S-shaped approach was proposed by Brunner et al. and Connolly et al., the approach allowed retraction of the medial head of gastrocnemius and elevation of the origins of popliteus and soleus for better exposure of posterior column fragments.
However, Lin et al. noticed that the posterior approach might have some disadvantages for patients with polytrauma, especially patients with chest trauma and C-spine injury, because a prone position may be commonly needed. They found that the prone position may not be suitable for polytrauma patients with chest and cervical injuries and recommended alternative positions, such as the lateral or supine position, may be more appropriate for these patients to avoid compressing the lungs or causing further injury to the cervical spine. Moreover, imaging techniques such as CT and magnetic resonance imaging, are essential to accurately assess the extent of the injuries and plan the most appropriate treatment course, to avoid further harm, and improve treatment outcomes. Based on the results of this study, the posterior approach may be considered as the preferred surgical approach for posterior tibial plateau fractures in cases of single-system posterior trauma without polytrauma or significant soft tissue injuries, and with a surgeon who is comfortable performing the approach. Further studies are needed to determine the optimal approach for this type of fracture.

Strengths and Limitations
Although this is the first systematic review and meta-analysis of surgical approaches to address posterior tibial plateau fractures, several limitations must be addressed. First, the approach decision may be mainly chosen by fracture pattern, soft tissue viability, body habitus, and surgeon's experience. Second, patient cohorts consist of patients with both isolated injury and polytrauma, which may attribute to fracture healing potential and surgical timing. Third, the level of studies included varied from observational to prospective studies; however, strict inclusion criteria were used to maximize the accuracy of results. Using the PRISMA guidelines, expansive search terminology in 2 languages increased the quality of studies that met inclusion criteria. Fourth, the postoperative protocols for ROM and weight-bearing status were not accounted for because both factors attributed to postoperative stiffness and incomplete arc of ROM. In addition, compliance with the postoperative protocol must be considered, especially among patients with trauma. Finally, other important parameters that could affect the complications, such as simple and complex types of fractures, injury mechanisms including crushing injury or fall injury, and methods of reduction including closed vs. open, were not all provided in the studies included.
Our sample of studies mainly consisted of case series and cohort studies, which can lead to lower overall evidence quality. However, randomized controlled trials are infrequently conducted to compare surgical approaches, especially in tibial plateau fractures. It should be noted that there may be some bias present in this meta-analysis because of the nature of the included studies. To address these limitations, future studies should aim to conduct high-quality research with strong study designs that minimize potential methodological biases. Potential methodological biases in studies on surgical approaches for tibial plateau fractures include selection bias, reporting bias, performance bias, detection bias, publication bias, small sample sizes, and heterogeneous patient populations. Selection bias may occur when there are systematic differences between the characteristics of patients undergoing different surgical approaches. Reporting bias may occur when study results are not fully reported or only positive results are reported. Performance bias may occur when patients or surgeons are not blinded to the surgical approach being used, and detection bias may occur when outcome assessors are not blinded to the surgical approach being used. Publication bias may occur when studies with negative or null results are less likely to be published. Small sample sizes may make it difficult to draw meaningful conclusions, and heterogeneous patient populations may make comparisons between studies more challenging. In addition, future studies should also include longer-term follow-up to evaluate the incidence of secondary procedures, such as implant retrieval, heterotopic ossification, residual instability, and arthritis, to better inform clinical decision-making and improve patient outcomes. It may be necessary to consider the potential issues related to revision surgery, such as hardware removal and the need for a later total knee arthroplasty. Furthermore, it may be important to investigate the rate of popliteal artery injuries and nerve issues arising from the posterior approach. Surgeon comfort with this approach should also be considered. These issues should be addressed in future studies to provide a comprehensive understanding of the posterior approach and its potential drawbacks.

Conclusion
The posterior approach for posterior tibial plateau fractures is associated with a better ROM, shorter operative time, than anterior or combined procedures. Additional prospective studies are required to identify the appropriate surgical approach best to achieve fracture fixation of posterior column tibial plateau fractures. However, it should be noted that the prone position required for the posterior approach may not be suitable for all patients, particularly those with medical and pulmonary comorbidities. Furthermore, in certain indications such as polytrauma, the posterior approach may not be the preferred method of treatment.

Source of Funding
Funding source did not play a role in the investigation

Appendix
The supporting material provided by the authors is posted with the online version of this article as a data supplement at jbjs.org (http://links.lww.com/JBJSREV/A970). This content was not copyedited or verified by JBJS.
Investigation performed at the Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung Branch, Keelung, Taiwan
Disclosure: The Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest forms are provided with the online version of the article (http://links.lww.com/JBJSREV/A969).

References
Revisiting the Schatzker classification of tibial plateau fractures
Three-column fixation for complex tibial plateau fractures
Correlation of parameters on preoperative CT images with intra-articular soft-tissue injuries in acute tibial plateau fractures: a review of 132 patients receiving ARIF
Tibial plateau fracture characteristics: computed tomography mapping of lateral, medial, and bicondylar fractures
The incidence of posterior tibial plateau fracture: an investigation of 525 fractures by using a CT-based classification system
Arthroscopic-assisted inflatable bone tamp reduction for treatment of posterolateral tibial plateau fractures
Arthroscopy-assisted surgery for tibial plateau fractures: 2- to 10-year follow-up results
Arthroscopy-assisted reduction of posteromedial tibial plateau fractures with buttress plate and cannulated screw construct
Tibial condylar fractures. Impairment of knee joint stability as an indication for surgical treatment
Understanding GRADE: an introduction
The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) for assessing the quality of nonrandomised studies in meta-analyses
Probable inference, the law of succession, and statistical inference
Transformations related to the angular and the square root
Meta-analysis in clinical trials
Measuring inconsistency in meta-analyses
Anterior midline incision is a safe and effective approach for high-energy medial shear fractures of the tibial plateau
Staged prone/supine fixation of high-energy multicolumnar tibial plateau fractures: a multicenter analysis
Surgical options for posterior tibial plateau fracture
Effects of surgical treatment guided by the three-column classification method on knee joint function and postoperative complications in patients with tibial plateau fractures
Three-plate fixation through two incisions for three-column fractures of tibial plateau with complex posterior fractures
The application of a three-column internal fixation system with anatomical locking plates on comminuted fractures of the tibial plateau
Surgical strategy for anterior tibial plateau fractures in hyperextension knee injuries
Treatment of tibial plateau fractures involving the posterolateral column using the extended anterolateral approach
Surgical treatment of lateral tibial plateau fractures involving the posterolateral column
Combined approaches for fixation of Schatzker type II tibial plateau fractures involving the posterolateral column: a prospective observational cohort study
Reinforcement strategy for lateral rafting plate fixation in posterolateral column fractures of the tibial plateau: the magic screw technique
Posterior popliteal fossa S-shaped incision with double-window approach in treating posterior column of tibial plateau fractures
A modified direct posterior midline approach for the treatment of posterior column tibial plateau fractures
Low-energy fracture of posterolateral tibial plateau: treatment by a posterolateral prone approach
Flexion-valgus unicondylar tibial plateau depression fracture pattern: classification and treatment
Effects of expanded anterolateral approach for tibial plateau fractures involved the posterolateral column
A posterior inverted L-shaped approach for the treatment of posterior bicondylar tibial plateau fractures
Complex bicondylar tibial plateau fractures with reversed tibial slope: our experience with a fracture-specific correction strategy
The extended posterolateral approach for split depression lateral tibial plateau fractures extending into the posterior column: 2 years follow up results of a prospective study
Fixation of posterior tibial plateau fracture with additional posterior plating improves early rehabilitation and patient satisfaction
Prone and direct posterior approach for management of posterior column tibial plateau fractures
A combined prone and supine approaches for complex three column tibial plateau fracture with posterolateral articular injury
Arthroscopic-assisted reduction and internal fixation for complex tibial plateau fracture: radiographic and clinical outcome with 2- to 15-year follow-up
Three-column subdivision for isolated posterolateral tibial plateau fractures and perspective surgical approaches
Posteromedial plate application using medial midline incision for complex tibia plateau fractures: a retrospective study
ROBINS-I: a tool for assessing risk of bias in non-randomised studies of interventions
Fractures of the tibial plateau
Revisiting the management of tibial plateau fractures
Posterior tibial plateau fracture treatment with the new WAVE posterior proximal tibia plate: feasibility and first results
Anterolateral versus modified posterolateral approach for tibial plateau fractures with involvement of the posterior column: a cadaveric study
How can the articular surface of the tibial plateau be best exposed? A comparison of specific surgical approaches
Improved visualization by central subluxation of the lateral meniscus in comminuted lateral tibial plateau fractures
Prevalence and influencing factors of nonunion in patients with tibial fracture: systematic review and meta-analysis
Risk of surgical site infections in OTA/AO type C tibial plateau and tibial plafond fractures: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Infection following fractures of the proximal tibia: a systematic review of incidence and outcome
Open reduction and fixation of medial Moore type II fractures of the tibial plateau by a direct dorsal approach
The posterior shearing tibial plateau fracture: treatment and results via a posterior approach
The timing of fracture treatment in polytrauma patients: relevance of damage control orthopedic surgery
The effect of head injury on fracture healing. A quantitative assessment