Potential causes and associated conditions with anti-sperm antibody production among infertile males: a systematic literature review
This study systematically reviews the literature to explore the potential causes of anti-sperm antibody (ASA) production among infertile men. A comprehensive search of PubMed was conducted in December 2024, utilizing keywords such as “anti-sperm antibody,” “immunologic infertility,” and related terms. The search yielded 2215 studies, which were screened by title and abstract, excluding 1857 studies. A total of 358 full-text articles were assessed for eligibility, and finally, 51 studies were included. Twenty-three thousand one hundred eight patients were involved in the included studies; 22,702 patients were infertile, and 406 were fertile controls. Infectious disease were the most commonly investigated causes of ASA production including chlamydia trachomatis infection with 9 studies. History of vasectomy and vasectomy reversal with 9 studies, varicocele (7), cryptorchidism (5), Inguinal hernia repair and other genital or inguinal surgeries (5), HPV infection (4), and seminal bacterial community and culture (4) were other potential investigated causes. Adeno-associated virus, mumps, congenital absence of vasa, testicular microlithiasis, testicular sperm extraction, testicular torsion, and testicular trauma were other causes that their correlation with ASA was explored. Vasectomy emerged as the most frequently studied factor significantly correlated with ASA production. Other conditions, like psychogenic anejaculation, prostatitis, and Buerger’s disease, were also associated, though findings on some factors remain controversial. This study highlights the diverse potential causes of ASA production in infertile males, categorized into infectious, autoimmune, inflammatory, and anatomical conditions. However, the variability in results underscores the need for further research with larger populations to clarify the underlying causes of ASA production in male infertility.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12865-025-00740-5.

Background
About 15% of couples worldwide are affected by infertility. Male factors account for nearly half of the cases. The immune system can significantly impact male infertility. Male immune infertility is defined as infertility caused by anti-sperm antibodies (ASA) production. The World Health Organization (WHO) emphasizes that ASA presence, without disrupting sperm function, is insufficient for diagnosing sperm autoimmunity. The prevalence of ASA in infertile men varies significantly, with reported rates ranging from 9 to 36%. This variability is likely due to differences in diagnostic methods and the heterogeneity of study populations.
Sperm-agglutinating antibodies were first detected in human serum and semen in 1954 and later associated with infertility in the 1970s. Despite extensive research, the clinical impact of ASA, the indications for testing, and the management of immune-related infertility remain controversial. ASAs affect fertility through multiple pathways. They can agglutinate sperm, reducing motility and impairing their ability to navigate the female reproductive tract. Additionally, ASA in females can block interactions between sperm and cervical mucus, preventing their ascent to the fallopian tubes. ASA interferes with acrosome reactions and zona pellucida binding, both critical steps for proper fertilization. ASA targeting sperm membrane proteins has been shown to alter ion channel function, disrupting the signaling cascades necessary for capacitation and hyperactivation.
Conditions such as testicular trauma, torsion, cancer, cryptorchidism, inflammation, obstruction, and varicocele have been reported as potential contributors to the presence of ASA; however, the association between these conditions and ASA remains controversial. ASA is mainly associated with obstructive azoospermia, especially post-vasectomy, where it is detected in 70–100% of men. Chronic bacterial infections like prostatitis also contribute to ASA development, possibly due to inflammatory damage and immune dysregulation. Additionally, viral infections have been suggested as a trigger. For example, some studies indicate a link between human papillomavirus (HPV) infection and ASA formation. Idiopathic cases of ASA remain a challenge as they lack identifiable causes, complicating diagnosis and management strategies. Despite these associations, the exact cause of ASA remains unknown.
Despite advancements in immunological techniques, diagnosing ASA remains challenging. Traditional tests, such as the immunobead binding test and mixed antiglobulin reaction (MAR), effectively detect ASA with limitations. Variations in sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility contribute to inconsistencies in identifying ASA as a definitive cause of infertility.
According to the discussed facts, the present study aimed to answer this question: What are the possible causes of ASA production among infertile males? by conducting a systematic literature review.

Methods

Study question and database search
Study question: What are the possible causes and associated conditions of ASA production among infertile males? To answer this question, the PubMed database was searched in December 2024 for articles that investigate the potential causes and correlations of producing ASA among infertile men, using search terms including “anti-sperm antibody, sperm immobilizing antibody, testicular immunity, immunologic infertility, immune infertility, immunocontraception, infertility, reproductive failure, man, men, male” and their synonyms including associated Mesh terms in several logical combinations.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The eligibility criteria for the present systematic review include: (1) English-language publications; (2) Human studies; (3) Cross-sectional studies; (4) Studies investigating the correlation between specific diseases, patients’ past medical or surgical histories, and clinical conditions with ASA production; and (5) Studies include infertile males as a whole or as part of the study population.
The following were excluded from the review: (1) Reviews; (2) Case reports; (3) Studies performed using animal models; (4) Studies investigating ASA only among women; (5) Studies that did not include infertile males or did not specify their fertility status; (6) Studies comparing different methods for detecting ASA; (7) Clinical trials investigating the effect of treatments, including medications and surgeries.

Data extraction
After an initial literature search, two independent authors (AF and MD) screened the title/abstract using the Rayyan.ai website. Any conflicts between these two authors were resolved by the third author (GM). Afterward, the available full text of the manuscripts was reviewed. Data extraction was conducted regarding each study’s first author, publication date, country, population, methods, and related diseases and conditions with ASA production.

Results

Research selection and data synthesis
As illustrated in Fig. 1, 2215 studies were identified by database searching. Studies were screened by their title and abstract, which resulted in the exclusion of 1857. Finally, 358 were assessed by their full text for eligibility, and 307 studies were excluded. Eventually, 51 studies met the study’s inclusion criteria and were included in the systematic review. The characteristics of the included studies are summarized in the supplementary Table.
PRISMA flow diagram

Methodological variance and geographical distribution
The United States is the leading country with, 13 included studies. Germany (8), China (5), Italy (4), United Kingdom (3), Iran (2), Japan (2), and Kuwait (2) were other countries with more than one included study. Netherlands, Czech Republic, Finland, Russia, Taiwan, Jordan, Sweden, Turkey, Israel, Indonesia, Australia, and Egypt were the other countries with only one included study.
Twenty-three thousand one hundred eight patients were involved in the included studies; 22,702 patients were infertile, and 406 were fertile controls. Forty-seven studies determined ASA in semen using various methods, including MAR, direct immunobead test, and ELISA. Thirteen studies also determined serum ASA. Eight studies had a fertile control group, and the remaining studies did not have a fertile control group.

Investigated causes and co-existed conditions
Vasectomy or vasectomy reversal (9),, Chlamydia trachomatis infection (9), Varicocele (7),, cryptorchidism (5), Inguinal hernia repair and other genital or inguinal surgeries (5),, HPV infection (4), seminal microbiota and culture (4), urinary tract infection or sexually transmitted disease (other than chlamydia) (3), testicular torsion (2), congenital absence of the vas (3), epididymo-orchitis (3), Leukocytospermia (5), Ureaplasma urealyticum infection (2), Mumps (2), smoking (2), Buerger’s disease (1), testicular microlithiasis (1), adeno-virus-related (1), prostatitis (1), appendectomy (1), elevated Anti-Mullerian hormone level (1), seminal PMN elastase (1), and other autoantibodies production (1) were investigated as potential or associated causes of producing ASA among infertile men (Fig. 2).
Investigated causes and associations of anti-sperm antibody production (WWW.Biorender.com)

Discussion

The association between ASA and infectious disease
Reproductive tract infections are thought to play a role in forming ASA by compromising the blood-testis barrier, leading to localized inflammation, and inducing epitope cross-reactivity with sperm. Research indicates that microbial infections can contribute to male infertility by eliciting immune responses, increasing inflammation, and promoting the accumulation of immune cells, proinflammatory cytokines, and chemokines. These processes, in turn, foster ASA production, which can harm germ cells and disrupt spermatogenesis.
Infectious diseases were the most commonly investigated causes of producing ASA among the included studies. Results indicated that about 31.4–33% of patients with a history of sexually transmitted disease or genitourinary infections are positive for ASA Also, Gubin et al. showed that having a history of genitourinary infection was associated with ASA production significantly. Chlamydia trachomatis, Ureaplasma urealyticum, HPV, mumps, and adeno-associated virus were investigated, especially in the included studies.
Five studies investigated the association between leukocytospermia and ASA. However, only one study revealed that leukocytospermia was significantly associated with higher ASA expression than fertile control. Also, this study revealed that the predominant subclass of immunoglobin among patients with leukocytospermia and pathogens in semen is IgM and IgA. Other studies showed no significant difference between leukocytospermia and ASA expression.

Chlamydia trachomatis and Urea plasma Urealyticum
Chlamydia is often identified as a significant cause of orchitis, primarily transmitted through sexual contact, with Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae being the most prevalent pathogens. During a Chlamydial infection, testicular cells may show DNA damage and disruptions in epigenetic regulation, leading to abnormalities in the sperm epigenome. Furthermore, the infection can induce increased leukocyte infiltration, compromise the blood-testis barrier, decrease sperm cell count, and reduce the size of seminiferous tubules, ultimately contributing to infertility.
As mentioned above, 9 studies investigated the association between active or previous infection by chlamydia trachomatis with ASA production. Among them, only one study demonstrated among patients with anti-chlamydial antibodies (IgG and IgA) in semen, there were significantly more patients who were ASA+. Also, one study showed that among patients who had anti-HSP60 antibodies in semen, there were more ASA + patients significantly. Other studies did not significantly correlate chlamydial infection and ASA production.
Only two studies evaluated the ASA in patients with Ureaplasma urealyticum infection. Despite another study, a study with a considerably larger population showed that patients with Ureaplasma urealyticum infection had significantly higher levels of ASA.

Viral diseases

Human papilloma virus
All 4 studies that investigated the relationship between HPV infection and ASA examined this correlation by detecting HPV DNA using the PCR technique in the semen of infertile patients. Garolla et al. demonstrated that 41% of patients with HPV + semen samples are ASA+. Another study compared ASA production between HPV-positive and negative groups and showed that in the HPV-infected group, the rate of ASA + patients was significantly higher than controls. However, one study revealed no statistical significance. HPV infection in semen can significantly reduce sperm motility. However, unlike other viral infections, HPV does not appear to impact sperm chromosomes. The detection of HPV DNA in sperm is often linked to the presence of ASAs of the IgA and IgG classes in individuals experiencing infertility.

Mumps and adeno-associated virus
The results of the included studies indicate that 23.5% of patients who had a history of mumps infection are ASA+; also, results of another study show that 2.9% of patients with positive ASA have a history of mumps orchitis. However, Verajankorva et al. showed that Patients with a history of mumps had a statistically significantly lower mean IgG and IgA than those without mumps. The adeno-associated virus had another virus whose association was investigated with ASA; however, no significant relationship was shown.

Specific structural conditions and surgeries
Results indicated that the serum of 11–71% of patients with congenital absence of the vasa were positive for ASA+. However, there was no ASA detection in the semen of these patients. However, one study indicated that ASA production among these patients seems to be lower than in patients with a history of vasectomy. Results of the present study indicate that ASA production does not have a significant association with testicular sperm extraction and testicular microlithiasis.

Vasectomy and vasectomy reversal
Vasectomy and vasectomy reversal were the most commonly evaluated causes in ASA + patients among the included studies. Studies estimated the positivity rate for ASA among previously vasectomized patients between 33 and 88%. Also, it seems that vasectomy reversal does not cause reduce in the rate of ASA positivity, as Patrizio P et al. showed that about 80% of patients who undergo vasectomy reversal remain ASA+. Almost all studies that investigated the relationship between vasectomy or vasectomy reversal with ASA production showed that in patients with a history of these two surgeries, the rate of ASA + patients is significantly higher. One study suggested that in patients with persistent infertility following vasovasostomy, partial obstruction is more likely to be the underlying cause than ASA, and such patients may benefit from a repeat reversal procedure.

Varicocele
Anti-sperm antibodies (ASAs) are significant in male infertility linked to varicocele, affecting 5%-15% of infertile men. They are associated with decreased semen quality, sperm agglutination, reduced motility, and impaired implantation. Higher ASA levels correlate with more severe varicose veins and more significant declines in sperm quality. Varicocele surgery may affect ASA levels variably without constantly impacting sperm quality. ASAs also limit reproductive recovery post-surgery. Varicocele alters the testicular immune environment, increasing inflammatory markers and oxidative stress, contributing to infertility. IL-6 is crucial in sperm damage and may serve as a biomarker. Further research is needed to optimize varicocele treatment for improved reproductive outcomes.
Al-Daghistani H et al. showed that about 27% of patients with a history of varicocele are ASA+. Also, one study demonstrated the incidence of varicocele among ASA + patients to be about 14%. However, no study among the included studies showed a significant relationship between fresh or previously treated varicocele with ASA. Also, one study demonstrated that patients with untreated varicocele had a statistically significantly lower mean of IgG ASA.

Inguinal hernia
As one of the most common surgeries, the role of inguinal hernia repair and its association with infertility has been investigated in several studies. Different methods for inguinal hernia repair include open herniorrhaphy and laparoscopic herniorrhaphy; however, they don’t affect post-operative infertility significantly and may result in transient azoospermia with short duration. Furthermore, using Mesh may affect patients’ fertility after operation. According to our study’s design, we did not include studies that investigated ASA production before and after inguinal hernia repair and only included studies that investigated the role of history of inguinal hernia repair on ASA. Negri et al. indicated that patients who underwent previous inguinal hernia repair have an increased rate of ASA production. However, Gubin D et al. showed that a history of inguinal hernia repair does not correlate with ASA.

Testicular torsion, testicular trauma, and cryptorchidism
Testicular trauma and torsion may be associated with ASA production with the probable disruption of the blood-testis barrier, which may expose sperm antigens to the immune system. However, none of the included studies investigating the correlation between a history of testicular torsion and ASA production indicated a significant association. Results about the history of testicular or genital trauma and ASA production are controversial. Iqbal P et al. showed that a history of genital trauma among ASA + patients was significantly more common as in ASA + group, the number of patients with history of genital trauma was 5.5 times higher than in the ASA- group (P-value < 0.001). Another study showed that about 30% of patients with a history of testicular trauma were ASA+. However, two studies indicated no correlation between ASA production and a history of testicular trauma.
There are controversial results about the association of cryptorchidism and ASA production. Urry R et al. showed patients with a history of cryptorchidism were ASA + significantly more than patients without. Furthermore, one study examined ASA by immunobead test and indicated patients with a history of unilateral cryptorchidism have binding spermatozoa to ASA-IgG in contrast with IgA; however, this value does not reach 50%. Also, this study showed that patients with a history of bilateral cryptorchidism don’t have any binding spermatozoa to ASA. However, some studies indicated no association between cryptorchidism and ASA production.

Autoimmune disease
The presence of ASA has been linked to various rheumatologic disorders, particularly autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Since these conditions involve dysregulated immune responses, individuals with rheumatologic diseases may be more likely to develop ASA due to immune system hyperactivity and loss of tolerance to self-antigens. Furthermore, shared inflammatory pathways, such as elevated cytokine levels and abnormal T-cell activity, may contribute to both autoimmunity and the production of ASA. However, according to our study’s inclusion criteria, we only included studies that investigated the ASA production among infertile males, so there were no studies investigating the ASA production among infertile males with SLE. Among the included studies, one study compared ASA + and ASA- patients for antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor, antimitochondrial, and anti-smooth muscle antibody and showed no significant difference. However, this study showed that Autoantibodies to thyroid microsomes are more frequent in ASA + infertile patients.

Buerger’s disease and smoking
One study investigated the relationship between Buerger’s disease and ASA in infertile men and demonstrated that the ASA level was positive in 25.6% of the patients with Buerger’s disease, which was significantly higher than controls. Omu et al. showed that about 20% of patients with a history of smoking are ASA+. However, Jarow et al. indicated that there was no significant correlation between smoking and ASA among infertile men.

Prostatitis, anti-Mullerian hormone, and auto-antibodies
One study investigated the history of prostatitis as a potential cause of ASA production and revealed that about 70% of patients with a history of prostatitis had significantly elevated titers of ASA.
One study investigated serum and seminal anti-Mullerian hormone levels in patients with ASA. Kucera et al. revealed no significant difference in serum levels of this hormone between ASA-positive and negative groups; however, the seminal level of anti-Mullerian hormone is significantly lower in ASA + patients with pathologic intra-acrosomal reactions than others.

Psychogenic anejaculation
Prolonged stasis of sperm in patients with psychogenic anejaculation may play a role in immune system stimulation to produce antibodies against sperm antigens. Severe asthenospermia after transrectal ejaculation in these patients may advocate this fact. Psychogenic anejaculation was the only psychological disorder that was investigated by the included studies. Almagor M et al. compared semen ASA in infertile patients with and without psychogenic anejaculation and revealed that ASA production was significantly higher among these patients compared with the control group.

Conclusion
ASA plays a significant role in immune-related infertility by interfering with normal sperm function and fertilization processes. These antibodies, produced in both men and women, target sperm cells as foreign invaders, leading to reduced sperm motility, impaired capacitation, and hindered acrosome reaction, which is essential for fertilization. The present study identified some potential causes and associated factors of ASA production, including vasectomy, psychogenic anejaculation, prostatitis, and Buerger’s disease. However, results about other factors, including HPV, chlamydial infection, testicular torsion, and testicular trauma, are controversial and require further assessments by conducting studies with larger populations.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Ali Faegh and Kaveh Haratian contributed equally as co-first authors.

Author contributions
Conceptualization and Supervision: GM; Methodology: AF; Data curation: AF, MD and GM; Writing—original draft: AF and RR; Writing—review and editing: GM, KH; Visualization: AM.

Funding
The authors did not receive any funding for the present study.

Data availability
More data about the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
NA.

Consent for publication
NA.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Immune infertility in men
World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for the examination and processing of human semen. 2021.
Antisperm antibody testing: A comprehensive review of its role in the management of immunological male infertility and results of a global survey of clinical practices
Sperm agglutinins in human semen and blood
Prognosis of fertility of men with sperm agglutinins in the serum
Effect of therapy on infertile couples with antisperm antibodies
Comparison of automated perimetry and pattern visually evoked cortical potentials in optic neuritis
Risk factors for antisperm antibodies in infertile men
The role of the antisperm antibodies in male infertility assessment after microsurgical varicocelectomy
ORIGINAL ARTICLE: incidence of antisperm antibodies in males with systemic autoimmune diseases
Incidence of antisperm antibodies in patients with carcinoma of the testis and in subfertile men with normogonadotropic Oligoasthenoteratozoospermia
Testicular trauma: potential impact on reproductive function
The incidence and influence upon fertility of antisperm antibodies in seminal fluid following vasectomy reversal
Pochernikov DG, Vinokurov EI, Strel’nikov AI, Iakovleva LV. [Experience in the treatment of autoimmune male infertility in patients with category 4 chronic prostatitis]. Urologiia. 2014;:75–6, 78–80.
Distribution of human papillomavirus and antisperm antibody in semen and its association with semen parameters among infertile men
Anti-sperm antibodies as an increasing threat to male fertility: immunological insights, diagnostic and therapeutic strategies
Value of serum antisperm antibodies in diagnosing obstructive azoospermia
Partial obstruction, not antisperm antibodies, causing infertility after Vasovasostomy
IgG antisperm antibodies attached to sperm do not correlate with infertility following Vasovasostomy
Functional role of spermagglutinating antibodies in men
Risk factors for male partner antisperm antibodies
Immunologic infertility: identification of patients with antisperm antibody
Low incidence of sperm antibodies in men with congenital absence of the Vas deferens
Chlamydia trachomatis infection in the genital tract is associated with inflammation and hypospermia in the infertile male of China
Chlamydia trachomatis detected by ligase chain reaction in the semen of asymptomatic patients without pyospermia or Pyuria
Immunology: antibodies to chlamydia trachomatis in semen and relationship with parameters of male fertility
The 60 kda heat shock protein in human semen: relationship with antibodies to spermatozoa and chlamydia trachomatis
Male immunity to the chlamydial 60 kda heat shock protein (HSP 60) - associated with semen quality?
Altered sperm function or sperm antibodies are not associated with chlamydial antibodies in infertile men with leucocytospermia
Antisperm antibodies and microorganisms in genital secretions-a clinically significant relationship?
Relationship between an asymptomatic male genital tract exposure to chlamydia trachomatis and an autoimmune response to spermatozoa
Seminal antibodies to human 60kd heat shock protein (HSP 60) in male partners of subfertile couples
Evaluation of serum testosterone, progesterone, seminal antisperm antibody, and Fructose levels among Jordanian males with a history of infertility
Analysis of 508 infertile male patients in south-western Finland in 1980–2000: hormonal status and factors predisposing to immunological infertility
Multivariant analysis of men from infertile couples with and without antisperm antibodies
Evaluation of the immunological cause of male infertility
Cryptorchidism is not a risk factor for antisperm antibody production in Post-Orchidopexy males with infertility
The incidence of antisperm antibodies in infertility patients with a history of cryptorchidism
Influence of inguinal hernia repair on sperm autoimmunity: the largest single center experience
Clinical characteristics of subfertile men with antisperm antibodies
Characteristics of men and women with Circulating antisperm antibodies in a combined infertility clinic in Kuwait
Distribution of human papillomavirus and antisperm antibody in semen and its association with semen parameters among infertile men
Association, prevalence, and clearance of human papillomavirus and antisperm antibodies in infected semen samples from infertile patients
Human papillomavirus prophylactic vaccination improves reproductive outcome in infertile patients with HPV semen infection: a retrospective study
Luttmer R, Dijkstra MG, Snijders PJF, Hompes PGA, Pronk DTM, Hubeek I, et al. Presence of human papillomavirus in semen in relation to semen quality. Hum Reprod. 2016. dev317.
Bacterial communities in semen from men of infertile couples: metagenomic sequencing reveals relationships of seminal microbiota to semen quality
Induction of immunoresponse by subclinical male genital tract infection?
Circulating Sperm-Agglutinating antibodies in azoospermic men with congenital bilateral absence of the Vasa deferentia
Sperm antibodies in serum and semen in men with bilateral congenital absence of the Vas deferens
Does leukocytospermia associate with poor semen parameters and sperm functions in male infertility?
Seminal immune response in infertile men with leukocytospermia: effect on antioxidant activity
Wan Y, Chen X, Chen Z, Liu W, Li S, Hua J. Impact of Ureaplasma urealyticum infection on semen parameters and in vitro fertilization outcomes in infertile men. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024;15.
Associations of Ureaplasma urealyticum infection with male infertility and intrauterine insemination outcomes
Secondary infertility: A neglected aspect of buerger’s disease
Testicular microlithiasis is not a risk factor for the production of antisperm antibody in infertile males
Presence of DNA of adeno-associated virus in subfertile couples, but no association with fertility factors
Clinical significance of sperm antibodies in infertility
Anti-Müllerian hormone in serum and seminal plasma in comparison with other male fertility parameters
Increased frequency of autoantibodies in men with sperm antibodies
The seminal Microbiome in health and disease
Wang F, Chen R, Jiang Q, Wu H, Gong M, Liu W et al. Roles of Sialic acid, AXL, and MER receptor tyrosine kinases in mumps virus infection of mouse Sertoli and Leydig cells. Front Microbiol. 2020;11:1292.
Chronic testicular chlamydia muridarum infection impairs mouse fertility and offspring development†
Association, prevalence, and clearance of human papillomavirus and antisperm antibodies in infected semen samples from infertile patients
Human papillomavirus prophylactic vaccination improves reproductive outcome in infertile patients with HPV semen infection: a retrospective study
Serial follow-up study of serum testosterone and antisperm antibodies in patients with non‐obstructive azoospermia after conventional or microdissection testicular sperm extraction
Serial ultrasonography, hormonal profile and antisperm antibody response after testicular sperm aspiration
Zhang L, Zhao X, Wang F, Lin Q, Wang W. Effects of Morinda officinalis polysaccharide on experimental varicocele rats. Volume 2016. Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine; 2016.
Male fertility and varicocoele: role of immune factors
Varicocele and antisperm antibody: fact or fiction??
Evaluation of serum testosterone, progesterone, seminal antisperm antibody, and Fructose levels among Jordanian males with a history of infertility
Male infertility following inguinal hernia repair: a systematic review and pooled analysis
Fertility after torsion of the spermatic cord
Fine structure and development of Sertoli junctions in human testis
Male fertility potential alteration in rheumatic diseases: a systematic review
Electroejaculation and assisted fertility in men with psychogenic anejaculation
Antisperm antibodies in men with psychogenic anejaculation