Humanized mouse model for vaccine evaluation: an overview
Animal models are essential in medical research for testing drugs and vaccines. These models differ from humans in various respects, so their results are not directly translatable in humans. To address this issue, humanized mice engrafted with functional human cells or tissue can be helpful. We propose using humanized mice that support the engraftment of human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) without irradiation to evaluate vaccines that influence patient immunity. For infectious diseases, several types of antigens and adjuvants have been developed and evaluated for vaccination. Peptide vaccines are generally used for their capability to fight cancer and infectious diseases. Evaluation of adjuvants is necessary as they induce inflammation, which is effective for an enhanced immune response but causes adverse effects in some individuals. A trial can be done on humanized mice to check the immunogenicity of a particular adjuvant and peptide combination. Messenger RNA has also emerged as a potential vaccine against viruses. These vaccines need to be tested with human immune cells because they work by producing a particular peptide of the pathogen. Humanized mice with human HSCs that can produce both myeloid and lymphoid cells show a similar immune response that these vaccines will produce in a patient.

Introduction
Developing a new vaccine is a very time-consuming and expensive process in which preclinical trials play a crucial role. Preclinical testing is done to collect sufficient data indicating the vaccine’s safety, potential efficacy, toxicity, and pharmacokinetic properties. Therefore, the selection of suitable animal models is very important. Using animals such as rodents and non-primates is unsuitable for preclinical studies due to the numerous species differences. Immunodeficient mice implanted with human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), i.e., hu-HSC and fetal bone marrow-liver-thymus (BLT), have the capacity to generate dendritic cells, B cells, T cells, macrophages, and natural killer (NK) cells. They show both humoral and cellular immune responses after infection with antigens. So, humanized mice are being explored to evaluate new vaccines as they are more faithful than conventional rodent models.
In this review, we summarize the reports on various humanized mouse models developed till now (Table 1, Fig. 1) and how their modification affects the production and proliferation of HSCs in them. We also include various studies on how humanized mouse have been used to study various immune responses and vaccine trials.

mRNA Vaccine
Messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines have high safety and can induce balanced cellular and humoral immunity without being subject to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) haplotype restriction. mRNA shows many advantages over subunit, killed, and live attenuated virus and DNA-based vaccines regarding safety, efficacy, and production. mRNA can encode any protein, enabling therapeutic vaccines to fight diverse infectious diseases and cancer. The working of the mRNA vaccine has been depicted in Fig. 2.
Various mRNA vaccines have recently been validated for their immunogenicity and efficacy. Synthetic mRNA is more translatable than ever due to RNA sequence engineering. For achieving therapeutic relevance, efficient in-vivo mRNA delivery is essential. Two basic approaches for the delivery are, first, ex-vivo mRNA loading in dendritic cells and then reinfusion of the transfected cells. Second, mRNA direct parenteral injection with or without a carrier.
Several mRNA vaccines induce robust CD8+ T-cell responses in addition to potent CD4+ T-cell responses. With only one or two low-dose immunizations, mRNA vaccines have the potential to generate strong neutralizing antibody responses. It is shown that mRNA vaccines have elicited immunity in animal models against various infectious diseases. In both cases, immunogenicity was more modest in humans than expected in animal models. Therefore, humanized mice models came into play for more predictable results.
Till now, only one mRNA vaccine has come in use, i.e., against coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). Human immune system (HIS)-humanized mouse model (“DRAGA”: HLA-A2.HLA-DR4.Rag1KO.IL-2RgcKO.NOD) is used to research COVID-19 showing the immunogenic effects of the virus-like that in humans.

Peptide Vaccines
Peptide vaccines use short peptide fragments to induce targeted immune responses in individuals. Accordingly, 20–30 amino acid sequences form an immunogenic peptide molecule that acts as an antigen determinant to activate sufficient cellular and humoral immunity. Thus, eliminating the induction of allergenic or reactogenic responses. The peptides produced are generally small; as a result, they produce a low immunogenic effect without a carrier molecule. Compared to conventional vaccines, manufacturing peptide vaccines are safe and cost-effective. The peptides are presented on patient MHC class I for cytotoxic T-cell activation and MHC class II for antibody production. The prediction of peptide presentation for HLA and mouse MHC is made using available algorithms. However, even if experimental mouse MHC presents the peptide, the same peptide does not need to be successfully presented on HLA. So, a humanized mouse model is needed to provide a human immune environment for more accurate predictions.
For a vaccine to be successful, it should protect against the disease and elicit a potent and prolonged memory humoral and cellular immune response. The working of the peptide vaccine has been depicted in Fig. 3.

B-cell response
The primary protection mechanism for many vaccines is the induction of epitope-specific antibodies. The targeted epitope often binds to the immunoglobulin G (IgG) antigen-binding fragment (Fab) region for infectious diseases. This results in certain effector functions that inhibit the infection by blocking host cell attachment or inducing pathogen-antibody complexes that are systemically cleared (i.e., by agglutination/opsonization). These effector functions include clearance or destruction of pathogen or pathogen-infected cells by complement activation or antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
Monomeric peptides are often poorly immunogenic as elicitation of protective antibodies requires affinity maturation, which is stimulated by cross-linking B-cell receptors (BCRs). The pathogen surface has multiple copies of the epitope that efficiently cross-links BCRs, stimulating affinity maturation. To improve the immunogenicity of desired peptide epitopes, they can be linked to virus-like particles or nanoparticles that can more efficiently cross-link BCRs. Certain microorganisms’ pathogenesis is linked to secreted or released factors like toxins (e.g., tetanus toxoid, anthrax toxin, or Staphylococcus aureus enterotoxin B) against which antibodies are produced. Thus, fragments and inactive variants of toxins can be used for vaccine production.

T-cell response
In the context of infectious disease, stimulation of epitope-specific T-cells clears and destroys the pathogen itself or infected host cells, thereby stopping the spread of infection. In immuno-oncology, immunotherapies that upregulate cancer-specific T-cells have shown great promise against blood cancers.
Epitope specific for T-cells are presented in the peptide binding groove of class I or class II MHCs on antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which is mediated by the T-cell receptors (TCRs). Antigens’ presentation and processing can occur via exogenous or endogenous pathways.
Peptides presented in class I and class II MHC follow a sequence pattern that contains anchor position and, thus, is in the interior of the peptide binding groove and away from TCR. The remaining residues interact with TCR and mediate epitope specificity. The loaded peptides into MHCs must have the sequence requirement, but that does not mean that the particular epitope will be immunogenic. To check the presentation of immunogenic sequences, the peptide should be repeatedly loaded onto APCs such as dendritic cells. For immuno-oncology, this can be the tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte expansion method, which can then be infused for adoptive transfer cell therapy in patients. In other situations, for stimulation of T-cell expansion, systemic delivery of peptide or DNA encoding the epitopes is sufficient. Furthermore, the structural features of the epitope-MHC-TCR ternary complex are essential for T-cell targeted vaccines as antigen specificity is dependent on it.

Humanized Mice and Immunity
The prediction of the development of protective immunity by vaccination is difficult as the immune condition is different for different patients (Fig. 4). A humanized mouse system reconstituted with the patient’s immune cells may help determine the immune condition of each patient. This system may not only show the effect of the specific vaccine, but it may also provide information regarding the patient’s immune response against the pathogen/cancer.

Reconstitution of Human Immune System in Humanized Mice with Hematopoietic Cells
Mice with HIS mice provide valuable tools for in-vivo study of human immunity. These mice are made by transplantation of human HSCs into non-obese diabetic (NOD) severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mouse model that led to the development of human lymphocytes and myeloid cells. Completely human-type antibody production in these mouse models has also been attempted with the transplantation of various types of HSCs.

Current HIS Mouse Models
Various humanized mice models with advantages and disadvantages are available for specific experimental needs. The mouse models are described below and summarized in Table 2.

SCID-Human Mouse
SCID mice are characterized by T and B lymphocyte impairment. Therefore, they have severe combined immunodeficiency, unable to mount an effective humoral or cellular immune response to foreign antigens. Usually, these mice show high susceptibility to infections from bacteria, fungi, and viruses that lead to death within the first 2 years of life if not treated by stem cell transplant. C.B-17 strain with autosomal recessive mutation that causes impaired lymphopoiesis became the first mouse model of SCID.
SCID mouse is unable to reject HSCs and human thymus when introduced together, enabling T cell development and maturation that mimics human physiology. Sub-lethally irradiated mice ensure complete reconstitution. Co-implantation of the thymus and liver in SCID mice shows prolonged reconstitution of human immune cells with minimum graft-versus-host disease.
SCID-human mice can provide great stride for immune response research but have certain limitations. Mature T cells are primarily restricted to implanted thymus/liver organoids. Also, functional immune responses that recapitulate the human immune response are not produced in these mice.

Human Peripheral Blood Leukocyte Mouse
First, human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were transferred into SCID-human in 1988. To a certain extent, effector functions are displayed as human immune cells persist for many weeks. Human peripheral blood leukocyte-SCID mice infected with hematopoietic cell tropic viruses such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 have led to productive infection and a significant decrease in CD4+ cell numbers.
Further, NOD mice showed better engraftment when crossed with SCID mice due to defects in the innate immune system. NOD/SCID mice with interleukin-2 receptor gamma (IL-2Rγ)-chain null mutation completely abrogate murine natural killer cell development and function, negatively affecting human lymphoid cell engraftment in mice. NOD/SCID/IL2rγ-null (NSG) or BALB/c-Rag2null IL-2Rγnull (BRG) backgrounds provide better reconstitution. These mice lack a primary immune response as de novo-multilineage hematopoiesis is absent. Graft versus host disease is a significant limitation in this model.

Hematopoietic Stem Cell Mouse
SCID and bg/nu/xid mice were intravenously infused with hematopoietic cells from human bone marrow, and it was found that bg/nu/xid mice showed higher levels of human progenitors. T cells, B cells, and macrophage progenitors can be isolated and cultured in vitro. HSC mice, when provided with human IL-3, erythropoietin, and human mast cell growth factor, showed increased differentiation of immature human bone marrow cells into erythroid, myeloid, and lymphoid lineages.
Human HSCs showed both short-term and long-term colony-forming potential in vitro and differentiation into lymphoid and myeloid cell lineages in NOD/SCID mice. CD34+ cells (widely accepted human HSC marker) can be isolated from fetal liver, liver, and umbilical cord blood, but they show varying levels of erythroid, lymphoid, and myeloid progeny.
Various backgrounds have been used for reconstitution with HSCs, including NOD/SCID, NOD/Shi-scid mice, NOD/Shi-scid/IL2Rγnull (NOG), and NSG, and comparative analysis has been performed. NSG and NOG mice had more significant engraftment than NOD/Lt-scid and NOD/Shi-scid in the thymus and spleen. When limiting doses of HSCs were given, female NSGs showed superior engraftment than males. Lack of antibody class switching due to lack of donor-matched HLA molecules in the mouse thymus is a significant drawback in HSC humanized mice.

DRAG Mouse
For the development of CD4+ T cells and B cells with antibody class switching, NOD.Rag1KO.IL2RccKO mice expressing HLA-DR4 (DRAG) were intravenously injected with CD34+ HSCs isolated from HLA-DR*0401 positive umbilical cord blood. DRAG showed higher levels of reconstitution of CD4+ T cells when compared against HLA mismatched recipients. However, there was no drastic increase in CD8+ cells.
On stimulation with either CD3/28 or phorbol myristate acetate/ionomycin, vigorous responses were shown by T cells isolated from DRAG mice similar to PBMCs from healthy volunteers. Immunoglobulin M levels were significantly higher, but B cell reconstitution was similar to control mice. The immunoglobulin class switching was confirmed as substantial levels of IgG reconstitution were seen in DRAG mice. Moreover, all human IgG subclasses were seen in DRAG mice plasma, with IgG2 being the most prevalent. This makes DRAG mouse a suitable model system for long-term vaccination studies.

Bone Marrow-Liver-Thymus Mouse
Co-implantation of fetal thymus/liver with simultaneously transplanting CD34+ fetal liver cells in NOD/SCID mice was first performed in 2006, later termed BLT for bone marrow-liver-thymus humanized mice. Due to an autologous human thymic environment, BLT allows the development of MHC-restricted T cells. Potent in vivo immune responses were seen in this mouse model and repopulate multiple organs, like spleen, lymph nodes, bone marrow, thymus, liver, lung, reproductive and digestive tracts with multilineages of immune cells, including neutrophils, monocytes, T cells, B cells, NK cells, and dendritic cells.
NSG background BLT mice showed superior reconstitution than NOD/SCID BLT mice. However, another study showed NOD/SCID BLTs having higher levels of intraepithelial lymphocytes in the large and small intestines.
In BLT mice, B cell reconstitution is considered primarily immature, and antibody class switching is defective. BLT mouse is proposed as a model for hypogammaglobulinemia because of inadequate antibody response.

Application of Vaccines in Humanized Mice
Mouse models have been of great advantage to understanding human immunology and drug testing for years. Even so, these models have several limitations. Humanized mouse models have the potential to overcome the current limitations of conventional mouse and animal models. New generation hu-mice have been used to investigate several vaccines against human pathogens, including dengue, malaria, HIV-1, hepatitis C virus (HCV) and Epstein-Barr virus. A study showed that the Hu-SPL-NSG model, when immunized with LSA3-FL or LSA3-729 (montanide ISA720 adjuvant), triggered T-helper-type 1 cellular immune response and production of human antibodies for LSA3-729 only. This result was similar to the clinical findings obtained. In another study, hu-HSC mice showed a neutralizing antibody response against dengue viral infection, while BLT and class-II transgenic mice showed HLA-restricted cellular responses. For HIV-1 infections, BLT mice showed weak antibody production and HLA-restricted cellular responses, while hu-HSC mice demonstrated varied antibody responses. HIS-DRAGA mice have also evaluated specific T and B cell responses after immunization with other pathogens like Zika, influenza, scrub typhus, malaria protozoans, and HIV. PBMC-transplanted NOG-hIL-4Tg mice also showed IgG production when vaccinated with keyhole limpet hemocyanin or HER2 multiple antigen peptide (CH401MAP). Hu-HSC-liver mice demonstrated immune responses against HCV and hepatitis B virus infection.

Conclusion
In conclusion, the findings suggests that humanized models could be cost-saving and relevant alternative for early evaluation of vaccine candidates before clinical trials and thus, require further studies.
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
Evaluating human immune responses for vaccine development in a novel human spleen cell-engrafted NOD-SCID-IL2rγNull mouse model
Human immune responses and potential for vaccine assessment in humanized mice
Developing mRNA-vaccine technologies
mRNA vaccines: a new era in vaccinology
Protective efficacy of in vitro synthesized, specific mRNA vaccines against influenza A virus infection
Zika virus protection by a single low-dose nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccination
mRNA-based dendritic cell vaccines
Supraphysiologic control over HIV-1 replication mediated by CD8 T cells expressing a re-engineered CD4-based chimeric antigen receptor
Expression of HLA class II molecules in humanized NOD.Rag1KO.IL2RgcKO mice is critical for development and function of human T and B cells
Humanized mice mount specific adaptive and innate immune responses to EBV and TSST-1
Preclinical and clinical demonstration of immunogenicity by mRNA vaccines against H10N8 and H7N9 influenza viruses
Safety and immunogenicity of a mRNA rabies vaccine in healthy adults: an open-label, non-randomised, prospective, first-in-human phase 1 clinical trial
A Human-Immune-System (HIS) humanized mouse model (DRAGA: HLA-A2. HLA-DR4. Rag1 KO.IL-2Rγc KO. NOD) for COVID-19
Peptide vaccine: progress and challenges
Design and development of synthetic peptide vaccines: past, present and future
More than one reason to rethink the use of peptides in vaccine design
Vaccine adjuvants revisited
Accurate pan-specific prediction of peptide-MHC class II binding affinity with improved binding core identification
Gapped sequence alignment using artificial neural networks: application to the MHC class I system
Pan-specific prediction of peptide-MHC class I complex stability, a correlate of T cell immunogenicity
Peptide-based vaccines: current progress and future challenges
Effective treatment of staphylococcal enterotoxin B aerosol intoxication in rhesus macaques by using two parenterally administered high-affinity monoclonal antibodies
Combinations of monoclonal antibodies to anthrax toxin manifest new properties in neutralization assays
A single human monoclonal antibody that confers total protection from tetanus
Immune checkpoint targeting in cancer therapy: toward combination strategies with curative potential
Structure of the complex between human T-cell receptor, viral peptide and HLA-A2
Adoptive T-cell therapy for cancer
A multipeptide vaccine is safe and elicits T-cell responses in participants with advanced stage ovarian cancer
Significance of humanized mouse models for evaluating humoral immune response against cancer vaccines
Humanized mice for immune system investigation: progress, promise and challenges
Human hemato-lymphoid system mice: current use and future potential for medicine
Development of a human adaptive immune system in cord blood cell-transplanted mice
Generation of humanized mice for analysis of human dendritic cells
Critical assessment of human antibody generation in humanized mouse models
Humanized mice for the evaluation of novel HIV-1 therapies
The SCID-hu mouse: murine model for the analysis of human hematolymphoid differentiation and function
Immunological reconstitution of sex-linked lymphopenic immunological deficiency
A severe combined immunodeficiency mutation in the mouse
Full reconstitution of the immune deficiency in scid mice with normal stem cells requires low-dose irradiation of the recipients
Long-term human hematopoiesis in the SCID-hu mouse
Transfer of a functional human immune system to mice with severe combined immunodeficiency
T-cell dysfunctions in hu-PBL-SCID mice infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) shortly after reconstitution: in vivo effects of HIV on highly activated human immune cells
Human xenograft models for virus infection
Breeding of a non-obese, diabetic strain of mice
The genetics and epidemiology of diabetes in NOD mice
Defective lymphoid development in mice lacking expression of the common cytokine receptor gamma chain
Role of natural killer cells on engraftment of human lymphoid cells and on metastasis of human T-lymphoblastoid leukemia cells in C57BL/6J-scid mice and in C57BL/6J-scid bg mice
High levels of human peripheral blood mononuclear cell engraftment and enhanced susceptibility to human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection in NOD/LtSz-scid/scid mice
A new xenograft model for graft-versus-host disease by intravenous transfer of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells in RAG2-/- gammac-/- double-mutant mice
Xenogeneic graft-versus-host-disease in NOD-scid IL-2Rγnull mice display a T-effector memory phenotype
hu-PBL-SCID mice: a model for human immune function, AIDS, and lymphomagenesis
SCID-hu-PBL: a model for making human antibodies?
The huPBL-SCID mouse as a means to examine human immune function in vivo
Human regulatory T cells control xenogeneic graft-versus-host disease induced by autologous T cells in RAG2-/-gammac-/- immunodeficient mice
Use of immunoglobulins in the prevention of GvHD in a xenogeneic NOD/SCID/γc- mouse model
Engraftment of immune-deficient mice with human hematopoietic stem cells
Cytokine stimulation of multilineage hematopoiesis from immature human cells engrafted in SCID mice
Antigenic analysis of hematopoiesis. III. A hematopoietic progenitor cell surface antigen defined by a monoclonal antibody raised against KG-1a cells
Characterization and partial purification of human marrow cells capable of initiating long-term hematopoiesis in vitro
Purification of primitive human hematopoietic cells capable of repopulating immune-deficient mice
Functional differences between transplantable human hematopoietic stem cells from fetal liver, cord blood, and adult marrow
Identification of primitive human hematopoietic cells capable of repopulating NOD/SCID mouse bone marrow: implications for gene therapy
Hematopoietic repopulating ability of cord blood CD34(+) cells in NOD/Shi-scid mice
Functional human T lymphocyte development from cord blood CD34+ cells in nonobese diabetic/Shi-scid, IL-2 receptor gamma null mice
Human lymphoid and myeloid cell development in NOD/LtSz-scid IL2R gamma null mice engrafted with mobilized human hemopoietic stem cells
Complete reconstitution of human lymphocytes from cord blood CD34+ cells using the NOD/SCID/gammacnull mice model
Comparison of human cord blood engraftment between immunocompromised mouse strains
Reconstitution of a functional human immune system in immunodeficient mice through combined human fetal thymus/liver and CD34+ cell transplantation
Induction of robust cellular and humoral virus-specific adaptive immune responses in human immunodeficiency virus-infected humanized BLT mice
IL-2 receptor γ-chain molecule is critical for intestinal T-cell reconstitution in humanized mice
Propagating humanized BLT mice for the study of human immunology and immunotherapy
Human natural killer cells mediate adaptive immunity to viral antigens
Antiretroviral pre-exposure prophylaxis prevents vaginal transmission of HIV-1 in humanized BLT mice
Intrarectal transmission, systemic infection, and CD4+ T cell depletion in humanized mice infected with HIV-1
Superior human leukocyte reconstitution and susceptibility to vaginal HIV transmission in humanized NOD-scid IL-2Rγ(-/-) (NSG) BLT mice
NOG-hIL-4-Tg, a new humanized mouse model for producing tumor antigen-specific IgG antibody by peptide vaccination
Timeline showing the evaluation of humanized mice models. SCID, severe combined immunodeficient; NOD, non-obese diabetic; IL-2Rγ, interleukin-2 receptor gamma; BLT, bone marrow-liver-thymus; SCF, stem cell factor; GM, granulocyte-macrophage; CSF, colony-stimulating factor; IL-6, interleukin-6.
Liposome/nanoparticle mediated delivery of messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine and its working. Increased antibody production, and more effective T-cells killing infected cells after vaccination. ER, endoplasmic reticulum; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-alpha; IFN-γ, interferon-gamma; Pfn, perforin; TCR, T-cell receptor; APC, antigen-presenting cells.
Working of peptide vaccine. Increased antibody production, activation of macrophages, and more effective T-cells killing infected cells after vaccination. APC, antigen-presenting cells; VLP, virus-like particle; TCR, T-cell receptor; Pfn, perforin; IFN-γ, interferon-gamma; TNF-α, tumor necrosis factor-alpha.
Representation of humanized mice utilization in vaccine trial. SCID-hu, severe combined immunodeficiency-human; Hu-PBL, human peripheral blood leukocyte; Hu-HSC, human hematopoietic stem cell; BLT, bone marrow-liver-thymus.
Humanized mice models across the years
Baseline strains	Primary models	Second generation models	Recent/emerging models	 	Strain	Year	Strain	Year	Strain	Year	Strain	Year	 	SCID derived	SCID	1983	CB17-SCID	1992	SGM3	2003, 2010	NBSGW	2015	 	bg/mu/xid	1988	NOD-SCID	1995	BLT	2006, 2013	pRORγt-γc	2018	 	IL2Rγnull	1995	NOD-SCID IL2Rγnull	2002	SCF	2012	BLT-lung	2019	 	Ossicles	2012	 	IL-3/GM-SCF	2012	 	RAG1/2 -/- derived	RAG1/2-/-	1992	(BALB-c)-RAG2-/-IL2Rγnull	1998–2005	CSF-1	2011	BRGWv	2014	 	ILRγnull	1995	NOD-RAG2-/-IL2Rγnull	2013	TPO	2011	MISTRG	2014	 	IL-3/GM-CSF	2011	BRGF	2016	 	Ossicles	2012	BRGSF	2017	 	SRG-15	2017	 	IL-6	2017	 	BRGST	2018	 	NFA2	2018
SCID, severe combined immunodeficient; NOD, non-obese diabetic; BLT, bone marrow-liver-thymus; IL-2Rγ, interleukin-2 receptor gamma; IL, interleukin; GM, granulocyte-macrophage; SCF, stem cell factor; CSF, colony-stimulating factor.
Humanized mouse models and immune responses
Model	Mouse strain	Transplanted tissue	Immune response	Isotypes	Advantages	Disadvantages	Reference	 	SCID-hu	SCID	Co-implantation of human fetal liver and thymic fragments under kidney capsule	No primary immune response	IgG	Abundant T cell lymphopoiesis	Surgical implantation needed; requires human fetal tissue; no multilineage hematopoiesis; poor peripheral T cell engraftment		 	Hu-PBL	SCID; NOD-SCID; NOG; NSG; BRG; NCG	Intraperitoneal injection of human PBMCs	No primary immune response	IgM; IgG	Easy preparation; immediate use; good T cell engraftment	No multilineage hematopoiesis; graft versus host disease		 	Hu-HSC	SCID; NOD-SCID; NOG; NSG; BRG; NRG; DRAG	Injection of HSC and CD34+ cells from cord blood/fetal liver/bone marrow/mobilized peripheral blood	Antigen specific humoral and cellular responses	IgM; IgG	Easy to prepare; multilineage hematopoiesis; mucosal human cell engraftment	No human HLA restriction with the exception of HLA class I transgenic mice		 	BLT	SCID; NOD-SCID; NSG; NRG	Human fetal liver and thymic fragments co-implantation with injection of CD34+ cells from fetal liver	Antigen specific humoral and cellular responses	IgM; IgG	Multilineage hematopoiesis; T cell maturation in autologous thymus; HLA restriction; mucosal human cell engraftment	Surgical implantation needed; human fetal tissue required	[, 78]
SCID, severe combined immunodeficient; SCID-hu, SCID-human; IgG, immunoglobulin G; Hu-PBL, human peripheral blood leukocyte; NOD, non-obese diabetic; NOG, NOD/Shi-scid/IL2Rγnull; NSG, NOD/SCID/IL2rγ-null; BRG, BALB/c-Rag2null IL-2Rγnull; NCG, NOD CRISPR Prkdc Il2r gamma; PBMCs, human peripheral blood mononuclear cells; IgM, immunoglobulin M; HSC, hematopoietic stem cell; HLA, human leukocyte antigen.