Defining a public health approach to substance use: insights from a systematic scoping review and conceptual framework development approach
Background
Psychoactive substance use represents a significant global public health challenge, leading to diverse health, social, and environmental harms. Traditional punitive and commercial approaches have faced criticism for potentially worsening these harms and overlooking potential benefits. Consequently, there is an increasing global call for a comprehensive public health approach to address psychoactive substances, focusing on both supply and demand reduction. However, the core components of a public health approach remain unclear. We aimed to conceptualize a public health approach to psychoactive substances and describe its core values, goals, and activities.
Methods
We used a two-step process to develop a coherent and comprehensive conceptual framework. First we conducted a scoping review of academic and practice literature on a public health approach to psychoactive substances published between 1950 and 2023 (n = 230 English language records). We then conducted an iterative team-based synthesis of the review findings and expert public health knowledge to address gaps in extant literature using a structured conceptual framework development approach.
Results
This conceptual framework includes core values (i.e. social justice, health equity, evidence-informed), activities (i.e. legal and regulatory action, supports and services, prevention and education, advocacy, and research, monitoring, and evaluation), and goals (e.g. improving population health; addressing determinants of substance use, substance harms and substance policy related harms; countering carceral logics) that are central to a public health approach to psychoactive substances.
Conclusions
Our coherent and comprehensive framework incorporates international literature and is informed by contemporary values and goals with the aim of promoting a consensus understanding of this critical practice area. This framework can guide efforts to design, implement, and evaluate public health interventions that maximize benefits and mitigate harm associated with psychoactive substances.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12889-025-25402-4.

Introduction
Harms associated with psychoactive substances are a global public health issue. Recent data indicate high global consumption of alcohol (nearly 43% in 2016), tobacco (approximately 20% in 2024), and other drugs (256 million people or 5·8% of global population). Psychoactive substances are associated with a wide range of health, social, and environmental harms, signaling the urgent need for effective interventions.
Punitive and commercial approaches have been used to address psychoactive substances; however, they have been criticized for exacerbating harms and ignoring benefits of substance use for some people. Punitive approaches, including the criminalization and penalization of psychoactive substance use, have not significantly reduced supply and demand. Some substances, such as alcohol and tobacco, have been regulated through legalization and commercialization, with varying degrees of public health consideration, to disrupt illegal markets. Nevertheless, these approaches have also generated criticism due to loose regulations on pricing and marketing that may encourage consumption. In consequence, there is a growing need for a ‘public health approach’ to psychoactive substances, including in global drug control debates, with focus on both supply and demand. We operationalize a democratic-emancipatory understanding of a 'public health approach' in recognition of harms caused by past public health interventions, but acknowledge that the term has been used in public health scholarship in reference to restrictive-paternalistic approaches.
Recent attempts to define a public health approach have taken a number of forms, including a historical analysis and systematic review of academic literature, and a qualitative inquiry into the perspectives of healthcare providers. However, the core components of such an approach remain unclear. Our work builds on these efforts by expanding the scope of evidence to draw on global academic and practice literature between 1950 and 2023. Here, we move beyond knowledge summation to inform a conceptual framework that integrates existing knowledge with practical and academic expertise that reflects contemporary public health research and practice. Such a framework, whether in whole or in part, may be useful for those seeking to implement a public health approach. We asked, “What core values, goals, and activities underpin a public health approach to psychoactive substance use?” To answer this question, we conducted a scoping review and sequentially developed a conceptual framework that describes a public health approach to psychoactive substances. This paper outlines the key components of the framework.

Methods
The development of this conceptual framework comprised two phases. First, a scoping review was conducted to map the existing literature on a public health approach to substances. Second, the findings were subjected to an iterative, team-based synthesis to identify gaps in extant literature and highlight contemporary public health concerns that were not extensively published on (e.g. environmental concerns). This process was guided by Jabareen’s (2009) conceptual framework development approach.

Phase 1: scoping review
We conducted a scoping review using Joanna Briggs Institute methodology and reported using Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for scoping review (PRISMA-SCr). Scoping reviews allow for review of literature that has not been “comprehensively reviewed” or may be “large, complex or heterogeneous [in] nature.” We used this review and synthesis to inform our conceptual framework development using methods outlined by Jabareen (2009). Full details of our protocol are available elsewhere, and highlights are provided below. Institutional ethics review was not required.

Study selection criteria
We included academic and practice literature records that:
Had the primary objective or purpose to conceptualize, define, or describe a theoretical or real public health approach to psychoactive substance use;
Included substantive discussion about (1) legal and/or illegal psychoactive substances (e.g. alcohol, cannabis, opioids), (2) field of public health, and (3) a population-level approach;
Were research studies, commentaries, editorials, opinion pieces, reports, books, and book chapters that present or review research;
Were published in English.
We excluded:
Articles that did not focus on population health (e.g. delivery of clinical care to individual patients).
Conference abstracts and programs, letters and speeches to committees or organizations, budgets and annual reports, meeting minutes, website postings or blogs, media articles, newspaper articles, legislation or standing committee transcripts, and dissertations or theses;
Non-English records;
Full text not available through the University of Alberta’s extensive library holdings, Google Scholar, Google Books, or Google.

Data sources and searches
An expert health librarian (S.C.) executed a search on seven databases using controlled vocabulary, search terms (e.g. MESH, Emtree) and keywords representing the concepts “public health frameworks” and “psychoactive substances”. We limited searches to English language and human studies. The librarian conducted the original searches from inception to April 13, 2021, and performed an updated search on March 20, 2023 (see Supplementary Material for a sample search).
To identify practice literature, we used a targeted Google advanced search strategy to search websites of relevant national and international non-profit, civil society, and government organizations or agencies (see Supplementary Material for list). Supplementary searches were also conducted using Google Scholar, the University of Alberta Government Information Archive and the University of Alberta Health Sciences Grey Literature Collection (see Supplementary Material for search strategy). Practice literature was searched from June 17 to July 21, 2021. We also screened the reference lists of all included peer-reviewed and practice literature to identify any records not captured in the above searches.

Study selection
All identified records were managed in Covidence (Veritas Health Innovation, Melbourne, Australia) and Google Drive (Alphabet Inc., California, USA) for title/abstract and full-text screening. Duplicates were removed. Two independent reviewers assessed the titles and abstracts of peer-reviewed records. One independent reviewer assessed titles and abstracts/executive summaries of the practice literature records and consulted the team as needed. After title/abstract screening, the full text of all records included in the title/abstract stage were screened by two independent reviewers against the study selection criteria. Any conflicts throughout the screening process were resolved through discussions with the team to reach consensus.

Data extraction
We developed a data extraction tool using Google Sheets (Alphabet Inc., California, USA). The data extraction tool included details on article and population characteristics, information describing a public health approach to psychoactive substances, as well as values, goals and activities (see Supplementary Material for complete list of variables). The tool was piloted by two independent reviewers (using three peer-reviewed and three practice records), and variables were refined as needed. For the remaining included records, two reviewers double-extracted the information and discrepancies were resolved through consensus.

Phase 2: data analysis and framework development
We drew on Jabareen’s (2009) approach to guide the development of our conceptual framework. This approach uses qualitative methods to build conceptual frameworks for multidisciplinary issues - appropriate for our conceptual framework given the interdisciplinary nature of both public health and substance use literature. Step One (Mapping the data) was completed via the scoping review. For Step Two (Reading and categorizing), we used descriptive content analysis, as per Sandelowski (2020), to inductively analyze the extracted data from each variable to understand key patterns and ideas across all records. In Step Three (Identifying and naming concepts), our interdisciplinary research team critically discussed the narrative summaries and identified concepts. Most concepts were guided by the literature identified during the scoping review; however, a few concepts were added during the framework development process to respond to contemporary public health issues and topics that have not been published extensively on, and were underrepresented or absent in the scoping review (e.g. commercial determinants of health). These concepts were identified based on a critical review of the identified literature and the team’s expertise and experience in public health and substance use, not as direct results from a literature synthesis. The research team consists of public health scholars working in a contemporary context where social justice and health equity are core values.
We compared and contrasted emerging concepts until relationships were well established, which reflected the ordering and ‘layering’ of the concepts in our framework into values, goals, and activities (Step Four). We continued to integrate, (re)synthesize and name the concepts to improve logic and sense (Steps Five and Six). We also presented the initial framework at an international drug policy meeting to validate the framework and elicit feedback (Step Seven).

Results

Included articles
We identified 10,334 records for screening; 363 peer-reviewed and 245 practice literature full-text records were assessed for eligibility (Fig. 1). An additional 36 records from the reference lists of included records were also assessed. A total of 230 records (168 peer-reviewed and 62 practice literature) were included (see Supplementary Material for complete list). The majority of records were published between 2010 and 2023 (n = 139, 60%) (Fig. 2) and about general psychoactive substances (Fig. 3).
PRISMA Flow Diagram outlining the literature search and selection process for Phase 1 (Scoping Review) of the conceptual framework development
Included Records on a Public Health Approach to Psychoactive Substances (1950-2023), by Record Type
Included Records on a Public Health Approach to Psychoactive Substances (1950-2023), by Substance

Conceptual framework for a public health approach to psychoactive substances
We designed this conceptual framework to emphasize elements of a public health approach to psychoactive substances that could be applied regardless of geography and substance. The framework is organized into the following sections: Values, Activities, and Goals. All sections are interconnected and dynamic. Values are defined as beliefs that inform and guide the development of goals and activities. Activities are specific and measurable actions that are required to achieve the goals of a public health approach. Goals include general and long-term guidelines of what a public health approach should achieve; they provide direction for a desired outcome. A summary of the framework is provided below in Fig. 4.
A conceptual framework for a public health approach to substances, outlining values, activities and goals

Underlying values of a public health approach to substances
Three core values underpin a public health approach to substances: social justice, health equity, and evidence-informed.

Social justice
Social justice is grounded in the belief of equal rights and opportunities for all. It has long been conceptualized as one of public health’s historical commitments and core values. Social, economic, political, and cultural environments must be considered in program planning and drug policy making in order to meet the needs of structurally vulnerable populations and prevent discrimination. Undoing harms associated with the criminalization of substance use should also be a key focus.

Health equity
As an extension of social justice, social and health inequities must be addressed, including ensuring equitable and fair access to high-quality services and supports, to support equitable health and socioeconomic outcomes for all people who use substances (PWUS). Any disparities in health and socioeconomic outcomes linked to race, gender, age, income, migration status, concurrent health issues, and geography demand action. Consequently, decolonization, anti-racism, gender inclusivity, and human rights principles guide a public health approach.

Evidence-Informed
When possible, ethically-justified policies and practices should be informed and evaluated by rigorous available evidence (scientific and lived experience), responsive to diverse and local contexts. However, we recognize that this can be difficult, particularly in the context of psychoactive substances where timely action is often required on imperfect or contested evidence. Therefore, policies should be adopted and coordinated across all levels of government, disciplines, and sectors with mechanisms in place to allow for review and amendment as new evidence emerges. A measure of proportionality must be also be taken in recognition that evidence is “socially positioned and value-laden.” Public health monitoring data should be used to plan the scale and scope of interventions to ensure they are commensurate with disease burden and aligned with population need.

Main domains of activity within a public health approach
All activities must flow from robust and good governance. Since the supply and demand of psychoactive substances are governed by legal and regulatory frameworks at the global, national, regional, and local levels, governing bodies must work in concert to advance this approach. Good governance will inform policy development and evaluation, cross-sectoral coordination, resource allocation for public health infrastructure, and oversight of public health strategies. Ultimately, a core challenge will be to create governance structures and processes that prioritizes the values, activities, and goals of a public health approach to address supply and demand considerations, while withstanding commercialization pressures.
Grounded in good governance, we identified five domains of activity needed to achieve the goals of a public health approach to substances: (1) legal and regulatory action; (2) supports and services; (3) prevention and education; (4) advocacy; and (5) research, monitoring, and evaluation.

Legal and regulatory action
A public health approach includes legal and regulatory action at the global, national, regional, and local levels, ensuring proportionality to harm and upholding the rights of PWUS. Given the harms of prohibition, models of legalization and regulation may address health and social issues while reducing crime and improving consumer protection and quality control. Regulatory models should prioritize public health. Criminal penalties and civil sanctions must also be carefully assessed and monitored for applicability and appropriateness. Regulations, varying by jurisdiction, substance, and overarching legal framework, should balance reducing the harms of criminalization and commercialization with preventing or reducing the burden of disease. Regulations should address: (1) supply; (2) production and product regulation; (3) commercialization and marketing; (4) distribution and use; and (5) retail sales, pricing and taxation.

Supports and services
High-quality, publicly-funded health and social services and supports must be offered to address individual and population health needs. All services, including public health, primary care, treatment, mental health, and social services, must be evidence-informed, coordinated, and integrated to promote timely access. Targeted services should be tailored for structurally-vulnerable groups, including youth, women and gender diverse people, incarcerated people and those with concurrent mental health issues, as well as people experiencing housing instability, and people with diverse cultural, ethnic, and linguistic backgrounds. Quality service delivery involves continuing provider education and professional development, adequate human, financial and material resources, and ethically-justified and evidence-informed guidelines. All supports and services should take a non-judgmental, person-centered, and trauma-informed approach.

Prevention and education
Prevention and education activities must be multi-sectoral to support and promote healthy behaviours through knowledge and awareness, healthy environments, and healthy public policy. Activities may include mass media campaigns or universal and school-based prevention programs. Drug education targeted to key populations and the public is necessary to raise awareness, reduce stigma, and change social norms.

Advocacy
Advocacy includes both political advocacy (e.g. activities with the intent to change or inform policy) and public advocacy (e.g. activities with the intent to change public attitudes). Political advocacy is important to create and reform the policies that have an impact on the population generally, as well as on PWUS, whereas public advocacy can increase public awareness of key issues, change social norms, and influence public opinion. Those with lived/living experience of substance use, including families of PWUS, should be deeply involved in advocacy efforts.

Research, monitoring, and evaluation
Enhanced research, monitoring, and evaluation are needed in the field. This includes robust monitoring of substance-related patterns, harms, and service use, with timely and transparent access to data. There is a demonstrated need for multi-method and interdisciplinary scientific research, particularly on understudied topics such as the experiences of women who use drugs, PWUS in middle to low-income countries, and racialized populations, and research to identify effective approaches for regulation, including optimal policies related to lobbying, marketing, advertising, distribution, and taxation. Routine evaluation must assess impacts of regulatory and policy changes.

Main goals of a public health approach to substances
The framework articulates several goals of a public health approach. They include: (1) improving population health; (2) addressing determinants of substance use, substance harms and substance policy related harms; (3) reducing stigma and discrimination; (4) ensuring equitable access to services; (5) empowering people who use substances and wider communities; (6) countering carceral logics; and (7) protecting ecological health.

Improving population health
A public health approach to substances has the primary goal of improving population health outcomes. This includes reducing acute and chronic morbidities, mortality and indirect health risks linked to acute toxicity events and substance-related complications. A public health approach also recognizes that substance use occurs along a spectrum from beneficial to harmful patterns of use whereby some PWUS are at greater risk for substance-related harms than others. Drawing on a ‘vulnerable populations approach,’ a public health approach should include both universal and complementary targeted strategies to support the health of the wider population and those “at risk of risks.”.

Addressing determinants of substance Use, substance harms and substance policy related harms
A public health approach aims to address social, structural and commercial determinants of substance-related harms. Social determinants are “non-medical factors that influence health outcomes,” including housing and socioeconomic status. Structural determinants are “written or unwritten rules” that create and maintain power relations over vulnerable groups and impact their health (e.g. culture, laws, policies, regulations). Commercial determinants are “private sector activities that affect people’s health, directly or indirectly, positively or negatively,” such as corporate influence on government policy decisions. Strategies targeting these systemic and structural determinants to minimize harms are essential and must complement individual-level interventions.

Reducing stigma and discrimination
A public health approach seeks to reduce stigma and discrimination by improving inclusion, support and compassion, improving access to services and reducing harms. Key strategies include education and advocacy, changing social norms, and viewing substance use as a health issue rather than a criminal/moral failure. However, stigma reduction is complex. While de-normalizing some substances like tobacco has reduced consumption, excessive denormalization can have unintended consequences like reduced help-seeking. A careful balance is needed.

Ensuring equitable access to services
All programs, services and supports must be designed and delivered using low-barrier models, with additional targeted interventions for equity-deserving groups. Enhanced accessibility may include integrating or co-locating services, reducing existing barriers to care, and ensuring services are readily available and affordable. Meaningful inclusion and engagement with PWUS support the development of programming that is relevant, appropriate and accessible.

Empowering people who use substances and the wider community
Meaningful community inclusion and engagement must include substantive engagement with PWUS, their support networks and the wider community, ensuring diverse perspectives. PWUS must be fairly compensated for their time and expertise, and recognized as key decision-makers. Community engagement and empowerment across all domains of this framework is critical for the relevance and effectiveness of interventions. Dedicated spaces for engagement and addressing engagement challenges should be prioritized.

Countering carceral logics
Countering carceral logics is an emerging area of focus for public health. It refers to opposing “a punishment mindset” that includes control through criminal and formal sanctions, and violence. These logics permeate healthcare, housing, and social services, and are present in many existing drug policies, including the criminalization and penalization of substance use. They have also been historically observed within public health practice, including surveillance of individuals diagnosed with communicable diseases and involuntary commitment. By countering carceral logics, a public health approach respects civil liberties, the pursuit of happiness, and human rights by prioritizing non-coercive strategies that address social harm.

Protecting ecological health
Recognizing that human and environmental health are fundamentally intertwined, a public health approach limits ecological harms from drug economies and production, including the cultivation, manufacturing and post-consumer waste of cannabis, coca and tobacco; narco-deforestation; and groundwater contamination from synthetic drug production. Because climate change and natural disasters can precipitate problematic substance use and disrupt service access, prioritizing ecological protection may benefit both planetary and public health.

Discussion
Based on our analysis of selected references, we developed a conceptual framework that describes the core values, goals, and activities of a coherent and comprehensive public health approach to all psychoactive substances. This framework builds on past efforts to describe a public health approach by integrating global practice literature and conceptualizing an approach that spans all levels of governance and forms of psychoactive substances. Although we have tried to develop a conceptual framework that can be applied across settings and substances, we recognize the importance of social context in population health interventions. We believe this framework, like other guiding frameworks in public health, can be used as a starting point for actors interested in adapting a public health approach. We expect that efforts aligning with this framework will look different in different settings and some components may not be feasible, even if they are optimal for population health outcomes.
A historical challenge to adopting a public health approach has been the lack of a consistent approach that spans all psychoactive substances and geographical locations. The dichotomy of legal and illegal substances is one critical challenge. We have attempted to develop a framework that outlines principles that are relevant for all psychoactive substances. We took this approach given scholars’ critiques of the arbitrariness of the current drug classification system which is not based on risk of harm and in recognition of many regional drug policies which have racist origins. We acknowledge that articulating a coherent and comprehensive framework for a public health approach to psychoactive substances does not eliminate all implementation barriers. Understanding the implementation context is critical. Additional context-dependent challenges, such as existing stigma around substances, limited public support in some areas, limited human and material resources, varying political will and public interest, regional commercial interests, and challenges with cross-sectoral and multi-jurisdictional coordination, must be addressed. While drug policy can be guided by evidence, it is also a domain of moralities which are often dependent on social and cultural contexts. Therefore, we expect that values may also influence how this framework is conceptualized and applied by others. There is also a need for increased research on the determinants of policy reform towards a public health approach to substances and the cost benefit of this approach. This knowledge will help identify key factors that support change and the contexts in which these factors are most effective.
We also recognize many historic and contemporary examples of carceral actions and interventions taken in the name of public health that have caused harm, particularly to structurally vulnerable populations. These challenges raise some questions about whether the field of public health is currently equipped to address substance-related issues. Much work is needed to educate the current and future public health workforce on the values, goals, and activities of a public health approach to psychoactive substances and equip them with the understanding, skills, competencies, and tools needed to advocate for better outcomes for all PWUS.
The complexity and breadth of a public health approach can seem overwhelming, making it difficult to determine where to begin. A ‘small wins’ strategy, drawing from Weick’s (1984) work on wicked problems, can generate momentum towards a coherent approach that minimizes health harms and maximizes population-level benefits. Addressing social problems through small changes can help overcome inertia and allow for more timely changes, less risk, and greater public acceptance. To successfully employ a small wins strategy, all wins (e.g. actions with concrete outcomes or in-depth changes) must be identified, valued, and assessed to determine if they support the scaling up and accumulation of wins. Communicating the series of small wins and their results to key partners can help mobilize further action. By employing such a strategy, we believe it is possible to overcome some implementation challenges.

Limitations
We only included English-language records. Although only 17 records were excluded for being published in a different language, it is possible that these records could contribute new knowledge of a public health approach. Because we focused on English texts, most of the literature was published in the Global North. We acknowledge that this may not be representative of other perspectives, particularly those in the Global South. Our focus on published academic and practice literature also excludes other forms of knowledge, such as Indigenous knowledge which is primarily shared as oral histories and not as written records. Most included records were from high-income countries and it is possible that some framework elements may not be generalizable to low and middle-income settings. The diversity and variety of records and their focus (e.g. substance, population, legal frameworks) made the synthesis of data and the development of a single conceptual framework difficult. Nevertheless, the findings from this paper are novel due to the integration of both academic and practice literature in the development of a conceptual framework, and it may serve as a foundation for future adaptations.
We have not addressed the political determinants of policy change, but acknowledge that policy actors will need to navigate the social and political norms of their settings. Achieving optimal public health policy has become increasingly difficult in some regions since the COVID-19 pandemic. Exploring these political determinants of policy change, particularly in the context of a public health approach to substance use, is an important area for future research.
We also recognize the disproportionate impacts of drug policy, criminalization, and substance-related harms on Indigenous populations. These impacts are rooted in colonization, land dispossession, and ongoing discrimination and racism. A limitation of this work is the exclusion of other forms of knowledge, like Indigenous knowledge, and a lack of articles focusing on Indigenous peoples’ interests. Indigenous-led responses to psychoactive substances are needed as part of a public health approach and further work is needed to develop these responses globally.

Conclusions
By critically analyzing and synthesizing academic literature with insights from global practice literature and public health expertise, our framework represents a significant step forward in conceptualizing a public health approach to substances. The coherent and comprehensive framework proposed in this paper presents an ‘optimal’ public health approach and could be useful for comparing current approaches across specific psychoactive substances and jurisdictions. Such comparisons enable actors to compare ‘what is’ to ‘what should be’ to further a more fulsome public health approach.

Supplementary Information

Abbreviations
PWUS
People who use substances
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Authors’ contributions
EH conceived and designed the study. SC, NDG, AM, KS, and BK conducted the literature search. NDG, AM, KS, EC, GD, LRG, TI, JCOA, HM and JN contributed to study screening and data extraction. HM, NDG, RMH, JN, TI, and EH analyzed the data. HM, NDG, RMH, JN and EH led drafting of the manuscript. All authors provided edits to the manuscript and approved the final manuscript. EH provided overall supervision and acquired funding. HM, NDG, RMH, JN and EH had full access to and verified all data in the study. All authors had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

Funding
This work is funded by the Canadian Public Health Association. HM receives doctoral funding from the Pierre Elliott Trudeau Foundation, and Killam Trusts. EH receives funding from the Canada Research Chairs program through a Tier 2 Canada Research Chair in Health Systems Innovation.

Data availability
Data are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
World Health Organization. Global status report on alcohol and health. 2018. https://iris.who.int/bitstream/handle/10665/274603/9789241565639-eng.pdf?sequence. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
World Health Organization. Tobacco use declines despite tobacco industry efforts to jeopardize progress. 2024. https://www.who.int/news/item/16-01-2024-tobacco-use-declines-despite-tobacco-industry-efforts-to-jeopardize-progress#:~:text=Globally%20there%20are%201.25%20billion,1%20in%203%20in%202000. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. World Drug Report. https://www.unodc.org/res/WDR-2023/WDR23_Exsum_fin_SP.pdf. 2023. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
Alcohol as a risk factor for liver cirrhosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Addiction should be treated, not penalized
Legalization as more effective control? Parallels between the end of alcohol prohibition (1927) and the legalization of cannabis (2018) in Ontario, Canada
Cannabis legalization in Canada: reflections on public health and the governance of legal psychoactive substances
The global movement towards a public health approach to substance use disorders
UNAIDS. A public health and rights approach to drugs. 2015. https://www.unodc.org/documents/ungass2016/Contributions/UN/UNAIDS/JC2803_drugs_en.pdf. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Chair’s summary of the thematic discussions on the implementation of all international drug policy commitments, following-up to the 2019 Ministerial Declaration. 2024. https://www.unodc.org/documents/commissions/CND/CND_Sessions/CND_67/Documents/ECN72024_CRP1.pdf. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
A scoping review of unintended harm associated with public health interventions: towards a typology and an understanding of underlying factors
Autonomy, paternalism, and justice: ethical priorities in public health
Dark logic’: theorising the harmful consequences of public health interventions
What is a public health approach to substance use? A qualitative systematic review and thematic synthesis
Substance use as a public health issue: a critical review of the Canadian literature, 1896–2020
Defining a public health approach to substance use: perspectives from professionals and practitioners across Canada
Building a conceptual framework: philosophy, definitions, and procedure
PRISMA extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation
Guidance for conducting systematic scoping reviews
Public health approaches to substance use: a scoping review protocol
Whatever happened to qualitative description?
Canadian Drug Policy Coalition. Getting to tomorrow: Ending the overdose crisis. 2013. https://www.drugpolicy.ca/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/CDPC2013_en.pdf. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
World Health Organization. The public health dimension of the world drug problem. 2019. https://syntheticdrugs.unodc.org/uploads/syntheticdrugs/res/library/treatment_html/The_Public_Health_Dimension_of_the_World_Drug_Problem.pdf. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
Chapados M, Gagnon F, Lapointe G, Tessier S, April N, Fachehoun RC, Samuel O. Legalization of non-medical cannabis: A public health approach to regulation. 2017. https://www.inspq.qc.ca/sites/default/files/publications/2233_legalization_non_medical_cannabis_summary.pdf. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
Alcohol and drug treatment systems in public health perspective: mediators and moderators of population effects
Health Canada Expert Task Force. Report 2: Recommendations on the federal government’s drug policy as articulated in a draft Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS). 2021. https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/about-health-canada/public-engagement/external-advisory-bodies/expert-task-force-substance-use/reports/report-2-2021.html. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
Approach to protecting workers from opioid use disorder and overdose related to occupational Exposure, Injury, and stress: APHA policy statement number 202012
Chief Public Health Officer of Canada. Preventing problematic substance use in youth. 2018. https://www.canada.ca/content/dam/phac-aspc/documents/corporate/publications/chief-public-health-officer-reports-state-public-health-canada/2018-preventing-problematic-substance-use-youth/2018-preventing-problematic-substance-use-youth.pdf. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
Pugh T, Netherland J, Finkelstein R, Frederique K, Meeks SM, Sayegh G. Blueprint for a public health and safety approach to drug policy. 2013. https://media.nyam.org/filer_public/56/f7/56f782cc-2fbb-4b8f-8399-8fe7e7f71617/3371_dpa_nyam_report_final_for_web_v2.pdf. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
From drug prohibition to regulation: a public health imperative
Promotion of smoking cessation in developing countries: a framework for urgent public health interventions
Emerson B, Haden M. Public health and the harm reduction approach to illegal psychoactive substances. In: Quah SR, editor. International encyclopedia of public health. 2nd ed. Academic; 2017. pp. 169–73.
Social construction and the evidence-based drug policy endeavour
A proportionality approach to the ethics of drug policy
What is good governance in the context of drug policy?
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. Informal Scientific Network statement: United Nations general assembly special session on drugs. 2016. p. 8. https://www.unodc.org/documents/ungass2016/Contributions/Civil/Informal_Scientific_Network_Statement/POST_SN_meeting_draft_FINAL.pdf. Accessed 27 October 2025.
COVID-19 and treating incarcerated populations for opioid use disorder
Cannabis legalization in state legislatures: public health opportunity and risk
World Health Organization. International Standards for the Treatment of Drug Use Disorders: Revised edition incorporating results of field-testing. 2020. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/international-standards-for-the-treatment-of-drug-use-disorders. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
Applying principles of injury and infectious disease control to the opioid mortality epidemic in North America: critical intervention gaps
Civil society involvement in harm reduction drug policy: reflections on the past, expectations for the future
Drug use disorders: impact of a public health rather than a criminal justice approach
Into the ordinary: non-elite actors and the mobility of harm reduction policies
Drexler K, Burden J. Treating substance use disorders in the same way we treat other chronic diseases. 2020. https://www.hsrd.research.va.gov/publications/forum/spring20/default.cfm?ForumMenu=spring20-1. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
Transcending the known in public health practice: the inequality paradox: the population approach and vulnerable populations
World Health Organization. Social determinants of health. 2024. https://www.who.int/health-topics/social-determinants-of-health#tab=tab_1. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
Keeping it political and powerful: defining the structural determinants of health
World Health Organization. Commercial determinants of health. 2023. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/commercial-determinants-of-health. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
Strategies to expand corporate autonomy by the tobacco, alcohol and sugar-sweetened beverage industry: a scoping review of reviews
The downside of tobacco control? Smoking and self-stigma: a systematic review
Stigma and self-stigma among women within the context of the German zero alcohol during pregnancy recommendation: a qualitative analysis of online forums and blogs
Engaging community partners to understand and respond to substance use and addiction crisis facing families in Prince Albert, Saskatchewan
Lopez CE. Abolish carceral logic. SJCRCL. 2022;17. https://law
Tuberculosis surveillance and its discontents: the ethical paradox
Involuntary commitment as carceral-health service: from healthcare-to-prison pipeline to a public health abolition praxis
Towards a social harm approach in drug policy
No public health without planetary health
European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. Environmental impact of synthetic drug production: analysis of groundwater samples for contaminants derived from illicit synthetic drug production waste. 2023. https://www.euda.europa.eu/drugs-library/environmental-impact-synthetic-drug-production-analysis-groundwater-samples-contaminants-derived-illicit-synthetic-drug-production-waste_en. Accessed 15 Apr 2025.
A narrative review on environmental impacts of cannabis cultivation
Theorizing big events as a potential risk environment for drug use, drug-related harm and HIV epidemic outbreaks
Climate change and substance-use behaviors: a risk-pathways framework
Craig P, Di Ruggiero E, Frohlich KL, et al. Taking account of context in population health intervention research: guidance for producers, users and funders of research. NIHR Journals Libr. 2018. 10.3310/CIHR-NIHR-01. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK498645/.
An action-oriented public health framework to reduce financial strain and promote financial wellbeing in high-income countries
World Health Organization. First Global Conference on Health Promotion. Geneva: WHO; c2025. Available from: https://www.who.int/teams/health-promotion/enhanced-wellbeing/first-global-conference. Cited 2025 Oct 10.
A public health approach to demand reduction
Decolonizing drug policy
Urgent and long overdue: legal reform and drug decriminalization in Canada.
Development of a rational scale to assess the harm of drugs of potential misuse
Persistent criminalization and structural racism in US drug policy: the case of overdose good samaritan laws
Studying moralities in drug policy: an editorial introduction
Small wins: redefining the scale of social problems
A small wins framework to overcome the evaluation paradox of governing wicked problems