A mechanistic evaluation of the metabolism disrupting potential of methyl tert-butyl ether
Graphical abstract
Highlights
Conducted a mechanistic assessment of the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE.
Reliable mechanistic evidence was limited to in vivo and in vitro mechanistic data.
Organization of data by KCs showed minimal signals of potential MDA activity.
No clear evidence MTBE acts via perturbing insulin signaling or lipid metabolism.
The current evidence base does not provide sufficient evidence MTBE acts as an MDA.
European authoritative and regulatory assessments of endocrine disruption increasingly incorporate evaluation of metabolism disrupting potential, yet there are no regulatory- or authority-validated models or guidance to identify metabolism disrupting agents (MDAs), which are agents that increase the risk of developing metabolic disorders. Methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), a volatile organic compound utilized as a fuel additive in many countries, was recently concluded to be a suspected endocrine disruptor based on its potential to elicit insulin resistance in rodents via an endocrine mode of action (MOA) in a Regulatory Management Option Analysis (RMOA). Therefore, a thorough mechanistic assessment was conducted to evaluate the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE. This novel approach included review of any mechanistic data including study/endpoint relevance and study reliability. Reliable data were mapped to the twelve key characteristics (KCs) of MDAs for critical evaluation of the strength of the evidence for activity within each KC. Next, the mechanistic data were contextualized and integrated within an MOA framework. No reliable epidemiological studies of MTBE were identified. Across eight KCs, largely inconsistent activity was identified in reliable in vivo and in vitro studies related to lipid, insulin, and glucose processes. MOA analysis further demonstrated inconsistent (endocrine) activity related to metabolism disruption and a lack of biologically plausible links between MTBE and metabolism disruption. Based on the current evidence identified, MTBE does not consistently perturb insulin signaling or lipid metabolism via proposed MOAs for metabolic disorders. Overall, MTBE fails to show consistent activity and adverse effects related to metabolic disruption.

Introduction
Obesity is a metabolic disease that is characterized by excess body fat, and it is clinically defined as a body mass index (BMI) ≥30 kg/m2 in adults in Western countries. Caloric excess and lack of exercise have long been implicated in the development of obesity; however, these factors alone do not account for the rapid and widespread increase in the incidence of obesity and other metabolic diseases observed over the last several decades. In fact, obesity is a multifactorial disease that involves (epi)genetic and environmental factors, operating via a suite of hormone receptors and signaling pathways, across numerous organs and organ systems. Several models have been proposed to explain the pathogenesis of obesity. The hypothesis of the obesogen model proposes that certain chemicals, termed obesogens, alter energy metabolism, increase the mass of white adipose tissue, and result in increased body weight gain and subsequent obesity.
Obesogens have been postulated to elicit obesity and related metabolic diseases through both endocrine-related and non-endocrine-related mechanisms and modes of action (MOAs) during early development and adulthood. Some obesogens have been considered endocrine disruptors (EDs) because their activity is associated with binding hormone receptors, disrupting hormone-signaling pathways, and perturbing endocrine-sensitive organs, resulting in obesity and related metabolic diseases.
Recently, a series of three reviews were published focusing on: the mechanisms (endocrine- and non-endocrine-related) involved in the development of obesity; evidence from known obesogens and their MOAs; and the assays available that are considered in the evaluation of obesogenic potential. Three main categories of mechanistic evidence are considered in the evaluation of obesogens: in vitro cell screening assays, in vivo animal studies, and epidemiological studies. In vitro models commonly used to study potential obesogens include pre-adipocyte models (e.g., 3 T3-L1 mouse cell line), mesenchymal stem cells, liver cell lines, and muscle cell lines, among others. In vivo animal models commonly include not only rodent models, but also various fish (e.g., Danio rerio [zebrafish] and Oryzias latipoes [medaka]) and invertebrate models (e.g., Drosophila melanogaster [fruit fly]). Notably, the in vitro screening assays can be used to identify potential obesogens but cannot be used alone to identify obesogens without evidence of increased white adipose tissue in vivo. As such, in vitro evidence alone is not sufficient for categorization of a substance as an obesogen. In vivo animal studies can inform dose–response relationships between an exposure to a potential obesogen, mechanistic data representing key events (KEs), and apical outcomes (AOs); however, studies using high doses that elicit systemic toxicity should be not used as reliable indicators of changes in body weight. Epidemiological studies of obesogens are designed to examine the relationship between exposure and clinical outcomes but are generally limited to examination of only a few outcomes (e.g., measures of insulin resistance, body weight/BMI).
Despite the growing volume of literature published regarding potential mechanisms and MOAs for obesogens, increased interest from authoritative bodies, and numerous publications on various assays and models used to generate data for evaluation, there are currently no validated models or regulatory/authoritative guidance for identification of obesogens. However, there is existing guidance for identifying EDs from the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) and the World Health Organization. The rigorous ECHA/European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) ED guidance for biocides and pesticides outlines how to collect, evaluate, and integrate data according to the weight of evidence (WoE), but largely focuses on outcomes (including reproductive and developmental toxicity, neurobehavioral, and cancers) associated with the estrogen, androgen, thyroid, and steroidogenesis (EATS) pathways. Most recently, ECHA updated the Guidance on the Application of the CLP Criteria, which included updates to the endocrine disruption criteria, such that classification requires identification of adverse effects, endocrine activity, and a biologically plausible link between the two. Thus, an ED is defined as “a substance or a mixture that alters one or more functions of the endocrine system and consequently causes adverse effects in an intact organism, its progeny, or subpopulations”. The ECHA CLP guidance is without specific considerations for evaluation of non-EATS pathways that would result in obesity or related metabolic diseases that have been associated with exposure to (suspected) obesogens, including type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D), metabolic dysfunction-associated-fatty liver disease (MAFLD, also known as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease [NAFLD]), and some cancers.
There is a growing need to establish a comprehensive framework for the evaluation of not only potential obesogens, but potential metabolism disrupting agents (MDA), which are broadly defined as chemical, physical, or infectious agents that could alter human metabolism and contribute to metabolic diseases, such as obesity, T2D, and MAFLD/NAFLD, among others. Based on the key characteristics of carcinogens (KCCs) concept for the systematic evaluation of human carcinogens, proposed a set of key characteristics (KCs) of MDAs, which are a robust set of criteria proposed for hazard identification of potential MDAs developed based on experts’ mechanistic understanding of reportedly known MDAs, including pharmaceuticals, chemicals, and physical and biological agents. Unlike KCCs, which present endpoints indicative of mechanistic activity (e.g., oxidative stress, genotoxicity), each KC of MDAs represents a potential set of pathways by which an MDA may act, including both KEs and AO associated with metabolic diseases.
One chemical agent that has been investigated for potential to disrupt metabolic pathways is methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE). MTBE is a volatile organic compound that was incorporated into gasoline starting in the mid-1980s because of the Amendment to the Clean Air Act by the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which required reformulated gasoline to contain at least 2% oxygen by weight. MTBE was phased out as an oxygenate of gasoline in the United States, not based on health effects, but due to its presence in drinking water from leakage of underground storage tanks. Today, MTBE is manufactured globally and used as a fuel additive in many countries. The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) evaluated MTBE in 1999, determining it was “not classifiable as to its carcinogenicity to humans;” however, IARC prioritized MTBE for (re-)evaluation in 2020–2024 and concluded that MTBE is a category 2B carcinogen. Current IARC evaluations utilize ten KCCs to evaluate mechanistic data in the assessment of the potential for an agent to cause cancer. In addition to these KCCs, IARC also considers the discovery of emerging carcinogenic mechanisms which has in past evaluations included mechanistic data related metabolic disorders, such as obesity and diabetes. In 2021, the endocrine-disrupting potential of MTBE was evaluated in a substance evaluation by the French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health Safety (ANSES), which concluded that additional consideration based on new data would be needed in the upcoming Regulatory Management Option Analysis (RMOA). This evaluation focused largely on the EATS modalities, without consideration of the obesogenic or metabolism disrupting potential. However, in addition to the traditional EATS modalities, the potential for MTBE to act as an ED through perturbation of non-EATS modalities received further attention, increasing scientific interest in these modalities and their potential MOAs. This is outlined in the RMOA, which considered evidence related to increased cholesterol levels in rodent models and evidence related to insulin resistance. It was concluded that MTBE is a suspected ED based on the potential to elicit insulin resistance via an endocrine MOA, although only one study was considered “robust and well-conducted”. Therefore, given the IARC evaluation of MTBE, which may include emerging carcinogenic mechanisms related to metabolic disorders, and the ANSES RMOA evaluation of the endocrine-disrupting potential of MTBE, including its obesogenic potential, the purpose here is to conduct a robust mechanistic evaluation of the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE.

Methods
Herein, mechanistic evidence regarding the consistency and biological plausibility of the metabolism disruption potential of MTBE is considered. Briefly, following data identification and extraction of data, two approaches to evaluate the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE are utilized and integrated to draw a conclusion about the potential for MTBE to act as an MDA. First, the mechanistic data are organized across the 12 KCs of MDAs proposed by and evaluated for overall activity per KC. Second, the data are integrated across identified MOAs for obesity and diabetes to more fully evaluate the potential for MTBE to act as an MDA, allowing for evaluation of the evidence to answer whether there is a biologically plausible link between any potential endocrine activity and adverse effects in the intact organism or its progeny, per the CLP criteria for EDs. Finally, the results of each approach are qualitatively integrated to make an overall WoE determination regarding the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE.

Evidence identification
Key characteristics of metabolism disruptors proposed by and list of studies with reliable MTBE-specific mechanistic data mapping to each KE.
#	KC of Metabolism DisruptorsA	Examples of Mechanisms, Including KEs and AOs, For Each KCA, B	Reliable References with MTBE-specific DataC	 	1	Alters function of endocrine pancreas	Destruction of pancreatic β-cells or alteration of their function, leading to reduced insulin release and altered glucose homeostasis (e.g., hyperglycemia)Reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretionHypersecretion of insulin resulting in hyperinsulinemia		 	2	Impairs function of adipose tissue	Disrupted function of adipocytes, including ability to store triglycerides, insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, and produce hormonesAltered balance between white, brown, and beige adipocytes through stimulated differentiation of pre-adipocytes		 	3	Alters nervous system control of metabolic function	Altered response to neuroendocrine signals, such as leptin, insulin, and ghrelinAltered hunger and satiation signalingModulates signaling of hypothalamic neuronsReduced basal metabolic rate	None identified	 	4	Promotes insulin resistance	Decreased response to insulin or insulin resistance in insulin-responsive tissues, leading to increased blood insulin levels, altered GLUT4 expression, and reduced glucose uptakePromoted insulin-induced insulin resistance from hyperinsulinemia		 	5	Disrupts metabolic signaling pathways	Favored differentiation of MSCs to adipocytes through binding to PPARγ-RXRActs on EAT receptorsDisruption of cell signaling pathways, including those involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism		 	6	Alters development and fate of metabolic cell types	Influenced commitment of pluripotent stem cells, altering number and type of metabolic cellsDifferentiation of MSCs or preadipocytes via PPARγ and/or RXR activationDevelopment of dysfunctional adipocytesDestruction of pancreatic β-cells		 	7	Alters energy homeostasis	Altered cellular bioenergetics in tissues involved in physical activityReduced physical activityAltered metabolic set point, leading to energy storage	None identified	 	8	Causes inappropriate nutrient handling and partitioning	Altered nutrient (e.g., carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids) synthesis, release, and storage, among othersImpairment of glucose mobilization from glycogen storesReduced glycogen storage in muscles and liver		 	9	Promotes chronic inflammation and immune system dysregulation in metabolic tissues	Chronic metabolic inflammation in visceral adiposity and insulin resistanceRelease of pro-inflammatory cytokinesAltered innate immunity		 	10	Disrupts gastrointestinal tract function	Disruption of nutrient and water absorptionAltered gastrointestinal microbiome diversity and functionAltered gut hormone regulation	None identified	 	11	Induces cellular stress pathways	Induction of cell stress that alters cell fateOxidative stress from mitochondrial dysfunctionIncreased ROS production from mitochondria in adipocytes, pancreas, or liver		 	12	Disrupts circadian rhythms	Disrupted circadian rhythm and sleep	None identified
Key: KC: key characteristic; KE: key event; AO: adverse outcome; GLUT4: glucose transporter; MSC: mesenchymal stem cells; PPARγ: peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma; RXR: retinoid X receptor; EAT: estrogen, androgen, and thyroid.
.
Selected examples of mechanisms associated with each KC, as identified by.
References in which there was at least some mechanistic data (across any of the three lines of evidence) that were evaluated as reliable (Klimisch Categorization 1 or 2); for a summary of the reliable references, see Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6, Table 7, Table 8. All data, regardless of reliability, is available in Supplementary File 3, and summaries of the studies considered non-reliable (Klimisch Categorization 3) or not assigned as to their reliability (Klimisch Categorization 4) are available in Supplementary File 2.
Summary of the inclusion/exclusion criteria for data extraction.
Inclusion Criteria	Exclusion Criteria	 	Studies with primary dataIn chemico, in vitro, or in vivo animal models and human exposure (epidemiological) studies that evaluate mechanistic data or apical/clinical outcomes of obesity, T2D, or NAFLDFor in chemico, in vitro or in vivo models, study must include an MTBE-alone exposure group and appropriate negative and/or positive control groupIn vivo studies with MTBE exposure duration ≤ 1 year or timepoints from chronic assay from ≤ 1 year	Reviews, commentaries, perspectives, or other articles without primary dataIn silico or computational modelsIn vitro or in vivo studies that did not include evaluation of MTBE alone (e.g., MTBE in mixture only or MTBE in conjunction with high fat diet only) or evaluated MTBE in a disease model (e.g., atherosclerosis model)Studies that do not include biomarkers or apical/clinical outcomes of obesity, T2D, and NAFLDIn vivo studies with MTBE exposure duration > 1 year (note: these were only the 2-year cancer studies where aging interferes with the ability to interpret the direct effect of a chemical on mechanistic data)
Key: MTBE: methyl tert-butyl ether; T2D: Type 2 Diabetes; NAFLD: non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Peer-reviewed studies and/or publicly available laboratory reports (guidelines and good laboratory practices [GLP]) of MTBE with mechanistic data and apical/clinical outcomes of obesity or other metabolic diseases were identified through handsearching of references in a recent evaluation of MTBE mechanistic endpoints organized across KCCs, which identified mechanistic data associated with receptor-mediated activity and emerging mechanisms of carcinogenicity, both of which have relevance to KCs of MDAs. Targeted literature searches in PubMed were also conducted using search syntax specific to MTBE (“MTBE” OR “methyl-tert butyl ether” OR “methyl tert butyl ether” OR “tert-Butyl methyl ether”) and key terms related to obesity and other metabolic diseases (see Supplementary File 1, Table S1) to identify relevant mechanistic data associated with exposure to MTBE in three types of models: in vitro assays in mammalian primary cells or cell lines, in vivo animal studies, and epidemiological studies. Syntax was updated following the publication of to ensure terms related to the 12 KCs were included in the literature searching. The potential relevance of studies identified from both handsearching the references of and the literature review was determined by screening at the title and abstract level. Any studies considered potentially relevant underwent full text review to determine relevance according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The inclusion and exclusion criteria are summarized in Table 2.

Data extraction
Mechanistic data from all three evidence streams (i.e., in vitro, in vivo, epidemiological) were collected and considered in the evaluation of the potential for MTBE to act as an MDA. Data extraction was conducted according to methods described by, except that models were not assigned strength scores in alignment with the approach described by. Study details considered included model, strain, sex, exposure route, dose or concentration, duration of exposure, tissue of analysis, and evaluation of systemic toxicity (in vivo) or cytotoxicity (in vitro). Activity status (active = 1; inactive = 0) was considered active at the dose/concentration identified to be a statistically significant and dose-dependent change from control. Non-dose dependent and transient effects were not considered to show activity. For in vitro studies, significant effects occurring at or above cytotoxic concentrations were not considered. The MTBE-specific mechanistic data (in vitro, animal in vivo, epidemiological) were mapped to the 12 KCs for MDAs developed by (Table 1). Given the overlapping nature of many of the KCs, which may lead to overrepresentation of any endpoints, data were assigned to a KC based on the most direct applicable evidence. For example, indicators of hyperglycemia and glucose tolerance (e.g., blood glucose) are related to KC 7 (Alters energy homeostasis) and KC 8 (Causes inappropriate nutrient handling and partitioning) but were considered most directly applicable to KC 8. In addition to mechanistic endpoints, apical and clinical measures of obesity and metabolic diseases (e.g., BMI, incidence of NAFLD) were extracted from in vivo animal studies and epidemiological studies.

Study reliability evaluation
For in vitro and in vivo animal data, study reliability was evaluated according to the Klimisch criteria: 1 – Reliable without Restriction, 2 – Reliable with Restriction, and 3 – Not Reliable. Additionally, consideration was also given to whether the exposure methods adequately controlled for volatility of MTBE. For epidemiological data, study reliability was evaluated using the method described by. This method was specifically chosen because the reliability categorizations are intended to be comparable and directly translatable to Klimisch criteria used for evaluating in vitro and in vivo animal data. Key areas of potential bias include outcome and exposure misclassification or imprecision, selection bias, residual (confounding) bias, statistical method, and reporting bias (see Supplementary File 1, Table S2 for specific study evaluation criteria).

Activity assessment & evidence integration
For each KC, an activity determination was made for each stream of evidence (i.e., the model categories: in vitro assays, in vivo animal studies, epidemiological studies) when there were sufficient reliable data. Next, an overall activity determination for each KC was made by integrating the evidence across the evidence streams. In both cases, consideration was given to consistency of endpoint activity across studies and/or endpoints. The activity assignments for individual evidence streams and the overall activity for each KC integrated across evidence streams included: activity – most endpoints are active; no activity – the majority of endpoints are not active; and, inconsistent activity – approximately equal number of endpoints are active and inactive.
Given that the KCs defined by consist of KEs and AOs that may intersect with those in other KCs, a second pathway-based approach of evidence integration was conducted to inform the conclusion regarding the potential for MTBE to act as an MDA in humans. In this second evaluation, integration of the evidence base included both mechanistic data identified from the KC approach and apical/clinical data in the context of identified MOAs by which agents have been shown to induce metabolic diseases. These MOAs were identified from published review articles containing mechanistic insights into metabolic disorders, including obesity and diabetes; the review articles were identified through targeted literature searches related to mechanisms for these metabolic disorders. Given the limited volume of reliable data and lack of consistent signals, all evidence, regardless of reliability, was considered in the MOA evaluation. The MOA evaluation also considered aspects related to the consistency and dose-responses observed across evidence streams.

Results
Through handsearching of references identified by and targeted literature searches, a total of 47 peer-reviewed studies and publicly available laboratory reports were identified that meet the inclusion criteria. Six of the 47 studies were epidemiological investigations, with 17 in vitro animal or human assays, and 32 in vivo animal models (seven publications included data from both in vitro and in vivo models). Data identified and extracted by, along with mechanistic data from additional studies identified from the targeted literature searching, were combined into a database organized by the 12 KCs (Supplementary File 3). Reliable data from these studies were utilized in the apical/clinical outcome assessment and the KC-based mechanistic assessment. In the MOA assessment, all evidence, whether found to be reliable or unreliable, was integrated due to limited data availability.

Clinical outcomes in humans/apical outcomes in animal models
Consistent with ECHA CLP, ECHA/EFSA ED Guidance and WHO State of Science reports on EDs, apical and clinical indicators of obesity and other metabolic diseases associated with MTBE exposure were first examined. The six epidemiological studies that were identified examined the association between clinical metrics of obesity (e.g., BMI, waist circumference) and/or NAFLD/MAFLD and exposure to MTBE, and were considered non-reliable (i.e., Money Categorization 3 or 4), largely due to lack of reporting, cross-sectional design, unclear reference group exposure, and lack of direct measurements of health outcomes (see Supplementary File 2). Twenty-seven reliable studies in experimental animal models (26 of which were in rodents, and some with multiple in vivo experiments) were identified that reported apical outcomes related to obesity.

Obesity: body weight, BMI, and waist circumference
No reliable epidemiological studies were identified with which to evaluate the association between MTBE exposure and clinical outcomes related to obesity. Evaluation of the apical indicators of obesity in animal models is complicated by the fact that body weight and BMI are markers of systemic toxicity. ECHA CLP guidance states that adverse effects that are non-specific consequences of toxicity should not be considered in identification of endocrine disruption potential. Thus, due to the large dose levels of MTBE that elicited systemic toxicity in many of the rodent toxicology studies (Supplementary File 1, Table S3), body weight was not considered a reliable indicator of obesogenic potential in these studies. At doses of MTBE that did not elicit/below which systemic toxicity was observed, no increases in body weight were noted in these studies (Supplementary File 2).
There were several reliable studies in which body weight was evaluated following exposure to relatively low doses of MTBE (i.e., ∼115–176 mg/kg/day for 3 days; 1  mg/kg/day for 24 weeks; and 0.1 and 1 mg/kg/day for 14 weeks). In only one study was there a statistically significant increase in body weights – in a study of male rats administered MTBE by oral gavage at 1 or 100 mg/kg/day for 24 weeks. Although this study is considered reliable, lack of validation of MTBE concentration in drinking water, considering it is volatile, restricts the confidence in this study’s reliability. In a study of similar design (i.e., approx. same actual dose anticipated in the drinking water study), no increased body weight was observed in male Wistar rats administered an oral gavage of 0, 1, or 100 mg/kg/day for 14 weeks.

NAFLD/MAFLD
No animal studies were identified that examined NAFLD/MAFLD and no reliable epidemiological studies were identified that examined the association between MTBE exposure and NAFLD/MAFLD (Supplementary File 2).

Clinical outcomes in humans / apical outcomes in rodents: conclusions
Given the lack of reliable epidemiological data, coupled with the concerns regarding evaluation of apical markers of obesity in rodents administered high doses of MTBE, a mechanistic evaluation was conducted consistent with the ECHA/EFSA ED guidance.

Mechanistic evaluation via KC framework
Summary of activity by evidence stream and overall activity for each KC, based on reliable data.
Mechanistic data from studies deemed reliable (i.e., those with Klimisch Categorization 1 or 2), were mapped to eight of the 12 KCs (Fig. 1). For each KC for which there were sufficient MTBE-specific data, a summary of the data is provided, followed by an overall activity determination for that KC; additional details are provided in Supplemental File 2. Further, tabular and written summaries of data not considered reliable for each KC are provided in Supplementary File 1 and Supplementary File 2, respectively. Justification for reliability categorizations for all studies is provided in Supplementary File 3.
No reliable MTBE-specific data were identified for KC 3: Alters nervous system control, KC 7: Alters energy homeostasis, KC 10: Disrupts gastrointestinal tract, or KC 12: Disrupts circadian rhythms. Insufficient (i.e., approximately ≤ 2 studies and/or datapoints) but reliable MTBE-specific data were identified for KC 1: Alters function of endocrine pancreas, KC 2: Impairs function of adipose tissue, and KC 6: Alters development and fate of metabolic cell types; details of the insufficient data are provided in Supplementary File 2.

KC 4: promotes insulin resistance
KC 4: ReliableA evidence for promotion of insulin resistance. Evidence considered not reliable or not assignable as to its reliability is presented in Supplementary File 1, Table S8. Full documentation of all data extracted is provided in Supplementary File 3, Table S17.
Endpoint	Species (Strain), Tissue	Route and Duration of Exposure	MTBE Concentration or DoseB	Result	Reliability Categorization	Reference	 	In vitro Assays	 	Insulin-stimulated glucose consumption	Mouse (3 T3-L1)	6 days	0, 0.01, 10, 100, 1000 μmol/L	↓	2		 	Glut4 expression	Mouse (3 T3-L1)	6 days	0, 0.01, 10, 100, 1000 μmol/L	↔	2		 	In vivo Studies	 	HOMA-IR	Mouse (C57BL/6J), serum	Oral (gavage); 14 weeks	0, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↔	2		 	IITT	Mouse (C57BL/6J), serum	Oral (gavage); 14 weeks	0, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↔	2		 	OGTT	Mouse (C57BL/6J), serum	Oral (gavage); 14 weeks	0, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↔	2
Key: HOMA-IR: homeostatic model assessment for insulin resistance; IITT: intraperitoneal insulin tolerance test; OGTT: oral glucose tolerance test; glut4: glucose transporter 4; ↓: decreased effect; ↔: no effect.
Evidence was considered reliable when the Klimisch Categorization was 1 or 2.
Values in bold indicate doses/concentrations at which there were significant effects on the endpoint; values underlined indicate doses at which there were significant effects on body weight (in vivo) or cell viability (in vitro). A lack of bolding or underlining indicates no significant effect was reported.
KC 4, promotion of insulin resistance, can be characterized by a decrease in insulin responsiveness in insulin-sensitive tissues, such as adipose tissue, liver, and muscle; sustained increase in blood insulin (i.e., chronic hyperinsulinemia); and altered glucose uptake in muscle and adipose tissue. Outcomes related to insulin resistance were examined in two reliable studies of MTBE from one publication, one in vivo study and one in vitro study (Table 3; Supplementary File 2; Supplementary File 3, Table S17). In vivo, neither male nor female mice showed significant effects across two measures of insulin resistance and one measure of glucose tolerance: homeostatic model assessment of insulin resitance (HOMA-IR), insulin tolerance test (ITT), or oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). In vitro in 3T3-L1 pre-adipocytes differentiated to mature adipocytes, a statistically significant and dose-dependent decrease in glucose consumption (≥7%; p < 0.01) was observed, but there was no significant change in mRNA expression of Glut4 (p > 0.05).
There are insufficient reliable data from which to evaluate KC 4 activity for each evidence stream; however, across the entire database of reliable studies (i.e., considering both the in vivo and in vitro data together), there is sufficient evidence that there is no activity for this KC, with the majority of data (4/5 endpoints) indicating MTBE does not promote insulin resistance (Fig. 1).

KC 5: disrupts metabolic signaling pathways
KC 5: ReliableA evidence for disruption of metabolic signaling pathways; only studies with evidence pertaining to metabolic pathways, not just receptor activation, are shown. Evidence considered not reliable or not assignable as to its reliability is presented in Supplementary File 1, Table S9. Full documentation of all data extracted is provided in Supplementary File 3, Table S18.
Endpoint	Species (Strain), Tissue	Route and Duration of Exposure	MTBE DoseB	Result	Reliability Categorization	Reference	 	In vivo Studies	 	Gene expression of PXR, SREBP2 and downstream targets	Rat (Wistar), liver	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 0.1, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	Δ	2		 	Protein expression of PXR, SREBP2 and downstream targets	Rat (Wistar), liver	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 0.1, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	Δ	2		 	miR expression	Rat (Wistar), liver	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 0.1, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	Δ	2
Key: PXR: pregnane X receptor; SREBP2: sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2; Δ: significant change in gene/protein expression; miR: microRNA.
Evidence was considered reliable when the Klimisch Categorization was 1 or 2.
Values in bold indicate doses at which there were significant effects on the endpoint; values underlined indicate doses at which there were significant effects on body weight. A lack of bolding or underlining indicates no significant effect was reported.
KC 5 encompasses disruption of metabolic signaling pathways, which are under regulation of various hormones, peptides, and growth factors that act via receptor-mediated pathways. These pathways may involve (1) peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma (PPARγ) binding, which stimulates adipocyte differentiation, (2) estrogen, androgen, thyroid, or glucocorticoid receptors, (3) cell signaling pathways (e.g., insulin receptor-related) that result in altered lipid or carbohydrate metabolism, inflammation, and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in the liver, and (4) epigenetic modifications that inhibit insulin degradation. One in vivo study was identified in which the effect of MTBE on sterol regulatory element-binding protein 2 (SREBP2) and pregnane X receptor (PXR) cell signaling pathways related to cholesterol metabolism were evaluated (Table 4; Supplementary File 2; Supplementary File 3, Table S18). In this study, gene and protein expression of PXR and SREBP2 were increased statistically significantly and/or dose-dependently compared to control, and mRNA and protein expression of various target genes were also altered significantly.
Beyond, eleven additional studies (in vitro human, in vitro mammalian, in vivo mammalian) with reliable data were identified for this KC from the KCC evaluation of MTBE by Borghoff et al. (; Supplementary File 3, Table S18). Both the in vitro and in vivo data provided inconsistent observations of activity related to the androgen receptor and induction of cytochrome P450s. The majority of the in vitro and in vivo data related to estrogen receptor, aromatase, and thyroid hormone receptor were inactive.
Overall, there is inconsistent activity regarding the ability of MTBE to disrupt metabolic pathways based on limited availability of reliable evidence for many pathways (e.g., PXR and SREBP2) and/or conflicting results regarding receptor activation in reliable in vivo and in vitro studies reviewed in (Fig. 1).

KC 8: causes inappropriate nutrient handling and partitioning
MDA-induced alterations to nutrient handling and partitioning includes alterations to various processes involved in the synthesis, release, mobilization, storage, or catabolism of lipids, carbohydrates, and animo acids. This may lead to changes in the utilization, mobilization, and storage of glucose, and reduced glycogen storage in the muscle and liver. The largest body of evidence for evaluation of the potential for MTBE to act as a metabolism disrupting chemical was identified for KC 8 (Supplementary File 2; Supplementary File 3, Table S21). Twelve publications containing 11 reliable in vivo animal studies and two reliable in vitro studies (i.e., one publication contained both an in vivo and an in vitro component) were identified as relevant to this KC, including aspects related to amino acid metabolism, glucose mobilization, and lipid release and mobilization.

Amino acid metabolism
KC 8: ReliableA evidence for inappropriate nutrient handling and partitioning related to amino acid metabolism and glucose metabolism. Evidence considered not reliable or not assignable as to its reliability is presented in Supplementary File 1, Table S11. Full documentation of all data extracted is provided in Supplementary File 3, Table S21.
Endpoint	Species (Strain), Tissue	Route and Duration of Exposure	MTBE Concentration or DoseB	Result	Reliability Categorization	Reference	 	In vitro Assays	 	Glutamate	Human (L-02)	24 h	0, 200, 400 nM	↑	2		 	Glutamine	Human (L-02)	24 h	0, 200, 400 nM	↓	2		 	GLS1 expression	Human (L-02)	24 h	0, 200, 400 nM	↑	2		 	In vivo Studies	 	Glutamate	Rat (Wistar), serum	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↑	2		 	Glutamine	Rat (Wistar), serum	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↓	2		 	GLS1 expression	Rat (Wistar), liver	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↑	2		 	Metabolome	Rat (Wistar), serum	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	Δ	2		 	Glucose	Rat (Wistar), urine	Oral (drinking water); 13 weeks	0, 0.5, 3, 7.5, 15 mg/mL	↔	1		 	Glucose	Rat (SD), blood	Inhalation; 13 weeks	0, 250, 500, 1000 ppmC	↔	1		 	Glucose	Rat (SD), urine	Inhalation; 13 weeks	0, 250, 500, 1000 ppmC	↔	1		 	Glucose	Rat (Fischer 344 CDF), blood	Inhalation; 13 weeks	0, 800, 4000, 8000 ppmC	↓	2		 	Glucose	Rat (SD), blood	Oral (gavage); 14 days	0, 357, 714, 1071,1428 mg/kg/day	↑	2		 	Glucose	Rat (SD), blood	Oral (gavage); 90 days	0, 100, 300, 900, 1200 mg/kg/day	↓	2		 	FPG	Rat (SD), serum	Oral (drinking water); 90 days	0, 40, 200, 1000 μg/LD	↑	2
Key: SD: Sprague-Dawley; FPG: fasting plasma glucose; ↑, increased effect; ↓: decreased effect; ↔: no effect; Δ: significant change metabolome.
Evidence was considered reliable when the Klimisch Categorization was 1 or 2.
Values in bold indicate concentrations at which there were significant effects on the endpoint; values underlined indicate concentration at which there were significant effects on body weight (in vivo) or cell viability (in vitro). A lack of bolding or underlining indicates no significant effect was reported.
6 h/day, 5 days/week.
Body weight data not reported for this study.
One publication with in vivo and an in vitro studies was identified that examined aspects related to amino acid metabolism (Table 5; Supplementary File 2; Supplementary File 3, Table S21). Male rats administered MTBE via gavage had statistically significant differences in the serum metabolome versus control, and the most enriched pathways (p < 0.05) were those related to amino acid metabolism, including D-glutamine and D-glutamate metabolism and phenylamine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis. Further, there was a statistically significant increase in serum glutamate with a significant decrease in serum glutamine. In vitro, statistically significant increases in media glutamate and decreases in glutamine were observed, as well as increases in expression of GLS1.

Glucose mobilization
Five in vivo studies evaluated glucose mobilization or excretion data following repeat dose exposure to MTBE, with mixed results (Table 5; Supplementary File 2; Supplementary File 3, Table S21). Collectively, these data provide, at most, weak and inconsistent evidence that MTBE has the potential to alter urinary or blood glucose levels in rodents. No changes in urine or blood glucose were observed in two studies of rats administered MTBE via drinking water and inhalation for up to 13 weeks, and decreased blood glucose was only observed concurrent with systemic toxicity in another study of MTBE inhalation in rats for 13 weeks. In a 90-day study conducted in rats administered an oral gavage of MTBE, the direction of blood glucose change was inconsistent across two timepoints (i.e., increased then decreased), and occurred only concurrent with systemic toxicity at the first timepoint. The only other MTBE study in rats in which increased blood glucose was observed did not report on systemic toxicity.

Lipid mobilization
KC 8: ReliableAin vivo rodent evidence for inappropriate nutrient handling and partitioning as indicated by blood lipids. Full documentation of all data extracted is provided in Supplementary File 3, Table S21.
Study	Species (Strain)	Route	MTBE Dose/ ConcentrationB	Exposure Duration	Sex	HDL	LDL	VLDL	Cholesterol	Triglycerides	Effect on BW	Reliability Categorization	 		Rat (SD)	Oral (gavage)	0, 800 or 1000 mg/kg/dayC	28 days	M				↔	↔	NR	2	 		Rat (SD)	Oral (gavage)	0, 400, 800, 1600 mg/kg/day	2 weeks	M	↔	↔		↑	↔	↔	2	 	4 weeks	M	↔	↓		↔	↓	↔	 		Rat (Wistar)	Oral (gavage)	0, 13.5 mmol/kg	1 day	F					↔	↔	2	 	0, 1.3 mmol/kg for 2 days then 20 mmol/kg 1 day	3 days	F					↔	↔	 		Rat (SD)	Inhalation	0, 250, 500, 1000 ppm	13 weeks	M				↔		↔	1	 	F				↔		↔	 		Rat (Wistar)	Oral (gavage)	0, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	24 weeks	M	↓	↔	↑	↔	↔	↔	2	 		Rat (SD)	Oral (gavage)	0, 357, 714, 1071, 1428 mg/kg/day	14 days	M				↑		↔	2	 	F				↔		↓	 	0, 100, 300, 900, 1200 mg/kg/day	90 days	M				↔		↔	 	F				↑		↓	 		Rat (SD)	Oral (drinking water)	0, 40, 200, 1000 ug/L	90 days	M	↓	↑		↑	↑	NR	2	 		Mouse (C57BL/6J)	Oral (gavage)	0, 100 mg/kg/day	13 weeks	M				↔	↔	↔	2	 	F				↔	↔	↔	 		Rat (Wistar)	Oral (gavage)	0, 0.01, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	24 weeks	M	↓		↑	↑	↔	↑	2
Key: M: male; F: female; ↓: statistically significant and dose-responsive decrease; ↑ statistically significant and dose-responsive increase; ↔: no statistically significant or dose-responsive increase; NR: not reported; BW: body weight; HDL: high density lipoprotein; LDL: low density lipoprotein; VLDL: very low-density lipoprotein.
Values in bold indicate doses at which there were significant and dose-dependent effects at least one blood lipid parameter; values underlined indicate doses at which there were significant effects on body weight.
Experiment 4; methods report dose as 800 mg/kg/day, results report dose as 1000 mg/kg/day.
Evidence was considered reliable when the Klimisch Categorization was 1 or 2.
Nine reliable in vivo studies were identified that examined the effect of MTBE exposure on blood or serum lipids (Table 6; Supplementary File 2; Supplementary File 3, Table S21). Across these studies, there was weak and inconsistent evidence that MTBE elicited adverse changes in the lipid profiles of rodents, with inconsistent effects reported for high-density lipoprotein (HDL), low-density lipoprotein (LDL), cholesterol, and triglycerides. No changes in serum lipid measures were reported in four reliable studies at MTBE dose levels up to 100 mg/kg/day for 28 days; 13.5–20  mmol/kg for 3 days; 1000  ppm for 13 weeks; or 100 mg/kg/day for 13 weeks. At least some significant effects on serum lipids were observed in five reliable in vivo studies in rodents orally (gavage or drinking water) exposed to MTBE for up to 24 weeks, although the direction of change was not always consistent. Further, in one of these studies, there were limitations in reporting (i.e., effects on body weight not reported) such that it is unclear whether these effects were a consequence of metabolic disruption or systemic toxicity.
KC 8: ReliableAin vitro evidence for inappropriate nutrient handling and partitioning related to lipid mobilization. Evidence considered not reliable or not assignable as to its reliability is presented in Supplementary File 1, Table S12. Full documentation of all data extracted is provided in Supplementary File 3, Table S21.
Endpoint	Species (Strain), Tissue	Route and Duration of Exposure	MTBE ConcentrationB	Result	Reliability Categorization	Reference	 	In vitro Assays	 	Gene expression of transporters and receptors involved in cholesterol efflux (ABCA1, ABCG1, SR-BI)	Human (THP-1 macrophages)	24 & 48 h	0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10 mmol/L	↓ and ↔C	2		 	Protein expression of transporters involved in cholesterol efflux (ABCA1, ABCG1)	Human (THP-1 macrophages)	24 & 48 h	0, 1, 10 mmol/L	↓ and ↔D	2		 	Gene expression of transporters and receptors involved in cholesterol uptake (CD36, SR-A)	Human (THP-1 macrophages)	24 & 48 h	0, 0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1, 10 mmol/L	↔	2		 	Cholesterol efflux	Human (THP-1 macrophages)	24 h	0, 1, 10 mmol/L	↓	2
Key: ABCA1: ATP-Binding Cassette Transporter A1; ABCG1: ATP-Binding Cassette subfamily G member 1; SR-BI: Scavenger receptor class B type 1; CD36: cluster of differentiation 36; SR-A: class A scavenger receptor; ↓: decreased effect; ↑: increased effect; ↔: no effect.
Evidence was considered reliable when the Klimisch Categorization was 1 or 2.
Values in bold indicate concentrations at which there were significant effects on the endpoint; values underlined indicate concentration at which there were significant effects on cell viability. A lack of bolding or underlining indicates no significant effect was reported.
Decrease in ABCA1 and ABCG1 but no change in expression of SR-BI.
Expression of ABCA1 was significantly decreased at 24 but not 28 h while ABCG1 was degreased at both timepoints.
In vitro in human THP-1 macrophages exposed to MTBE, there was a statically significant decrease in mRNA expression of transporters and receptors involved in two cholesterol efflux (ABCA1, ABCG1) but not in SR-BI or the cholesterol uptake receptors CD36, or SR-A (Table 7; Supplementary File 2; Supplementary File 3, Table S21). Protein expression of ABCA1 was transiently and significantly decreased, while ABCG1 expression was significantly decreased. In cholesterol efflux experiments in the THP-1 cells, a statistically significant (p < 0.05) decrease in NBD-cholesterol efflux was observed.
The evidence that MTBE causes inappropriate nutrient handling and partitioning is considered to be inconsistent, given the conflicting results related to glucose and lipid mobilization across many reliable in vitro and in vivo studies (Fig. 1). Evidence for altered amino acid metabolism was limited to data from one reliable study. Thus, the overall activity for KC 8 is considered inconsistent for MTBE.

KC 9: promotes chronic inflammation and immune system dysregulation in metabolic tissues
KC 9: ReliableA evidence for promotion of chronic inflammation and immune dysregulation in metabolic tissues. Evidence considered not reliable or not assignable as to its reliability is presented in Supplementary File 1, Table S13. Full documentation of all data extracted is provided in Supplementary File 3, Table S22.
Endpoint	Species (Strain), Tissue	Route and Duration of Exposure	MTBE Concentration or DoseB	Result	Reliability Categorization	Reference	 	In vitro Assays	 	Gene expression of TNF-α	Human (THP-1)	24, 48 h	0, 1, 10 mmol/L	↔	2		 	Gene expression of IL-1β	Human (THP-1)	24, 48 h	0, 1, 10 mmol/L	↑	2		 	Protein expression of IL-1β	Human (THP-1)	24, 48 h	0, 1, 10 mmol/L	↔	2		 	In vivo Studies	 	CRP levels	Rat (SD), serum	Oral (drinking water); 3 months	0, 40, 200, 1000 μg/LC	↑	2		 	Inflammation	Rat (SD), liver	Oral (drinking water); 90 days	0, 40, 200, 1000 μg/L	↑	2		 	Gene expression of IL-1β	Rat (Wistar), liver	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 0.1, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↑	2		 	Gene expression of TNF-α	Rat (Wistar), liver	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 0.1, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↑	2		 	Protein expression of TNF-α	Rat (Wistar), liver	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 0.1, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↑	2		 	Gene expression of NF-κB	Rat (Wistar), liver	Oral (gavage); 24 weeks	0, 0.1, 1, 100 mg/kg/day	↔	2
Key: SD: Sprague-Dawley; CRP: c-reactive protein; TNF-α: tumor necrosis factor alpha; IL-1β: interleukin-1 beta; NF-κB: nuclear factor kappa-B; ↑: increased effect; ↔: no effect.
Evidence was considered reliable when the Klimisch Categorization was 1 or 2.
Values in bold indicate doses/concentrations at which there were significant effects on the endpoint; values underlined indicate doses/concentrations at which there were significant effects on body weight (in vivo) or cell viability (in vitro). A lack of bolding or underlining indicates no significant effect was reported.
Body weight data not reported for this study.
KC 9 postulates that MDAs elicit both chronic metabolic inflammation and dysregulation of immune processes in metabolic tissues. Metabolic inflammation is associated with obesity and insulin resistance and is characterized by pro-inflammatory markers such as TNFα, IL-1, IL-6, INFα, etc. Activation of macrophage foam cells contributes to lipid storage and perturbations of the innate immune response. Three reliable in vivo studies and one reliable in vitro study were identified in which aspects related to inflammation and immune system dysregulation were evaluated in the context of metabolism disrupting potential (Table 8; Supplementary File 3, Table S22). In vivo, rats exposed to MTBE for 3 months in drinking water at 0, 40, 200, or 1000 μg/L had statistically significant increases in high-sensitive C-reactive protein in the blood at ≥40 μg/L MTBE. Further, in a study of similar design, rats exposed to MTBE for 90 days in drinking water at the same concentrations had mild liver inflammation at blood concentrations ≥200 μg/L MTBE. In rats administered MTBE via oral gavage, statistically significant increases in IL-1β and TNFα gene expression were observed at ≥0.01 mg/kg/day, and the protein expression of TNFα was increased at ≥1 mg/kg/day; no dose-dependent increases in gene expression were observed for NF-κB. In vitro in human THP-1 macrophages exposed to MTBE, there was a statistically significant increase in the relative IL-1β mRNA levels but no change in TNF-α expression and no significant difference in IL-1β release.
The evidence that MTBE promotes chronic metabolic inflammation and dysregulation of immune process is inconsistent across the endpoints within the reliable in vitro study but consistently active across reliable in vivo studies (Fig. 1). Considering the data across both evidence streams, the overall activity assignment for KC 9 for MTBE was active. However, these inflammatory effects were observed primarily in the liver in exposed animal models and most likely represents a non-specific inflammatory response associated with high dose xenobiotic exposure, rather than chronic metabolic inflammation associated with metabolism disruption.

KC 11: induces cellular stress pathways
KC 11 proposed by for MDAs is induction of cellular stress pathways, a common feature of many disease pathologies. In the context of MDAs, mitochondrial distress and endoplasmic reticulum stress may result in increased reactive oxygen species in key metabolic cells, including adipocytes, liver cells, and pancreatic cells. No studies were identified in which oxidative stress was examined in adipocytes or pancreatic cells.
In the evaluation of the potential carcinogenicity of MTBE, mechanistic data was mapped to 10 KCCs; from that effort, 14 reliable MTBE studies were identified related to oxidative stress, including several in liver cells, all of which are relevant in consideration of KC 11 of MDAs (Supplementary File 3, Table S24). In the KCC evaluation, it was determined that there was inconsistent activity for oxidative stress given the conflicting results observed across reliable in vivo animal and in vitro models. Therefore, in the evaluation of MTBE as a potential MDA, the evidence for KC11 demonstrates inconsistent activity in both evidence streams and overall.

KC evidence integration
Regarding both mechanistic and apical/clinical outcome data, there were no reliable epidemiological data from which to evaluate the potential for MTBE to act as a metabolism disruptor. In the overall integrated activity assessment across evidence streams for all KCs, no activity assessments were made for seven KCs (a lack of [reliable] in vivo animal and in vitro evidence for four KCs and insufficient data were available to make an activity assessment for three KCs), inconsistent activity in three KCs, overall activity for one KC, and overall no activity for one KC (Fig. 1). In vivo, there are inconsistent changes (and changes not always considered adverse) in parameters such as serum lipids and blood glucose; only one of 26 studies (Klimisch Categorization 1 or 2) found an increase in body weight, and several studies including doses of MTBE ≥ 100-fold lower than those which elicited systemic toxicity in other studies (i.e., decreased body weight) did not report increases in body weight. One in vitro study suggested that MTBE may contribute to adipogenesis (which was not reflected in vivo), but evidence across several in vitro studies regarding insulin- and glucose-related mechanisms was inconsistent. Overall, the available MTBE mechanistic data considered reliable are largely inconsistent, as demonstrated through evaluation within this KC framework.

Evidence evaluation via MOA integration
To further inform whether MTBE acts as a metabolism disruptor, the mechanistic data for each KC can be integrated through consideration of pathway approaches, whereby the (in)activity is mapped to KEs. A mechanistic examination is consistent with the approach outlined by ECHA in the updated CLP guidance, which states that an ED must demonstrate endocrine activity, elicit an adverse effect on the intact organism, offspring, or future generations, and there must be a biologically plausible link between the endocrine activity and the adverse effect. The concepts of these CLP principles were applied in a WoE evaluation of the metabolism disrupting potential of triphenyl phosphate. Thus, a pathway-based approach can be applied whereby the endocrine activity is evaluated through KEs, the adverse effect is indicated by AOs, and the pathway of key event relationships acts as the biologically plausible link. Given the complex network of pathways that contribute to metabolism disorders, and the fact that few mechanistic insights have been made regarding identified obesogens, the integration of the evidence for MTBE across KCs is limited to examination of potential MOAs through which MTBE may act to elicit effects related to metabolism for which potential activity signals were observed in the KCs.
Many of the data with activity within and across KCs for MTBE were related to aspects of altered insulin and glucose signaling and lipid metabolism, highlighting the importance of considering both non-endocrine and endocrine-related mechanisms through which agents may elicit metabolic disruption. Thus, the MOAs through which MDAs may perturb insulin signaling and lipid metabolism were identified and MTBE (in)activity data from the KCs were mapped to the KEs across in vivo, in vitro, and epidemiological streams of evidence. All data, reliable and non-reliable, were integrated into the MOA assessment, given the limited availability of data mapping to MOAs. As such, the clinical effects data indicative of obesity (e.g., BMI) in the epidemiological studies (all of which are non-reliable) will be incorporated into the identified MOA. As previously discussed and consistent with ECHA CLP guidance, the non-specific toxicological effects arising from systemic toxicity, such as decreased body weight, in rodent toxicology studies should not be considered as an adverse outcome in the identification of endocrine disrupting potential. Therefore, this MOA analysis will focus on the KEs that led up to apical outcomes of associated with metabolism disorders but will exclude consideration of systemic toxicity effects (e.g., increased body weight) from in vivo animal studies. Several endocrine-related and non-endocrine-related MOAs proposed but not accepted by regulators were identified from targeted literature searches for consideration for which there were relevant data for MTBE. The heterogeneity of the existing data and the large MTBE data gaps in the identified MOAs precludes assessment of temporal and dose-concordance for each MOA.

MOA evaluation: perturbed insulin & glucose signaling
T2D is a condition characterized by, among other factors, perturbations in insulin and glucose signaling and insulin resistance. Insulin is a peptide hormone secreted by pancreatic β cells in response to increased blood glucose levels, which stimulates the glucose uptake in various insulin-sensitive tissues (e.g., adipose tissue, liver, skeletal muscle) and conversion of glucose to glycogen in the liver. Data from several KCs can be integrated to evaluate the potential for MTBE to alter insulin signaling through identified proposed MOAs. In the first proposed MOA, secondary insulin resistance in insulin-responsive tissues (KC 4) arises in response to hyperinsulinemia (KC 1, KC 4) from insulin hypersecretion by dysfunctional pancreatic β cells (KC 1, KC 8). Alternatively, it has been suggested that primary insulin resistance originates in insulin-responsive tissues, resulting in a secondary response of the pancreatic β cells to increase insulin secretion. However, evidence for the latter proposed MOA is less supported; therefore, this proposed MOA will not be evaluated here. A second investigated postulated MOA through which T2D may arise is via reduced insulin secretion from dysfunctional pancreatic β cells (KC 1), resulting in hyposinsulinemia, and subsequently hyperglycemia (KC 8) and T2D. Glucagon, secreted by pancreatic β cells, also works to regulate blood glucose through response to hypoglycemia. No data were identified for MTBE related to glucagon’s role in development of T2D, and thus proposed MOAs related to glucagon were not investigated here.
Integration of evidence via MOA evaluation for TD2 (i.e., the AO) related to insulin resistance. Data from all three lines of evidence, including reliable and non-reliable data, were assigned to each KC and then were evaluated for relevance to each KE in the proposed MOA. The data across all three lines of evidence were considered to make an integrated assessment regarding overall evidence for each KE in the proposed MOA (black outlined box). Based on the integrated evidence for each KE, an overall determination was made regarding MTBE’s ability to act through this MOA (leftmost black box).
The first proposed MOA suggests that increased pancreatic insulin release by the pancreas results in hyperinsulinemia, which leads to decreased tissue responsiveness to insulin and insulin resistance (Fig. 2). Reliable data from two KCs and two studies mapped to the first proposed MOA for insulin resistance. Given the limited data mapping to KEs in this proposed MOA, the epidemiological data, despite being non-reliable, were considered for integration across the proposed MOA; these epidemiological data from two KCs mapped to two KEs (Fig. 2). For the first KE (i.e., increased pancreatic insulin secretion), data from one in vivo animal study provided weak evidence that MTBE does not elicit this KE. Reduced pancreatic mRNA expression of insulin (as measured via insulin1 and insulin2) was observed in rats administered MTBE in drinking water at ≥200 μg/L, which the authors reported was related to effects on zinc homeostasis and transport in the pancreas, as indicated by reduced expression of mt1a and slc30a8 at ≥40 μg/L. Given the concerns regarding the dose of MTBE delivered in the drinking water, coupled with the lack of actual measures of insulin secretion (e.g., gene expression data only), the evidence against this KE is considered weak. Further, no additional downstream effects of reduced pancreatic insulin were investigated in this study, including no measures of circulating insulin or insulin resistance. Regarding the second KE (i.e., hyperinsulinemia), there were data from two non-reliable epidemiological studies, with significant limitations regarding generalizability of the findings (Supplementary File 3). There were statistically significantly lower fasting insulin levels in gas station workers compared to non-occupationally exposed workers and lower serum insulin levels in high MTBE-exposed individuals compared to low MTBE-exposed individuals. Therefore, the evidence against this KE (i.e., evidence for hypoinsulinemia) is considered unreliable. Regarding KE 3 (i.e., decreased tissue responsiveness to insulin and insulin resistance), MTBE data from all three lines of evidence (in vivo animal, in vitro animal and human, and epidemiological data) were identified. In an in vitro assay performed in immortalized mouse 3T3-L1 cells matured to adipocytes, there was statistically significant decreased insulin-dependent glucose consumption, but no changes in the expression of the receptor responsible for insulin-dependent glucose transport into cells (Glut4). While this in vitro study may suggest that MTBE affects insulin responsiveness, as no changes in the glucose transporter expression were observed, the in vivo study by did not report any differences in insulin resistance, insulin tolerance, or glucose tolerance (HOMA-IR, IITT, OGTT, respectively) relative to control in mice administered oral gavages of MTBE for 14 weeks at 0.1 to 100 mg/kg/day. No in vivo studies were identified that directly measured insulin-resistance or response in insulin-sensitive tissues of animals exposed to MTBE. In the epidemiological studies by, consistent with the in vivo results, there were no differences in HOMA-IR between the gas station workers and non-occupationally exposed individuals nor in the high MTBE-exposed group compared to the low MTBE-exposed group; however, there was a statistically significant higher mean triglyceride glucose (TyG) index, an index the authors report is indicative of insulin-resistance, in gas station workers compared to non-occupationally exposed individuals. Overall, the evidence that MTBE acts via this pathway is inconsistent across all three evidence streams. Thus, given a lack of clear and consistent evidence available, this evaluation does not support that MTBE acts via this proposed endocrine MOA to interfere with insulin sensitivity (Fig. 2).
Integration of evidence via MOA evaluation for TD2 (i.e., the AO) related to hyperglycemia. Data from all three lines of evidence, including reliable and non-reliable data, were assigned to each KC and then were evaluated for relevance to each KE in the proposed MOA. The data across all three lines of evidence were considered to make an integrated assessment regarding overall evidence for each KE in the proposed MOA (black outlined box). Based on the integrated evidence for each KE, an overall determination was made regarding MTBE’s ability to act through this MOA (leftmost black box).
The second MOA proposes dysfunctional pancreatic β cells have reduced insulin secretion, which leads to hypoinsulinemia and hyperglycemia, resulting in T2D (Fig. 3). Reliable data from five in vivo studies across two KCs mapped to two KEs in the identified proposed MOA; no relevant in vitro studies were identified. As with the first MOA evaluation, given the limited data mapping to KEs in this proposed MOA, the non-reliable epidemiological data were included for integration across the proposed MOA; these data from two KCs mapped to two KEs (Fig. 2). The same data considered for the first KE in the first proposed MOA were considered for the first KE (i.e., reduced pancreatic insulin secretion) in this proposed MOA. The evidence that MTBE decreased insulin secretion was weakly supported by this study in which pancreatic expression of insulin genes was evaluated. Data regarding the second KE (i.e., hypoinsulinemia) were only identified from the two non-reliable epidemiological studies in which statistically significant lower fasting insulin levels were observed in gas station workers compared to non-occupationally exposed workers and statistically significant lower serum insulin levels were observed in high MTBE-exposed individuals compared to low MTBE-exposed individuals, as previously reported. For the third KE (i.e., hyperglycemia), data were identified from five reliable in vivo rodent studies. Increased fasting plasma glucose (FPG) was observed in the study by at only the highest concentration (compared to changes in insulin gene expression at all concentrations); however, significant concerns remain regarding the actual MTBE exposure in this study, as there was no control for MTBE volatility. In contrast to the increased FPG reported by, another study of MTBE exposure via drinking water in which there were adequate controls for MTBE’s volatility found no significant effect on urine glucose in mice administered MTBE in drinking water at up to 15 mg/mL. No significant changes in urine or blood glucose were observed in an inhalation study of MTBE exposure (≤1000 ppm). Regarding other studies of blood glucose, a statistically significant reduction in blood glucose relative to control was observed in MTBE-treated rodents, with a transient increase observed only in females at 14 days but not at 90 days in one study, which was also accompanied by decreased body weight indicative of systemic toxicity. In the non-reliable epidemiological studies, there was statistically significantly higher fasting plasma glucose in gas station workers compared to non-occupationally exposed workers and in high MTBE-exposed individuals compared to low MTBE-exposed individuals. Collectively, the evidence that MTBE acts via this MOA is inconsistent across both evidence streams, including inconsistencies among the in vivo studies considered reliable. Thus, given a lack of clear and consistent evidence available, the MOA evaluation does not support that MTBE acts via this proposed endocrine MOA to interfere with glucose homeostasis (Fig. 3).
Across these two proposed endocrine-related MOAs for diabetes, there is insufficient evidence that MTBE acts as an ED, as it does not fulfill the CLP criteria. Regarding endocrine activity, there was weak and inconsistent evidence for altered insulin-stimulated glucose uptake in vitro and weak evidence for reduced pancreatic gene expression in vivo. However, there was no consistent evidence of adverse effects, as there was no evidence for insulin resistance or glucose tolerance in intact organisms in vivo, and no consistent evidence of hyperglycemia in vivo. In addition, no biologically plausible link was observed between potential endocrine activity and any adverse effects indicative of diabetes, following exposure to MTBE.

MOA evaluation: perturbed lipid metabolism
Integration of evidence via MOA evaluation for obesity (i.e., the AO) related to lipid metabolism. Data from all three lines of evidence, including reliable and non-reliable data, were assigned to each KC and then were evaluated for relevance to each KE in the proposed MOA. The data across all three lines of evidence were considered to make an integrated assessment regarding overall evidence for each KE in the proposed MOA (black outlined box). Based on the integrated evidence for each KE, an overall determination was made regarding MTBE’s ability to act through this MOA (leftmost black box).
Alterations to lipid metabolism have long been implicated in obesity. Lipid metabolism comprises a complex web of mechanisms with many key receptors, transcription factors, and enzymes that occurs in many metabolic active tissues, including the main lipid metabolism organ, the liver, and other tissues such as thyroid and adipose. The liver is a critical organ in lipid metabolism, responsible for lipid synthesis and blood lipid regulation. Data from KC 8 were integrated to evaluate the potential for MTBE to alter lipid metabolism through the identified proposed MOA related to lipid release from the liver. In this proposed MOA, inappropriate production or release of lipids from the liver into circulation may result in increased fat storage in the liver or other organs and tissues, leading to obesity (the AO) (Fig. 4). Among reliable data, only one in vitro study (mapping to KE 1) was identified, and the only in vivo evidence was related to circulating lipid levels (KE 2). Therefore, in vitro assays and epidemiological studies with data relevant to the KEs but considered non-reliable were included in integration across the MOA (Fig. 4). Given BMI and waist circumference were presented as an average (kg/m3 and cm, respectively) by group, and not defined relative to a diagnosis of obesity (e.g., the number of participants with a BMI that is clinically considered obese [e.g., >30 kg/m3] was not presented), these metrics were considered indicators of increased fat storage (i.e., KE 3), rather than a clinical diagnosis of obesity (the AO) in the MOA assessment.
Two in vitro studies were identified that examined the first KE in this proposed MOA. In the reliable study, THP-1 cells were exposed to MTBE, resulting in altered expression of cholesterol efflux transporters (but not cholesterol uptake receptors) and reduced cholesterol efflux. In the non-reliable study, increased cholesterol and triglycerides were measured in the supernatant of HepaRG cells treated with MTBE, which may indicate increased efflux. Given the conflicting reports of cholesterol efflux in vitro, the evidence for this KE is considered inconsistent. Evidence for alterations to blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels (i.e., KE 2) was also inconsistent in the studies of rodents exposed to MTBE orally or via inhalation. In the one non-reliable epidemiological study, no difference in total serum triglycerides was observed between gas station workers and those non-occupationally exposed to MTBE, but the gas station workers had a statistically significant increase in total serum cholesterol relative to the non-occupationally exposed controls. For KE 3 (i.e., increased fat storage in tissues and organs), only non-reliable studies were identified. In vitro in HepaRG cells treated with MTBE, there was a significant increase in intracellular cholesterol and triglycerides content, as well as increased lipid deposition. In the two epidemiological studies, results for BMI were conflicting, and there was no evidence of an association between increased waist circumference and MTBE exposure. Therefore, results for KE 3 are considered unreliable and inconsistent. Thus, across the evidence streams, the evidence that MTBE acts through a proposed lipid metabolism MOA to elicit metabolic disorders lacks consistency. The lack of consistent indications of endocrine activity and adverse effects do not support a biologically plausible link between exposure to MTBE and obesity through this proposed MOA.

Discussion
In this evaluation, the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE was examined through combining the identification of mechanistic data mapped to KCs and integrating them into KEs in proposed MOAs of metabolism disruption. MTBE-specific mechanistic data were organized into KCs of MDAs using a recently published framework described by. Across all evidence streams, the activity assessment for each KC varied, with no or insufficient reliable data in 7 of the KCs, no activity in reliable studies for one KC (4: promotes insulin resistance), inconsistent activity in reliable studies in three KCs (5: disrupts metabolic signaling pathways; 8: causes inappropriate nutrient handling and partitioning; and, 11: induces cellular stress pathways), and activity in reliable studies for one KC (9: promotes chronic inflammation and immune system dysregulation in metabolic tissues), although the observed inflammatory response in the liver may be a general response to xenobiotic exposure rather than inflammation associated with metabolic disruption. The insufficient data identified for most KCs prevents making robust activity determinations, illustrating that reliable data with which to evaluate the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE using this framework is limited.
To further evaluate the potential that MTBE acts as a metabolism disruptor, the weak and inconsistent signals from all data (reliable and non-reliable) underwent further assessment with consideration of a pathway approach in a MOA evaluation. The MOA evaluation demonstrated that despite the relatively large volume of mechanistic literature identified, there are very few mechanistic data relevant to most KEs in the identified MOAs related to metabolism disruptors, representing several data gaps. Overall, the available MTBE-specific data provide inconsistent and/or weak signals that MTBE alters insulin signaling and lipid metabolism. With the lack of KE data identified to support potential MOAs, there is a lack of support that MTBE is an MDA. This is also consistent with data from two studies in which MTBE was administered to rodents on either a high fat diet (HFD) or a high cholesterol diet in which there were only weak activity signals observed suggesting MTBE is not an MDA. In one of these studies, mice were administered a HFD in conjunction with oral gavage of MTBE at 0, 0.1, 1, or 100 mg/kg/day for 14 weeks resulting in no consistent or significant adverse changes in body weight, rate of subcutaneous adipose tissue, serum lipids, liver weight, blood glucose, insulin sensitivity; small, non-dose dependent increased in visceral white adipose tissue rate and adipocyte area (males only); and, a statistically significant increase in insulin resistance in males only. In a study of ApoE −/− mice fed a high cholesterol western diet and administered MTBE at 0, 10, 100, or 1000 μg/kg/day, no statistically significant increases in body weight, various serum lipids, serum glucose, or plasma TNF-1 or IL-1B were observed.
Thus, based upon the evidence identified and through the robust organization of MTBE data by KCs of MDAs, and further integration of identified evidence into KEs within MOAs for obesity and diabetes, MTBE does not meet the WHO definition of an ED or the CLP criteria to be labeled as an ED. This is consistent with a previous assessment that found that MTBE lacks direct endocrine activity. However, in contrast, ANSES reported that MTBE was a suspected ED based on potential to act via an endocrine MOA to elicit insulin resistance. The discrepancy between the conclusions reached by ANSES and this assessment are likely explained by several factors. First, this assessment incorporated data from hand searching and target literature searches, producing a robust database of dozens of studies with mechanistic data potentially relevant to the evaluation of the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE; conversely, the assessment by ANSES relied upon a small subset of select in vivo and in vitro studies related to cholesterol and insulin sensitivity, without consideration of the breadth of the evidence, including epidemiological studies and other in vitro and in vivo studies, many of which fail to show an association between MTBE exposure and metabolism disrupting effects at doses that do not elicit systemic toxicity. The additional data identified herein allow for a more thorough evidence integration approach and WoE conclusion, considering both quantity and quality (i.e., reliability) of the data. ANSES acknowledged that there was “only one study” that showed an effect of MTBE on insulin resistance and considered it “robust and well-conducted” without adequate justification.
As previously stated, this analysis was conducted in line with principles from WHO and CLP guidance for EDs and incorporated two approaches—KCs and MOAs—to evaluate the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE. Overall, this comprehensive analysis identified a greater amount of mechanistic data (epidemiological, in vivo, in vitro) that was used in a transparent approach to evaluate study reliability and employed a dual approach to assess the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE. The findings support that at this time, there is no clear or consistent signal of metabolism disruption observed in the MTBE evidence base, emphasizing that there is no supporting evidence that MTBE is a potential endocrine disruptor through application of the principles of the CLP guidance.
This analysis serves as an example of the rigor needed to evaluate metabolism disrupting potential in the context of endocrine disruption, which is currently not explicitly incorporated into regulatory and agency guidance. However, this robust assessment of the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE has limitations. First, the type and reliability of data available with which to evaluate the potential for MTBE to act as an MDA limit the assessment. Many studies identified with data pertinent to the KCs were not designed explicitly to evaluate the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE; as such, there are data gaps for many KCs used for assessing KEs in the identified proposed MOAs considered. Also, most available studies used relatively large doses of MTBE that elicit systemic toxicity (i.e., reduced body weight), and thus, are not useful in identification of AOs associated with MDAs. Of the mechanistic data that are available across all three evidence streams, methodological and reporting limitations (e.g., lack of controlling for volatility of MTBE, limited dose ranges, potential for confounding, etc.) decrease the reliability of many of the studies identified, especially the epidemiological studies. Further, the MOA assessment was limited by sparse and heterogenous data from limited study designs and reliability, which precludes the assessment of temporal and dose-concordance within each proposed MOA at this time. As such, the assessment is only as reliable and robust as the studies from which data are evaluated and integrated. Additionally, this assessment could be expanded to include a more robust risk of bias analysis beyond the methods employed, which could be incorporated into a more quantitative assessment of activity for each KC, similar to approaches developed for quantitative KCC integration and evaluation. Nevertheless, the strengths of these analyses include the comprehensive evidence identification strategy, and the application of both an approach to map data to the KCs of MDAs and across KEs in MOAs that allows for evaluation of the biological plausibility of proposed MOAs for metabolism disruption in the assessment.

Conclusion
In this analysis, a novel approach was applied to the evaluation of the metabolism disrupting potential of MTBE. In this investigation, the epidemiological, in vivo animal, and in vitro human and animal studies were assessed according to the KCs of MDA as proposed by, with added considerations regarding study reliability, consistent with approaches described by. A critical evaluation of the strength of the evidence for each of the 12 KCs was performed, followed by an overall integration of data and qualitative WoE of activity across each KC. The current evidence base indicates inconsistent signals that MTBE may elicit any effects on lipid, insulin, and glucose related processes. Further analysis demonstrated a lack of consistency in the KC data as mapped to KEs in various proposed MOAs that converge into AOs indicative of metabolism disorders (e.g., obesity, T2D). Both assessments illuminated data gaps in evaluation of the activity of individual KEs and AOs. These analyses highlighted the lack of consistent evidence for (endocrine) activity and adverse effects related to metabolic disruption. As such, MTBE does not meet the definition of an ED based on the. In conclusion, based upon the identified evidence base, MTBE fails to show consistent activity and adverse effects related to metabolic disruption.

Funding/disclosures
ToxStrategies received consulting fees from Sustainable Fuels for preparation of the manuscript. Authors AN Buerger, MJ Vincent, S Fitch, B Rivera, and SJ Borghoff are employed by ToxStrategies, which is a consulting firm that provides services on toxicology and risk assessment issues, to private and public organizations. N Engel is employed by Evonik Oxeno GmbH & Co. KG, a producer of MTBE, and as such receives a salary from the company. J Zhang is an employee of SABIC, a producer of MTBE, and as such receives a salary from the company. EK Rushton is an employee of LyondellBasell, a producer of MTBE, and as such receives a salary from and holds stock in the company. The work reported in this article was conducted during the normal course of employment, and no authors received personal fees.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: ToxStrategies received consulting fees from Sustainable Fuels for preparation of the manuscript. Authors AN Buerger, MJ Vincent, S Fitch, B Rivera, and SJ Borghoff are employed by ToxStrategies, which is a consulting firm that provides services on toxicology and risk assessment issues, to private and public organizations. N Engel is employed by Evonik Oxeno GmbH & Co. KG, a producer of MTBE, and as such receives a salary from the company. J Zhang is an employee of SABIC, a producer of MTBE, and as such receives a salary from the company. EK Rushton is an employee of LyondellBasell, a producer of MTBE, and as such receives a salary from and holds stock in the company. The work reported in this article was conducted during the normal course of employment, and no authors received personal fees.

References
ANSES. SUBSTANCE EVALUATION CONCLUSION as required by REACH Article 48 and EVALUATION REPORT for Tert-butyl methyl ether EC No 216-653-1 CAS RN 1634-04-42021. 2021.
ANSES. AVIS de l’Agence nationale de sécurité sanitaire de l’alimentation, de l’environnement et du travail. 2023.
Exposure profile to traffic related pollution in pediatric age: a biomonitoring study
ATSDR. Toxicological Profile for Methyl tert-Butyl Ether (MTBE). In: Services USDoHaH, editor. 2023.
Chemical toxins: a hypothesis to explain the global obesity epidemic
The toxicity effects of the individual and combined exposure of methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) and tire rubber powder (RP) on Nile tilapia fish (Oreochromis niloticus)
Weight of evidence evaluation of the metabolism disrupting effects of triphenyl phosphate using an expert knowledge elicitation approach
Toxicity of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) following exposure of Wistar Rats for 13 weeks or one year via drinking water
Oncogenicity studies of inhaled methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) in CD-1 mice and F-344 Rats
Systematic evaluation of the evidence base on methyl tert-butyl ether supporting a lack of concern for carcinogenic hazard in humans based on animal cancer studies and mechanistic data
Chun, J.S., B.D. Burleigh-Flayer, W.J. Kintigh, Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether: Vapor Inhalation Oncogenicity Study in Fischer 344 Rats. CTR BRR, Editor: EPA-OTS, 1992.
The role of endocrine disruptors bisphenols and phthalates in obesity: current evidence, perspectives and controversies
Neurotoxicological evaluation of methyl tertiary-butyl ether in rats
Subchronic studies in Sprague-Dawley rats to investigate mechanisms of MTBE-induced Leydig cell cancer
Effect of oral methyl-t-butyl ether (MTBE) on the male mouse reproductive tract and oxidative stress in liver
Responses of the steroidogenic pathway from exposure to methyl-tert-butyl ether and tert-butanol
Two-year drinking water carcinogenicity study of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) in Wistar rats
Effects of subchronic methyl tert-butyl ether ether exposure on male Sprague-Dawley rats
ECHA, Andersson N, Arena M, Auteri D, Barmaz S, et al. Guidance for the identification of endocrine disruptors in the context of Regulations (EU) No 528/2012 and (EC) No 1107/2009. EFSA J.. 2018;16(6):e05311.
ECHA, Guidance on the Application of the CLP Criteria, Version 5.0. Part 3: Health Hazards: European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) Helsinki; 2024.
Environmental obesogens and their impact on susceptibility to obesity: new mechanisms and chemicals
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA). MTBE, Oxygenates, and Motor Gasoline. 2000.
Interactive effects of methyl tertiary-butyl ether (MTBE) and tertiary-amyl methyl ether (TAME), ethanol and some drugs: Triglyceridemia, liver toxicity and induction of CYP (2E1, 2B1) and phase II enzymes in female Wistar rats
EPA. State Actions Banning MTBE (Statewide) 2007.
Early beta cell dysfunction vs insulin hypersecretion as the primary event in the pathogenesis of dysglycaemia
FR-MSCA. Draft Regulatory Management Option Analysis (RMOA) MSCA AF-, editor, 2022.
Methyl tertiary-butyl ether (driveron) three month inhalation toxicity in rats with cover letter dated 021287
Endocrine-disrupting organotin compounds are potent inducers of adipogenesis in vertebrates
Molecular mechanisms underlying chemical liver injury
Glutaminase 1 isoform up-regulation associated with lipid metabolism disorder induced by methyl tertiary-butyl ether in male rats
MTBE exposure may increase the risk of insulin resistance in male gas station workers
Mediation effect of serum zinc on insulin secretion inhibited by methyl tert-butyl ether in gas station workers
The role of glucagon in the pathophysiology and treatment of type 2 diabetes
Prevalence of obesity and severe obesity among adults: United States, 2017-2018
Environmental Obesogens: Mechanisms and Controversies
Metabolism disrupting chemicals and metabolic disorders
Obesity II: establishing causal links between chemical exposures and obesity
Obesogens and obesity: state-of-the-science and future directions summary from a healthy environment and endocrine disruptors strategies workshop
Obesity III: obesogen assays: limitations, strengths, and new directions
Evaluation of offspring sex ratio, sex hormones and antioxidant enzymes following exposure to methyl tertiary butyl ether in adult male Sprague-Dawley rats
A systematic approach for evaluating the quality of experimental toxicological and ecotoxicological data
Application of in vitro models for studying the mechanisms underlying the obesogenic action of endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) as food contaminants-a review
Consensus on the key characteristics of metabolism disruptors
Methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE)-induced cytotoxicity and oxidative stress in isolated rat spermatogenic cells
The effects of methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) on the male rat reproductive system
Cytotoxicity and oxidative stress study in cultured rat Sertoli cells with Methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) exposure
Oxidative stress and DNA damage in earthworms induced by methyl tertiary-butyl ether in natural soils
Evaluation of 13-week inhalation toxicity study on methyl t-butyl ether (MTBE) in Fischer 344 rats
Obesity I: overview and molecular and biochemical mechanisms
SIRT1 attenuated oxidative stress induced by methyl tert-butyl ether in HT22 cells
Emerging concepts and opportunities for endocrine disruptor screening of the non-EATS modalities
The need for good practice in the application of mechanistic constructs in hazard and risk assessment
A systematic approach for evaluating and scoring human data
Methyl tertiary butyl ether lacks tumor-promoting activity in N-nitrosodiethylamine-initiated B6C3F1 female mouse liver
Comparative short-term effects of methyl tertiary butyl ether and unleaded gasoline vapor in female B6C3F1 mice
Methyl tertiary butyl ether-induced endocrine alterations in mice are not mediated through the estrogen receptor
Gasoline-derived methyl tert-butyl ether as a potential obesogen linked to metabolic syndrome
Methyl tertiary-butyl ether inhibits THP-1 macrophage cholesterol efflux in vitro and accelerates atherosclerosis in ApoE-deficient mice in vivo
Fourteen- and ninety-day oral toxicity studies of methyl tertiary-butyl ether in Sprague-Dawley rats
Exposure to methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) is associated with mitochondrial dysfunction in rat
Disturbance of zinc and glucose homeostasis by methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE); evidence for type 2 diabetes
Toxicity of methyl tertiary-butyl ether on human blood lymphocytes
Biochemical effects of methyl tertiary-butyl ether in extended vapour exposure of rats
Differential toxic effects of methyl tertiary butyl ether and tert-butanol on rat fibroblasts in vitro
Beyond the surface: Consequences of methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE) exposure on oxidative stress, haematology, genotoxicity, and histopathology in rainbow trout
Silva, L.K., Espenship MF, Pine BN, Ashley DL, De Jesus VR, Blount BC. Methyl tertiary-butyl ether exposure from gasoline in the U.S. Population, NHANES 2001-2012. Environ. Health Perspect. 2019;127(12):127003.
Key characteristics of carcinogens as a basis for organizing data on mechanisms of carcinogenesis
Effect of methyl tert-butyl ether on adipogenesis and glucose metabolism in vitro and in vivo
Carcinogenicity of automotive gasoline and some oxygenated gasoline additives
miR-18a-5p/PXR/SREBP2 was involved in MAFLD associated with methyl tert-butyl ether among petrol station workers
WHO. Aspartame, methyleugenol, and isoeugenol. In: IARC, editor. IARC Monogr Identif Carcinog Hazards Hum, 2024.
WHO. Global Assessment of The State-Of-The-Science of Endocrine Disruptors. In: Safety IPoC, editor. 2002.
WHO. State of the science of endocrine disrupting chemicals-2012. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2012.
WHO. Report of the Advisory Group to Recommend Priorities for the IARC Monographs during 2020–2024. In: (IARC) IAfRoC, editor. 2019.
A framework for systematic evaluation and quantitative integration of mechanistic data in assessments of potential human carcinogens
Induction of testosterone biotransformation enzymes following oral administration of methyl tert-butyl ether to male Sprague-Dawley rats
Alterations in endocrine responses in male sprague-dawley rats following oral administration of methyl tert-butyl ether
An investigation of methyl tert‑butyl ether‑induced cytotoxicity and protein profile in chinese hamster ovary cells
Relationship between methyl tertiary butyl ether exposure and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a cross-sectional study among petrol station attendants in southern China
Methyl tert-butyl ether inhibits pubertal development of Leydig cells in male rats by inducing mitophagy and apoptosis

Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crtox.2026.100290.