Unexplained breathlessness: Integrating pathophysiological insights with clinical evaluation
Unexplained breathlessness is a challenging symptom encountered across diverse medical conditions. This review will briefly overview the interplay between central neural mechanisms and peripheral receptor activity leading to symptom perception. A holistic and multidisciplinary approach to unexplained breathlessness is crucial to assess and optimise known comorbidities, as well as investigate potential less common conditions associated with dyspnoea. Specific advanced testing modalities will be briefly discussed in the context of breathing pattern disorders, laryngeal hyperreactivity, disorders of the pulmonary vasculature, autonomic dysfunction and cardiovascular diseases.
Graphical abstract

Key points
Breathlessness is a common symptom defined as a ‘subjective experience of breathing discomfort that consists of qualitatively distinct sensations that vary in intensity’.
Approximately 27% of adults aged 40 and older report experiencing breathlessness of any intensity.
Dyspnoea arises from a mismatch between the neural respiratory drive generated by the medullary and cortical efferent centres and the sensory feedback from the various receptors within the respiratory system.
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) should be considered in all cases of breathlessness that remains unexplained following directed cardiopulmonary investigations.
The management of complex breathlessness requires a tailored and multidisciplinary approach that starts with investigating and optimising comorbidities, and then carefully considers advanced testing at experienced centres.

Introduction
Breathlessness is a common symptom defined by the official American Thoracic Society statement on dyspnoea as a ‘subjective experience of breathing discomfort that consists of qualitatively distinct sensations that vary in intensity’. The prevailing theory is that dyspnoea arises when there is a conscious awareness of the mismatch between the expected sensory signals (‘what the brain expects’) and the actual afferent feedback received (‘what the brain receives’) from receptors in the respiratory muscles, lungs, airways and chest wall.
Since this pivotal definition offered by the American Thoracic Society, multiple shades of meaning have been introduced in common practice. Indeed, expressions such as complex, unexplained or out-of-proportion breathlessness are now widely adopted by the medical community. For clarity, unexplained breathlessness will be hereby defined as persistent dyspnoea for which no clear cause can be identified after an initial, directed evaluation, such as that proposed by NHS England. Complex breathlessness is dyspnoea with multiple contributing factors, often involving overlapping respiratory, cardiovascular, neuromuscular and/or psychological components. Lastly, out-of-proportion breathlessness refers to all those cases of mismatch between the severity of objective cardiopulmonary disease and the level of breathlessness reported by the patient.
In this brief CME review, we will try to untangle the puzzle of breathlessness by providing a state-of-the-art overview of its neuropathophysiological basis and a multi-modal approach to its assessment, with a particular focus on complex and unexplained dyspnoea.

Epidemiology
Breathlessness affects a significant proportion of the adult population and is particularly prevalent among older people and individuals with comorbid conditions. According to published epidemiological studies, approximately 27% of adults aged 40 and older report experiencing breathlessness of any intensity. Moderate to severe dyspnoea, instead, has been reported in more than one third of people over 70 years of age.
Chronic breathlessness is most commonly associated with respiratory disease (61%), followed by cardiac disease (21%) and obesity or a sedentary lifestyle (7%). Among middle-aged individuals, asthma is the leading cause. Other risk factors include a low BMI, smoking history, female sex, poor lung function, anxiety, depression and lower socioeconomic status.
Breathlessness has also been associated with worse survival, both in the general population and in specific subsets (eg older age and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients). It negatively impacts quality of life, activity levels and social function including participation in the workforce, with significant costs for the society.

The perception of breathlessness
Breathing is predominantly an unconscious process that can be brought into awareness either voluntarily through cortically mediated processes, or automatically through the gating mechanism that allows appropriate behavioural actions to be taken in response to physiological stimuli.
It has been hypothesised that respiratory sensations occur when respiratory afferent signals are gated into the cerebral cortex, triggering both a somatosensory awareness of breathing and an associated emotional response. Respiratory sensations are processed in the cerebral cortex through a complex interplay between afferent signals from various receptors and efferent outputs from both medullary and cortical centres to the respiratory muscles. These sensory receptors include mechanoreceptors located in the respiratory muscles and chest wall, which respond to stretch; peripheral chemoreceptors at the carotid bifurcations and aortic arch, which detect fluctuations in arterial oxygen tension (PaO₂) as well as acidosis and increases in arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO₂); and central chemoreceptors in the medulla, which respond to changes in pH and PaCO₂. In the lungs, rapidly adapting stretch receptors (RARs), slowly adapting stretch receptors (SARs) and vagally innervated bronchial C-fibres play key roles – SARs are activated by increased airway wall tension during constriction, while RARs are stimulated by rapid changes in lung volume or irritants inhalation, and C-fibres respond to both mechanical and chemical triggers. The activation of the transient receptor potential melastatin 8 (TRPM8) channels in trigeminal thermoreceptors of the nose and face by cold airflow creates a pleasant sensation of an open nose and lower airways, reducing work of breathing and reliance on accessory muscles. Disruption of this reflex may lead to dyspnoea and, conversely, stimulation with external airflow may potentially attenuate it. These sensory inputs are relayed to the medullary respiratory centres for motor feedback and ascend via the limbic system and thalamus to the somatosensory, insular and cingulate cortices, where the awareness of breathing effort and unpleasantness is processed.
Schematic representation of the central and peripheral mechanisms involved in the perception of breathlessness. Respiratory muscle activity stems from the integration of motor commands from the medulla and motor cortex at the spinal motor neuron level. This activation of respiratory effectors generates afferent feedback that is relayed back to both the motor command centres and the somatosensory cortex. Here, a comparison occurs between the corollary discharge – a copy of the motor command sent to the somatosensory cortex – and the actual afferent feedback, potentially leading to a sensory mismatch (also referred to as ‘neuromechanical dissociation’). Dyspnoea arises when the limbic cortex attributes negative emotions to this mismatch, adding an affective dimension to the experience. Dotted lines indicate the corollary discharge.
Fig 1
Dyspnoea therefore arises from a discrepancy between the neural respiratory drive generated by the medullary and cortical efferent centres and the sensory feedback from the various receptors within the respiratory system, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 1.
Different afferent inputs can lead to distinct sensory experiences, meaning that dyspnoea is not a uniform sensation, but rather comprises several distinct components. The primary sensations include: 1) work/effort, where breathing is perceived as requiring significant effort; 2) tightness, characterised by a constricted or heavy chest; and 3) air hunger, described as an unsatisfied urge to breathe or the feeling of being starved for air. It is thought that these perceptions arise from different physiological mechanisms. For instance, air hunger may typically result from excessive stimulation of brainstem respiratory centres – triggered by factors such as carbon dioxide or hypoxia – that is not adequately met by the ventilatory response. In our experience and others’, air hunger is frequently seen in patients with dysfunctional breathing with or without nasal obstruction, and in those with autonomic dysregulation, whereas the sensation of chest tightness originates from airflow obstruction.

Assessment
In this section, we will provide a brief overview of the available tools to assess complex and unexplained breathlessness. The definition of specific diagnostic pathways is outside of the scope of this CME review, as we appreciate that it relies on the available resources of the specific setting, may it be a GP clinic, a district general hospital or a tertiary referral centre.
In the case of unexplained symptoms, almost by definition, the most common causes have already been assessed. Therefore, symptoms out of proportion to the physiological and structural defect, rarer diseases or less usual presentations of common conditions should be considered. Despite this, it is recommended to avoid jumping directly into advanced testing for rare/unusual conditions, but rather follow the traditional medical approach to any symptom. This includes a careful multidimensional assessment of dyspnoea, a thorough history and examination – with particular attention to any unoptimised comorbidity, and planning of investigations, as recommended by the NHS England Breathlessness Pathway. Any uncontrolled comorbidity should be recognised and treated as appropriate; among the most commonly found there are asthma, obesity and deconditioning, smoking, gastro-oesophageal reflux, chronic rhinosinusitis and allergies. As such, a multidisciplinary approach to its assessment and management is crucial.
A multitude of tools to assess the different dimensions and implications of dyspnoea have been developed. Among the most widely adopted, the Borg CR10 is a non-linear scale used to quantify the intensity of breathlessness, ranging from 0 (not breathless at all) to 10 (the most intense breathlessness ever experienced). The Borg scale is also the most frequently used to evaluate dyspnoea during exercise testing. The modified Medical Research Council dyspnoea score (mMRC) is instead largely used to determine the functional impact of breathlessness, ranging from 0 (on strenuous exercise) to 4 (even while dressing or undressing).
Suggested investigation for the diagnostic work-up of complex and unexplained breathlessness.
Table 1
Tests	Comments	 	Initial screening	 	Blood tests	- Anaemia / low iron can contribute to breathlessness.- High eosinophil and/or IgE levels may suggest underlying eosinophilic airway inflammation and atopy in the context of obstructive lung disease.- Raised BNP/NT-proBNP levels may suggest heart failure.- Consider thyroid, muscle enzymes and vitamin D.	 	ECG	- Resting ECGs are often normal in cases of exertional dyspnoea.- Longer recordings with Holter monitors or implanted loop recorders may be considered depending on the symptoms.	 	Chest X-ray	- Often the initial imaging modality.- May pick up additional signs of diaphragmatic elevation/paresis.	 	Spirometry	- With bronchial challenge tests or reversibility with bronchodilators as indicated.- Inspiratory obstruction may suggest extrathoracic (eg laryngeal) obstruction.	 	Lung volumes	- In obstructive disease, increased residual volume and residual volume to total lung capacity ratio (RV/TLC) – especially in emphysema – can help identify candidates for lung volume reduction.	 	Gas transfer	- A decreased DLCO indicates impaired gas exchange at the alveolar–capillary interface and is commonly seen in interstitial lung disease, emphysema and pulmonary vascular disorders.- Diseases that only limit lung expansion will reduce gas volume, but the surface area and membrane properties change only slightly (VA reduced, but KCO rises with only small DLCO reductions).	 	FeNO	- It can help identify type 2 inflammation in patients with an obstructive pattern.- It confirms a diagnosis of asthma if ≥50 ppb, in adults with a suggestive history.	 	Echocardiogram	- It can commonly detect left ventricular systolic dysfunction, valvular heart disease, indirect signs of pulmonary hypertension and pericardial disease.- It can also show signs of left ventricular diastolic dysfunction (eg dilated left atrium in sinus rhythm, left ventricular hypertrophy, E/E’ ratio on tissue Doppler > 13). In symptomatic patients with normal resting physiology, stress echocardiography may be warranted.	 		 	Advanced testing	 		 	Arterial blood gas	- It provides information on oxygenation, ventilation and acid–base status.- It helps detecting extrathoracic causes of dyspnea, such as hyperventilation due to metabolic acidosis (eg Kussmaul breathing).	 	Chest CT scan	- High resolution, to better assess lung interstitium, if suspecting ILD.- Can be performed with specific protocols (eg for EDAC) based on clinical suspicion.- Further testing, including CT sinuses, CTCA, CTPA as indicated.	 	Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET)	- CPET allows the functional integrated assessment of the cardiac, pulmonary and skeletal muscle systems. It can effectively detect ventilatory and gas exchange abnormalities during exercise.- CPET can help identify deconditioning, obesity, dynamic hyperinflation and dysfunctional breathing as potential contributors to unexplained dyspnoea.- Chronotropic incompetence (eg failure to appropriately increase the HR on exercise) is a rare cause of breathlessness and can be assessed on CPET. In addition, there may be clues from a tachycardic response for autonomic dysfunction, eg PoTS.	 	V/Q or SPECT scan	- Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary disease imaging modalities.- SPECT is more sensitive than planar radionucleotide perfusion scan.	 	Cardiac MRI	- It represents the gold standard method for assessing right ventricular function.- Contrast enhancement allows the identification of myocardial fibrosis.	 	Bronchoscopy and laryngoscopy	- Bronchoscopy is the gold standard method to diagnose EDAC.- Laryngoscopy can assess laryngeal dysfunctions.- Continuous laryngoscopy during exercise is used to diagnose EILO.	 	Respiratory muscle function	- Essential whenever respiratory muscle weakness is suspected.- Sniff nasal inspiratory pressure is a simple bedside test of inspiratory muscle function.- Advanced tests include transdiaphragmatic pressure measurement (Pgas – Poes), phrenic nerve stimulation and diaphragm electromyogram.	 	GI investigations	- Useful to detect occult gastro-oesophageal and laryngopharyngeal reflux.
IgE, immunoglobulin E; BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; NT-proBNP, N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in one second; FVC, forced vital capacity; VA, alveolar volume; KCO, transfer coefficient for carbon monoxide; DLCO, diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide; ECG, electrocardiogram; FeNO, fractional exhaled nitric oxide; ppb, parts per billion; E/E’ ratio, ratio of peak early mitral inflow velocity over the early diastolic mitral annular velocity; PoTS, postural orthostatic syndrome; V/Q, ventilation/perfusion; SPECT, single photon emission computed tomography; ILD, interstitial lung disease; EDAC, excessive dynamic airway collapse; CTCA, CT coronary angiogram; CTPA, CT pulmonary angiogram; HR, heart rate; CPET, cardiopulmonary exercise testing; EILO, exercise-induced laryngeal obstruction; Pgas, pressure in the stomach; Poes, pressure in the oesophagus.
As recommended by the NHS England pathway, initial assessment should include a thorough history, physical examination and initial respiratory and cardiac investigations, as outlined in Table 1. These should include blood tests (including full blood count, iron profile, vitamin D, thyroid function, muscle enzymes, N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) and IgE levels), fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO), ECG, chest imaging, pulmonary function testing and echocardiography. Further advanced tests, such as exercise testing, cardiac magnetic resonance, bronchoscopy or neurophysiological tests, to cite a few, should be undertaken at experienced centres.
Overview of cardiopulmonary exercise testing. The figure explains a few key CPET parameters among the many physiological measures it provides. VO2, oxygen uptake; HR, heart rate; SV, stroke volume; O2, oxygen; VT, tidal volume; Bf, breathing frequency; BPD, breathing pattern disorders; IC, inspiratory capacity.
Fig 2
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) stands as the gold standard method to assess exercise intolerance. It should be considered in all cases of breathlessness that remain unexplained following pulmonary function testing, chest imaging, and first-line cardiac investigations, including echocardiography. An overview of the main CPET parameters is provided in Fig. 2.
It is a particularly versatile tool that can be undertaken both non-invasively or with specific ‘add-ons’ to address specific questions. For example, invasive CPET (iCPET) is performed with the use of a Swan–Ganz catheter, just as in right heart catheterisation, and is used to diagnose exercise pulmonary hypertension (EPH), pre-load failure and in assessing early signs of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. On the other hand, continuous laryngoscopy during exercise (CLE) has been used to assess exercise-induced laryngeal obstruction (EILO).

Specific considerations

Breathing pattern disorders
Breathing pattern disorders (BPD) – sometimes also referred to as ‘dysfunctional breathing’ – are characterised by deranged ventilatory biomechanics resulting in breathlessness, with complex physiological and psychological interplays. After a thorough assessment, there might not be organic causes identified; however, many lesser-recognised causes may be overlooked. Additionally, BPD may be present when breathlessness is out of proportion to an underlying trigger, and may be heightened by anxiety or stress. The prevalence of BPD in the general population has been reported around 9%; however, in patients with chronic respiratory diseases, it can be significantly more frequent.
Currently, there is no consensus regarding its precise definition and classification, with several proposals being made. According to a pathophysiological approach, Boulding et al proposed five types of thoracic dysfunctional breathing: hyperventilation, periodic deep sighing, thoracic dominant breathing, forced abdominal expiration and thoracoabdominal asynchrony.
There is no gold standard diagnostic test yet, but it requires the exclusion of other organic cardiopulmonary or metabolic underlying causes. The Nijmegen questionnaire, Breathing Pattern Assessment Tool (BPAT), Manual Assessment of Respiratory Motion (MARM) and breath hold time are currently widely used for BPD screening and assessment. As a comprehensive tool to investigate the pathophysiology of dyspnoea, CPET has been used to objectively assess abnormal ventilatory responses during exercise. Despite the absence of definite CPET criteria for the diagnosis of BPD, some typical features and patterns can be recognised (not necessarily simultaneously). 1) High breathing frequency (Bf) at rest with a rapid increase in the early phase of exercise; 2) highly variable and erratic Bf and tidal volume (Vt) kinetics; 3) high ventilatory equivalents for CO2 (VeqCO2); 4) low end-tidal CO2 tension (PetCO2); 5) high minute ventilation/CO2 output (VE/VCO2) ratio and slope with usually a normal ratio of dead volume to tidal volume (VD/VT).
It is important to assess the nasal airway, since nasal obstruction may lead to dysfunctional breathing and air hunger. Furthermore, BPD is very frequently seen in autonomic dysfunction, such as overlapping conditions including postural orthostatic syndrome (PoTS) / intolerance, inappropriate sinus tachycardia, chronic fatigue syndrome and post-acute COVID syndrome. The cornerstones of treatment include optimising any underlying condition (eg asthma being the most frequent), breathing pattern retraining with specialised physiotherapists and/or speech and language therapists, exercise training, cognitive behavioural therapy, yoga and relaxation techniques.

Airways
Laryngeal hyperresponsiveness, including inducible laryngeal obstruction (ILO), is an often overlooked contributory mechanism to complex and unexplained breathlessness. It presents with breathlessness, noisy breathing, and often discomfort localised to the throat. It has been documented in up to half of non-severe asthmatic patients, with an even higher prevalence in severe asthma. Exercise-induced laryngeal obstruction (EILO) has been documented as another condition leading to exertional breathlessness, especially in young female patients, associated with turbulent airflow in the upper airways during high-intensity exercise. Continuous laryngoscopy, both at rest/baseline and under the stress circumstances associated with symptom onset (eg exercise), is essential for the diagnosis. High-quality data on its effective management are currently lacking in the literature, but speech and language therapy in a highly specialised centre is usually regarded as the gold standard.
Large airway collapse (LAC), which encompasses excessive dynamic airway collapse (EDAC) and tracheobronchomalacia, is another often unrecognised contributor to complex or unexplained breathlessness. Characterised by an excessive collapse of the central airways during exhalation, this condition manifests with dyspnoea, difficulty with expectoration, and expiratory wheezes – symptoms that overlap with many other respiratory disorders. Therefore, whenever these symptoms persist despite standard treatments (eg the use of bronchodilators for wheezing), this condition should be considered in the differential. While dynamic CT scanning at end-inspiration and on forced expiration is the most sensitive non-invasive modality, bronchoscopic assessment of airway collapse is the diagnostic gold standard. Treatments include physiotherapy, positive airway pressure therapy, stenting and surgical interventions.

Pulmonary vasculature
Involvement of the pulmonary vasculature should be considered in cases of unexplained or out-of-proportion exertional breathlessness.
The development of pulmonary hypertension (pH), for example, is being increasingly recognised as the overt involvement of the pulmonary vasculature in the clinical course of many pulmonary conditions, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). In IPF, patients with exertional dyspnoea and exercise intolerance out of proportion to the extent of their fibrotic lung disease, based on imaging and pulmonary function tests, should be investigated for associated pH. Echocardiography is the recommended screening tool, and a recent Delphi consensus statement proposed a diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) <40% predicted, a rapid decline in DLCO (>15%) and a forced vital capacity (FVC)/DLCO ratio >1.6 as PFT-related triggers to prompt pH screening.
Patients with persistent unexplained breathlessness despite adequate anticoagulation after a pulmonary embolism should be screened for chronic thromboembolic pulmonary disease (CTEPD). V/Q scintigraphy remains the most effective screening tool to exclude CTEPD and requires at least 3 months of effective anticoagulation. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) is commonly used to diagnose CTEPD, but a negative result cannot rule it out, as CT scans may miss distal disease.
A minority of patients with unexplained exertional breathlessness, with normal resting haemodynamics, may display exercise pH (EPH). This requires exercise right heart catheterisation for diagnosis and is defined by a mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP)/cardiac output (CO) slope >3 mmHg/L/min between rest and exercise. Whenever suspected, onward referral to a specialist centre is warranted.

Neuromuscular and chest wall considerations
A wide array of neuromuscular and musculoskeletal conditions can be found in cases of complex and unexplained breathlessness, including chest wall deformities, kyphoscoliosis, motor neuron disease, muscular dystrophies and diaphragmatic paresis. Respiratory muscle weakness should always be assessed in cases of apparently unexplained breathlessness. Respiratory muscle weakness may be indicated by symptoms such as breathlessness that worsens when bending forward or when lying flat/underwater, and by paradoxical abdominal motion on examination. A very simple, bedside indicator of respiratory muscle strength can be obtained by measuring the sniff nasal inspiratory pressure.

Cardiovascular diseases
Cardiovascular diseases are highly prevalent among patients with exertional dyspnoea. However, in the absence of specific associated symptoms/signs such as radiating chest pain, palpitations or peripheral oedema, subtler forms of cardiovascular involvement, such as left ventricular diastolic dysfunction or mild forms of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF) may remain overlooked.
Among cardiac conditions frequently not picked up by resting routine investigations (eg ECG, BNP levels or echocardiography), there are dynamic diastolic dysfunction, dynamic mitral regurgitation, chronotropic insufficiency, exertional arrhythmias and dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction, to cite a few.
In some series, almost one fifth of patients with unexplained breathlessness may be diagnosed with a recently proposed syndrome of pre-load failure; a condition of insufficient blood flow return to the heart, resulting in several physiological perturbations, such increased dead space ventilation and peripheral shunting. It is diagnosed through invasive CPET and increasing the salt/fluid intake is currently the mainstay of non-pharmacological management, although where there is an overlap with PoTS, then other pharmacological interventions can be considered (see below).
Following initial cardiac screenings, further investigations may therefore be warranted, including exercise echocardiography, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, 24-hour ECG, and exercise heart catheterisation among others.

Autonomic neural dysfunctions
A variety of conditions associated with autonomic dysfunction can lead to breathlessness. Among the most widely recognised entities, postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (PoTS) is especially prevalent in younger women. PoTS is frequently triggered by another illness, such as viral infections (including SARS-CoV-2). Symptoms (including palpitations, dizziness, headaches and nausea) are most pronounced when standing and tend to improve when lying down. General medical and cardiological evaluations usually appear normal, often resulting in a delayed diagnosis. An active stand test or tilt table test is used to confirm the diagnosis. Both non-pharmacological treatments (such as increasing fluid and salt intake) and pharmacological therapies (eg pyridostigmine, midodrine, fludrocortisone and rate-limiting drugs) are available, albeit with limited data.

Affective disorders
Lastly, the whole range of affective disorders, from generalised anxiety to depression, can significantly influence the perception of breathlessness. It has been shown that even without any clearly defined physical illness, individuals with low mood and anxiety tend to report a wide range of somatic and visceral symptoms, including dyspnoea. While seldom the only or direct cause of breathlessness, affective disorders negatively impact clinical outcomes. A specialist psychological referral should therefore be considered whenever anxiety/mood factors are deemed contributory.

Conclusion
In conclusion, the evaluation of unexplained breathlessness requires a structured, stepwise approach beginning with a comprehensive history and physical examination. A multidisciplinary strategy is essential, addressing both the physiological and psychological dimensions of the condition. The integration of systematic assessment techniques with patient-centred care can ensure a more accurate diagnosis and effective management, ultimately improving patient outcomes.

Funding
This article did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Andrea Baccelli: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Francesco Lo Giudice: Writing – review & editing, Supervision. Gulammehdi Haji: Writing – review & editing. Rachel J. Davies: Writing – review & editing. Wendy Gin-Sing: Writing – review & editing. Luke S. Howard: Writing – review & editing.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
An official American Thoracic Society Statement: update on the mechanisms, Assessment, and Management of dyspnea
England NHS. NHS England » adult breathlessness pathway (pre-diagnosis): diagnostic pathway support tool. Accessed March 24, 2025. https://www.england.nhs.uk/long-read/adult-breathlessness-pathway-pre-diagnosis-diagnostic-pathway-support-tool/.
Predictors of dyspnoea prevalence: results from the BOLD study
Absolute values of lung function explain the sex difference in breathlessness in the general population
Dyspnoea and quality of life in older people at home
Predictors of chronic breathlessness: a large population study
Dyspnea is a better predictor of 5-year survival than airway obstruction in patients with COPD
Lower workforce participation is associated with more severe persisting breathlessness
Cortical and subcortical central neural pathways in respiratory sensations
The Human perception of breathing: how do we perceive breathing and why surgery cannot always resolve nasal congestion
The unpleasantness of perceived dyspnea is processed in the anterior insula and amygdala
The multiple dimensions of Dyspnea: review and hypotheses
Breathlessness and dysfunctional breathing in patients with postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS): the impact of a physiotherapy intervention
Medically unexplained symptoms: assessment and management
Dyspnoea: a multidimensional and multidisciplinary approach
American College of Chest Physicians. ATS/ACCP Statement on cardiopulmonary exercise testing
Invasive cardiopulmonary exercise testing in the evaluation of unexplained dyspnea: insights from a multidisciplinary dyspnea center
The prevalence of dysfunctional breathing in adults in the community with and without asthma
Dysfunctional breathing: a review of the literature and proposal for classification
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing in the assessment of dysfunctional breathing
Central airway collapse, an underappreciated cause of respiratory morbidity
Vascular involvement in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Screening strategies for pulmonary hypertension in patients with interstitial lung disease: A multidisciplinary Delphi study
2022 ESC/ERS guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension
Respiratory muscle assessment in clinical practice
Cause and evaluation of chronic dyspnea in a pulmonary disease clinic
Extracardiac abnormalities of preload reserve: mechanisms underlying exercise limitation in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, autonomic dysfunction, and liver disease
Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome: JACC focus seminar
Symptoms and the body: taking the inferential leap
This article has an accompanying continuing medical education (CME) activity. Completion of this CME activity enables RCP members to earn two external CPD credits. The CME questions are available at: https://cme.rcp.ac.uk/.