Evaluation of organ developmental toxicity of environmental toxicants using zebrafish embryos
There is increasing global concern about environmental pollutants, such as heavy metals, plastics, pharmaceuticals, personal care products, and pesticides, which have been detected in a variety of environments and are likely to be exposed to nontarget organisms, including humans. Various animal models have been utilized for toxicity assessment, and zebrafish are particularly valuable for studying the toxicity of various compounds owing to their similarity to other aquatic organisms and 70% genetic similarity to humans. Their development is easy to observe, and transgenic models for organs such as the heart, liver, blood vessels, and nervous system enable efficient studies of organ-specific toxicity. This suggests that zebrafish are a valuable tool for evaluating toxicity in specific organs and forecasting the potential impacts on other nontarget species. This review describes organ toxicity caused by various toxic substances and their mechanisms in zebrafish.

INTRODUCTION
There is growing worldwide concern regarding environmental pollutants, including heavy metals, plastics, pharmaceuticals, personal care products (PPCPs), and pesticides. These environmental pollutants have been detected in various aquatic environments, and their potential for human exposure has increased as a result of the ecological cycle. Various in vitro and in vivo models have been developed to investigate the toxic effects of environmental pollutants.
Zebrafish animal models are widely used to examine the effects of numerous toxicants because of their various advantages. They have comparable reactivities to toxicants in other aquatic organisms and are 70% genetically similar to humans, with 80% similarity in genes associated with disease. They have transparent embryos, making it easy to observe changes during development and to use various transgenic models to determine toxicity in different organs. Numerous organ toxicities, including cardiotoxicity, vascular toxicity, hepatotoxicity, and neurotoxicity, have been examined in zebrafish models. Because the structure and physiology of each organ are similar to those of humans, it is possible to predict the toxic effects on aquatic organisms as well as on humans.
This review describes the effects of common environmental contaminants frequently found in aquatic environments on different zebrafish organs. Various transgenic zebrafish models with fluorescent proteins attached to organ-specific markers, such as the heart, blood vessels, liver, and nerves, have been used to investigate abnormal structures and alterations in organ-specific gene expression. Moreover, genes and signaling pathways involved in the development and function of each organ were identified to elucidate the mechanisms of toxicity. This indicates that zebrafish can be effectively used to assess organ-specific toxicity and predict potential effects on other nontarget organisms.

ZEBRAFISH ANIMAL MODEL FOR TOXICITY ASSESSMENT AND ITS DEVELOPMENTAL PROCESS
Zebrafish are small; therefore, they can be bred on a large scale, have a relatively short generation period, and have high fecundity. Additionally, females lay approximately 200 eggs per week through external fertilization, and because the embryos are transparent, the development of internal tissues and organs can be easily monitored. Moreover, zebrafish have the advantage of being similar to many aquatic organisms in terms of their reactivity to toxicants. They are 70% genetically similar to humans; therefore, the toxic effects of various toxicants can be predicted in aquatic organisms as well as in humans. These advantages have led to their widespread use in toxicity assessment.
Graphical illustration depicts the developmental process of the blood vessels, heart, nerves, and liver in zebrafish larvae.
Fig. 1
Primary neurogenesis in zebrafish begins at approximately 3-somite and is completed by 24 hours postfertilization (hpf), with changes in neural and axonal pathways assessed at 48 hpf. Myelinated Schwann cell precursors in the peripheral nervous system were observed at 2 days postfertilization (dpf), and myelinating oligodendrocytes in the central nervous system (CNS) were observed at 60 hpf (Fig. 1). Myelin loss and dysfunction are pathological features of several neurological diseases.
Blood vessels are the first organ system to be created during vertebrate embryonic development through the process of angiogenesis, where vascular endothelial cells coalesce to form vascular cords, and the initial vascular network expands by dividing or elongating existing blood vessels through angiogenesis. The cardiovascular system of zebrafish is essential for survival 7 days after fertilization, and the endocardium, the inner lining of the heart, is formed by vascular endothelial cells.
The zebrafish heart is the first organ to form during embryonic development and has a simple structure with 1 ventricle and 1 atrium compared to the human heart. The heart precursors are located on the side of the blastocyst, form a linear heart tube at 24 hpf, clearly divide into an atrioventricular structure at 48 hpf, and eventually form a S-shaped heart through cardiac looping (Fig. 1). Endocardial cushions are then formed between the chambers, and the heart valve structure is reshaped to prevent blood from flowing backward. Additionally, zebrafish embryos can progress to the late heart formation stage without circulation, because they receive oxygen through passive diffusion.
At approximately 30 hpf, hepatic anlagen initially appears as a small protrusion on the left side of the intestinal rod. At 2 dpf, the liver bud was enlarged, indicating a transition from budding to the growth phase and formation of the hepatic duct. Additionally, liver growth occurs as blood circulates through the hepatic blood vessels, and its size increases up to 10-fold between 72 and 120 hpf. This organ plays an important role in the circulatory system by detoxifying toxic substances and secreting bile to aid digestion. The zebrafish liver first expresses liver-specific factors, such as hhex and prox1 at 24 hpf, and development is complete at 120 hpf.

ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTANTS THAT AFFECT AQUATIC ENVIRONMENTS
Many environmental pollutants are emerging as global concerns. We selected and briefly described representative toxic substances that are frequently detected in the aquatic environment and are likely to affect nontarget organisms.

Heavy Metal
Heavy metals are divided into toxic metals (eg, cadmium and mercury) and essential trace metals (eg, manganese and iron) and pollute the environment through various routes, such as waste disposal and fossil fuel combustion. They are not biodegradable and remain in the environment for a long time when released into ecosystems, thereby affecting both humans and animals. For example, elevated concentrations of total mercury and methylmercury have been reported in rivers and reservoirs in the Atlantic region of the United States and are known to be potent neurotoxins in fish. Additionally, the concentration of Hg in shallow groundwater in a nonurbanized environment was 20 ng/L, whereas in an urbanized environment, the concentration of Hg was as high as 177 ng/L compared with undeveloped wetlands.

Plastics
Plastics are essential for a wide range of applications, including healthcare, clothing, and construction. It has been reported that global plastic production increased rapidly from 1950 to 2016, reaching approximately 30 million tons. Due to improper disposal methods, plastics are released into the natural environment. Especially during the COVID-19 pandemic, the increased use of masks and disposable packaging to prevent the spread of the virus, along with their inappropriate disposal, has caused serious environmental problems, resulting in increased plastic debris in the ocean. Plastics have a very long half-life, and their decomposition rate is slow in the deep sea, making it one of the places with the highest concentration of microplastic particles. These particles are likely to be absorbed into the gastrointestinal tract and tissues of fish.

Pharmaceuticals and Personal Care Products
Pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) are a variety of chemicals used to prevent and treat human and animal diseases, including medicines (eg, anticancer drugs, antibiotics, and hormones) and personal care products (eg, shampoos, lotions, and sunscreens). PPCPs enter the environment through several routes, such as hospitals, residential areas, and wastewater treatment facilities, and are detected in surface water and groundwater at concentrations ranging from ng/L to mg/L. Humans and animals exposed to PPCPs have been reported to experience various changes, such as endocrine disruption, hormonal function disruption, cellular changes, behavioral effects, and oxidative stress. For example, the risk index for antibiotics and anticancer drugs in aquatic environments is high in regions with high population densities. In particular, amoxicillin, a widely used antibiotic, has been detected at 13,300 ng/L in African surface waters, whereas acetaminophen has been detected at 506 ng/L in surface waters and 25 ng/L in groundwater.

Pesticide
Pesticides with low adsorption to soil particles can be transported far from farmlands and, depending on factors such as temperature, humidity, and air movement, enter various environments. Organophosphate insecticides, dinitroaniline herbicides, and triazole fungicides are commonly used in aquatic environments. Organophosphate insecticides, including malathion, parathion, and dimethoate, are used in agriculture for pest control and crop protection. This compound was detected at high concentrations in groundwater in China, with levels of 4.86 ng/L for methyl-parathion, 3.88 ng/L for malathion, and 7.14 ng/L for dimethoate. Dinitroaniline herbicides are pre-emerging herbicides detected in various water samples. For example, pendimethalin was detected at maximum concentrations of 28 ng/L in groundwater in Greece (1996-1997) and 2 µg/L in surface water in Georgia, USA (2015-2016), respectively. Furthermore, the triazole fungicide, which is widely used worldwide, has also been detected in rivers and agricultural water up to 0.5 μg/L.

TOXICOLOGICAL RESEARCH IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF ZEBRAFISH

Cardiotoxicity
Evaluation of cardiotoxicity and vascular toxicity in zebrafish larvae. To evaluate cardiotoxicity, transgenic models, such as flk1:EGFP, myl7:EGFP, and myl7:DsRed are typically used, and structural abnormalities are analyzed by measuring the distance between the bulbus arteriosus (BA) and sinus venosus (SV). To investigate vascular toxicity, transgenic models such as flk1:EGFP, fli1a:EGFP, and gata1a:DsRed are typically used, and vasculature intensity and defects are analyzed. Genes primarily evaluated when identifying both toxicities are shown.
Fig. 2
Cardiotoxicity damages the heart tissue and muscle, which can induce heart dysfunction, leading to heart rate changes and inadequate blood pumping. Zebrafish embryos have been widely utilized in cardiotoxicity research because of several advantages. The zebrafish heart has 2 chambers, making it structurally different from the human heart, which has 4 chambers, but it has similar electrophysiological features; it is easy to observe changes in phenotype, and it has a high degree of genetic orthology. In zebrafish, cardiotoxicity can be assessed using various indicators, such as hemorrhage, pericardial edema, heart rate, and thrombosis. Moreover, various genes related to cardiac development and function, such as cmlc2, amhc, vmhc, ugt1a6, and rarg, have been examined to investigate cardiotoxicity at the molecular level. Indeed, our study showed that the triazole fungicide, triadimenol, induces cardiotoxicity in zebrafish larvae. Cardiotoxicity was examined using the transgenic model flk1:EGFP, a green fluorescent protein attached to the endothelial receptor flk1. Changes in cardiac structure due to triadimenol exposure were determined by measuring the change in length between sinus venosus and bulbus arteriosus, which are connected to the atrium and ventricle, respectively. An alteration in the distance between them indicates abnormal cardiac structure and the possibility of irregular blood circulation. Indeed, the abnormal cardiac structure induced by triadimenol resulted in a reduced heart rate in zebrafish larvae. These changes in zebrafish hearts were accompanied by the altered expression of genes involved in cardiac function and development, such as actc1, erbb4a, and erbb4b. Moreover, triadimenol reduced the phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt and MAPK signaling molecules, including ERK, JNK, and p38. The PI3K pathway regulates the cardiac cell state and immune responses within the heart, and anomalies in this pathway can affect the development of cardiomyocytes and cardiac fibroblasts, potentially resulting in apoptosis and heart muscle contraction. The ERK, JNK, and p38 signaling pathways are also known to play important roles in cardiac development by regulating fibroblast growth factor and Wnt signaling. Therefore, the downregulation of these pathways by triadimenol could affect cardiac development. In the previous report, penconazole, a triazole fungicide, has been reported to cause cardiotoxicity in zebrafish. myl7:EGFP transgenic zebrafish whose cardiomyocytes were labeled with green fluorescent proteins were used to investigate the cardiotoxicity of penconazole (Fig. 2). It also increases the bulbus arteriosus-sinus venosus distance, indicating an abnormal cardiac structure and altered cardiac development-related genes such as nkx2.5, gata4, and vmhc. Furthermore, previous studies have reported other environmental pollutants, such as heavy metals and microplastics.

Vascular Toxicity
The development of the heart and the formation of blood vessels are closely linked. In cardiac hypertrophy, cardiomyocyte growth is accompanied by angiogenesis, which expands the coronary vasculature. Therefore, appropriate oxygen and nutrients can be delivered to the heart, affecting normal heart development. In zebrafish larvae, prominent vascular structures near the heart and yolk include the common cardinal vein (CCV) and aortic arch. The CCV links all veins to the heart before the cardiovascular system is fully developed in zebrafish larvae and begins to diminish between 74 and 98 hpf. The aortic arches are crucial for blood circulation in the head and tail regions as they link the ventral and lateral dorsal aortas. Vascular structures such as the posterior cardinal vein (PCV), dorsal aorta (DA), dorsal longitudinal anastomotic vessels, intersegmental vessels (ISV), caudal artery, and caudal vein are present in the bodies and tails of zebrafish larvae (Fig. 2). Arterial blood from the heart flows through the DA in the trunk to the caudal artery in the tail region, and venous blood flows from the caudal vein through the PCV into the heart. ISVs include arterial and venous ISV that connect the DAs and PCVs to the dorsal longitudinal anastomotic vessels. These vasculatures have frequently been investigated to examine the vascular toxicity of various environmental pollutants. Our previous studies showed that the benzimidazole fungicide thiabendazole induces malformation of the vasculature in zebrafish larvae. In the head region, it reduced the relative intensity of the cerebrovascular and aortic arches, and the CCV area, which should have decreased between 74 and 98 hpf was increased by thiabendazole exposure. Moreover, thiabendazole inhibits the segregation of DA and PCV in the zebrafish trunk. Ethalfluralin, a dinitroaniline herbicide, also induces abnormal development of the vascular structure in zebrafish larvae. The vascular toxicity of ethalfluralin was examined using the flk1:EGFP transgenic model, which reduced the relative intensity of the brain and intestinal vasculature. Both toxicants cause vascular toxicity by altering the expression of genes involved in blood vessel development, such as those belonging to the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) family. Moreover, polyvinylpyrrolidone-coated silver nanoparticles could induce hypoxia by disturbing oxygen diffusion in zebrafish eggs, which activated hif1 and VEGF signaling, resulting in bcl2 downregulation. Additionally, the aggregation of nanoparticles in the endoplasmic reticulum inhibits protein synthesis. These changes induced vascular toxicity in zebrafish by disrupting angiogenesis.

Neurotoxicity
Evaluation of hepatotoxicity and neurotoxicity in zebrafish larvae. Hepatotoxicity was analyzed by measuring the intensity and area of the liver in fabp10a:DsRed transgenic model. Transgenic models such as olig2:DsRed, huc:GFP, mbp:GFP, and hb9:GFP are typically used to analyze neurotoxicity in various structures, such as the brain, motor neurons, and myelination. Genes that were mainly assessed when identifying both toxicities are also indicated.
Fig. 3
Because zebrafish have a morphology similar to that of the CNS in humans, they are widely used in research of neuroscience. Structurally, the zebrafish brain is organized similarly to the mammalian brain, with a forebrain, midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal cord. There are many functional similarities between the zebrafish and human brain. The participation of the amygdala and habenula in the emotional behavior of zebrafish is similar to that observed in humans and plays a role in controlling the release of dopamine and serotonin. Moreover, it is easy to observe structural changes in the nervous system through various transgenic models and evaluate behavior; therefore, it is often used for neurotoxicity evaluation and drug evaluation for neurological diseases. In a previous study, the olig2:DsRED transgenic zebrafish model was used to determine the neurotoxicity of the carbamate insecticide, oxamyl. It reduces the relative number and length of dorsal axons, and these changes are accompanied by changes in the expression of genes involved in neurodevelopment, such as neurog1, gfap, sox10 (Fig. 3). The same transgenic model was used to investigate the neurotoxicity of mevinphos, an organophosphate insecticide. It reduces the length of the ventral axon and induces notochord defects by decreasing the expression of neurogenesis-associated genes. In another study, the neurotoxicity of the herbicide, fluroxypyr-1-methylheptyl ester was determined using the mbp:EGFP transgenic zebrafish model with a fluorescent protein attached to myelin basic protein. It induces abnormal myelination by triggering discontinuous expression pattern of Mbp. In a previous study, the hb9:GFP transgenic zebrafish model with a fluorescent protein attached to the motor neuron marker Hb9 was used to examine the neurotoxicity of photoaged polystyrene microplastics. The microplastics reduced the fluorescence intensity of motor neurons in the hb9:GFP transgenic models and altered the levels of neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), as well as neurotransmitter-related enzymes, resulting in changes in locomotor activity. Neurotoxicity in zebrafish has also been reported for the macrolide antibiotic, azithromycin. It induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and cell death in the brain and interfered with the VEGF/Notch signaling pathway, which plays an important role in neurodevelopment. It also excessively activated vegfaa, kdrl, and flt1, which are involved in the VEGF signaling pathway, while inhibiting Notch signaling, including notch1a, notch1b, notch2, and notch3. These alterations downregulated HuC/D, neuronal markers, acetylcholinesterase, and dopamine activities, resulting in abnormal behavior.

Hepatotoxicity
Identifying organ toxicity of various toxicants and their mechanisms using zebrafish.
Table 1
Affected organ	Toxicant	Transgenic model	Major findings (mechanism)	Reference	 	Cardiotoxicity	Triadimenol	flk1:EGFP	Change in length between sinus venosus (SV) and bulbus arteriosus (BA)Altered expression of genes, such as actc1, erbb4a, and erbb4bReduced the phosphorylation of PI3K/Akt and MAPK signaling, including Erk, Jnk, and p38		 	Penconazole	myl7:EGFP	Increased the BA-SV distanceAltered expression of genes, nkx2.5, gata4, and vmhc		 	Vascular toxicity	Thiabendazole	flk1:EGFP	Reduced the relative intensity of the cerebrovascular and aortic archesReduced common cardinal vein (CCV) areaInhibited the segregation of dorsal aorta (DA) and posterior cardinal vein (PCV)Altered expression of genes, such as those belonging to the VEGF family		 	Ethalfluralin	Reduced the relative intensity of the brain and intestinal vasculatureAltered expression of genes, such as those belonging to the VEGF family		 	Polyvinylpyrrolidone-coated silver nanoparticles	fli1a:EGFP	Induced hypoxia state by disturbing oxygen diffusionActivated hif1 and VEGF signaling, resulting in bcl2 downregulationInhibited protein synthesis in endoplasmic reticulum		 	Neurotoxicity	Oxamyl	olig2:DsRED	Reduced the relative number and length of dorsal axonsAltered expression of genes, such as neurog1, gfap, and sox10		 	Mevinphos	Reduced the length of the ventral axonAltered the expression of neurogenesis-associated genes		 	Fluroxypyr-1-methylheptyl ester	mbp:EGFP	Induced abnormal myelination by triggering discontinuous pattern of Mbp		 	Polystyrene microplastics	hb9:GFP	Reduced the fluorescence intensity of motor neuronsAltered the levels of neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine and GABA		 	Azithromycin		Activated VEGF signaling pathway, including vegfaa, kdrl, and flt1Inhibited Notch signaling, including notch1a, notch1b, notch2, and notch3		 	Hepatotoxicity	Acifluorfen	fabp10a:DsRed	Reduced the intensity and size of the liver		 	Fluchloralin	Reduced the intensity and size of the liverAltered expression of genes, such as prox1, hdac1, and ppplr12a		 	Pb		Decreased catalase activity and produced ROSActivated Nrf2-Keap1 pathway
ROS, reactive oxygen species.
The liver of zebrafish comprises cell types that are similar in morphology and function to those found in the human liver, including hepatocytes, stellate cells, biliary epithelial cells, and endothelial cells. These conserved orthologous cell types in the zebrafish larvae perform the same functions as those in humans. Unlike humans, who have hepatic lobules, zebrafish have hepatic tubules, indicating a structural difference in the liver. Nevertheless, recent studies have reported that zebrafish exhibit an architecture resembling that of hepatic lobules, which are characterized by polygonal structures. Cytochrome P450 enzymes, which play an important role in metabolizing substances in the liver, are evolutionarily conserved in zebrafish and humans. Moreover, in zebrafish liver development, transcription factors, including prox1, hhex, and foxa2, play crucial roles in hepatic specification, as in mammals. Although there are structural differences between the human and zebrafish livers, similarities in metabolism, function, and development are often used to determine the hepatotoxicity of toxicants and drugs. The hepatotoxicity of acifluorfen and fluchloralin, which are diphenyl ether and dinitroaniline herbicides, respectively, has previously been investigated using the fabp10a:DsRed transgenic model with liver-specific fluorescently labeled genes. Both acifluorfen and fluchloralin reduced the intensity and size of the liver, and fluchloralin reduced the expression of genes related to liver function and development, such as prox1, hdac1, and ppp1r12a. Pb, a well-known heavy metal with a high exposure potential toward aquatic organisms, has also been reported to cause hepatotoxicity in zebrafish. Pb decreases catalase activity and produces ROS in the zebrafish liver, leading to lipid peroxidation. Furthermore, ROS activates the Nrf2-Keap1 pathway, and the activated Nrf2 is translocated to the cell nucleus, stimulating the transcription factor ARE and increasing the expression of ho1, nqo1, and hsp70. These changes lead to structural abnormalities in the liver of zebrafish, as identified by histological analysis. The organ toxicities of these toxicants and their mechanisms of action are summarized in Table 1.

LIMITATIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH
Some of the toxicants reviewed in this study have been investigated for their detailed mechanisms of organ toxicity; however, specific mechanisms have not yet been explored. Additionally, while toxicants induce toxicity in various organs, their associations have not been adequately investigated. Therefore, it is necessary to study the toxicity at different stages of zebrafish development to determine the association between different organ toxicities. Zebrafish are widely used as toxicity assessment models owing to their many advantages; however, they also have limitations. Toxicants are added to the water in zebrafish toxicity assessments, making dermal exposure the primary route of action. By contrast, humans are more likely to be exposed to toxic substances through contaminated drinking water, highlighting the differences in exposure routes. Although zebrafish are genetically similar to humans, significant differences exist, such as differences in their immune systems and a relatively simple CNS. Therefore, the use of humanized models or organoids in conjunction with zebrafish has been proposed. Thus, future research that considers these limitations is necessary to better predict the toxic effects in aquatic organisms and humans using zebrafish.

CONCLUSION
There is an increasing global concern regarding environmental pollutants, particularly heavy metals, plastics, PPCPs, and pesticides. Recent studies have emphasized the necessity of comprehensive toxicity assessments to understand their impacts on ecosystems and human health. Consequently, ongoing research is focused on developing methodologies for more accurate and reliable toxicity evaluations. This review article presents organ toxicity, including cardiotoxicity, vascular toxicity, hepatotoxicity, and neurotoxicity, in zebrafish caused by representative environmental toxicants and their mechanisms and discusses toxicity assessment methods. Organ toxicity can be easily identified using various transgenic zebrafish models, because the reactivity of zebrafish to toxicants is similar to that of other aquatic organisms, and the anatomical and functional similarities of their organs to those in humans enable the prediction of potential toxic effects. However, there are also limitations to toxicity studies using zebrafish, and future studies will need to take these into account.

Author Contributions
Taeyeon Hong: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Junho Park: Writing – original draft, Validation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Garam An: Visualization, Validation, Investigation. Jisoo Song: Visualization, Validation, Data curation. Gwonhwa Song: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Data curation, Conceptualization. Whasun Lim: Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.

Declaration of Competing Interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Effectiveness of zebrafish models in understanding human diseases-a review of models
Oxamyl exerts developmental toxic effects in zebrafish by disrupting the mitochondrial electron transport chain and modulating PI3K/Akt and p38 Mapk signaling
Fluroxypyr-1-methylheptyl ester interferes with the normal embryogenesis of zebrafish by inducing apoptosis, inflammation, and neurovascular toxicity
Thiobencarb induces phenotypic abnormalities, apoptosis, and cardiovascular toxicity in zebrafish embryos through oxidative stress and inflammation
Zebrafish models of human motor neuron diseases: advantages and limitations
Interrenal development and function in zebrafish
Zebrafish in toxicology and environmental health
Variable contributions of mercury from groundwater to a first-order urban coastal plain stream in New Jersey, USA
Zebrafish embryos and larvae as alternative animal models for toxicity testing
Genetic and cellular analyses of zebrafish atrioventricular cushion and valve development
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin inhibits regression of the common cardinal vein in developing zebrafish
Imaging myelination in vivo using transparent animal models
The uses of zebrafish (Danio rerio) as an in vivo model for toxicological studies: a review based on bibliometrics
Advances in the study of heart development and disease using zebrafish
Arteries provide essential guidance cues for lymphatic endothelial cells in the zebrafish trunk
Azithromycin induces neurotoxicity in zebrafish by interfering with the VEGF/Notch signaling pathway
Dinitroaniline herbicide resistance and mechanisms in weeds
Pharmaceuticals and personal care products in waters: occurrence, toxicity, and risk
Physiological, pharmacological and toxicological considerations of drug-induced structural cardiac injury
Unravelling the blood supply to the zebrafish pharyngeal jaws and teeth
FGF2 prevents sunitinib-induced cardiotoxicity in zebrafish and cardiomyoblast H9c2 Cells
Pros and cons of plastic during the COVID-19 pandemic
Lead induced genotoxicity and hepatotoxicity in zebrafish (Danio rerio) at environmentally relevant concentration: Nrf2-Keap1 regulated stress response and expression of biomarker genes
Vascular morphogenesis in the zebrafish embryo
Vascular toxicity of silver nanoparticles to developing zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Interplay between PI3K/AKT pathway and heart disorders
Analysis of pesticides in surface water, stemflow, and throughfall in an agricultural area in South Georgia, USA
Identification and developmental expression of the full complement of Cytochrome P450 genes in Zebrafish
Using zebrafish to assess the impact of drugs on neural development and function
Angiogenesis and angiocrines regulating heart growth
Fluchloralin induces developmental toxicity in heart, liver, and nervous system during early zebrafish embryogenesis
Ethalfluralin induces developmental toxicity in zebrafish via oxidative stress and inflammation
Exposure to acifluorfen induces developmental toxicity in the early life stage of zebrafish
Brief guidelines for zebrafish embryotoxicity tests
Plastic pollution: when do we know enough?
The zebrafish reference genome sequence and its relationship to the human genome
Structure and function of the developing zebrafish heart
A comprehensive review of 1,2,4-triazole fungicide toxicity in zebrafish (Danio rerio): a mitochondrial and metabolic perspective
The vascular anatomy of the developing zebrafish: an atlas of embryonic and early larval development
Pollutants in aquatic system: a frontier perspective of emerging threat and strategies to solve the crisis for safe drinking water
Therapeutic potential of CKD-504, a novel selective histone deacetylase 6 inhibitor, in a zebrafish model of neuromuscular junction disorders
Resveratrol ameliorates penconazole-induced cardiotoxicity by inhibition of oxidative stress and apoptosis in zebrafish larvae
Cellular and molecular analyses of vascular tube and lumen formation in zebrafish
Zebrafish as an emerging model for studying complex brain disorders
The role of a neurovascular signaling pathway involving hypoxia-inducible factor and notch in the function of the central nervous system
Effect of heavy metals: an overview
Extracellular vesicles as an endocrine mechanism connecting distant cells
Requirement of vasculogenesis and blood circulation in late stages of liver growth in zebrafish
Scenario of organophosphate pollution and toxicity in India: a review
Polystyrene microplastics effects on zebrafish embryological development: comparison of two different sizes
Zebrafish models of cancer therapy-induced cardiovascular toxicity
Endocardial and epicardial derived FGF signals regulate myocardial proliferation and differentiation in vivo
Mevinphos induces developmental defects via inflammation, apoptosis, and altered MAPK and Akt signaling pathways in zebrafish
Impact of diesel particulate matter on the olfactory bulb of mice: insights from behavioral, histological, and molecular assessments
Homocysteine-induced peripheral microcirculation dysfunction in zebrafish and its attenuation by L-arginine
Characteristics of plastic pollution in the environment: a review
Photoaged polystyrene microplastics result in neurotoxicity associated with neurotransmission and neurodevelopment in zebrafish larvae (Danio rerio)
Zebrafish in the study of early cardiac development
The zebrafish cardiac endothelial cell-roles in development and regeneration
Induction of developmental toxicity and cardiotoxicity in zebrafish embryos by Emamectin benzoate through oxidative stress
Liver development and cancer formation in zebrafish
The global threat from plastic pollution
Evolution of LPS recognition and signaling: the bony fish perspective
The medial habenula as a regulator of anxiety in adult zebrafish
In vivo recording of adult zebrafish electrocardiogram and assessment of drug-induced QT prolongation
Developmental toxicity of prometryn induces mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, and failure of organogenesis in zebrafish (Danio rerio)
Terbutryn causes developmental toxicity in zebrafish (Danio rerio) via apoptosis and major organ malformation in the early stages of embryogenesis
Coronary microvascular rarefaction and myocardial fibrosis in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction
Reliable water quality prediction and parametric analysis using explainable AI models
From endoderm formation to liver and pancreas development in zebrafish
Biliary epithelial cells are facultative liver stem cells during liver regeneration in adult zebrafish
Comparative study on a novel lobule structure of the zebrafish liver and that of the mammalian liver
Heavy metal exposure and cardiovascular disease
Occurrence and spatial and temporal distribution of pesticide residues in groundwater of major corn-growing areas of Greece (1996-1997)
Reduced cellular process and developmental process genotoxicity of polystyrene nanoplastics in zebrafish embryogenesis using proteins
Developmental defects induced by thiabendazole are mediated via apoptosis, oxidative stress and alteration in PI3K/Akt and MAPK pathways in zebrafish
Triadimenol promotes the production of reactive oxygen species and apoptosis with cardiotoxicity and developmental abnormalities in zebrafish
Mechanisms of female reproductive toxicity in pigs induced by exposure to environmental pollutants
Sonochemical degradation of pesticides in aqueous solution: investigation on the influence of operating parameters and degradation pathway - a systematic review
The specification of zebrafish (Danio rerio) heart electrocardiogram index characteristic responses to different types of pollutants
p38 MAPK pathway in the heart: new insights in health and disease
Mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling in the heart: angels versus demons in a heart-breaking tale
The brilliance of the zebrafish model: perception on behavior and Alzheimer's disease
Zebrafish as a useful model system for human liver disease
Transgenic zebrafish (Danio rerio) as an emerging model system in ecotoxicology and toxicology: historical review, recent advances, and trends
Zebrafish genetics and vertebrate heart formation
The feasibility of the zebrafish embryo as a promising alternative for acute toxicity test using various fish species: a critical review
The use of zebrafish (Danio rerio) as biomedical models
Twisting of the zebrafish heart tube during cardiac looping is a tbx5-dependent and tissue-intrinsic process
Mesenchymal stromal cells prevent progression of liver fibrosis in a novel zebrafish embryo model
Risk assessment of cardiotoxicity to zebrafish (Danio rerio) by environmental exposure to triclosan and its derivatives
Removal of pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs) from wastewater: a review
Agriculture development, pesticide application and its impact on the environment
Progress in building clinically relevant patient-derived tumor xenograft models for cancer research
The zebrafish as a model of vascular development and disease
Exposure to aflatoxin B(1) interferes with locomotion and neural development in zebrafish embryos and larvae.
Using zebrafish for investigating the molecular mechanisms of drug-induced cardiotoxicity