Mutated Adenovirus Attacks in West Bengal, India: Risk Evaluation of Multi‐Country Outbreaks and Mitigation Strategies
ABSTRACT
Aim
The human adenovirus (HAdV) is beginning to spread rapidly in children through human, surface and animal vectors. Around 12,000 cases were recognised in 2022 in West Bengal and a shocking number of cases arose throughout India and in other under‐developed areas. This is going to be a big threat to public health since no vaccine, awareness or protocol policies were introduced. Early detection, immediate isolation and proper policy developments are the key factors in overcoming the situation. Therefore, we performed this rapid review and discussed probable mitigation strategies, updated research on vaccine development, and treatment strategies to control the outbreaks of mutated HAdV.
Design
This is a narrative review of publicly available information.
Methods
Here, we extracted updated information and data using the terms HAdV outbreaks, mutations, species, risks and prevention from Google Scholar and PubMed. We considered relevant articles that have discussed prevention strategies, ongoing research, and antiviral drugs for managing HAdV outbreaks.
Results
Early detection from throat swabs, isolation and symptomatic treatments are required to minimise viral infections. A massive test needs to be performed to find the affected people. The cases should be immediately isolated. It is recommended to treat high‐touch surfaces with heat‐ or bleach‐containing cleaners to prevent the spread of infection. Oxygen support and many broad‐spectrum antivirals have been used to treat HAdV. Several studies showed antibody neutralisation and interactions between the natural killer cell receptor KIR3DS1 and HLA‐F in infected cells, indicating possible therapeutic options in the future. HAdV‐4 and HAdV‐7 vaccines have been limitedly approved for administration to military personnel.
Conclusion
Isolation, certain safety measures, broad‐spectrum antiviral drugs and further research on new vaccines could be useful to prevent this virus from producing a worldwide pandemic. Also, the authorities should ensure the proper therapeutic interventions and nursing care facilities for the infected children.
Patient or Public Contribution
Patient or public contribution was not relevant to our work.

Background
After the recent COVID‐19 pandemic, we as a society have been hit with multiple other virus attacks such as the Nipah virus, Zika virus and Japanese Encephalitis. The adenovirus is another illness that is experiencing a more rapid spread since the COVID‐19 pandemic. The human adenovirus (HAdV) is a collection of viruses that belongs to the genus Mastadenoviurs of the Adenoviridae family (Khan et al. ). There are currently over 70 known serotypes of HAdV that give rise to seven species (Figure 1), the majority belong to species HAdV‐D (57 types) (Table S1, http://hadvwg.gmu.edu/) (Hage et al. ). Concerns of HAdV have arisen due to the virus' genetic variability, with species B (HAdV‐3,7,11 and 14), C (HAdV‐1,2,5 and 6), and E (HAdV‐4), causing mild respiratory illnesses (Table S2; CDC , Gray and Erdman , Hage et al. ), similar to cold or flu‐like symptoms as compared to others that cause gastroenteritis and hepatitis. The virus' prevalence can be seen through its transmission capability, environmental persistence, and genetic mutations. Populations susceptible to HAdV range from children as young as 5 years old to the elderly, who both are more vulnerable to the virus (Children's Hospital of Philadelphia ). Transmission of the virus is common through physical contact with an infected individual or object such as doorknobs, hard surfaces and toys (Children's Hospital of Philadelphia ). The tenacious nature of the virus is proven through its resistance to common disinfectants and can prolong longevity on objects. Unlike the flu, being a seasonal illness, the HAdV‐55 strains, which cause respiratory symptoms, can infect individuals all year round (Children's Hospital of Philadelphia ).
Human adenovirus species and associated health hazards.
Characteristics of both HAdV and the coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) show similarities through their respiratory and hepatic affiliated symptoms and genome composition. The species HAdV‐C which causes hepatitis, was shown to have short indels, contributing to a lower mutation rate as compared to SARS‐CoV‐2 genomes (Akaishi ). Multiple genetic diversity of early gene regions (E1 and E4) in HAdV‐C increased the lytic growth of the virus, transcription of viral genes, replication, interactions with host cell proteins, and transmission contribute to the evolutionary process of HAdV‐C (Dhingra et al. ). Reports show that children suffering symptoms of acute hepatitis from SARS‐CoV‐2 were also possibly co‐infected by HAdV‐C showing the correlation between the two (Wang et al. ). Furthermore, the virus can mutate by homologous recombination of the GC and AT nucleotides when multiple adenovirus types are present, which increases the strength of the virus (Robinson et al. ). The adenovirus is especially dangerous because it can lie dormant in tissue for up to several years, and emerge to infect high‐risk populations, such as immunocompromised patients (Kojaoghlanian, Flomenberg, and Horwitz ), and once the virus is active, it elicits rapid replication with over 50,000 copies being created in a 36‐h window (Kremer ). The species of HAdV‐F with HAdV‐40 and HAdV‐41 strains, which cause gastroenteritis, are transmitted through faecal‐oral contact from changing diapers or ingestion of contaminated food or water (Children's Hospital of Philadelphia ). Awareness of the virus has been brought up in developing countries such as Bangladesh, Pakistan and Brazil where morbidity and mortality rates due to acute gastroenteritis are higher (Khan et al. ). Gastroenteritis causes roughly half a million deaths per year and is the second leading cause of death among children under the age of five (Thakur, Thakur, and Ratho ). Since 2023, adenovirus cases have skyrocketed in children, with the virus targeting those between the ages of 5 and 15, and there has been a notable difference in the virus' effects. The length of recovery has increased as fevers are now taking more than a week to cease, and coughing can persist for multiple weeks (Times of India ). Not only is this creating a more detrimental impact on the infected individuals, it has also created a heavier burden for healthcare workers as they are struggling to keep up with the number of cases. More specifically in West Bengal, since the start of 2023, they have documented 165 out of 500 adenovirus cases with some even being fatal, and they simply do not have enough paediatric units in their hospitals, qualified doctors or the equipment to handle their situation (India Today ). Currently, there is no vaccine to treat HAdV (Children's Hospital of Philadelphia ), and with people gathering as COVID‐19 measures are lessened, there is a greater risk for infection. As outbreaks are erupting in other parts of the world, this virus needs to be handled properly to prevent it from becoming as widespread as the COVID‐19 pandemic.

Methods
Nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs were collected from hospitalised and outdoor patients with a history of fever or measured fever of≥ 38°C and cough, with onset within the last 10 days. The samples obtained from the affected patients in December 2022 were sent to the National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases (ICMR‐NICED) in Kolkata for testing. Patients who did not have flu‐like symptoms were excluded from the study. Patients who tested positive for adenovirus were only considered. The total number of adenovirus‐affected patients was recorded based on the news cited in the newspaper (Guardian, ) and website (World Socialist Web Site ).

Outbreak History HAdV
As of 2020, there has been an increase in the infection rates caused by different diseases. On 1 September 2021, the Nipah virus took a young boy's life in Kerala, India (Thakur, Thakur, and Ratho ). In the United States, the Zika virus has seen an increase in cases since 2021, as the virus resulted in 40,249 cases as of 2022 (PAHO ). Classified by the Centres for Disease Control as a Level 2 Alert, outbreaks of Japanese Encephalitis have occurred in 2021–2022 throughout Australia resulting in 37 cases (CDC ; WHO ).
The HAdV can be quickly spread through human, surface and animal vectors (Figure 2), and was first discovered in Austria in 1953 (dela Cruz et al. ; Kajon et al. ). Hospitals and daycares are examples of some common areas where outbreaks can occur (Mitchell et al. ), however, most adenovirus outbreaks occur in military settings due to the close living quarters as well (Kolavic‐Gray et al. ). COVID‐19 has made its way through the world, doctors are seeing an increase in cases of what is believed to be the HAdV. Children are being hit the hardest, with cases reported by the World Health Organisation (WHO) in children of 1 month to 16 years old since April 2022 (WHO ). India is witnessing the most cases, as the adenovirus accounts for about 32% of tested samples in Kolkata since January 2023 (India Today ). In the past, from April 2017 to March 2020, the adenovirus had been found circulating in eastern India 351 out of 3882 stool samples testing positive (Chandra et al. ). In West Bengal in December 2022, an HAdV outbreak affected over 12,000 people, and over 3000 children were hospitalised with severe symptoms. The city of Kolkata suffered nearly 150 deaths because of this adenovirus outbreak (World Socialist Web Site ). Similar samples were collected in Bangladesh from 2004 to 2005, with 17 out of 917 testing positive (Dey et al. ). Furthermore, the virus has been seen spreading, as 23 positive samples have been documented in the southwestern regions of India from 2011 to 2013 (Akhil et al. ). There have been documented cases in Iran as well, with 16 of 376 samples testing positive from 2015 to 2017, as well as in Argentina, Japan, South America and Taiwan (Arashkia et al. ; Lai et al. ). HAdV‐55 is a reemerging mutation that has been causing outbreaks in Asia. In an outbreak in 2020 in China, 60 individuals were infected with HAdV‐55. Fifty‐six of these individuals were admitted to the hospital, but there were no fatalities. All 60 of the individuals had a fever; 43.33% had a sore throat and headache, 15% had a cough and 18.33% experienced dizziness (Liu et al. ).
Spread of human adenoviruses by means of human, surface and animal vectors.
As cases of human adenovirus are being continually documented, it is important to note that many more cases could be circulating without notice, as in the United States specifically, where doctors do not have to test or document suspected cases (CDC ). This is a problem, as we need to be informed about the disease burden of the human adenovirus to handle it properly.

Disease Burden due to HAdV
There are more than 50 types of HAdV that can cause infection in humans (CDC ). Genotypes causing outbreaks worldwide with varying symptoms are HAdV‐55, HAdV‐41 and HAdV‐40. HAdV‐55 and HAdV‐40/HAdV‐41 have different disease burdens associated with them. HAdV‐55 primarily attacks the respiratory system, while HAdV‐40/HAdV‐41 mainly causes gastroenteritis in children. The most common symptom of adenovirus is a respiratory illness, and it is causing prominent issues and even death in younger children. The most prevalent strains of HAdV detected are 1, 2, 3, 5 and 6 often presenting as a respiratory infection (Foy et al. ). Strain 7 is unique in that it can cause infections in closed communities such as daycares, and in open communities as compared to Strain 3, which is generally limited to closed communities (Pacini, Collier, and Henderson ; Cole et al. ; Gerber et al. ). In the US military recruits, Strains 4 and 7 made up 90% of all hospitalizations (Dingle et al. ). In Chinese military recruits, a cross between Strains 11 and 14, Strain 55 is associated with acute respiratory distress syndrome (Liu et al. ). Strains 34 and 35, although not causing hemorrhagic cystitis, were isolated from kidney transplant recipients. Strains 8, 19 and 37 are all similar in that they cause epidemic keratoconjunctivitis (EKC), uniquely, 19 and 37 were isolated from the genitourinary tract of young adults with EKC, leading to speculation that Strains 19 and 37 may be sexually transmitted (Guyer et al. ; Tabrizi et al. ). Although many adenoviruses cause diarrhoea and pyrexia, Strains 40 and 41 are most prevalent in immunocompetent adults, while in those who are immunocompromised Strains 50, 51 and 52 may also be involved (Jones 2nd et al. ). HAdV‐55 has the potential of becoming pneumonia in children under 5 years old (Liu et al. ). HAdV‐55 can also be fatal as shown in an incident in Anhui Province, China. A household had been infected by HAdV‐55 and three were hospitalised. One of the three family members died after the onset of respiratory failure (WHO ).
In Argentina, children have been experiencing acute lower respiratory illness, thus accounting for the third leading cause of death. One study of 24 cases collected between 1991 and 1992 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, found that children with HAdV had a higher frequency of pneumonia (71%) compared to the children without HAdV and adenovirus Serotype 7 was the cause of death with an overall rate of 28.6% (Arashkia et al. ). Another hospital in Buenos Aires reported 29 paediatric cases between 1984 and 1988, where 10 cases ended in death (Murtagh et al. ). Furthermore, those who did survive experienced chronic lung issues (Arashkia et al. ). Serotype 7 linked with a more severe condition, was only identified in the case group than control (Zadheidar et al.). While Serotype 7 results in the greatest number of fatalities, Serotypes 2 and 3 have also resulted in death in Taiwan between 2010 and 2011, as shown by a study done on 45 positive adenovirus cases. Pneumonia was the most common symptom seen in these patients (40), with other symptoms being bronchopneumonia (5), fever (34), upper respiratory issues (45), gastrointestinal illnesses (21), encephalitis (7) and even seizures (10). Out of the 45 patients, 10 died and 12 of the survivors suffered from chronic neurological and respiratory issues (Lai et al. ).

The Recent Attacks in West Bengal, India
As cases in children have recently been noted throughout West Bengal, India, there is much concern over the outcomes of this spread, specifically what could happen if a mutation occurs. High fatality and chronic pulmonary disease are being seen in children who have become infected with Type 3 (HAdV‐3) and Type 7 (HAdV‐7). Studies conducted by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and the NICED have shown that HAdV‐3 and HAdV‐7 are capable of mutation as a result of recombination when both are present and since HAdV‐7 has extremely high rates of replication this is happening at an alarming speed. When an individual becomes infected with this mutated human adenovirus, a great cytokine response and a more serious respiratory infection are noted (Fu et al. ). As West Bengal is very densely populated, with 1028 people per square kilometre, it has a population density of over double that of India (Districts of West Bengal ; Worldometer ). Dense populations pose a ripe environment for HAdV propagation, as human‐to‐human respiratory transmission is the most common mode of transmission (Crenshaw et al. ). AdV has an alarming human‐to‐human transmission rate of 98% among healthy adults over 4 weeks (Chakraborty, Mukherjee, and Dasgupta ). Due to the economic state of West Bengal, many people living in rural areas work in India (Velázquez‐Lizárraga et al. ). This is a dangerous situation, as individuals migrating from one dense population to another carrying a highly infectious virus could prove to be the nucleating factor of a severe epidemic affecting potentially billions of people. Another alarming characteristic of this HAdV strain is its impact on immunocompromised persons and children. HAdVs, in general, cause many presentations of upper respiratory, lower respiratory and gastrointestinal infections (Crenshaw et al. ). Acute gastroenteritis is the primary morbidity for children infected with HAdV (Velázquez‐Lizárraga et al. ). Viral transmission can also occur through contact with an infected individual's faeces which poses concerns for the caretakers of these children becoming infected, as well as others interacting with small children (Shieh ). There are very few preventative measures to slow the spread of this novel HAdV, as there is currently no vaccine approved for the general public. Likewise, there are currently no therapeutics approved to treat HAdV infections specifically but rather, the approved treatment plan involves antivirals that treat other infections (Chen and Tian ). This is very similar to the covid‐19 virus which, at its beginning, had no approved vaccine or therapeutics (Molecular Devices ). If left unattended this novel HAdV strain could prove to turn a localised outbreak into a covid‐19 level pandemic.

Policy and Preventive Recommendation
Many preventive measures can be put in place to reduce the spread of HAdV (Figure 3). It is important to wash your hands frequently with soap for 20 s. Avoid close contact with those who are sick, and avoid touching your nose, eyes, or mouth with unwashed hands (CDC ). If an individual finds themselves feeling unwell, it is recommended to visit a clinic to receive a test. HAdV can be diagnosed with a respiratory viral swab (CDC ). If the test is positive, the individual should isolate in their home and avoid contact with individuals when possible (dela Cruz et al. ). The virus can shed for days to weeks after infection, therefore it is recommended to treat high‐touch surfaces with heat or bleach‐containing cleaners to prevent the spread of infection (dela Cruz et al. ).
Policy recommendation and possible preventive measures to reduce the spread of human adenovirus.

Current Treatment Protocols and Vaccine Development Efforts
Currently, there is no protocol to report or trace the HAdV infections that occur. This means that if there is a known diagnosis of the infection, either an individual or an outbreak, it is not seen as a notifiable infection. There is a serum and whole blood test to determine the type of adenovirus the individual is infected with, but running this test is not common (CDC ). Treatment options for HAdV‐55, 40 and 41 are very limited and mainly supportive (Mücke and Zeuzem ). Treatments typically are for symptoms involved with the respective HAdV mutation. Many clinicians use various therapeutics for adenovirus infections, but there are currently no FDA‐approved drug regimens that combat adenoviruses. Several case reports or case series have been published, but few controlled prospective studies (Ljungman ). Fortunately, there have been studies looking at an assortment of treatment options, some having contradictory outcomes. For example, γ‐globulin was studied as a prophylaxis against adenovirus infections and while one study found it lacked efficacy another found it had a positive effect on those with adenovirus‐associated inflammatory cardiomyopathy (Chin, Stallones, and Lennette ; Maisch et al. ). Some other possible therapies explored by researchers are interferon‐β and the transfer of adenovirus‐sensitive T‐cells for those who are immunocompromised and not responsive to traditional antiviral therapy (Sandkovsky, Vargas, and Florescu ). A concrete and comparatively broadly implemented therapy would be the adenovirus vaccine approved by the FDA in 2011 for military personnel (Radin et al. ). Although this vaccine has had no post‐marketing studies, post‐vaccination symptoms were monitored, and it was found that of 294 recipients, 10%–15% had respiratory or systemic symptoms after 10 days (Iskander et al. ). Currently, a HAdV‐4 and HAdV‐7 vaccine have been approved for administration to military personnel only, as they have been deemed to have a higher risk of developing acute respiratory disease (Gray and Erdman ). This vaccine has not been approved for the general population (CDC ). Some studies have investigated antibody neutralisation and interactions between natural killer cell receptor KIR3DS1 and HLA‐F in infected cells (MacNeil et al. ). Research has been done to test the efficacy of treatments targeting this interaction for cancer, and viral infections. Of note, one study found a positive correlation between the interaction of KIR3DS1 and HLA‐F and the control of Hepatitis C infected cell culture (Lunemann et al. ). These interactions are possible treatment options in the future. With the rise of possibilities of Adenovirus mutating with other highly infectious viruses, such as COVID‐19, there is a high probability the rate and intensity of infection will increase (Wang et al. ).
Oxygen support is given in hospitalizations for mutations such as HAdV‐55. Many broad‐spectrum antivirals have been used to treat HAdV such as cidofovir, ribavirin, and ganciclovir. These antivirals have varying efficacies against HAdV (MacNeil et al. ). Nebulized ribavirin, for example, was mildly effective in the treatment of two children with adenovirus pneumonia (Buchdahl, Taylor, and Warner ). Nebulized ribavirin is indicated for respiratory syncytial virus and is dosed paediatrically 6 g over 12–18 h/day for 3–7 days (Buchdhal et al. 1985). Intravenous ribavirin has been used in patients who are immunocompromised presenting with hemorrhagic cystitis and disseminated disease (McCarthy et al. ). One explanation for the mixed results seen with ribavirin is a recent finding that only HAdV species C are susceptible to ribavirin (Morfin et al.). One alternative to ribavirin, cidofovir, is effective against all known HAdV species (Morfin et al. 2005). Further research into the exact coverage and efficacy of these two agents for HAdV infections is needed to determine a precise indication for these two treatments. Cidofovir's comparative reliability is seen in one retrospective study of 45 bone marrow transplant recipients who received cidofovir for HAdV infection, in which 69% had successful outcomes, although 40% developed cidofovir‐associated toxicity (Ljungman et al. ). HAdV infections must be controlled, both locally and globally. The infrastructure of the impacted countries must be effectively utilised for this task, as well as communication between these countries is paramount to a successful response. This collaboration between affected countries must be tempered with the knowledge that some participating countries may not be economically capable of such a response, and would need supplementation from other partner countries. Reflecting on the COVID‐19 pandemic, the same focus on socioeconomic factors, like cooperation, interdisciplinary and monetary investment must be placed on the spread of HAdV. This would greatly reduce the transmission of this virus, encourage a more holistic approach to understanding and addressing the issue, and decrease the probability of another pandemic (Zoungrana, Yerbanga, and Ouoba). Early detection and immediate isolation are imperative for effective containment, as HAdV is seen most commonly in the paediatric population, whose immune systems are still developing and cannot mount as full of a response as an adult. Policymakers must also develop education programs for the general population so that the individuals in these countries know enough to help themselves.
Our previous knowledge on strictly maintaining the non‐pharmaceutical interventions (NPI) for COVID‐19 outbreak, should be utilised into the affected areas as the resurgence of respiratory viral diseases (CDC ) and the shifting of endemic pattern of HAdV (from B to C) were found when the measures of NPIs were relaxed (Wang et al. ).

Limitations
We only record the number of deaths and cases based on the officially released news, however, the numbers are likely to be much higher than official statistics, as the Association of Health Service Doctors warns (Guardian, ). A more comprehensive approach to the epidemiology and incidence is required to expand this article to other populations.

Potential Areas for Future Research
Efforts should be made by government officials to expand the opportunity to get exclusive HAdV vaccine to the general public, as opposed to limiting it only to military service members, shortcomings of the current strategies. More robust analysis on the quick diagnosis, characteristics, transmission of HAdV, and development of subunit and recombinant vaccine strategies need to be included in further research works.

Conclusion
The human adenovirus is a disease that has been experiencing a resurgence since the COVID‐19 pandemic, creating illness and even fatalities in younger children. Its unique ability to remain latent in the body and then later reactivate along with its detrimental mutation abilities with itself and other viruses is creating concern as a new strand has been recently reported in West Bengal and spreading throughout India. With the only vaccine for those in the military, those in outbreak areas must be educated and take the proper safety measures to prevent this virus from spreading out of control and creating yet another worldwide pandemic. Limiting a vaccine to a singular government organisation stifles vaccine development for the broader population by lowering the profit margin a pharmaceutical company may make by producing and developing a vaccine, or a better vaccine for the general population.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, data curation, writing‐original draft: Md. Ashrafur Rahman, Sydney Cronmiller, Julianne Ernest, Jonah Nguyen, Donovan Zong, Rob Davis, Amanda Rawa and Marie Roke Thomas. Conceptualization, supervision, writing‐review & editing: Rana Al Mosharrafa, Yeasna Shanjana and Md. Rabiul Islam. All authors reviewed and approved the final submission.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

References
Comparison of Insertion, Deletion, and Point Mutations in the Genomes of Human Adenovirus HAdvC‐2 and SARS‐CoV‐2
Genotyping of Human Adenoviruses Circulating in Southwest India
Molecular Analysis of Human Adenoviruses in Hospitalized Children < 5 Years Old With Acute Gastroenteritis in Tehran, Iran
Nebulised Ribavirin for Adenovirus Pneumonia
“Japanese Encephalitis in Australia.”
“Clinical Overview.”
“Instructions for Diagnostic Testing, Typing, and Submission.”
Adeno‐Associated Virus 2 and Human Adenovirus F41 in Wastewater During Outbreak of Severe Acute Hepatitis in Children, Ireland
“Adenovirus Reporting and Surveillance.”
“Adenoviruses: Prevention and Treatment.”
Bengali Migrant Workers in South India: A Mixed‐Method Inquiry Into Their Earnings, Livings and Struggle During Covid Pandemic
Genetic Characterization and Phylogenetic Variations of Human Adenovirus‐F Strains Circulating in Eastern India During 2017–2020
Vaccine development for human mastadenovirus
“Adenovirus Infections.”
The Effect of Gamma Globulin on Acute Respiratory Illness in Military Recruits
Illness and Microbial Experiences of Nursery Children at Junior Village
Perspective on Adenoviruses: Epidemiology, Pathogenicity, and Gene Therapy
Adenovirus Infection and Outbreaks: What You Need to Know
Molecular Epidemiology of Adenovirus Infection Among Infants and Children With Acute Gastroenteritis in Dhaka City, Bangladesh
Molecular Evolution of Human Adenovirus (HAdV) Species C
Epidemiology of Acute, Respiratory Disease in Military Recruits
“List of Districts of West Bengal.”
Viral and Mycoplasmal Pneumonia in a Prepaid Medical Care Group During an Eight‐Year Period
Human Adenovirus Type 7 Infection Causes a More Severe Disease Than Type 3
Outbreak of Adenovirus Genome Type 7d2 Infection in a Pediatric Chronic‐Care Facility and Tertiary‐Care Hospital
Adenovirus Vaccines
Epidemic Keratoconjunctivitis: A Community Outbreak of Mixed Adenovirus Type 8 and Type 19 Infection
Human Mastadenovirus Type 70: A Novel, Multiple Recombinant Species D Mastadenovirus Isolated From Diarrhoeal Faeces of a Haematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Recipient
“Adenovirus Spike in West Bengal: What Are Its Symptoms and Treatment?”
Enhanced Adenovirus Vaccine Safety Surveillance in Military Setting, United States
New Adenovirus Species Found in a Patient Presenting With Gastroenteritis
Molecular Epidemiology and Brief History of Emerging Adenovirus 14‐Associated Respiratory Disease in the United States
Epidemiology of Human Adenovirus in Pakistani Children Hospitalized With Community‐Acquired Gastroenteritis Under the Age of Five Years
The Impact of Adenovirus Infection on the Immunocompromised Host
Large Epidemic of Adenovirus Type 4 Infection Among Military Trainees: Epidemiological, Clinical, and Laboratory Studies
What Is the Risk of a Deadly Adenovirus Pandemic?
Adenovirus Serotype 3 and 7 Infection With Acute Respiratory Failure in Children in Taiwan, 2010–2011
An Outbreak of Acute Respiratory Disease Caused by HAdV‐55 in Beijing, China, 2020
In Vitro Characterization of Human Adenovirus Type 55 in Comparison With Its Parental Adenoviruses, Types 11 and 14
Prevalence of Human Infection With Respiratory Adenovirus in China: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Treatment of Adenovirus Infections in the Immunocompromised Host
Cidofovir for Adenovirus Infections After Allogeneic Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation: A Survey by the Infectious Diseases Working Party of the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation
Interactions Between KIR3DS1 and HLA‐F Activate Natural Killer Cells to Control HCV Replication in Cell Culture
Adenoviruses in Medicine: Innocuous Pathogen, Predator, or Partner
Treatment of Inflammatory Dilated Cardiomyopathy and (Peri)myocarditis With Immunosuppression and i.v. Immunoglobulins
Intravenous Ribavirin Therapy for Disseminated Adenovirus Infection
Adenovirus 7a: A Community‐Acquired Outbreak in a children's Hospital
“Covid‐19 Timeline: Diagnostics, Vaccines, and Therapeutic Antibody Development.”
In Vitro Susceptibility of Adenovirus to Antiviral Drugs is Species‐Dependent
The Recent Outbreak of Acute Severe Hepatitis in Children of Unknown Origin ‐ What Is Known So Far
Adenovirus Type 7h Respiratory Infections: A Report of 29 Cases of Acute Lower Respiratory Disease
Adenovirus Infections and Respiratory Illnesses in Children in Group Day Care
“Epidemiological Update for Dengue, Chikungunya and Zika in 2022.”
Dramatic Decline of Respiratory Illness Among US Military Recruits After the Renewed Use of Adenovirus Vaccines
Molecular Evolution of Human Adenoviruses
Adenovirus: Current Epidemiology and Emerging Approaches to Prevention and Treatment
Human Adenovirus Infections in Pediatric Population—An Update on Clinico‐Pathologic Correlation
Human Adenoviruses Types Associated With Non‐gonococcal Urethritis
Nipah Outbreak: Is It the Beginning of Another Pandemic in the Era of COVID‐19 and Zika
“Virus Outbreak in West Bengal Leaves 19 Children Dead and Thousands in Hospital.”
“Surge in fast‐spreading adenovirus infection among schoolkids in Pune.”
Transcriptomic Analysis of Pacific White Shrimp (Litopenaeus Vannamei, Boone 1931) in Response to Acute Hepatopancreatic Necrosis Disease Caused by Vibrio Parahaemolyticus
The Changed Endemic Pattern of Human Adenovirus From Species B to C Among Pediatric Patients Under the Pressure of Non‐pharmaceutical Interventions Against COVID‐19 in Beijing, China
Human Adenoviruses: A Suspect Behind the Outbreak of Acute Hepatitis in Children Amid the COVID‐19 Pandemic
“Disease Outbreak News; Japanese Encephalitis—Australia.”
“Disease Outbreak News; Multi‐Country—Acute, severe hepatitis of unknown origin in children.”
“Adenovirus Outbreak in Indian State of West Bengal Ravaging Children.”
“India Population (Live).”
Molecular Epidemiology of Human Adenoviruses in Children With and Without Respiratory Symptoms: Preliminary Findings From A Case–Control Study
Socio‐Economic and Environmental Factors in the Global Spread of COVID‐19 Outbreak