Transesophageal Atrial Pacing for the Evaluation of Accessory Atrioventricular Pathways in Wolff‐Parkinson‐White Syndrome: A Pediatric Case Report and Literature Review
ABSTRACT
Arrhythmia induction and identifying the functional characteristics of accessory pathways in Wolff‐Parkinson‐White (WPW) syndrome typically requires an invasive electrophysiological study. This case reports a 13‐year‐old boy with a five‐year history of paroxysmal palpitations, where transesophageal atrial pacing (TEAP) was used to identify accessory pathways. TEAP revealed multiple tachycardia forms, differentiating orthodromic atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia with narrow and wide QRS complexes. EPS confirmed two pathways, diagnosing WPW syndrome. TEAP effectively assessed accessory pathways' functional characteristics and their roles in tachycardia, showcasing its potential as a minimally invasive diagnostic tool for this condition.
A 13‐year‐old boy has experienced intermittent paroxysmal palpitations for 5 years. Finally, tachycardia was induced through transesophageal atrial pacing, and an in‐depth analysis of the mechanism of tachycardia was conducted. The diagnostic results from transesophageal atrial pacing were fully consistent with those from intracardiac electrophysiological examination.

Introduction
Wolff‐Parkinson‐White (WPW) syndrome is a ventricular preexcitation syndrome, i.e., an abnormal phenomenon of atrioventricular conduction, where cardiac excitement bypasses the normal conduction pathways through an accessory pathway (AP) connecting atria and ventricles and prematurely excites a portion of or both ventricles, causing premature depolarization of some ventricular muscle fibers (Finocchiaro et al. ). The most common arrhythmias (tachycardias) associated with WPW syndrome are orthodromic AVRT, antidromic AVRT, and atrial fibrillation. Although rare, atrial flutter and pre‐excited atrial tachycardia can also be associated with WPW. WPW can be diagnosed early in children, often due to palpitations, dizziness, and syncope, but many children remain asymptomatic (Escudero et al. ).
Invasive electrophysiological studies (EPS) have widely been used to assess both antegrade and retrograde conduction properties, as well as to precisely localize the position of APs. Despite the high sensitivity of invasive EPS, the invasive nature of the procedure has prompted the search for alternative techniques for diagnosing tachycardias (Shwayder et al. ). Furthermore, tachycardia attacks in childhood tachycardias are typically infrequent and of short duration, which reduces the likelihood of detection through ECG or Holter monitoring (Aykan et al. ).
Transesophageal atrial pacing (TEAP) is a minimally invasive electrophysiological examination widely used to assess the replication and termination of tachycardia (Toni and Blaufox ). As a simple, cost‐effective, fluoroscopy‐free, and minimally invasive diagnostic tool, TEAP is easier to perform than EPS to evaluate the mechanisms of palpitation in pediatric patients. TEAP could be a safer and more accepted method to identify the APs, avoiding invasive EPS (Strasburger ).
Here, a pediatric patient with two APs identified using TEAP is reported. EPS was subsequently performed, and the APs were confirmed.

Case Presentation
A 13‐year‐old boy was admitted to the authors' hospital in March 2023 for a 5‐year history of paroxysmal palpitations with a recurrence and worsening over the past 3 days. Each episode of paroxysmal palpitations lasted for approximately half an hour, with sudden onset and cessation. The palpitation symptoms were accompanied by dizziness and limb weakness, often occurring after exercise and were relieved after resting for approximately half an hour.
The patient has no confirmed history of diabetes, hypertension, bronchitis, gastritis, or any other diagnosed medical conditions. Moreover, there was no relevant family history of palpitations. The patient's height and weight were 170 cm and 48 kg. Temperature was 36.4°C, pulse was 100 beats per minute, respiration rate was 20 breaths per minute, and blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg. The patient had no other specific signs or symptoms. Routine laboratory tests were all within the limit of normal. Cardiac ultrasound showed no significant abnormalities.
Before TEAP, 5 mL of dyclonine hydrochloride mucilage (0.1 g/10 mL, Yangzijiang Pharmaceutical Group Co. Ltd.) was administered orally, allowing it to coat the throat. Then, the patient slowly swallowed the solution for a short time. TEAP was performed after 10 min.
The ECG identified delta waves in the limb and precordial leads (Figure 1). Lead V1 had an RS complex, whereas leads I, aVL, II, III, and aVF were positive.
ECG was obtained upon the patient's admission.
Tachycardia was recorded after S1S2 stimulation with TEAP. The ECG showed multiple types of narrow and wide QRS tachycardia. The various forms of tachycardia were divided into two categories (Figure 2A,B).
(A and B) Tachycardia was recorded after S1S2 stimulation with TEAP. The routine ECG and esophagus lead ECG showed multiple types of narrow and wide QRS tachycardia. (A) PSVT‐1; (B) PSVT‐2.
The 12‐lead ECG of PSVT‐1 showed alternating wide and narrow QRS tachycardia. Wide QRS tachycardia presented with a right bundle branch block. The narrow QRS tachycardia was regular and showed a 1:1 V‐A association. The RP intervals between leads V1 and the esophagus were compared (Figure 3A). The RP interval was fixed at 144 ms, greater than 70 ms for the esophageal lead. Compared to the QRS complex in lead V1 during sinus rhythm, there was a prominent retrograde inverted P wave following the QRS complex in lead V1 in the narrow QRS of PSVT‐1 (Figure 3B,C), and the RP interval was 104 ms (Figure 3D). As the RP interval was longer in the esophageal lead than in V1, the most consistent feature of PSVT‐1 was orthodromic reciprocating tachycardia due to the right accessory retrograde properties.
(A) RP intervals between leads V1 and the esophagus were compared. (B) Retrograde P waves were negative in lead V1 in the narrow QRS of PSVT‐1. (C) Morphology of the QRS in lead V1 during sinus rhythm. (D) Comparison between wide and narrow QRS of the RP interval in the esophageal lead and lead V1. (E) RP interval of the left bundle branch block was measured using the esophageal lead in PSVT‐2.
The RP interval in the esophageal lead was also accurately measured. The comparison between wide and narrow QRS of the RP interval was 184 vs. 144 ms in the esophageal lead, while the PR interval remained the same in lead V1 (Figure 3D). This observation suggested that when the right bundle branch was blocked, the ventriculoatrial interval was prolonged. The reentry loop of tachycardia could only be conducted through the septum and was retrograde with the left bundle branch, consistent with the typical Coumel's law (Kerr et al. ).
PSVT‐2 is a rare wide‐to‐narrow tachycardia (Figure 2B). A wide QRS of the left bundle branch block was induced using the S1S2 program. The RP‐(1) interval of the left bundle branch block measured using the esophageal lead was 136 ms, and the RR interval was 296 ms (Figure 3E). After 6 s, the tachycardia suddenly converted to a narrow QRS tachycardia with an RR interval of 296 ms. The RP‐(2) interval of the narrow QRS was 96 ms as measured using an esophageal lead (Figure 3E). Both the wide QRS of the left bundle branch block and the narrow QRS, and the polarity and morphology of retrograde P‐waves were unclear in lead V1. In lead I, the retrograde P wave was found to be inverted only in the narrow QRS complex. The wide QRS of the right bundle branch block was recorded between the wide QRS of the left bundle branch block and the narrow QRS (Figure 3E). The RP‐(3) interval of the right bundle branch block measured by the esophageal lead was 96 ms. Interestingly, the narrow QRS's RP interval significantly differed from that of PSVT‐1. Hence, the possible diagnoses of PSVT‐2 were (1) orthodromic AVRT (but this could also be retrograde conduction to the atria via another AP), and (2) atypical AVNRT in which the AP did not participate in the PSVT mechanism, but instead conducted to the ventricle.
The RP intervals of the narrow and wide QRS of the right bundle branch block were the same, whereas the RP interval was significantly prolonged (> 35 ms) when the left bundle branch block occurred. This observation seemed to indicate the existence of another concealed left‐sided AP. No jumping phenomenon was observed during esophageal pacing while reviewing the induction process, and the RP interval was always > 70 ms. Atypical AVNRT conducted to the ventricle by the AP could be ruled out.
Therefore, using TEAP, PSVT‐1 and PSVT‐2 were identified as orthodromic AVRT, while retrograde conduction to the atria was determined through two different APs. The right‐sided AP showed antegrade conduction to the ventricle and retrograde conduction to the atria, whereas the left‐sided AP only showed retrograde conduction to the atria.
Finally, TEAP identified the culprit behind the patient's recurrent palpitation symptoms and episodes of PSVT. EPS was conducted during sinus rhythm. Earlier ventricular activation was recorded in the proximal coronary sinus (CS9‐10) (Figure 4A). AP mapping was performed along the tricuspid annulus during sinus rhythm. The mapping results demonstrated that the AP was in the 9–10 o'clock position in the tricuspid annulus. Narrow QRS tachycardia was induced by CS pacing with S1S2 stimulation. During tachycardia, the atrial activation pattern did not follow retrograde right‐sided AP. An earlier retrograde atrial activation occurred at CS 7–8 (Figure 4B). During tachycardia, mapping was performed along the mitral annulus using a transseptal approach. Further mapping revealed that atrial activation along the mitral annulus occurred earlier than in the right atrial septum. The mapping of retrograde atrial activation during tachycardia demonstrated the existence of retrograde left‐sided AP. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with WPW with two APs.
(A and B) Intracardiac electrogram (EGM) during EPS. (C) Right ventricular pacing after ablation termination. (D) Postoperative follow‐up ECG was performed.
Radiofrequency ablation was performed at two different sites. After ablation termination, right ventricular stimulation showed that ventricular retrograde conduction to the atria exhibited decremental Wenckebach conduction (Figure 4C). Pre‐excitation disappeared, and tachycardia ended immediately (Figure 4D).
After 3 months of follow‐up, the patient did not show tachyarrhythmia recurrence. After radiofrequency ablation, the ECG returned to normal, with no tachycardia recurrence. The patient no longer experienced the previously recurrent symptoms of palpitations.

Discussion
The patient reported here had significant ventricular pre‐excitation on the 12‐lead ECG and symptoms of paroxysmal palpitations. The electrophysiological activity of the AP was determined through TEAP and confirmed by the EPS examination.
PSVT is a common type of tachycardia characterized by a rapid and regular heart rhythm caused by abnormal conduction of electrical signals in the heart. These episodes typically have a sudden onset and termination. Each episode lasts for a duration ranging from a few minutes to several hours. Reentry mechanisms are mostly responsible for PSVT. The most common types of PSVT are AVNRT and AVRT. These two can be distinguished using routine ECG, including criteria such as retrograde P‐wave amplitude (Nakatani et al. ), ST‐segment elevation in lead aVR (Haghjoo et al. ), and ST‐T changes during tachycardia (Mahtani and Nair ). However, the accuracy and specificity of the diagnosis still require improvement. Preoperative identification of the type of tachycardia through EPS can effectively shorten the EPS time, help select the appropriate radiofrequency ablation approach for the patient, and reduce unnecessary catheter ablation injuries by shortening catheter operation time, especially in pediatric patients (Shwayder et al. ).
TEAP and esophageal lead ECG can effectively induce, identify, and terminate supraventricular tachycardia by determining the relationship between P waves and QRS complexes and synchronously measuring the RP interval and entrainment (Aykan et al. ; Hessling et al. ; Koutsampasopoulos et al. ; Toni and Blaufox ). TEAP can determine the conduction characteristics of the antegrade and retrograde pathways of the reentrant circuit by measuring the RP and PR intervals in the esophageal lead (Kerr et al. ). The presence of a non‐visualized retrograde P wave in lead V1 or the formation of an R wave at the end of the QRS complex, along with an RP interval of ≤ 70 ms in the esophageal lead, is considered a characteristic of typical slow‐fast atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia (Stavrakis et al. ). When the RP interval in the esophageal lead was > 70 ms, AVRT or non‐typical AVNRT was the most consistent with the diagnosis (Chen et al. ).
Certain electrophysiological phenomena that occur during pacing can be distinguished and diagnosed. For example, in patients with WPW accompanied by orthodromic AVRT, if a functional bundle branch block occurs on the same side as the AP, tachycardia propagates down the contralateral bundle branch, resulting in a prolonged duration of activation of the reentrant impulse by > 0.035 s. This prolonged duration leads to an increase in the length of the tachycardia cycle and a decrease in the heart rate; it is known as Coumel's law (Kerr et al. ).
In the case reported here, different types of narrow and wide QRS tachycardia were unexpectedly induced during the TEAP examination. The induction and termination process of tachycardia was fully recorded using a 12‐lead ECG and an esophageal‐lead ECG. The RP intervals were accurately measured in the esophageal lead and the V1 lead. Similar to the narrow QRS tachycardia of PSVT‐1, the RP interval was 144 ms in the esophageal lead and 104 ms in lead V1, indicating that retrograde conduction to the right atrium occurred earlier. The diagnosis of orthodromic AVRT caused by right‐sided AP retrograde conduction was preliminarily confirmed. Interestingly, a wide QRS with a right bundle block and a narrow QRS appearing alternately was also found. The RP interval measured in the esophageal lead was 184 ms. The RP interval was significantly prolonged compared to the narrow QRS without a right bundle block. Based on the above measurements, it was surprising that tachycardia was in accordance with Coumel's law (Kerr et al. ).
In a subsequent TEAP, a completely different type of tachycardia was observed. Initially, wide QRS tachycardia with a left bundle branch block morphology was unexpectedly induced. Because wide QRS complex tachycardia could be ventricular tachycardia or retrograde AVRT, it could easily lead to hemodynamic instability. Therefore, the diagnosis must be made quickly and accurately. In the case reported here, the morphology of the QRS complex on the surface ECG and the RP interval on the esophageal ECG were promptly observed. In addition, the esophageal ECG indicated that the RP interval was shorter than the PR interval, which was unlikely to be due to retrograde AVRT. This wide QRS complex tachycardia with left bundle branch block morphology suddenly transitioned to narrow QRS tachycardia after only 6 s.
The RP interval of narrow QRS tachycardia measured by the esophageal lead was significantly shortened to 96 ms compared to PSVT‐1, suggesting a different mechanism for tachycardia. Differentiating atypical AVNRT from OAVRT remains challenging. However, the appearance of a wide QRS complex with a right bundle branch block provides further evidence for assessment. Subsequently, the RP interval in the esophageal lead was measured for wide QRS complexes with a left bundle branch block, a right bundle branch block, and narrow QRS complexes. RP intervals in the esophageal lead were measured at 0.136 s and 0.096 s, respectively. This observation indicated that during tachycardia, compared to the normal QRS morphology, the RP interval remained unchanged with the right bundle branch block. At the same time, it was prolonged by more than 0.035 s with the left bundle branch block. Similarly, it conforms to the conclusions of Coumel's law. This finding provided a definitive diagnosis of orthodromic AVRT through concealed left‐sided AP conduction.
Cardiac electrophysiological examination confirmed dual APs in the left and right atrioventricular annuli. Tachycardia induced by this method showed a more uniform morphology than that induced by esophageal electrophysiology. Antegrade AP mapping along the tricuspid annulus identified a right antegrade AP, while programmed endocardial atrial pacing induced a narrow QRS‐type PSVT. Intracardiac electrograms revealed a retrograde left‐sided AP. Compared to transesophageal pacing, endocardial pacing more accurately localized and characterized the APs. Analysis of QRS waveform morphologies and RP intervals from esophageal and V1 leads further confirmed the presence of multiple APs through transesophageal atrial pacing.
Compared to an EP study, TEAP provides a relatively non‐invasive method for pacing the atria. However, almost all patients who underwent TEAP reported discomfort, typically described as a mild burning sensation or chest pain similar to indigestion, though most tolerated it well. There is limited literature on TEAP‐related complications. As reported by Gallagher et al. , an excessively high pacing threshold or improper electrode placement may lead to phrenic ventricular pacing (2/65, 3.08%) or nerve pacing (1/65, 1.54%). Additionally, rapid atrial pacing can unintentionally trigger atrial fibrillation and result in a rapid ventricular response in individuals with pre‐excitation syndrome (4/38, 10.53%) (Gallagher et al. ). In an EP study, mild complications such as hematoma at the puncture site, catheter entrapment, and transient atrioventricular block may occur during catheter placement and manipulation (Dung et al. ). Severe complications, though rare, can include fatal outcomes, atrioventricular block requiring pacemaker implantation, cardiac tamponade, pneumothorax, and the need for blood transfusion. The complication rate at the time of ablation was reported to be 3.7%–7.7% in children and adolescents (Kugler et al. ; Dung et al. ). Regarding procedure duration, Sommer et al. reported that in adult WPW patients, the mean procedure time—from cine loop acquisition to sheath removal—was 60 ± 26.3 min (Sommer et al. ). Data on TEAP procedure duration are limited; however, at our Esophageal Electrophysiology Center, it typically ranges from 30 min to an hour, depending on the purpose of TEAP, the patient's condition, and procedural complexity.
Tachycardia caused by two distinct APs is rare; only a few cases were reported (Costa et al. ). Of course, the different natures of the dual APs observed in the reported cases will lead to various clinical manifestations. The presence of two distinct APs also complicates their electrophysiological determination, but it can be achieved through careful examination. Due to the inability of TEAP to utilize several diagnostic methods for differentiating PSVT in intracardiac EPS, such as ventricular entrainment, His‐bundle pacing, and ventricular RS2 stimulation, the accuracy of PSVT diagnosis using TEAP is affected. In cases of combined PSVT types, the dominant type during an episode may mask the presence of other types, which only become apparent after radiofrequency ablation, leading to missed diagnoses. In addition, compared with the variety of stimulation sites available in EPS, TEAP primarily stimulates the left atrium via esophageal electrodes, resulting in a lower inducibility rate for supraventricular tachycardia compared with EPS. A carefully protocolized examination and mapping of antegrade and retrograde pathways can help identify cases of multiple APs (Strasburger ).
After radiofrequency ablation was performed to block the dual APs, tachycardia was no longer induced, and the electrocardiogram returned to its normal morphology. The patient was followed up for 3 months after radiofrequency ablation, and no further tachycardia occurred.
This study is a single case report from one center. Nevertheless, considering the small number of reported cases of dual APs, the information provided here could be useful in the future.

Conclusions
In conclusion, the pediatric patient with pre‐excited tachycardia was found to have right‐sided pre‐excitation AP and left‐sided concealed AP on TEAP examination. TEAP could determine the functional characteristics and roles of APs in tachycardia.

Author Contributions
Jing Chen and Ping Zuo carried out the studies, participated in collecting data, and drafted the manuscript. Xiaoyun Yang performed the statistical analysis and participated in its design. Bei Wang participated in the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Ethics Statement
The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (NCT06458803). All participants were informed about the study protocol and provided written informed consent to participate in the study. I confirm that all methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines. All procedures were performed in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later amendments.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Data Availability Statement
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.

References
Comparison of Transesophageal and Intracardiac Electrophysiologic Studies for the Diagnosis of Childhood Supraventricular Tachycardias
Transesophageal Electrophysiology Study in the Diagnosis of Dual Atrioventricular Nodal Nonreentrant Tachycardia
Unveiling Duodromic Atrioventricular Reentrant Tachycardia in Wolff‐Parkinson‐White Syndrome: A Unique Circuit Showing His Bundle Dissociation With Two Septal Accessory Pathways in Close Anatomical Proximity
Phuoc Radiofrequency Catheter Ablation for Paroxysmal Supraventricular Tachycardia in Children: Insights on its Safety and Efficacy From a Lower Middle‐Income Country
Loss of Ventricular Preexcitation During Noninvasive Testing Does Not Exclude High‐Risk Accessory Pathways: A Multicenter Study of WPW in Children
Sudden Cardiac Death in Pre‐Excitation and Wolff‐Parkinson‐White: Demographic and Clinical Features
Esophageal Pacing: A Diagnostic and Therapeutic Tool
Value of the aVR Lead in Differential Diagnosis of Atrioventricular Nodal Reentrant Tachycardia
Transesophageal Electrocardiography and Atrial Pacing in Children
Changes in Ventriculoatrial Intervals With Bundle Branch Block Aberration During Reciprocating Tachycardia in Patients With Accessory Atrioventricular Pathways
Transesophageal Overdrive Pacing in a Patient With Atrial Tachycardia and Beta‐Thalassemia Major. A Challenging Simplicity
Radiofrequency Catheter Ablation for Tachyarrhythmias in Children and Adolescents
Supraventricular Tachycardia
Differentiation of Slow‐Slow Form of AVNRT From AVRT Through a Posteroseptal Accessory Pathway by Retrograde P‐Wave Amplitude
Difficulties With Invasive Risk Stratification Performed Under Anesthesia in Pediatric Wolff‐Parkinson‐White Syndrome
MediGuide in Supraventricular Tachycardia: Initial Experience From a Multicentre Registry
Slow/Fast Atrioventricular Nodal Reentrant Tachycardia Using the Inferolateral Left Atrial Slow Pathway: Role of the Resetting Response to Select the Ablation Target
The Transition From Fetal to Neonatal Supraventricular Tachycardia: What Is the Role of Transesophageal Atrial Pacing?
Transesophageal Evaluation of Asymptomatic Wolff‐Parkinson‐White Syndrome