Hydrogen Proton Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (MRS) in Differential Diagnosis of Intracranial Tumors: A Systematic Review
Meningioma, glioma, and metastases are the most common intracranial tumors in clinical practice. In order to improve the prognosis of patients, timely diagnosis and early treatment are crucial. Hydrogen proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS) imaging can noninvasively display the biochemical information of tissues in vivo and has been applied to identify and diagnose intracranial tumors. We want to comprehensively evaluate 1H-MRS identify and diagnose intracranial tumors by meta-analysis. Some databases such as PubMed and Cochrane Library were used to systematically search articles that were about identifying and diagnosing intracranial tumors with 1H-MRS. Then, weighted mean difference (WMD) was used as an effect size to conduct meta-analysis. There are altogether nine articles, including 533 patients. Results of meta-analysis: The Cho/Cr and Cho/NAA ratios in the LGG group were significantly lower than those in the HGG group (WMD = −0.69, 95% CI (−0.92, −0.45), P < 0.001, WMD = −0.76, 95% CI (−1.03, −0.48), P < 0.001). The Cho/Cr ratio of tumor and peritumor in the HGG group was significantly different from that in the metastasis group (0.68, 95% CI (−1.27, 2.62), P < 0.001, WMD = 0.94, 95% CI (0.41, 1.47), P < 0.001). There was no significant difference in the tumor and peritumor NAA/Cr ratio between the HGG group and metastasis group (WMD = −0.64, 95% CI (−1.63, 0.34), P=0.31, WMD = −0.22, 95% CI (−0.59, 0.15), P=0.24). 1H-MRS can provide metabolic information of different intracranial tumors and can effectively diagnose and differentiate glioma and metastasis. 1H-MRS can also provide a reliable basis for the classification of glioma, and has certain clinical application value.

1. Introduction
According to statistics, intracranial tumors account for over 5% of the tumor incidence rate, and 20% to 30% of other tumors can be transferred to the intracranial area, which has a high incidence rate. Clinical studies have found that early diagnosis and treatment are important for improving the prognosis of patients with intracranial tumors. Conventional MRI is only morphological imaging, which cannot reflect the functional metabolism of tissues, and it is difficult to make qualitative diagnosis for tumors with similar morphology. It is especially difficult to diagnose and differentiate cases of multiple gliomas or single metastases, as well as tumors located on the surface of the brain next to the longitudinal fissure pool, next to the lateral fissure pool and in the gray-white matter junction area of the brain. Hydrogen proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS) can determine the metabolism energy of human tissues and organs, biochemical changes, and compound quantification. 1H-MRS compensates for the lack of qualitative diagnosis in conventional MRI. The 1H-MRS can also quantify the chemical composition of biopsies for histological clarification of the extent of intracranial tumor infiltration. It can be used clinically to detect metabolites of cranial tumors such as N-aspartic acid acetate(NAA), choline-containing compounds(Cho), creatine(Cr), and changes in histochemical properties to obtain local metabolic information of the lesion. The 1H-MRS can also quantify the chemical composition of biopsies for histological clarification of the extent of intracranial tumor infiltration. However, due to different types and grades of intracranial tumors, their tissue components are naturally different. Therefore, there is some variation in the levels of various metabolites measured by 1H-MRS as reported in various studies. Based on the controversy of various metabolite levels measured by 1H-MRS in the diagnosis of intracranial tumors, this study will systematically evaluate the diagnostic efficacy of 1H-MRS for intracranial tumors using diagnostic accuracy meta-analysis.

2. Data and Methods

2.1. Retrieval Methods
Literature searches were conducted through PubMed, Web of Science, Cochrane Library, and other databases, and the search time was since the establishment of the database. The search term is “1H-magnetic resonance spectroscopy or 1H-MRS” and “intracranial tumor or glioma or metastasis.” In order to identify more studies, we also consulted the references of relevant articles.

2.2. Inclusion Criteria
The following were the inclusion criteria: (1) published literature to date, and language was limited to English. (2) The differential diagnosis of 1H-MRS for glioma and metastatic tumor was not limited to gender and age. (3) Measurements include at least one of Cho/Cr, Cho/NAA, and NAA/Cr. (4) Complete clinical data of the patient.

2.3. Exclusion Criteria
The following were the exclusion criteria: (1) The following types of articles will be excluded, such as duplicate literature, unpublished, animal experiments, conference abstracts and review articles. (2) Articles not associated with differential diagnosis of intracranial tumors. (3) Specific data cannot be obtained in articles.

2.4. Literature Screening
Two researchers independently completed the collection and inspection of the literature. First, they worked together to develop a search strategy. Then, they independently completed the inclusion of the literature in strict accordance with the inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria that had been developed, respectively. Literature inclusion process is as follows: First of all, the initial screening of the retrieved documents is done by looking at the titles and abstracts of the documents. The full-text analysis of the literature that passed the initial screening was then further screened. Finally, the final inclusion was determined based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the literature.

2.5. Extraction of the Data and Quality Evaluation
Information on the headlines of the literature, lead author, country, type of study design, sample size, patient age et al, 1H-MRS field strength, intracranial tumor type and number of cases, detection area (tumor/perimeter), and relevant metabolic indicators were extracted for the included studies. Article quality evaluation was done using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS), and studies with a score of 6 or higher are considered quality documentation.

2.6. Statistical Method
Data were meta-analyzed using Stata 12.0 statistical software. Weighted mean difference (WMD) was taken as an effect size. The heterogeneity was analyzed by Z test and I2. If P > 0.1 and I2 < 50%, there was no significant heterogeneity among the included studies, and the meta-analysis was carried out by the fixed effect model. On the contrary, there is heterogeneity among studies, and meta-analysis is carried out in a random effect mode. The analysis of publication bias was conducted using funnel plots.

3. Results

3.1. Literature Search Results and Basic Information
We preliminarily searched and identified 161 potentially relevant articles in the database, and 7 articles were obtained through other resource identification or other records. And then, we read the title and abstract preliminarily and excluded 128 articles with inconsistent research contents, repetition, review, or meeting. On further full-text reading, a total of 9 articles were included, as shown in Figure 1. The characteristics of each study literature are as shown in Table 1.

3.2. Results of Meta-Analysis

3.2.1. Meta-Analysis of Differential Diagnosis of Glioma Grade
(1) Tumoral Core Cho/Cr. We included four studies, and there was no statistical heterogeneity among studies, so we used the fixed-effects model. There was a significant difference in the Cho/Cr ratio between the LGG group and HGG group (WMD = −0.69, 95% CI (−0.92, −0.45), P < 0.001), as shown in Figure 2.
(2) Tumoral Core Cho/NAA. We included four studies, and there was no statistical heterogeneity among studies, so we used the fixed-effects model. There was a significant difference in the Cho/NAA ratio between the LGG group and HGG group (WMD = −0.76, 95% CI (−1.03,−0.48), P < 0.001), as shown in Figure 3.

3.2.2. Meta-Analysis of Differential Diagnosis between HGG and Metastasis
(1) Tumoral Core Cho/Cr. We included five studies, and there was statistical heterogeneity among them (I2 = 93.32%), so adopted the random effect model. There was a significant difference in the Cho/Cr ratio between the HGG group and metastasis group (WMD = 0.68, 95% CI (−1.27, 2.62), P < 0.001). Subgroup analysis was performed using different field strengths of 1H-MRS, 3 references were used for 3.0T, and there was statistical heterogeneity among all studies (I2 = 75.68%, P=0.01). So, we used the random effect model. The results showed that tumoral core Cho/Cr in the HGG group was higher than that in metastasis group, and the difference was statistically significant (WMD = −0.67, 95% CI (−1.99, 0.64), P=0.01), as shown in Figure 4.
(2) Tumoral Core NAA/Cr. We included five studies, and there was statistical heterogeneity among them (I2 = 96.49%), so we adopted the random effect model. There was no significant difference in the NAA/Cr ratio between the HGG group and metastasis group (WMD = −0.64, 95% CI (−1.63, 0.34), P=0.31). Subgroup analysis was performed using different field strengths of 1H-MRS, 3 references were used for 3.0T, and there was statistical heterogeneity among all studies (I2 = 98.74%, P < 0.001). So, we used the random effect model. Meta-analysis results showed that tumoral core NAA/Cr in the HGG group was lower than that in metastasis group, and the difference was statistically significant (WMD = −1.16, 95% CI (−3.08, 0.77), P < 0.001), as shown in Figure 5.
(3) Peritumoral Cho/Cr. We included five studies, and there was statistical heterogeneity among them, so we adopted the random effect model. There was a significant difference in the peritumoral Cho/Cr ratio between the HGG group and metastasis group (WMD = 0.94, 95% CI (0.41, 1.47), P < 0.001), as shown in Figure 6.
(4) Peritumoral NAA/Cr. We included five studies, and there was statistical heterogeneity among them, so we adopted the random effect model. There was no significant difference in peritumoral NAA/Cr ratio between the HGG group and metastasis group (WMD = −0.22, 95% CI (−0.59, 0.15), P=0.24), as shown in Figure 7.

3.3. Bias Risk
A funnel plot of peritumoral NAA/Cr in the HGG group and metastasis group showed that the studies were relatively symmetrical within the funnel plot and the risk of bias was low among studies, as shown in Figure 8.

4. Discussion
1H-MRS has shown significant advantages in the diagnosis of intracranial tumors as the only noninvasive means to detect metabolic information of brain tumors in vivo. 1H-MRS can not only reflect the concentration of various metabolites in the form of waveform but also obtain the local metabolic information of the lesion.
Moreover, at the same time, it is also possible to quantify the chemical composition of the biopsies, to clarify the extent of intracranial tumor infiltration by histology, to detect changes in the concentration of metabolites such as NAA, Cr, and Cho in the region of interest (parenchymal and peritumoral regions) of the human brain, and to assess the tissue metabolism based on the parameters of the wave spectrum of these metabolites. It can help to reflect the structural information of tumor tissues, which is more conducive to the differential diagnosis of intracranial tumors. Relevant studies have found that NAA is a neuron marker, and NAA peak is distributed at 2.02 × 10−6. In the brain tumor state, the peak NAA was significantly reduced, and the degree of reduction was closely related to the degree of neuronal destruction. However, in fact, low NAA peaks are seen in 1H-MRS in patients with metastases and meningiomas, probably due to tumor marginal voxel effect or tumor invasion of normal brain tissue. In addition, the Cho peak was distributed at 3.22 × 10−6, which is an important indicator of glial proliferation, cell metabolism, and myelin formation. Relevant studies found that the tumor grade was positively correlated with Cho/Cr in tumor parenchyma. The Cr peak is located at 3.02 PPM, mainly due to the composition of Cr and pCr (phosphocreatine), the total amount is relatively constant under different metabolic conditions in the same individual brain. Therefore, the Cr peak can be used as a reference to obtain the relative ratio of other metabolites to Cr for comparison. Most of the pathological wave spectra of some cranial tumors are similar. Therefore, studies related to the composition and concentration of peritumor metabolites detected by 1H-MRS for the identification of intracranial tumors have not reached a consensus conclusion in this regard.
The results showed that the Cho/Cr and Cho/NAA ratios of the LGG group were significantly lower than those of the HGG group, the difference was statistically significant, which was consistent with the literature report. Glioma can lead to the increase of tumor cells in the lesion and the increase of cell membrane, so the Cho peak is significantly increased. At the same time, the number of neurons was reduced by invasion and destruction, and NAA decreased significantly. Cr showed a moderate decline. With the increase of malignant degree of gliomas, the peak value of Cho in HGG was significantly higher than that in LGG, and the peak value of NAA was significantly lower than that in LGG, indicating that the proliferation of tumor cells in HGG was more active and the destruction of normal neurons was more serious. It may be related to proliferation, mitosis, destruction, or degeneration of neurons of brain tumor cells. Due to tumorigenesis and pathological changes, the peritumor region changes. LGG have lower Cho/Cr than HGG, suggesting that MRS contributes to glioma grading, where the Cho/Cr ratio reflects a more stable tumor grade.
MRS analysis of metabolite ratios in parenchymal and peritumoral regions was used to differentiate gliomas from metastases, but the findings were inconsistent. This study showed that there was no statistically significant difference between the tumor and peritumor NAA/Cr ratios in the HGG group contrast with the metastasis group. The tumor NAA/Cr was lower in the HGG group than in the metastasis group in a subgroup analysis using 1H-MRS system 3.0T, and there is heterogeneity between studies(I2 = 98.74%, P < 0.001). However, it was undifferentiated between the glioma group and metastasis group in MRI system 1.5T, and there was high heterogeneity between studies. The study concluded that the proliferation rate of glioma cells is higher than that of metastases and may be associated with a decrease in cell numbers due to tumor cell necrosis in brain metastases. Therefore, different MRI intensities in clinic may affect the value of MRS in distinguishing NAA/Cr tumor's core in the two groups, and the clinical conclusions need to be further explored. In this study, the tumor and peritumor Cho/Cr ratios of the HGG group and the metastasis group were inconsistent, which is generally consistent with the results of most other studies. It is possible that the rise in Cho is not significant mainly due to peritumoral vasogenic edema of brain metastases. However, there are differences in cell proliferation activity and peritumoral edema formation mechanisms in the parenchymal areas of different tumors. It may be caused by the presence of partial volume effect due to the lack of neurons in brain metastases. Or it may be caused by the infiltration of tumor cells into the surrounding normal tissues and the area of interest of the wave spectrum beyond the tumor. Therefore, the clinical differentiation between glioma and brain metastasis tumors and peritumoral Cho/Cr needs to be investigated in further studies with larger sample sizes.
In order to observe the bias risk of the included studies, we took the advanced glioma group and the BMS group as an example to make a funnel plot of peritumoral NAA/Cr. The results showed that each study was relatively symmetrical in the funnel plot, and the risk of bias among the studies was low. The results of this study were highly reliable. Some shortcomings of this study are as follows: First, the number of included studies was small, and each meta-analysis did not reach 10 studies, resulting in insufficient cases. Therefore, this study needs to be included in more high-quality studies to further support validation. Second, there are different degrees of statistical heterogeneity among the literature included in this study. The source of heterogeneity may be related to the MRS detection method, age distribution, sample size, reference diagnostic criteria, and publication bias in the included studies. However, due to the small number of included studies, subgroup analysis cannot be further conducted to explore the causation of heterogeneity. Third, many of the included studies did not describe the reference diagnostic criteria in detail, and there may be cases that are easy to be confused. Finally, language limited to English are included in the study, it may be a potential risk of missed detection, which may affect the interpretation of the results to a certain extent.

5. Conclusion
1H-MRS provides a new and noninvasive method for studying biochemistry and energy metabolism in vivo. By comparing tumor Cho/Cr and Cho/NAA, it is a guideline for the diagnosis of glioma grading, and comparing tumor and peritumor Cho/Cr is useful for the differential diagnosis of HGG and metastases. However, this study has some limitations, and more studies and in-depth further support are needed to confirm.

Data Availability
The simulation experiment data used to support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest regarding the publication of this paper.
Efficacy comparison of multi-phase CT and hepatotropic contrast-enhanced MRI in the differential diagnosis of focal nodular hyperplasia: a prospective cohort study
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy detection of high lipid levels in intraaxial tumors without central necrosis: a characteristic of malignant lymphoma
Local image variance of 7 Tesla SWI is a new technique for preoperative characterization of diffusely infiltrating gliomas: correlation with tumour grade and IDH1 mutational status
The 2016 world health organization classification of tumors of the central nervous system: a summary
Myo-inositol concentration in MR spectroscopy for differentiating high grade glioma from primary central nervous system lymphoma
Empirical comparison of publication bias tests in meta-analysis
Distinction between high-grade gliomas and solitary metastases using peritumoral 3-T magnetic resonance spectroscopy, diffusion, and perfusion imagings
High-grade gliomas and solitary metastases: differentiation by using perfusion and proton spectroscopic MR imaging
In vivo single-voxel proton MR spectroscopy in the differentiation of high-grade gliomas and solitary metastases
Differentiation of glioblastoma multiforme from metastatic brain tumor using proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy, diffusion and perfusion metrics at 3 T
Measurements of diagnostic examination performance using quantitative apparent diffusion coefficient and proton MR spectroscopic imaging in the preoperative evaluation of tumor grade in cerebral gliomas
3 Tesla magnetic resonance spectroscopy: cerebral gliomas vs. metastatic brain tumors. Our experience and review of the literature
The diagnostic value of apparent diffusion coefficient and proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in the grading of pediatric gliomas
Advanced MR imaging techniques in the evaluation of nonenhancing gliomas: perfusion-weighted imaging compared with proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy and tumor grade
Integrating diffusion kurtosis imaging, dynamic susceptibility-weighted contrast-enhanced MRI, and short echo time chemical shift imaging for grading gliomas
[Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H-MRS)]
Clinical imaging of tumor metabolism with 1 H magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Metabolic alterations in the peritumoral brain in cases of meningiomas: 1H-MRS study
Improving the utility of 1H-MRS for the differentiation of glioma recurrence from radiation necrosis
Quantitative assessment of gliomas by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Glioma grading: sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values of perfusion MR imaging and proton MR spectroscopic imaging compared with conventional MR imaging
Advanced magnetic resonance imaging in glioblastoma: a review
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy, positron emission tomography and radiogenomics-relevance to glioma
Proton MR spectroscopy of tumefactive demyelinating lesions
Document retrieval process.
Cho/Cr forest of the tumoral core in the LGG group and HGG group.
Cho/NAA forest of the tumoral core in the LGG group and HGG group.
Cho/Cr forest of the tumoral core in the HGG group and metastasis group.
NAA/Cr forest of the tumoral core in the HGG group and metastasis group.
Cho/Cr forest of peritumoral in the HGG group and metastasis group.
NAA/Cr forest of peritumoral in the HGG group and metastasis group.
Funnel plot of peritumoral NAA/Cr in the HGG group and metastasis group.
Features of the included studies.
Author	Years	Country and territories	Study design	Sample size	Age median (range) years	Field strength	Tumor types (n)	Area	Measurement	NOS	 	Chiang 	2004	Taiwan	Prospective	26	25–76	3.0T	HGG (n = 14) brain metastasis (n = 12)	Tumoral core peritumoral	Cho/Cr, NAA/Cr	6	 		 	Law 	2002	Australian	NA	51	51.9 (15–80)	1.5T	HGG (n = 13) brain metastasis (n = 18)	Tumoral core peritumoral	Cho/Cr, Cho/NAA, NAA/Cr	7	 		 	Fan 	2004	China	NA	22	46.7 (32–62)	2.0T	HGG (n = 14) brain metastasis (n = 8)	Tumoral core peritumoral	Cho/Cr, Cho/NAA, NAA/Cr	7	 		 	Tsougos 	2012	Greece	Prospective	49	32–73	3.0T	HGG (n = 35) brain metastasis (n = 14)	Tumoral core peritumoral	Cho/Cr, Cho/NAA, NAA/Cr	7	 		 	Server 	2011	Norway	NA	74	NA	1.5T	LGG (n = 15) HGG (n = 59)	Tumoral core peritumoral	Cho/Cr, Cho/NAA	6	 		 	Caivano 	2013	Italy	Prospective	60	67 (33–86) 56 (30–81)	3.0T	LGG (n = 14) HGG (n = 32) brain metastasis (n = 14)	Tumoral core peritumoral	Cho/Cr, Cho/NAA, NAA/Cr	7	 		 	Yao 	2021	China	Retrospective	209	0–14	1.5/3.0T	LGG (n = 143) HGG (n = 66)	Tumoral core	Cho/Cr, Cho/NAA, NAA/Cr	7	 		 	Sahin 	2013	Turkey	NA	20	46.86 (29–64) 38.17 (28–57)	3.0T	LGG (n = 14) HGG (n = 6)	Tumoral core	Cho/Cr	6	 		 	Metwally 	2014	Egypt	NA	22	34.4 (15–63)	1.5T	LGG (n = 14) HGG (n = 8)	Tumoral core	Cho/NAA	6
HGG means high-grade glioma and LGG means low-grade glioma.