Metachronous Osteosarcoma, A Differential Diagnosis to be Considered in Children With Osteosarcoma: A Review of Literature and a Case From Our Center
Metachronous osteosarcomas (MOS) are currently defined as tumors that arise in a way and site unusual for typical metastasis. In this article, we reviewed the recent literature on the occurrence of metachronous osteosarcoma and presented a case from our center. Our patient, a 10-year-old girl, presented with metachronous osteoblastic osteosarcoma of the left distal femur ∼5 years after the successful treatment for osteosarcoma of the right distal femur. Even after several relapses, complete remission (CR) was achieved after the first osteosarcoma and after the metachronous osteosarcoma. The literature research revealed that metachronous osteosarcoma occurs in 3.4 to 5.4% of osteosarcoma patients. The time interval between the diagnosis of the initial osteosarcoma and the metachronous tumor ranged from 0.2 to 14.3 years (median 2.5 y). MOS appears to have differences in localization and metastatic spread, as well as a different survival pattern compared with primary osteosarcoma and osteosarcoma recurrence. Survival (median 4.3 y, range 0 to 24.6 y) appears to be associated with the time interval to diagnosis of MOS. In particular, early MOS (<24 mo after primary diagnosis) seem to have a poorer prognosis. Therefore, the occurrence of MOS at oncological unusual sites should be considered as a differential diagnosis in osteosarcoma survivors.
Osteosarcoma is a rare malignancy with an incidence of 0.2 to 0.3/100 000 per year in Europe. Despite its rarity, osteosarcomas are the most common primary bone tumors in children. Approximately 30% of patients develop a recurrence with pulmonary metastasis as a common relapse. In comparison, the occurrence of skeletal lesions consecutively to the initial primary tumor is rare, but there seems to be a small subset of patients who develop 1 or more new nonmetastatic tumors in the skeleton after the successful treatment of the initial osteosarcoma. These lesions, which occur distant from the primary tumor after the initial treatment of primary osteosarcoma are denoted as metachronous osteosarcoma (MOS). MOS can be further classified into early MOS (tumor developing <24 mo from primary osteosarcoma) and late MOS (tumor developing >24 mo from primary osteosarcoma). Because of the improved treatment of malignant bone tumors, physicians and patients should be aware of the possibility of MOS occurrence, and it should be considered as a differential diagnosis in osteosarcoma survivors. Therefore, we analyzed and compared the data of several articles with large cohorts regarding the occurrence of MOS and presented the case of a 10-year-old girl who presented with metachronous osteoblastic osteosarcoma of the left distal femur ∼5 years after the successful treatment of osteosarcoma of the right distal femur.

MATERIAL AND METHODS
The literature search was conducted in PubMed and Cochrane databases and the following search strategies were applied: metachronous osteosarcoma, metachronous AND osteosarcoma. Moreover, we manually searched the reference lists of eligible studies and case reports to identify additional relevant publications. Data from the case report were collected from the database of our center. We obtained patient consent to use the data for publication.

Case Presentation
At the age of 6 years, the patient was diagnosed with a pulmonary metastasized osteosarcoma of the right distal femur. Chemotherapy was initiated according to the COSS-96 protocol. After neoadjuvant chemotherapy, a wide resection of the tumor and a rotationplasty were performed. The pathologic diagnosis was consistent with an immature osteoblastic osteosarcoma, good response, and Salzer-Kuntschik regression grade 2 (RG2) (Fig. 1). Postoperatively, adjuvant chemotherapy was performed according to the COSS-96 standard risk 1 protocol. Resection of the lung metastasis was also performed. At the end of therapy, complete remission (CR) was achieved.
Histopathological findings of A, primary osteosarcoma after neoadjuvant treatment compared with B, metachronus osteosarcoma after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
After the treatment, the patient underwent regular clinical examinations, radiographs of the affected leg, and computed tomography scans of the lungs, but new pulmonary metastases developed 20 months after the initial metastasectomy. Chemotherapy was then administered according to the COSS-96 relapse protocol. The patient underwent bilateral thoracotomy, and all lung metastases were successfully removed. CR2 was confirmed. The patient was disease-free for 14 months before new metastases were detected on a chest CT. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (a regimen of carboplatin and etoposide) was administered. In addition, a thoracotomy was performed on the right side for resection of the 2 new metastases. Adjuvant treatment included 2 cycles of cyclophosphamide and topotecan. After this treatment, CR3 was achieved. Furthermore, at the time of each relapse, skeletal scintigraphy was performed to rule out the potential of skeletal lesions at those time points. Four years and 9 months after the initial diagnosis, the 10-year-old patient noticed an increasing mass in her left knee joint. An MRI scan of the left femur revealed significant osteolysis of the left distal femur, suggestive of osteosarcoma. Biopsy of the left distal femur confirmed osteoblastic osteosarcoma. The histologic appearance of the biopsied specimen showed partial necrosis and spindle cells with pleomorphic nuclei forming an osteoid matrix (Fig. 2). Chest CT showed no new suspicious foci, and no extrathoracic metastases were found. Therefore, neoadjuvant chemotherapy (2 cycles) and adjuvant chemotherapy (2 cycles) with daunorubicin, cisplatin, ifosfamide, and etoposide were administered. After neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the tumor was completely removed, and an endoprosthetic replacement was performed. The pathologic examination of the resected specimen showed that >95% of the tumor was necrotic, and wide tumor-free resection margins were obtained. A germ-line analysis for cancer predisposition syndromes has not been performed, however, the patient’s family history of cancer did not raise suspicion of cancer predisposition syndromes. After the treatment, CR4 was achieved. Since then, the patient has been in complete remission, and there has been no evidence of disease for 12.5 years.
Histopathological findings of the metachronous osteosarcoma of the left distal femur at 10x and 20x magnification using HE staining (A) before and (B) after neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

Literature Review and Discussion

Background
Among survivors of osteosarcoma, there appears to be a small subset of patients with MOS. Because of the small number of patients who present with 1 or more new, nonmetastatic tumors after the initial treatment, the literature is limited to a few studies and case reports. Few data are available on patients and tumor characteristics, and on MOS outcomes. Previously, the development of metachronous osteosarcoma after the successful treatment of the original primary tumor was thought to be associated with a poor prognosis, but there appears to be a different survival pattern in patients with MOS than in osteosarcoma recurrences in general. In some reports, it has been shown that long-term survival is possible if the patient receives aggressive treatment, including chemotherapy and surgery.
Therefore, we analyzed and compared data from several articles with relatively large cohorts regarding the incidence of metachronous osteosarcoma. Table 1 summarizes the literature of MOS.
Clinicopathological Features of the MOS Literature
References	N. cases/Percentage of cases with MOS (%)	N. early MOS	N. late MOS	Sex	Mean age at Primary Diagnosis (y)	Median time ﻿from Primary Tumor to MOS (y)	Pulmonary Metastasis at time of MOS	Median Survival time after MOS (y)	Outcome	Location of MOS	Histology of MOS	 	Aung et al	23 (5.4)	12	11	F=7 (30%)M=16 (70%)	15.5range (4.6 to 41.9)	1.4range (0.2 to 11.3)	Yes (n=3)No (n=20)	1.5range (0.8 to 6.9)	A-NED= 5 (21.7%)AWD= 2 (8.7%)DOD=16 (69.6%)	Axial skeleton (n=7)extremities (n=16)	OGS (n= 3)Osteoblastic(n=10)Chondroblastic (n=2)Teleangiectatic (n=1)Unknown (n= 7)	 	Brandal et al	10 (3.4)	7	3	F=2 (20%)M=8 (80%)	23.7range (6 to 62)	1.7range (0.2 to 4.9)	No (n=10)	3.7range (0 to 24.6)	A-NED =2 (20%)D-NED =1 (10%)DOD=7 (70%)	Axial skeleton (n=5)extremities (n=4)multifocal (n=1)	Osteoblastic(n=6)Chondroblastic (n=1)Fibroblastic (n=1)Unknown (n=2)	 	Jaffe et al	11 (4.1)	4	7	–	12.4range (9 to 16.3)	2.8range (0.9 to 6.5)	Yes (n=1)No (n=10)2nd MOS (n=2)	1.33range (0.2 to 4.2)	A-NED= 5 (45.4%)DOD=6 (54.6%)	Axial skeleton (n=0)extremities (n=7)multifocal (n=4)	Osteoblastic (n=8)Chondroblastic (n=2)Teleangiectatic (n= 1)	 	Rodriguez et al	5	1	4	F=1 (20%)M=4 (80%	20.0range (13 to 31)	3.25range (1.0 to 6.5)	No (n=5)2nd MOS (n=2)	6.4range (2.0 to 8.0)	A-NED=4 (80%)D-NED=1 (20%)	Axial skeleton (n=0)extremeties (n=5)	–	 	Fitzgerald et al	12	–	–	–	range (11 to 45)	2.9range (0.4 to 13.6)	No (n=12)	–	–	–	–	 	Marcove et al	3	0	3	F=1 (33,3%)M= 2(66,7%)	17.7range (15 to 23)	3.5range(2.5 to 4.8)	–	11.75range (6.25 to 16)	A-NED=3 (100%)	Axial skeleton (n=0)extremeties (n=3)	–	 	Stevens et al	38(1.8)	15	23	F=11 (29)M=27 (71)	16.6range (4 to 59)	2.1range(0.5 to 14.3)	No (n=38)	1.33range (0.12 to 4.7)	A-NED =16 (42.1)D-NED =2 (5.3)DOD =20 (52.6)	Axial skeleton (n=24)extremeties (n=10)craniofacial (n=4)	–	 	Our case	1	0	1	F	6	4.75	No	12.5	A-NED	extremeties	osteoblastic
– indicates unknown, not reported; A-NED, alive, no evidence of disease; AWD, alive with disease; D-NED, dead with no evidence of osteosarcoma; DOD dead of disease; F, female; M=male; MOS, metachronous osteosarcoma; OGS, osteogenic sarcoma.

Patient Characteristics
Metachronous osteosarcoma (MOS) is a rare form of osteosarcoma. The literature research showed that MOS occurs in 3.4 to 5.4% of osteosarcoma patients. MOS mainly occurs in adolescents. Their mean age at primary diagnosis was 17.7years (range 4 to 62 y). The interval between the diagnosis of the initial osteosarcoma and the metachronous tumor varied from 0.2 to 14.3 years. Some patients developed second metachronous tumors after the successful treatment of the primary osteosarcoma and the first MOS. In 4 cases, patients developed pulmonary metastases at the same time the MOS were detected. In terms of gender distribution, there appears to be a male prevalence. This corresponds to the prevalence of primary osteosarcoma (1.3 M vs. 1.0 F).
On the basis of our review, 39 of the reported cases were early MOS (interval between diagnosis of primary and MOS <24 mo), and 51 of the reported cases were late MOS (interval between diagnosis of primary and MOS >24 mo).

Tumor Characteristics
Primary osteosarcomas are known to occur mostly in the metaphysis of the long bones. However, MOS seem to occur more frequently in the trunk.
In this review, the most common location of the primary tumor was the femur. The primary lesions were located at the following sites (in decreasing frequency): femur > tibia > humerus > pelvis > ulna/radius > spine > craniofacial. The metachronous tumors mostly appeared as single lesions and were located in the following sites: Pelvis > Limb > Axial > Craniofacial > Spine > Multifocal > Humerus > Radius/Ulna. Multifocal lesions were observed in 5 cases.
The most common histopathologic subtype was osteoblastic osteosarcoma. In the studies in which the histopathologic subtypes of the primary tumor and MOS were examined in more detail, the histology of the MOS was mostly consistent with the primary tumor. For example, Jaffe et al reported that the histology in 8 of 11 MOS matched the histology of the original osteosarcoma. Brandal et al reported that the histologic subtype was concordant in all MOS, except for those where no biopsy of the MOS was performed. In the study of Aung et al the histology of MOS was consistent in ten of 23 patients (43%). In 7 patients, no biopsy of the MOS was performed and in 6 cases a different histologic subtype was found.

Treatment
To date, there is no single method for the treatment of MOS. The most common treatment approach is surgery alone or a combined treatment approach of surgery and chemotherapy. For each patient, the treatment must be individually customized depending on possible therapy options after the therapy for their primary tumor.
Although Jaffe et al treated their MOS patients with single-agent cisplatin or ifosfamide (8), most MOS patients in the other studies were treated with multiple-agent chemotherapy, including etoposide, ifosfamide, carboplatin/cisplatin, methotrexate (MTX), and doxorubicin.
Stevens et al suggested a positive association between the utilization of chemotherapy and the prognosis of MOS. This seems to be consistent with other studies. Those patients who received a combined treatment approach of surgery and chemotherapy for their primary and metachronous osteosarcoma had a better outcome and longer survival rate. Aung et al reported that 44.4% of patients treated with combined therapy were alive and disease-free at the last follow-up. Brandal et al described 2 patients (20% of the cohort) who were treated with surgery and chemotherapy and are still alive and free of the disease.
However, this association between the use of chemotherapy and the prognosis of MOS seems to exist only in late MOS. Aung et al reported that in their cohort of patients who developed early MOS, there was no difference in survival between the patients who received combined therapy and those who received monotherapy. Furthermore, Stevens et al emphasize that it is important to achieve surgical clearance because incomplete surgery appears to be 1 of the strongest negative prognostic factors in primary osteosarcoma and MOS.

Outcome/Survival
Advances in the treatment of malignant bone sarcomas, in which surgery is supplemented by neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy, have improved the overall prognosis of osteosarcoma patients. Nevertheless, the recurrence of osteosarcoma is generally associated with a worse prognosis. Less than 25% of patients with osteosarcoma recurrence become long-term survivors. In particular, the prognosis of patients who relapse with bone lesions is worse than that of patients who relapse with lung metastases.
On the basis of our literature review, the survival rate of patients with MOS varied from 0 to 24.6 years. The median survival after diagnosis of MOS was 4.3 years and the median time from diagnosis of primary osteosarcoma to the diagnosis of MOS was 2.5 years (range 0.2 to 14.3 y). The survival rate seems to be correlated with the time interval to the diagnosis of MOS. In most of the reviewed cases, a longer time interval from the diagnosis of initial osteosarcoma to the diagnosis of the MOS correlated with prognosis.
Aung et al reported that patients who developed late MOS had significantly longer survival rates compared with patients who developed early MOS. In their sample, the 5-year survival rate for late MOS with multimodality therapy was 61%, whereas the survival rate for patients with early MOS was only 8%. The 5-year overall survival rate was 33%.
The poorer prognosis of early MOS became also apparent in the study of Brandal et al, where none of the patients with early MOS were alive at the last time of follow-up. The overall survival rate in this cohort was 20%.
Stevens et al noted that a longer time interval (>18 mo from initial diagnosis) was associated with a better overall survival. They also noted that MOS that develops more than 18 months after initial diagnosis appears to have a better prognosis than the recurrence of osteosarcoma in general.
Rodriguez et al suggested that patients with MOS have a different survival pattern from patients with osteosarcoma recurrences. The authors reported a survival rate of 80% in a cohort of 5 patients, compared with a 5-year overall survival rate of patients with osteosarcoma recurrence of 23 to 29%.
Event-free survival rates in the studies reviewed were variable, ranging from 20 to 100% (Table 1). While Marcove et al observed that all of their patients achieved long-term disease-free survival (median 11.75 y), Brandal et al reported only 2 of 10 patients with long-term disease-free survival. In the largest cohort of Stevens et al, a survival rate of 42% after 5.5 years was observed.
These data powerfully demonstrate that patients with MOS can become long-term survivors if they receive renewed aggressive therapy that includes surgery and the additional use of chemotherapy with multiple agents.

DISCUSSION
In the literature review and our patient example, it is clear that patients who developed 1 or more new nonmetastatic tumors after the treatment of primary osteosarcoma may become long-term survivors. However, it is not certain that all reported cases are secondary osteosarcomas. Currently, there is no exact scientific way to distinguish the MOS and metastasized osteosarcoma scientifically, including no reliable methods to evaluate special molecular features. The diagnosis of MOS is more or less an empirical and clinical decision made on the basis of well-known and described routes of metastasation through the blood stream and the lymphatic drainage. Metastasizing is a very inefficient and complicated process, needing a fine-tuned microenvironment at the destination site of the tumor’s spread. Therefore, a new recurrence of osteosarcoma without a logical explanation of the known metastasation biology and route as well as an unusual chronology of the new tumor help to differentiate between metachronous OS and metastasized OS.
In our case, the MOS occurred more than 24 months after the primary osteosarcoma (4.75 y) in an unusual location for metastasis (growth plate of the left femur), which should be considered a second independent osteosarcoma rather than a bone metastasis. Further studies are needed to analyze the molecular pathologic features and clonality of osteosarcomas.
The etiology of MOS remains unknown and it has been suggested that individuals are predisposed to develop MOS as a result of an underlying mesenchymal or humoral disorder or develop in damaged or dystrophic mesenchymal tissue. This altered mesenchymal tissue could arise from chemotherapy, radiation, or other therapeutic agents. The literature review also showed that there exists differences in MOS compared with primary osteosarcoma in the localization and the metastatic spread.
While primary osteosarcoma is more common in the extremities, MOS appeared to be more common in the trunk. Regarding the metastatic spread, MOS seems to metastasize rarely to the lungs in comparison with primary osteosarcoma, where pulmonal metastasis is the common site. ∼10 to 20% of patients have distant metastases at the time of diagnosis of primary osteosarcoma, with pulmonary metastases being the most common site (86.7%).
From this literature review, a minority of patients developed pulmonary metastases concurrent with the discovery of MOS. However, some studies only included patients with skeletal lesions without pulmonary metastasis.
Rodriguez et al suggested alterations in metachronous tumors compared with primary osteosarcomas. They also suggested that these tumors could be altered by chemotherapy or radiation, leading to pulmonary metastasis in rare cases. In our case, no histologic changes were detected between the first osteosarcoma and the MOS. Another suggestion was that these tumors themselves may have genetic alterations that limit their pulmonary metastasis. In addition, they mentioned the possibility of genetic alterations in the patients rather than in the tumor that predispose to MOS.
Underlying genetic conditions such as retinoblastoma, Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Rothmund-Thomson syndrome, and Paget disease are known to predispose to osteosarcoma. However, only a minority of patients in the reported MOS cases had genetic changes, although retinoblastoma and Li- Fraumeni syndrome was noted in several cases (Table 2). In our patient germ-line, analysis had not yet been performed, however, the patient’s family history of cancer did not raise suspicion of cancer predisposition syndromes. MOS can be further classified into early MOS (tumor developing <24 mo from primary osteosarcoma) and late MOS (tumor developing >24 mo from primary osteosarcoma). Amstutz distinguished 3 types of MOS: Type 1 was defined as synchronous osteosarcoma with multiple and almost simultaneous osteosarcoma lesions in childhood and adolescence. Type 2 was defined as multiple low-grade osteosarcoma lesions in adults. Type 3A was defined as early MOS (tumor development <24 mo after primary osteosarcoma) and type 3B was defined as late MOS (tumor development > 24 mo after primary osteosarcoma). This division into early and late MOS is important for patient outcomes. The literature review showed that the survival rate seems to be associated with the time interval to the diagnosis of MOS. Patients who developed late MOS had a better prognosis and longer survival than patients with early MOS, especially when treated with aggressive therapy, including surgery and neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy.
Cancer Predisposition Syndromes in MOS Cases
Aung et al	Brandal et al	Jaffe et al	Rodriguez et al	Fitzgerald et al	Marcove et al	Stevens et al	 	N. MOS cases	23	10	11	5	12	3	38	 	Total number of genetic chances	–	1	4	–	—	–	–	 		–	–	1	–	–	–	–	 	Retinoblastoma	–	–	3	–	–	–	1	 	Li-Fraumeni syndrome	–	1	1	–	–	–	–
– indicates unknown, not reported; MOS, metachronous osteosarcoma.
Therefore, one supposes that there is a different survival pattern in patients with MOS compared with osteosarcoma recurrence in general. The event-free survival in the reported cases varied from 20 to 100% (mean 44,6%). In comparison, overall survival and event-free survival at 10 years in patients with primary osteosarcoma were 72 and 66%, respectively and the 5-year overall survival of osteosarcoma recurrence was 23 to 29%. Bielack et al investigated the survival rates of second and subsequent osteosarcoma recurrences but did not use the name MOS. The 5-year overall and event-free survival for osteosarcoma recurrences were 16 and 9% for second recurrences, 14 and 0% for third, 13 and 6% for fourth, and 18 and 0% for fifth recurrences. This indicates that patients with metachronous osteosarcoma generally appear to have a better outcome compared with osteosarcoma recurrences, particularly those patients in whom the MOS developed >24 months after primary diagnosis, making it important to consider the presence of MOS versus late “true” metastasis.

CONCLUSION
In summary, our literature review has shown that metachronous osteosarcoma is a rare disease, but not as rare as previously thought. Therefore, the possibility of MOS occurring at another site should be considered as a differential diagnosis in survivors of osteosarcoma. Even after a long period of time, late osteosarcoma recurrence is possible, which means that follow-up should be prolonged. MOS appears to have differences in localization and metastatic spread, as well as a different survival pattern than primary osteosarcoma and osteosarcoma recurrence. Patients with MOS should be treated with curative intent, including surgery and tailored neoadjuvant and adjuvant multiagent therapy.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
Pediatric osteosarcoma: An updated review
International osteosarcoma incidence patterns in children and adolescents, middle ages and elderly persons
Descriptive epidemiology of sarcomas in Europe: Report from the RARECARE project
The epidemiology of osteosarcoma
Review of management issues in relapsed osteosarcoma
The metastatic patterns of osteosarcoma
Osteosarcoma relapse after combined modality therapy: an analysis of unselected patients in the Cooperative Osteosarcoma Study Group (COSS)
Single and multiple metachronous osteosarcoma tumors after therapy
Three metachronous osteosarcomas within 22 years without pulmonary metastases: A case report and review of the literature
Synchronous and metachronous skeletal osteosarcomas: The Norwegian Radium Hospital experience
Current strategies of chemotherapy in osteosarcoma
Osteosarcoma: the COSS experience
[Determination of the degree of morphological regression following chemotherapy in malignant bone tumors]
Metachronous osteosarcoma: A report of five cases
Solitary skeletal osteosarcoma recurrence. findings from the cooperative osteosarcoma study group
Metachronous skeletal osteosarcoma in patients treated with adjuvant and neoadjuvant chemotherapy for nonmetastatic osteosarcoma
Multiple metachronous osteogenic sarcoma. Report of twelve cases with two long-term survivors
Treatment of a second bone osteosarcoma: 3 cases and an unusual MRI finding
Comment on “prognostic factors in high-grade osteosarcoma of the extremities or trunk: An analysis of 1,702 patients treated on neoadjuvant cooperative osteosarcoma study group protocols” [5] (multiple letters)
Osteosarcoma treatment - where do we stand? A state of the art review
Postrelapse survival in osteosarcoma of the extremities: prognostic factors for long-term survival
Bone metastases in osteosarcoma patients treated with neoadjuvant or adjuvant chemotherapy: The Rizzoli experience in 52 patients
Osteosarcoma lung metastases detection and principles of multimodal therapy
Identifying osteosarcoma metastasis associated genes by weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA)
Microenvironmental regulation of tumor progression and metastasis
Metastasis : New insights into organ-specific extravasation and metastatic niches
Multiple osteogenic sarcomata — Metastatic or multicentric? Report of two cases and review of literature
Multifocal osteosarcoma. A case report with review of the literature
Primary metastatic osteosarcoma: Presentation and outcome of patients treated on neoadjuvant Cooperative Osteosarcoma Study Group protocols
Osteosarcoma: Molecular pathogenesis and iPSC Modeling
Second primary neoplasms in patients with retinoblastoma
Frequency of pathogenic germline variants in Cancer-susceptibility genes in patients with osteosarcoma
Long-term results of the co-operative German-Austrian-Swiss osteosarcoma study group’s protocol COSS-86 of intensive multidrug chemotherapy and surgery for osteosarcoma of the limbs
Second and subsequent recurrences of osteosarcoma: presentation, treatment, and outcomes of 249 consecutive cooperative osteosarcoma study group patients