Evidence evaluation of acupuncture and its related therapies for female urinary incontinence: an overview and quality assessment of systematic reviews and meta-analyses
INTRODUCTION
Through methodological quality assessment, this paper summarized the report quality and evidence level of systematic reviews (SRs)/meta-analyses (MAs) of acupuncture and its related treatment of female urinary incontinence (UI).
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION
We conducted a comprehensive search in four internationally recognized databases (PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, Cochrane Library) for SRs/MAs pertaining to the treatment of female UI using acupuncture and its related therapies. We evaluated the methodological quality of the SRs/MAs using the “Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews 2” (AMSTAR-2) tool, assessed the quality of evidence using the “Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation” (GRADE) system, and evaluated the reporting quality of the SRs/MAs using the “Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 2020” (PRISMA-2020) guidelines. This overview is registered with PROSPERO, CRD42024557600.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS
In the final selection of 7 SRs/MAs, a consistent finding of the superiority of acupuncture and related therapies in the treatment of female UI was observed. Methodological quality was classified according to AMSTAR-2, with three rated as “high,” two as “moderate,” and two as “low.” The main sources of downgrading included the absence of funding sources, failure to provide a reasonable explanation for heterogeneity, and not reporting potential conflicts of interest. According to the GRADE system, the quality of evidence ranged from moderate to very low. The most common reason for downgrading the evidence quality was the repeated utilization of the same original randomized controlled trials. Some results were also downgraded due to inconsistency, imprecision, and potential publication bias. According to the PRISMA-2020 statement, most SR/MAs clearly presented their title information, and almost all of them correctly used meta-analysis methods. However, some of them lacked comprehensive analysis and discussion of bias risk and consistency of results and were deficient in terms of protocol registration and documentation.
CONCLUSIONS
Acupuncture and related therapies demonstrate superiority in terms of efficacy and safety for the treatment of female urinary incontinence (UI). The overall quality of the SRs/MAs seems to be satisfactory, particularly when compared to studies of acupuncture for the treatment of other conditions. However, attention should still be given to the proper use of methods and ensuring completeness in reporting.

Introduction
Female urinary incontinence (UI) refers to the involuntary leakage of urine and is commonly categorized in clinical settings as urgency urinary incontinence (UUI), stress urinary incontinence (SUI), mixed urinary incontinence (MUI), or other forms of UI, such as overflow and continuous UI. SUI arises from actions that increase intra-abdominal pressure, such as coughing, sneezing, vigorous physical activity, and laughter. UUI is characterized by sudden and intense urges to urinate, which are difficult to suppress and result in urine leakage. MUI may denote the simultaneous presence of two or more types of incontinence symptoms, with the co-occurrence of stress and urgency symptoms being relatively common in clinical practice.
The etiology of female UI is multifaceted, involving factors like weakened pelvic floor muscles, pelvic floor imbalances, disturbances in the bladder’s internal environment, and dysregulation of neural functions controlling urination and urine storage. Research indicates that nearly 50% of women are affected by this condition, with 77% of elderly women residing in nursing homes being afflicted by it. However, despite this high prevalence, only 25% of patients seek treatment. Behavioral therapies such as bladder training, pelvic floor exercises, and percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation are typically recommended to alleviate UUI symptoms. Common treatments for SUI include weight management, pelvic floor muscle training, estrogen therapy, duloxetine, midurethral sling surgery (MUS), and tension-free vaginal tape surgery (TVT, Ethicon). Female UI continues to be a subject of international concern due to its high incidence. However, diagnostic and therapeutic strategies are continually evolving, and a definitive and universally effective treatment approach has yet to emerge. First-line behavioral therapies demand high patient compliance and may have limited efficacy. Pharmacological treatments entail certain side effects, and surgical approaches may not fully resolve the associated symptoms, necessitating the emergence of more effective treatment modalities. Additionally, research into the pathophysiology of female UI lacks conclusive and systematic evidence, necessitating further investigations. In the latest 2022 edition of the European Association of Urology (EUA) guidelines, female UI is classified as non-neurogenic female lower urinary tract symptoms, encompassing storage, voiding, and post-voiding symptoms. Storage symptoms include frequency, urgency, nocturia, and incontinence (stress, urgency, and mixed). Voiding symptoms encompass hesitancy, intermittency, slow stream, straining, splitting or spraying, and terminal dribble. Post-voiding symptoms include post-micturition dribble and a sensation of incomplete bladder emptying. Lower urinary tract symptoms are generally categorized into clinical syndromes, such as overactive bladder, underactive bladder, urinary incontinence, nocturia, voiding dysfunction, or urogenital fistulas. Lower urinary tract symptoms are common in women, causing significant distress and embarrassment and imposing substantial individual and societal costs. While estimates of prevalence differ depending on the definitions and populations studied, the importance of this issue is widely recognized in terms of human suffering and economic burden.
In recent years, acupuncture and related therapies, such as electroacupuncture, have made significant breakthroughs in the field of female urinary incontinence (UI). Pioneered by teams led by Liu Zhishun and Liu Baoyan, their research has been published in leading international journals. Their studies have demonstrated the efficacy of acupuncture in reducing the frequency of incontinence, alleviating urgency and stress-related symptoms, and improving the overall quality of life for affected women. Additionally, acupuncture has shown a better safety profile compared to pharmaceutical interventions. Notably, two recent multicenter randomized controlled trials have provided evidence of the efficacy of electroacupuncture in treating stress urinary incontinence in women and comparing the effectiveness of electroacupuncture combined with pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT) to solifenacin for mixed urinary incontinence. However, there are currently no multicenter clinical trials that have provided placebo-controlled or lifestyle guidance-controlled assessments of acupuncture therapy. Acupuncture, as a traditional therapeutic approach, offers the advantages of simplicity, convenience, cost-effectiveness, and high patient compliance. In recent years, several systematic reviews and meta-analyses have confirmed that acupuncture can improve UI symptoms. Research also indicates that combining acupuncture with electrical stimulation in the lumbosacral area can regulate pelvic floor muscle function. Furthermore, electroacupuncture can promote neuroreinnervation of pelvic floor muscles, thereby improving incontinence symptoms. Some studies have shown that stress urinary incontinence can induce c-Fos expression in the MPA area, and acupuncture at Sanyinjiao can reduce c-Fos expression induced by micturition, thus exerting a therapeutic effect.
Meta-analysis involves a systematic and quantitative analysis of multiple studies with similar objectives and independent findings. However, the quality of evidence in systematic reviews and meta-analyses(SRs/MAs) is contingent upon the quality of the included studies and the researchers’ methodological understanding, meaning that conclusions may not be entirely uniform, and recommendations for clinical application may be limited. SRs/Mas reappraise the evidence obtained from systematic reviews and meta-analyses related to a specific disease treatment, consolidating and enhancing clinical practicality, and providing users with higher-quality evidence. This article summarizes SRs/MAs on acupuncture and related therapies for female UI. It employs the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses 2020 (PRISMA-2020) statement to assess reporting quality, the Assessing Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews 2 (AMSTAR-2) for methodological quality of the included studies, and the GRADE tool to evaluate the quality of the evidence, with the aim of providing guidance for clinical acupuncture treatment of female UI.

Evidence acquisition
This study followed the Cochrane Review Guidelines and referred to the Preferred Reporting Item (PRIOR) guidelines for medical intervention reviews. The review protocol has been registered in the International Prospective Systems Review Registry (PROSPERO) database, CRD42024557600.

SRs/MAs Inclusion/Exclusion criteria
The included studies are SRs/MAs of clinical randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that intervened with acupuncture and related therapies (such as electroacupuncture) for the management of female UI. To ensure the generalizability of the research assessments, only SRs/MAs published in international journals (whether publicly available or not) were considered. We encompassed female patients definitively diagnosed with UI according to guideline criteria, including those with stress urinary incontinence, urgency urinary incontinence, mixed urinary incontinence, or other types. There were no restrictions on patient demographics, such as age, race, religion, or disease severity. Exclusion criteria comprised UI caused by other conditions, such as urinary tract infections, bladder or urinary system tumors, neurogenic bladder, and post-stroke incontinence. Interventions encompassed acupuncture and related therapies compared to other treatment modalities in the SRs/MAs. No constraints were placed on the methods of other interventions, which could include sham acupuncture, placebos, medications, physical therapy, rehabilitation exercises, lifestyle guidance, and more. Outcome measures included assessments of symptoms and quality of life, such as the International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire-Short Form (ICIQ-SF), the 1-hour pad test, adverse event rates, therapeutic efficacy, and the incidence of urinary incontinence.

Search strategy and methods
We conducted searches on internationally recognized literature databases, including PubMed, the Cochrane Library, Web of Science, and Embase. In PubMed, the primary keywords for acupuncture and related therapies included “Acupuncture,” “Electroacupuncture,” “Electric acupuncture,” and “Electro-acupuncture.” Keywords related to female urinary incontinence included “Urinary incontinence,” “Stress urinary incontinence,” “Urgency urinary incontinence,” and “Mixed urinary incontinence.” The primary subject headings for SRs/MAs included “Meta-analysis,” “Systematic review,” and “Systematic evaluation.” The search was expected to cover articles from the inception of the databases up to September 2023. Table I outlines the search strategy used for PubMed.
—PubMed retrieval strategy.
PubMed query	 	#1 “Acupuncture”[Mesh]	 	#2 (((acupuncture[Title/Abstract]) OR (electroacupuncture[Title/Abstract])) OR (electric acupuncture[Title/Abstract])) OR (electroacupuncture[Title/Abstract])	 	#3 #1 OR #2	 	#4 “acupuncture”[Title/Abstract] OR “electroacupuncture”[Title/Abstract] OR “Pharmacopuncture”[Title/Abstract]	 	#4 “Meta-Analysis” [Publication Type]	 	#5 (meta-analysis[Title/Abstract]) OR (meta analysis[Title/Abstract])	 	#6 #4 OR #5	 	#7 ((System review[Title/Abstract]) OR (System evaluation[Title/Abstract])) OR (system assessment[Title/Abstract])	 	#8 #6 OR #7	 	#9 “Urinary Incontinence”[Mesh]	 	#10 (((urinary incontinence[Title/Abstract]) OR (stress urinary incontinence[Title/Abstract])) OR (mixed urinary incontinence[Title/Abstract])) OR (urge urinary incontinence[Title/Abstract])	 	#11 #9 OR #10	 	#12 #3 AND #8 AND #11

Data extraction
A seasoned research specialist (XM) formulated the search strategy and conducted searches on four databases. The search results were imported into EndNote software (Version X9), and a standard literature screening process was applied. The entire process was documented, forming a workflow diagram. Subsequently, three evaluators (X.M., Y.C., and Y.Y.) meticulously reviewed the full texts of the literature according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria defined in this SRs/MAs. After standardized training, two researchers (Y and YY) independently assessed the quality of the studies using the GRADE, PRISMA-2020, and AMSTAR-2 scales in a blinded fashion. The consistency of scale ratings was analyzed using Cohen’s kappa statistics of SPSS software by another statistical expert. Finally, a senior research specialist (XM) evaluated the ratings with κ values <0.8 to determine the ultimate scores.

Assessment of research overlap in SRs/MAs
We used the GROOVE tool to statistically analyze the studies included in SRs/MAs, and cross referenced them in the evidence table matrix to evaluate the corrected coverage area (CCA) between SRs/MAs. The definition of overlapping classification is “slight” (CCA 0-5%), “moderate” (CCA6-10%), “high” (CCA11-15%), or “extremely high” (CCA>15%).

SRs/MAs quality assessment
Two assessors, namely Y and RY, assessed the methodological quality of the included studies using the AMSTAR-2. This tool comprises 16 evaluation items, including seven key items (key items 2, 4, 7, 9, 11, 13, and 15), with each item assessed as “Yes,” “Partially yes,” or “No.” The overall methodological quality of each study was categorized into four levels: “High” if no or only one non-critical item failed to meet the criteria, “Medium” if more than one non-critical item did not meet the criteria, “Low” if one key item did not meet the criteria, and “Very low” if more than one key item did not meet the criteria, with or without a non-key item.
To evaluate the quality of the included studies, we employed PRISMA-2020 statement, which comprises 27 evaluation items. Each item was scored as “Full report (1 point),” “Partial report (0.5 point),” or “Unreported (0 points).” The final overall rating score was classified as follows: ≤15 indicated a report with severe information deficits, >15 and ≤21 signified a report with defects, and >21 represented a report with relative completeness.
The quality of evidence for outcome measures was assessed using the GRADE system, which evaluates and grades evidence based on five dimensions: risk of bias, inconsistencies, indirectness, imprecision, and publication bias. The severity of any corresponding downgrade was considered. The level of evidence for each outcome measure was determined by the following criteria: high quality without grade-lowering factors, intermediate quality with a grade-1 reduction, low quality with a grade-2 reduction, and extremely low quality with a grade-3 or more reduction.

Evidence synthesis

Study identification
A total of 114 publications were identified through the database search, and after deduplication, 51 articles were excluded. By screening titles and abstracts, 55 articles were further excluded, leaving 8 full-text review articles for eligibility assessment. A final set of Seven articles met the criteria. Figure 1 illustrates the flow chart of the selection process.
—Flow diagram of the literature search and study selection process.

Characteristics of included SRs/MAs
The characteristics of the seven included SRs/MAs are summarized in Table I. All of the studies were published between 2013 and 2023, and all were published in English. Notably, one of these studies was a collaborative effort between scholars from the United Kingdom and China’s Hong Kong, while the rest were conducted exclusively in China. All the included SRs/MAs focused solely on randomized controlled trials.
According to GROOVE’s matrix cross referencing results, the determined CCA value is 4.92%, indicating a small overlap between the studies included in our study. There may be significant differences in the inclusion criteria among different system evaluations. The studies of Kannan2023 and Zhong2020 have a higher frequency in SRs/MAs we included (Figure 2).
—Overlapping of studies included in systematic reviews.
Each SR/MA included between 1 and 15 randomized controlled trials; the number of individuals varied from 60 to 1577 participants. The intervention measures in the treatment groups primarily involved electroacupuncture (EA), laser acupuncture (LA), body acupuncture (BA), hand acupuncture (HA), acupressure, EA combined with midodrine hydrochloride tablets, EA combined with pelvic floor muscle training (PFMT), moxibustion, ginger-partitioned moxibustion combined with Kegel exercises. The control groups encompassed untreated controls, sham acupuncture, traditional electrical stimulation (TES), rehabilitation training (pelvic muscle antagonistic training/PFMT), midodrine hydrochloride tablets (or midodrine hydrochloride tablets + tolterodine capsules), Liuwei Dihuang pills, solifenacin/tolterodine tablets + PFMT, placebo, and vaginal gel with duloxetine (Supplementary Digital Material 1: Supplementary Table I).
The primary outcome measures in these SRs/MAs included mean urine leakage, the 1-hour pad test, International Continence Society ICS 72-hour pad test (72-hour IEF), International Consultation on Incontinence Questionnaire Short Form (ICIQ-SF) score, patient self-assessment, UI episodes/urgency symptoms/number of urge accidents, the number of women using urine pads, the number of women reporting small leaks, clinical effectiveness (clinical cure rate, clinical improvement rate), and adverse events (AEs) (Supplementary Table I).
Six SRs/MAs evaluated methodological quality using the Cochrane Collaboration’s risk of bias tool. One SRs/MAs utilized the Physiotherapy Evidence Database quality scale to delineate the trial design details, thereby assessing the completeness of methodology and reporting quality (Supplementary Table I).

Effectiveness and safety of acupuncture for UI
Despite the evident limitations in the quality of the original RCTs, all the included SRs/MAs endorse the efficacy and safety of acupuncture in the clinical management of female UI. These findings can be categorized into two groups: 1) acupuncture as a standalone intervention; 2) acupuncture as an adjunct to pharmaceuticals or rehabilitation training (Supplementary Table I).

Acupuncture used as an independent therapy
Five SRs/MAs reported that EA was superior to sham EA in reducing mean urine leakage, urine leakage in the 1-hour pad test, UI episodes in the 72-hour voiding diary, ICIQ-SF scores, improving self-assessment, and increasing clinical effectiveness. Two SRs/MAs reported that both acupuncture and LA significantly reduced urgency events, urgency symptoms, and urine leakage compared to sham acupuncture and sham LA.
Four SRs/MAs compared EA to oral Duloxetine supported the superiority of electroacupuncture over Duloxetine in metrics such as ICIQ-SF scores, 1-hour pad test urine weight, and UI episodes in the 72-hour voiding diary, number of pressure UI patients reporting improvement and complete cure. One SRs/MAs compared moxibustion to topical Proctosedyl ointment, indicating moxibustion’s advantage in reducing urine pad test leakage.
Three SRs/MAs all employed ICIQ-SF scores and 1-hour pad test urine weight as assessment measures. They consistently found that EA was superior to rehabilitation training in improving clinical effectiveness and reducing urine leakage.
One SRs/MAs compared to the Solifenacin combined with PFMT group and the Tolterodine combined with PFMT group, the EA group showed a significant reduction in 1-hour pad test urine weight and ICIQ-SF score. However, the two groups had no statistically significant difference in the change in the frequency of UI episodes in the 72-hour voiding diary.

Acupuncture used as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy
One SRs/MAs compared the effectiveness of EA combined with medication therapy and medication therapy alone. When added to Duloxetine, EA was more effective in reducing urine leakage in the 1-hour pad test and decreasing ICIQ-SF scores.
One SRs/MAs compared the effectiveness of EA combined with rehabilitation training and Chinese herbal medicine treatment. The group receiving PFMT and EA reported a higher number of complete cures in patients with pressure UI than the group taking the oral Liuwei Dihuang Pills.
Two SRs/MAs compared rehabilitation training and acupuncture with rehabilitation training alone. Moxibustion combined with Kegel exercises was superior to rehabilitation training in enhancing clinical effectiveness and reducing ICIQ-SF scores. PFMT combined with EA was more effective in reducing the 1-hour pad test urine weight and ICIQ-SF scores when compared to PFMT, PFMT combined with sham EA.

Safety of acupuncture for UI treatment
Two SRs/MAs included safety reports. The study by Cui evaluated the safety of acupuncture and sham acupuncture, there were no significant differences between the two groups regarding the occurrence of AEs, including pain, hematoma, infection, fatigue, and nausea. In the study by Wang, adverse reactions were observed only in the Duloxetine group, with no reports in the EA group.

Quality of methodology
According to AMSTAR-2 classification, three SRs/MAs were rated as “high” in methodological quality because they had only one non-critical item that did not conform. Two SRs/MAs were rated as “medium” in methodological quality because they had more than one non-critical item not meeting the criteria. Two SRs/MAs were rated as “low” in methodological quality because they had significant flaws in at least one key domain (Table II).
—Critical Appraisal for Methodological Quality of SRs/MAs Based on AMSTAR-2 Checklist.-
Authors	AMSTAR-2	Quality assessment	 	Q1	Q2	Q3	Q4	Q5	Q6	Q7	Q8	Q9	Q10	Q11	Q12	Q13	Q14	Q15	Q16	 	Cui 	Y	Y	Y	PY	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	M	 	Kannan 	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	L	 	Lai 	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	H	 	Wang	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	L	 	Yang	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	H	 	Yang	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	H	 	Zhong	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	M
Y: yes; PY: partial yes; N: no; CL: critically low; L: low; M: moderate; H: high.
A consistent methodological flaw was found across all SRs/MAs in item 10 (systematic review authors report no funding sources for each study included). In other non-critical items, two SRs/MAs each lacked item 14 (systematic review authors provide a reasonable explanation and discussion of any heterogeneity in the study results), and item 16 (systematic review authors report all sources of potential conflicts of interest, including any funding received for producing the systematic review). Additionally, there was one SRs/MAs each that had problems with the research question and inclusion criteria not including the PICO components, did not use duplicate literature selection, and did not employ duplicate data extraction (Table II).
In the critical items, item 4 (comprehensive search strategy) was rated as “partially met” for one SRs/MAs due to insufficient information provided. Item 15 (systematic review authors perform quantitative pooling, investigate publication bias adequately, and discuss its potential impact on the results) for two SRs/MAs reported as “no” (Table II).

Quality of evidence
The seven included SRs/MAs encompass a total of 36 results related to the effectiveness of acupuncture in treating UI. According to the GRADE system, the quality of evidence ranges between moderate and very low (7 rated as “moderate,” 22 as “low,” and 7 as “very low”).
The most common reason for downgrading the evidence quality was the risk of bias in the original RCTs, which affected the majority of the SRs/MAs. Some results were also downgraded due to inconsistency, imprecision, and the potential for publication bias. None of the results had their evidence quality downgraded due to indirectness (Supplementary Digital Material 2: Supplementary Table II).

Quality of reporting
According to the PRISMA-2020 statement, 71.43% of the SRs/MAs explicitly mentioned in their titles that they were systematic reviews. 42.86% of SRs/MAs described the methods for assessing the risk of bias in the included studies. 85.71% of SRs/MAs explained the methods used for presenting data and synthesizing results. Consistent with AMSTAR-2 Item 10, no studies provided information about the primary funding sources. In the data items of the methods section, 85.71% of SRs/MAs listed and explained additional variables required. In the synthesis methods section of the methods, 71.43% of SRs/MAs described the methods used to explore potential sources of heterogeneity in study results; 57.14% of SRs/MAs explained any sensitivity analyses conducted to assess the robustness of the synthesis results. Only 28.57% of SRs/MAs explained the methods for assessing the risk of bias due to missing results during the synthesis process. In the results section, 71.43% of SRs/MAs explained potential reasons for heterogeneity in study results and tested these results; 57.14% of SRs/MAs described the results of all sensitivity analyses conducted to assess the robustness of the synthesis results. In the protocol and registration, 57.14% of SRs/MAs provided registration information for the systematic review; only one study explicitly stated how the protocol could be accessed. In other aspects, 71.43% of SRs/MAs respectively provided information on the financial and non-financial sources of support for the systematic review and the roles of the sponsors in conducting the systematic review, disclosed any conflicts of interest for all authors (Supplementary Digital Material 3: Supplementary Figure 1).

Discussion

Evidence quality of acupuncture and related therapies for the treatment of female urinary incontinence
SRs/MAs on the topic of acupuncture and related therapies for the treatment of female urinary incontinence have become increasingly common after 2020. This trend may be attributed to a growing demand for evidence assessment, especially after a 2017 report in JAMA highlighted the superior effectiveness of electroacupuncture for treating stress urinary incontinence. While acupuncture therapy has its origins in China, the related SRs/MAs were not solely conducted by Chinese institutions; researchers from the UK have also contributed to the body of evidence in this field.
Among the 7 SRs/MAs we included, a common feature was the relatively low number of included randomized controlled trials (RCTs). None of the systematic reviews included more than 10 studies, but the overall number of participants in these studies was substantial. The results consistently demonstrated the advantages of acupuncture and related therapies, showing that acupuncture was superior in improving lower urinary tract symptoms, alleviating psychological stress in patients, and enhancing their quality of life when compared to other treatments (placebo controls, sham acupuncture, oral medications, pelvic floor muscle training, rehabilitation exercises, electrical stimulation, etc.). The CCA evaluation result of this study is 4.92%, representing a lower RCT repeatability. Low repeatability reduces the overall impact of repetitive research on the evaluation of SRs/MAs, while also indicating the representativeness of a single systematic review. Although there are few internal RCTs in the SRs/MAs, the research types are not singular. But it may also represent the limitation of insufficient research in a single direction and limited evidence.
AMSTAR-2, a widely used tool for critically assessing systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials, helps evaluate the quality of SRs/MAs. AMSTAR-2 comprises 16 questions covering scientific aspects related to the design of systematic reviews and meta-analysis methods. Factors such as the advance establishment of protocols, comprehensive literature searches, literature screening, risk of bias assessment, methods for meta-analysis data synthesis, discussion of publication bias are key determinants of high-quality research. The comprehensiveness of literature searches and the scientific validity of study criteria influence the quality of included studies. Additionally, risk of bias assessment contributes to the validity of meta-analysis results. The discussion of publication bias is informative for interpreting results, and the presence of publication bias indicates limitations and bias in study findings. Our evaluation of the AMSTAR-2 scores of our study’s systematic reviews and meta-analyses revealed generally moderate to high levels of evidence, with only two receiving a low rating due to an insufficient number of included studies for assessing publication bias. These results indicate that the design of the included SRs/MAs was scientifically sound, and the overall level of evidence was credible.
GRADE is designed to evaluate the quality of evidence for meta-analysis statistical methodology. Most of the SRs/MAs we included had low evidence ratings, primarily due to multiple biases. These biases were a result of deficiencies in the study designs included in the systematic reviews. Furthermore, most of the results synthesized showed substantial heterogeneity (I2 >50%), mainly arising from the lack of consistency between intervention groups and control groups. Existing studies often categorize acupuncture as a single intervention without considering the differences in acupuncture point selection, needling techniques, and treatment durations, which may lead to variations in treatment efficacy. This lack of specificity and categorization results in significant internal inconsistencies during meta-analysis. Wide confidence intervals also contributed to bias, which, if not analyzed carefully, could lead to misinterpretation of results. However, these factors did not seem to be taken into account in the included literature.
PRISMA-2020 is used to assess the overall quality of articles reporting SRs/MAs. The scoring of the abstracts for the included studies was generally low, and variations in journal requirements for abstract word limits might contribute to the lack of detail in some descriptions. However, the abstract serves as a concise summary of the essential information and should be referenced by researchers. The introduction and description of the study design in the articles were relatively comprehensive, and appropriately formulating scientific questions and choosing suitable research methods are essential. Sensitivity analysis and exploration of missing data as tools for investigating model stability should be implemented, but these elements were lacking in the SRs/MAs included in our study. The presentation and discussion of results in SRs/MAs were quite thorough. However, aspects such as the prior proposal of a research plan, registration, modifications, and other considerations were insufficient. Proposing a research plan is necessary to alert other researchers and provide a reviewable plan. Most of the SRs/MAs included in our study had adequate financial support, which can ensure the integrity and feasibility of the research.

The intervention effect of sham acupuncture on results
In the present study, the SRs/MAs involving both true and sham acupuncture comparisons indicated that acupuncture was more effective than sham acupuncture. Although some large-sample sham acupuncture controlled trials in recent years have resulted in more effective acupuncture. However, there are still some clinical trials claiming that sham acupuncture is as effective as conventional acupuncture. These studies lack criteria for the implementation of sham acupuncture, and other factors such as the site and duration of needle retention, frequency of treatments, and the total number of treatments required to obtain efficacy can affect clinical outcomes. Therefore, it is premature to assert that sham acupuncture is not significantly different from real acupuncture.

Strengths and limitations of the study design
This study aimed to assess the quality of SRs/MAs on acupuncture and related therapies for the treatment of female urinary incontinence. We included all studies involving acupuncture without imposing any restrictions on the types of acupuncture, ensuring the comprehensiveness of quality assessments. Furthermore, we conducted searches and included literature solely from international search platforms to maintain the universality of the study and avoid geographical research quality bias that could result from the inclusion of studies from a single country or search platform. This study employed internationally recognized scales for evaluating the quality of SRs/MAs and established a rigorous assessment process to ensure the fairness of the results.
However, the primary limitation of this study is that the number of source studies included in the SRs/MAs was generally low. This limitation resulted in the inability to assess publication bias for certain items, such as an insufficient number of studies, possibly leading to an underestimation of the overall quality assessment. The issue of a limited number of studies is not only a limitation of this study but also a constraint inherent to SRs/MAs. Although a meta-analysis can be conducted as long as there are more than two studies, it is essential to consider whether it is necessary to include different SR/MAs when the overall number of studies is limited.

Discussion on the potential of acupuncture as an effective treatment for female urinary incontinence
Internationally, treatment guidelines for female urinary incontinence (UI) are still evolving. Regardless of behavioral guidance, lifestyle improvements, medications, surgeries, etc., no definitive one-size-fits-all approach has been established. In the latest guidelines by the European Association of Urology (EAU), female UI has been redefined and categorized under female non-neurogenic lower urinary tract symptoms. This highlights the potential existence of multiple types and varying symptoms of female UI, making it a complex condition influenced by various factors. Therefore, further research and updates are necessary for understanding the etiology, pathophysiology, better treatment methods, prognosis, and other aspects of female non-neurogenic lower urinary tract symptoms.
Acupuncture and related therapies appear to have unique advantages in treating this condition. The 2014 guidelines by the International Urogynecological Association (IUGA) recommended acupuncture therapy as a supplementary alternative treatment for female mixed UI. The results from the systematic reviews and meta-analyses (SRs/MAs) included in this study consistently indicate the efficacy of acupuncture therapy. Previous research has shown that electrical stimulation of the sacral nerves can counteract stress urinary incontinence (SUI) symptoms and improve bladder function, which is similar to the effects of electroacupuncture. The micturition reflex of the bladder is mediated by the sympathetic nervous system from the abdominal nerves (T11-L2), parasympathetic nerves from the pelvic nerves, and somatic nerves from the spinal cord (S2-S4), with S3 being the primary innervating nerve of the bladder. It has been found that acupoints’ main therapeutic functions are closely related to the corresponding nerve segments, where back-shu acupoints are horizontally associated with visceral organs. Electroacupuncture may improve SUI in rats by regulating the maximum bladder capacity, leak point pressure, possibly related to the enrichment of white matter in the brain. Electroacupuncture can lower the levels of serum succinic acid, citric acid, 3,4-dihydroxybutyric acid, succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase, and 3-hydroxybutyric acid-related substances in UI patients, which promotes the improvement of energy metabolism in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Furthermore, acupuncture appears to regulate enzymes related to collagen metabolism in the pelvic support tissues of SUI rats, such as matrix metalloproteinases, lysyl oxidase, glycosaminoglycans, transforming growth factor β, and calpain, which are related to enhancing collagen content and function in the pelvic floor muscles.
Compared to the quality assessments of other SRs/MAs, the quality of SRs/MAs on acupuncture and related therapies for treating female UI is relatively high. A quality assessment of SRs/MAs on acupuncture for the treatment of perimenopausal insomnia indicated low or very low quality of evidence, suggesting that the quality of the evidence was compromised. Another quality assessment of a systematic review on acupuncture for eczema also marked, compared to the control group, the inclusion review of the acupuncture group was more effective and safer. However, the quality of the evidence was lower, so conclusions should be treated cautiously. An assessment of the quality of SRs on acupuncture for mild cognitive impairment and dementia showed that out of 73 outcomes, 50 (68.5%) were of low or very low quality, while 23 (31.5%) were of moderate quality. In contrast to these findings, the evidence levels for acupuncture and related therapies in the treatment of female UI are of moderate or high quality. Aside from the limitations stemming from the inclusion of a limited number of studies, which we have discussed earlier, these SRs/MAs outperform other relevant studies regarding the rigor of study protocols and completeness of reporting. We believe this could be attributed to the search platforms used, as some SRs/MAs, in addition to searching internationally recognized databases, also searched individual country-specific databases. We emphasize that this approach is undesirable as it can introduce geographical bias, given that journal evaluation criteria may not be uniform in certain regions, leading to uncontrolled variations in the quality of the included literature. In conclusion, acupuncture and related therapies for the treatment of female UI offer advantages in terms of efficacy and safety. The quality of the relevant SRs/MAs is also relatively reliable, and it is recommended as an advantageous treatment for female UI. Nevertheless, given the limited number of related randomized controlled trials (RCTs), the question of whether it is necessary to repeat the meta-analysis when there are too few studies is worth considering.

Conclusions
From the study results, it can be concluded that acupuncture and related therapies offer advantages in terms of efficacy and safety for the treatment of female urinary incontinence (UI). Acupuncture demonstrates benefits in improving UI symptoms and enhancing patients’ quality of life. However, there might be some issues with the relevant systematic reviews and meta-analyses (SRs/MAs). For instance, the limited number of included studies might lead to quality downgrades due to the lack of sensitivity analyses and the assessment of publication bias, and the question of whether it is necessary to repeat the meta-analysis when including the same literature multiple times should be considered. Nevertheless, the overall quality of the SRs/MAs appears to be satisfactory, especially when compared to studies on acupuncture for the treatment of other conditions. The study results are worth considering.

Supplementary Digital Material 1

Supplementary Digital Material 2

Supplementary Digital Material 3
Conflicts of interest: The authors certify that there is no conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the material discussed in the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the : evidence-based research on acupuncture and moxibustion in the treatment of advantageous diseases ().

References
European Association of Urology Guidelines on the Diagnosis and Management of Female Non-neurogenic Lower Urinary Tract Symptoms. Part 1: Diagnostics, Overactive Bladder, Stress Urinary Incontinence, and Mixed Urinary Incontinence.
Urinary Incontinence in Women: A Review.
Stress Incontinence in Women.
Fourth International Consultation on Incontinence. Fourth International Consultation on Incontinence Recommendations of the International Scientific Committee: evaluation and treatment of urinary incontinence, pelvic organ prolapse, and fecal incontinence.
Urinary incontinence in women.
Urinary incontinence in women: variation in prevalence estimates and risk factors.
Prevalence of and risk factors for urine leakage in a racially and ethnically diverse population of adults: the Boston Area Community Health (BACH) Survey.
Clinical management of urinary incontinence in women.
Percutaneous tibial nerve stimulation for overactive bladder syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Oestrogen therapy for urinary incontinence in post-menopausal women.
The role of duloxetine in stress urinary incontinence: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Transobturator Tape: Over 10 Years Follow-up.
The standardisation of terminology in lower urinary tract function: report from the standardisation sub-committee of the International Continence Society.
Anxiety and depression associated with urinary incontinence. A 10-year follow-up study from the Norwegian HUNT study (EPINCONT).
Review of the epidemiology of overactive bladder.
Effect of bothersome overactive bladder symptoms on health-related quality of life, anxiety, depression, and treatment seeking in the United States: results from EpiLUTS.
The prevalence of lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) in the USA, the UK and Sweden: results from the Epidemiology of LUTS (EpiLUTS) study.
The burden of lower urinary tract symptoms: evaluating the effect of LUTS on health-related quality of life, anxiety and depression: EpiLUTS.
The economic impact of overactive bladder syndrome in six Western countries.
Effect of Electroacupuncture on Urinary Leakage Among Women With Stress Urinary Incontinence: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
Electroacupuncture Versus Pelvic Floor Muscle Training Plus Solifenacin for Women With Mixed Urinary Incontinence: A Randomized Noninferiority Trial.
Yang XM, Ran DW, Kong Y et al. Quantitative analysis of literature on the improvement of symptoms and quality of life in women with urinary incontinence by electroacupuncture therapy and its treatment parameters. World Science and Technology - Modernization of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 2023; 25(2):659-671.
Simultaneous perineal ultrasound and vaginal pressure measurement prove the action of electrical pudendal nerve stimulation in treating female stress incontinence.
Effects of acupuncture on abdominal leak point pressure and c-Fos expression in the brain of rats with stress urinary incontinence.
Pollock M, Fernandes RM, Becker LA, Pieper D, Hartling L. Chapter V: overviews of reviews. In: Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, editors. Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions version 6.3; 2022 [Internet]. Available from: www.training.cochrane.org/handbook [cited 2024, Jul 25].
Preferred Reporting Items for Overviews of Reviews (PRIOR): a protocol for development of a reporting guideline for overviews of reviews of healthcare interventions.
Reporting guideline for overviews of reviews of healthcare interventions: development of the PRIOR statement.
Graphical representation of overlap for OVErviews: GROOVE tool.
Systematic review finds overlapping reviews were not mentioned in every other overview.
The Efficacy and Safety of Acupuncture in Treating Stress Urinary Incontinence in Women from a Meta-Analysis of Four Randomized Controlled Trials.
Efficacy of various forms of acupuncture for the treatment of urinary incontinence in women: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Is electroacupuncture safe and effective for treatment of stress urinary incontinence in women? A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Acupuncture for stress urinary incontinence in adults.
Efficacy of acupuncture for urinary incontinence in middle-aged and elderly women: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
Does electroacupuncture benefit mixed urinary incontinence? A systematic review and meta-analysis with trial sequential analysis.
Effectiveness of electroacupuncture for female stress urinary incontinence: a systematic review and Meta-analysis.
Higgins JP, Green S. Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions. Wiley; 2008.
Construct validity of the Physiotherapy Evidence Database (PEDro) quality scale for randomized trials: item response theory and factor analyses.
AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews that include randomised or non-randomised studies of healthcare interventions, or both.
Manual acupuncture versus sham acupuncture and usual care for prophylaxis of episodic migraine without aura: multicentre, randomised clinical trial.
Efficacy of acupuncture for endometriosis-associated pain: a multicenter randomized single-blind placebo-controlled trial.
Efficacy of Intensive Acupuncture Versus Sham Acupuncture in Knee Osteoarthritis: A Randomized Controlled Trial.
Superficial Needling Acupuncture vs Sham Acupuncture for Knee Osteoarthritis: A Randomized Controlled Trial.
Effect of Acupuncture vs Sham Acupuncture on Live Births Among Women Undergoing In Vitro Fertilization: A Randomized Clinical Trial.
Acupuncture for chronic knee pain: a randomized clinical trial.
Mixed urinary incontinence: international urogynecological association research and development committee opinion.
Electrical stimulation of the pudendal nerve promotes neuroregeneration and functional recovery from stress urinary incontinence in a rat model.
Daily bilateral pudendal nerve electrical stimulation improves recovery from stress urinary incontinence.
Experimentally induced bladder permeability evokes bladder afferent hypersensitivity in the absence of inflammation.
Neural acupuncture unit: a new concept for interpreting effects and mechanisms of acupuncture.
Effect of electroacupuncture on the intestinal microflora in rats with stress urinary incontinence.
Electroacupuncture and acupuncture promote the rat’s transected median nerve regeneration.
Wide Pulse width electroacupuncture ameliorates denervation-induced skeletal muscle atrophy in rats via IGF-1/PI3K/Akt pathway.
The Role of Acupuncture in Treating Perimenopausal Insomnia: An Overview and Quality Assessment of Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses.
Effect of acupuncture in eczema: an overview of systematic reviews.
Acupuncture for Mild Cognitive Impairment and Dementia: An Overview of Systematic Reviews.