Approach to the Patient With Pancreatogenic Diabetes
Abstract
Diabetes can occur secondary to a wide array of exocrine pancreas pathologies. Pancreatogenic diabetes is a broad diagnostic term used to encompass these disparate causes of diabetes, which taken together are estimated to account for 1% to 9% of all cases of diabetes. The more common causes of pancreatogenic diabetes include pancreatitis, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, cystic fibrosis, pancreatectomy, and fibrocalculous pancreatic disease. Persons with these exocrine pancreatic conditions should be screened for diabetes. Reciprocally, clinicians should consider the possibility of underlying pancreatic disease in persons with diabetes. Of special concern, diabetes can be the presenting sign of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, for which clinical suspicion remains crucial as there are not yet distinguishing biomarkers. Timely diagnosis of diabetes is especially important in cystic fibrosis, because even mild diabetes can worsen lung disease and mortality risk in this condition. Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is present in many cases of pancreatogenic diabetes. In these cases, provision of pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy may improve glycemic control. Optimal screening and treatment approaches are evolving, differing depending on the specific pancreatic pathology. Clinicians should be vigilant for exocrine pancreas symptomatology, including abdominal pain, steatorrhea, and malabsorption in their patients with diabetes.
Pancreatogenic diabetes is broadly defined as diabetes occurring secondary to pathologies that primarily affect the exocrine pancreas and/or composite (exocrine and endocrine) pancreas. Interchangeable terms for pancreatogenic diabetes include “pancreatic,” “pancreatogenous,” and “type 3c” or “type IIIC” diabetes. Despite its simple definition, the diagnosis of pancreatogenic diabetes is often difficult to ascertain, as the symptoms and findings can overlap with more common forms of diabetes. Pancreatogenic diabetes is estimated to comprise 1% to 9% of all cases of diabetes and is likely underrecognized. Case descriptions of pancreatogenic diabetes predate the discovery of insulin. There are multiple specific causes of pancreatogenic diabetes, each with specific pathophysaiology and clinical considerations. This overview touches on the more common specific forms, with a detailed discussion and cases highlighting pancreatitis, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), and cystic fibrosis-related diabetes (CFRD), with a brief discussion of other causes. Given that pancreatogenic diabetes has elevated rates of missed diagnosis and increased morbidity compared to other forms of diabetes mellitus, clinicians providing diabetes care should be familiar with these and maintain an index of suspicion for pancreatic disease in all patients with diabetes.

Postpancreatitis Diabetes Mellitus
Postpancreatitis diabetes mellitus (PPDM) is the current terminology referring to pancreatogenic diabetes occurring as a consequence of pancreatitis. PPDM risk is associated with all 3 classifications of pancreatitis chronology: acute pancreatitis (AP), acute recurrent pancreatitis (ARP), and chronic pancreatitis (CP). AP is acute inflammation of the pancreas and typically manifests with sudden-onset abdominal pain accompanied by elevation of amylase and lipase to greater than 3 times the upper limit of normal. ARP is defined as more than 1 episode of AP. The definition of CP is less standardized but typically includes pancreatitis with irreversible structural changes in the pancreas. Diabetes risk is not as high after a single episode of AP, unless pancreatitis is especially severe or recurrent. The prevalence of diabetes is high for adults with CP of any cause and increases with duration of disease. The lifelong risk approaches 46% to 83% after 20 years of disease. PPDM occurs in 6% to 9% of children with ARP/CP, and risk is the highest in hereditary pancreatitis for which lifetime diabetes risk approaches 70% to 80%. PPDM occurs in a wide variety of clinical contexts and presentations, as illustrated by the following cases.

Cases

Case 1—Chronic Pancreatitis From Alcoholism
A 54-year-old male without a previous diagnosis of diabetes experienced a chronic pancreatitis flare 2 days after binge drinking. He presented with nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). Acute management included IV fluids, thiamine, and IV insulin with dextrose. Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 8.5%, up from 6.0% 1 year prior. A computed tomography scan showed atrophy and calcification of the pancreas. He was discharged on basal plus mealtime insulin and continuous glucose monitoring. At endocrine follow-up, his continuous glucose monitoring history showed an average glucose of 185 mg/dL with frequent hypoglycemia at 1 to 5 Am. Postprandial glucoses were often over 250 mg/dL. GAD/ZnT8/IA-2 antibodies were negative. Fasting triglycerides were 340 mg/dL. He was counseled for alcohol and smoking cessation. His basal insulin was reduced, and mealtime insulin was increased.

Case 2—Severe Acute Pancreatitis
A 28-year-old man with an intellectual disability secondary to past gunshot head trauma was found down at his nursing home. Blood glucose was 1593 mg/dL with a beta-hydroxybutyrate of 0.8 mmol/L. He was somnolent, confused, and tachycardic, with obesity and acanthosis nigricans. Perfusion was adequate and lactate 3.5 mmol/L (reference range 0.5-2.0 mmol/L). He was not previously known to have diabetes but had a known seizure disorder treated with valproate. IV insulin and fluids were initiated to treat his hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state. His tachycardia and level of consciousness improved for 12 hours, at which time he experienced rapid circulatory collapse. Resuscitation was unsuccessful. Autopsy revealed 2L abdominal sanguineous fluid, a grossly hemorrhagic pancreas, and microscopic acute and chronic hemorrhagic pancreatitis, thought likely secondary to valproate therapy.

Case 3—Hereditary Pancreatitis
A 15-year-old male with a 3-year history of ARP was referred to endocrinology by his gastroenterologist due to concern for diabetes. Genetic testing had revealed pathological variants in the CFTR and PRSS1 genes (gene abbreviations and names are detailed in Table 1), with either one alone being a risk factor for hereditary pancreatitis (see OMIM#167800). He had developed pancreatic exocrine pancreatic insufficiency 1 year prior and required pancreatic enzyme replacement. A detailed workup determined that he did not have cystic fibrosis (CF; ie, he had 1 functional CFTR copy). He was obese, had acanthosis nigricans, and had multiple primary relatives with type 2 diabetes (T2DM). He did not tolerate metformin, likely complicated by pancreatic insufficiency. After dietary counseling, HbA1c remained in the prediabetes range. Given the high prevalence of T2DM in the population and rising obesity rates in adults and teens, we will increasingly encounter complex cases like this that combine aspects of metabolic syndrome and pancreatogenic diabetes.
Gene symbols and names
Symbol	Name	 	CEL	Carboxyl ester lipase	 	CFTR	Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator	 	PRSS1	Serine protease 1	 	SPINK1	Serine peptidase inhibitor Kazal-type 1

Case 4—Drug-induced Pancreatitis and Diabetes
A 13-year-old boy developed B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Pegasparaginase was administered on day 4 as part of induction chemotherapy. On day 25 of induction, he presented in DKA with vomiting and abdominal and back pain. The pain failed to improve despite resolution of DKA with insulin, raising suspicion for pancreatitis. Lipase was 1287 U/L (reference range 13-60). Ultrasound showed acute interstitial pancreatitis. Gastroenterology was consulted to manage pancreatitis. C-peptide was 0.7 ng/mL (reference 1.1-4.4) when plasma glucose was 183 mg/dL. Islet autoantibodies were negative and serum triglycerides normal. Asparaginase was presumed to be the predominant cause of his pancreatitis and was permanently discontinued. Unfortunately, he developed an infected pancreatic pseudocyst, prolonging his illness. He was weaned from insulin 80 days after his initial DKA presentation. Thankfully, he remains free of diabetes, pancreatic sufficient, and free of malignancy at 7 years of follow-up.

Causes of Pancreatitis and PPDM
Biliary stones are the most common cause of AP in adults in most high-income countries. If cholecystectomy is performed after the first episode of pancreatitis, biliary stones are less likely to cause CP. The mechanism of pancreatitis is obstructive.
Alcohol use contributes to one-third of AP and approximately 40% to 70% of CP cases in the United States and is the leading risk factor for pancreatitis worldwide. Interestingly, clinical symptoms of AP often develop not during the consumption of alcohol but 1 to 2 days after heavy drinking and a return to meal consumption as seen in case 1. Transition to CP is believed to involve recurrence of AP and typically requires 80 gm daily of alcohol use for 6 to 12 years. Thus, alcohol cessation and the reduction of modified risk factors, especially tobacco use, are very important. Binge drinking can precipitate ketoacidosis, both in the presence and absence of diabetes. Pathogenesis of alcoholic ketoacidosis is characterized by a switch of energy substrates from carbohydrates to lipids due to reduced oral intake, ethanol conversion to acetyl-CoA, and low hepatic glycogen stores associated with alcohol use. Diuresis due to suppression of antidiuretic hormone by alcohol and poor oral intake cause dehydration, which reduces the removal of ketones through urine. In addition to fluid resuscitation, acute management of alcoholic ketoacidosis includes dextrose to promote utilization of carbohydrate as the primary energy source. Thiamine supplement prior to dextrose administration to prevent Wernicke encephalopathy and monitoring for withdrawal syndrome are additional important considerations.
Hypertriglyceridemia is the third leading cause of AP in both adults and pediatrics. AP risk increases when serum triglycerides are 1000 mg/dL or higher and is less likely to occur when serum triglycerides are below 500 mg/dL. A 4% increase in AP incidence is reported for every 100 mg/dL of triglycerides above 1000 mg/dL. Hypertriglyceridemia can result from genetics, disease conditions, medications, and combinations of these. Poorly controlled diabetes, obesity, nephrotic syndrome, hypothyroidism, HIV infection, lipodystrophy, alcohol, oral estrogen, and glucocorticoid are factors that increase serum triglycerides levels. In addition, pregnancy causes a physiological increase in triglycerides that can trigger AP in rare cases. Management of hypertriglyceridemia by addressing contributing factors, ceasing alcohol use, and reducing carbohydrate intake is important to prevent the recurrence of pancreatitis. Fenofibrates and omega-3 fatty acids may be utilized to treat those whose triglyceride levels do not respond sufficiently to lifestyle modification and the removal of offending factors.
Hereditary pancreatitis is the most common cause of CP in children and persists to adulthood. It is characterized by ARP starting typically before age 10, with progression to CP, pancreatogenic diabetes, and increased risk of pancreatic cancer. The etiology includes autosomal dominant mutations in PRSS1, CFTR, and SPINK1 (OMIM#167800), among other genetic mechanisms.

Pathophysiology of PPDM
The primary pathophysiology of PPDM is inadequately understood. Furthermore, given the range of disparate disease processes in persons with pancreatitis, the pathophysiology likely varies among individuals. However, insulin deficiency is the common primary pathology. In addition to insulin deficiency, insulin resistance, other islet hormone dysfunction, and autoimmunity have been described in both children and adults with PPDM. Both increased and decreased insulin sensitivity can occur with CP. Of note, pancreatectomy to alleviate ARP or CP results in severe and brittle diabetes due to absolute insulin and islet deficiency, unless islet autotransplantation is performed.

Clinical Care of PPDM

Screening
Despite a lack of standard guidelines, given the high rates of diabetes in CP, screening for diabetes should be a standard of care for all CP patients, regardless of underlying cause or age, with increased vigilance needed for those with known risk factors. Pancreas-related risk factors include AP complications, exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, pancreatic calcifications, pancreatic atrophy, pancreas surgery, and pancreatic disease severity. It may be reasonable to monitor HbA1c every 6 months for at least the first 24 months after an AP episode, as the cumulative incidence of new prediabetes (NOD) or diabetes after a single episode of AP climbs from 20% to 40% during this time frame.

Treatment
Unfortunately, evidence-based guidelines are lacking for the treatment of pancreatogenic diabetes. Simply applying standard treatment approaches for T2DM is likely inadequate, as people with pancreatitis-associated diabetes experience worse diabetes control, require earlier initiation of insulin therapy, endure 5 times greater risk for severe hypoglycemia, and suffer increased mortality compared to T2DM. Additionally, management of pancreatogenic diabetes is complicated by accompanying pathology in other islet hormones, including glucagon, pancreatic polypeptide, and somatostatin, by malabsorption in those with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and/or anatomical changes from pancreatic surgery, altered secretion of incretin hormones, and altered gut microbiome. These interfere with normal postmeal glucose excursion, insulin secretion, and insulin sensitivity. Unfortunately, achieving the goal HbA1c < 7% in pancreatogenic diabetes is often challenging due to the propensity to both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia, as seen in case 1.
Historically, metformin is considered the first line of therapy, especially for those with mild hyperglycemia, improving the hepatic insulin resistance that often occurs in pancreatogenic diabetes. Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonists and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors have historically been avoided due to a potential risk of pancreatitis with these agents. Interestingly, although the use of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors is not recommended, the presumed increased risk for pancreatitis with GLP-1 receptor agonists is not supported by multiple large meta-analyses, and use of these medications likely is not contraindicated in pancreatitis. The use of sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors may need caution in subjects who are insulinopenic, heavy alcohol users, or after total pancreatectomy, considering the risk of ketoacidosis. Unfortunately, pancreatogenic diabetes is more likely to require insulin therapy for adequate control compared to T2DM. However, poor glucagon secretion increases the susceptibility to hypoglycemia. Given this, continuous glucose monitoring can be a useful adjunct to insulin therapy.
An additional complication to diabetes management in those with pancreatitis is the loss of pancreatic exocrine function in some. A recent larger cohort study indicates the presence of exocrine insufficiency likely modulates response to specific diabetes treatments. This study found that although oral glucose-lowering medications showed similar efficacy at reducing HbA1c in pancreatogenic diabetes without exocrine insufficiency compared to T2DM, oral agents were less effective in those with pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, likely due to greater β-cell deficiency. In addition to higher dependency on insulin therapy, those with pancreatic exocrine insufficiency require specific nutrition counseling. Fortunately, pancreatic enzyme supplementation may improve glycemic control. Additionally, exocrine insufficiency requires monitoring for vitamin D and other fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies and osteoporosis that can occur with malabsorption. In addition, chronic pain and alcohol dependence potentially need to be addressed in the context of diabetes management, making a multidisciplinary approach very important for this group of patients.

Pearls From Cases

Case 1
Alcohol use is the second most common cause of AP, which can occur days after a drinking binge. Diabetes secondary to pancreatitis is associated with increased glucose lability compared to T2DM, with greater postmeal excursions and a higher risk for hypoglycemia. Earlier initiation of meal-time insulin and increased monitoring for hypoglycemia are needed compared to T2DM.

Case 2
Fulminant diabetes can be the initial presentation of severe AP. It is important to maintain a high index of suspicion for underlying exocrine pancreas disease in patients with NOD, especially in those less able to report a history of abdominal pain.

Case 3
In the absence of pancreatitis, this case would have met diagnostic criteria for T2DM and been appropriately managed as such. However, given the underlying pancreatic disease, the management required adaptation for pancreatic diabetes. Given the high frequency of T2DM in the population and the rising obesity rates in adults and teens, complex cases with aspects of T2DM combined with underlying exocrine pancreatic disease are likely to continue to increase.

Case 4
Modern cancer therapeutics have improved survival but can increase risk for both diabetes and exocrine pancreas complications both during acute treatment, as seen in this case, and in long-term survivors. It will become increasingly important for diabetes care providers to be aware of the implications of cancer treatment and survivorship for their patients. The most commonly implicated agents are asparaginases, but a lengthy list of other antineoplastics is thought to contribute to pancreatitis risk, including azathioprine, mercaptopurine, various protein kinase inhibitors, and checkpoint inhibitors.

PDAC
NOD in persons over age 50 years raises the suspicion of PDAC, the most common form of pancreatic cancer, especially if there is antecedent weight loss. However, the vast majority of NOD in this demographic is not due to PDAC. While survival has improved for many types of cancers, the survival rate for PDAC remains dismal, and PDAC is predicted to be the second leading cause of cancer death, surpassing colon cancer, by 2040.

Case 5—Pancreatic Ductal Carcinoma
On annual health examination, a 65-year-old woman without a previous diagnosis of diabetes had an HbA1c of 7.2%. She reported 10 kg unintentional recent weight loss (body mass index from 33 to 29) and vague discomfort in her abdomen for 6 months. Physical examination and routine laboratory tests were otherwise unremarkable. She was started on metformin and referred for diabetes education and nutritional counseling. Two months later, computed tomography of the abdomen due to worsening abdominal pain revealed a 1.8 cm mass in the body of the pancreas. Partial pancreatectomy confirmed the diagnosis of PDAC. Her body mass index decreased to 27 by 3-month postoperative follow-up, by which time her diabetes had resolved.

Pathophysiology of Diabetes Due to PDAC
Interestingly, hyperglycemia is 1 of the earliest changes seen in PDAC. Fasting glucose begins to increase up to 36 months prior to the diagnosis of PDAC, and half of subjects develop NOD within the 2 years prior to PDAC diagnosis. Hyperglycemia is associated with tumor size, and it is estimated that PDAC increases blood glucose beginning when a tumor reaches the size of 1 to 2 mL. Worsening of control in established diabetes can also be a symptom of PDAC. The comparison of stable and unstable diabetes (defined as a change in treatment regimen after a 2-year period of stable medication use) in Australian females showed a hazard ratio of 2.55 for PDAC in those with unstable diabetes. Interestingly, both β-cell dysfunction and insulin resistance correlate with tumor size, and tumor-secreted factors likely cause both insulin resistance and β-cell dysfunction as a paraneoplastic syndrome. In addition to circulating factors, PDAC is characterized by pancreatic fibrosis and inflammation that could cause β-cell dysfunction. Indeed, islets near PDAC show basement membrane thickening and expression of β-cell dedifferentiation markers. Interestingly, resection of PDAC is sometimes accompanied by reversal of diabetes. Although this suggests paraneoplastic factors contributing to the development of diabetes in PDAC, the resolution of diabetes could be also due to weight loss and the change in gastrointestinal anatomy related to partial pancreatectomy.

Detection of PDAC Among Adults With Diabetes
Poor outcomes for PDAC are partly attributed to difficulty in detecting cases at an early curative stage. Although carbohydrate antigen 19-9 is fairly well known as a possible biomarker for PDAC, it has poor sensitivity and does not have added value for detecting early PDAC in NOD. There is interest in the possible utility of adrenomedullin, Gal3, S100A9, metabolite profiles, and/or meal-stimulated pancreatic polypeptide for detection of PDAC in NOD, but none of these have been validated. The strong association between hyperglycemia and PDAC poses a question whether NOD (and recently worsening diabetes) can be targeted for early detection of PDAC. However, owing to the high prevalence of T2D in the general population, only 0.6% to 1% of NOD cases have PDAC, thus universal screening of this cohort is deemed not cost-effective. Among readily available clinical parameters, age over 50 and weight loss are 2 risk factors associated with PDAC within the NOD cohort. In 1 study, weight loss at the time of diabetes onset was seen in 59% of PDAC and 30% of T2D (P = .02). On the other hand, parental history of diabetes did not discriminate between the 2 groups. Enriching New-Onset Diabetes for Pancreatic Cancer calculates a score based on change in weight, change in blood glucose, and age at onset of diabetes to predict risk of PDAC. The positive score enriches NOD subjects with PDAC to 3% to 4%. However, this remains insufficient sensitivity to justify pancreatic imaging to screen for PDAC in this large group.
Treatment of diabetes in the context of PDAC typically mimics that used for PPDM discussed previously, and providers should gauge the level of endocrine and exocrine pancreatic dysfunction in each case. In addition, evidence suggests that the choice of antidiabetic medication might influence the clinical course of PDAC. Meta-analyses of retrospective cohort trials suggest that metformin has a beneficial impact on survival of PDAC patients with diabetes. Recently, it has been proposed that SGLT2 inhibitors may have utility repurposed as adjuvant PDAC therapy. Pancreatic cancer cells can express SGLT2, which is considered to increase glucose uptake and support tumor growth. Indeed, the inhibition of SGLT2 in preclinical PDAC models reduced tumor growth. Although its antineoplastic efficacy requires validation in a randomized clinical trial, SGLT2 inhibitors might benefit PDAC subjects, especially in those with cardiorenal complications and at a low risk of DKA. The potential risk of GLP-1 receptor agonist to provoke PDAC development was first postulated from the formation of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia in rodents that received a GLP-1 receptor agonist. Pancreatic ductal cells express GLP-1 receptor, which activates a proliferative pathway in vitro. However, clinical studies, including large retrospective cohort studies, have not established a causal association of GLP-1 receptor agonist therapy with PDAC in humans so far. Rather, the incidence of obesity-associated cancers including PDAC was lower in people with T2D treated with GLP-1 receptor agonist than those treated with insulin in a large retrospective cohort study. While GLP-1 receptor agonists may not increase the risk of developing PDAC, evidence is lacking on whether GLP-1 receptor agonists positively or negatively affect outcomes of people who are diagnosed with PDAC.

Pearls From Case
Although PDAC is relatively rare, the mortality rate is quite high. As NOD or sudden unexplained loss of diabetes control may be the initial symptom of PDAC, providers caring for adults with diabetes should retain an increased index of suspicion for PDAC. This is especially important as early diagnosis and tumor removal increases the cure rate for both cancer and diabetes as seen in the case.

CFRD
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a severe, multiorgan disorder, previously almost always lethal in childhood. CF is caused by dysfunction of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFRD), an anion channel. CF adversely affects primarily the lungs, pancreas, and intestines. However, people with cystic fibrosis (PwCF) are at extremely high risk for development of a specific form of diabetes, termed CFRD.

Case 6—CFRD
A 47-year-old man with CF and diabetes, 15 years post-lung transplant, was rereferred to endocrinology. His CFRD was previously managed with a basal-bolus insulin regimen. He was taking pancreatic enzymes with meals for exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. He had gastroparesis and nutcracker esophagus and thus took rapid-acting insulin after meals. After highly effective modulator therapy (HEMT) initiation, he began experiencing postprandial hypoglycemia even with 1 unit of insulin and consequently self-discontinued meal-time insulin but continued long-acting insulin. His return to endocrinology was triggered by an increase in his HbA1c from 7.8% to 9.2%. His diabetes control improved with continuous glucose monitoring and half-unit pens for his meal-time insulin, followed by fine-tuning his carbohydrate ratio and insulin-meal timing.

Overview of CFRD
Nearly all PwCF have a propensity for hyperglycemia. Roughly 20% of young adult PwCF and 40% of middle-aged adult PwCF have CFRD. Risk factors for the development of CFRD include female sex, family history of T2DM, CF-related liver disease, severity of CF (CFTR genotype), enteral nutrition, and increasing age. The presentation of CFRD is typically mild/silent but often is associated with weight loss/poor weight gain. Surprisingly, spontaneous hypoglycemia is also common in people with CF, even in the absence of diabetes.

Pathophysiology of CFRD
Regarding pathogenesis, CFRD is perhaps the best-studied and -understood form of pancreatogenic diabetes. The primary cause of CFRD is impaired insulin secretion. In CF, pancreatic secretions become overly viscous and acidic, leading to extensive exocrine pancreatic disease by early childhood. This results in a massive loss of normal exocrine tissue. Despite this, pancreatic islets are relatively spared, and the degree of β-cell mass loss may not alone be sufficient to explain the development of diabetes. Multiple other factors in the CF pancreas likely also contribute to poor insulin secretion, including islet remodeling that favors α, delta, and PP cells over β cells; accumulation of islet amyloid; increased inflammatory cytokines; reactive oxygen species; loss of incretin responsiveness; and possibly altered microcirculation and neuronal innervation. Additionally, CF is accompanied by changes in gastrointestinal function that can alter transit time and incretin hormone levels, which may further contribute to hyperglycemia.

CFRD and HEMT
Beginning in 2012, small-molecule drugs, termed HEMT, became available, which largely restore function to many of the common mutant forms of CFTR. HEMTs greatly improve lung and intestinal health to those PwCF carrying responsive CFTR mutations. The expected lifespan for PwCF now exceeds 60 years in those responders able to access HEMT. This has shifted the CF mortality curve sufficiently that the majority of people with CF are now adults. Unfortunately, CFRD typically does not resolve postinitiation of HEMT, and the fraction of adult PwCF who have diabetes has not diminished. Thus, in contrast to other complications of CF, CFRD remains a highly burdensome comorbidity in the HEMT era. Classically, CFRD was associated with worsening lung function and increased risk for pulmonary death. The best available evidence suggests that CFRD still increases the risk of pulmonary CF disease despite use of HEMT.

CFTR Screening and Treatment
Fortunately, there are guidelines for CFRD screening and treatment, although there is not yet evidence to address whether screening should be altered in those on HEMT. General recommendations are to screen PwCF yearly for CFRD with oral glucose tolerance testing starting at 10 years of age. Treatment of CFRD is unique in that a primary goal is preventing worsening lung disease as well as more typical complications of diabetes mellitus. The mainstays of treatment include insulin and adequate nutrition to avoid unhealthy weight loss. There is not yet evidence to address whether treatment should be substantially altered in those responding to HEMT.

Pearls From Case
The patient in this case experienced significant reactive hypoglycemia, which is extremely common in PwCF and was likely worsened by his gastroparesis. Also contributing to his presentation is that PwCF can be extremely insulin sensitive, and adults with CFRD can require only surprisingly small doses of insulin. In these cases, it is useful to consider insulin pumps or insulin pens and syringes that allow the administration of half units of insulin. Additionally, people with CF typically have significant but relatively shorter duration of postprandial glucose excursions, making carbohydrate coverage prior to meals (rather than at or after meals) even more essential than in other forms of diabetes.
Typical challenges managing CFRD include (1) subclinical onset, which requires screening; (2) spontaneous hypoglycemia and insulin sensitivity requiring customized treatment; (3) use of supplemental feedings; and (4) complexity of care and care burden. Recommendations to address these include (1) yearly screening for diabetes starting at age 10 years (or sooner), (2) early use of continuous glucose monitoring if available, (3) use of half-unit pens if needed, and (4) early initiation of insulin pump therapy.

Extrapancreatic Diabetes Risk Factors for Pancreatogenic Diabetes
Insulin resistance likely contributes to diabetes risk in persons with exocrine pancreatic disease. In fact, among persons with pancreatitis, many of the known extrapancreatic diabetes risk factors could be related to insulin resistance, including increasing age, family history of T2DM, hypertriglyceridemia, alcoholism, obesity, male sex, and non-White race. Other extrapancreatic risk factors might also be related to the propensity for β-cell failure include smoking, polygenic T2DM risk score, pancreatic disease duration, and autoimmune disease. Genetic risk alleles for CFRD overlap with those for T2DM.

Other Causes of Pancreatogenic Diabetes

Pancreatectomy and Pancreas Loss
Complete loss of the pancreas causes absolute deficiency of exocrine and endocrine pancreatic function. For these reasons, the phenotype of diabetes after total pancreatectomy differs from isolated insulin deficiency. The loss of glucagon secretion contributes to a potential decreased ability to recover from hypoglycemia. Furthermore, loss of pancreatic exocrine function can alter gut function and the kinetics of nutrient absorption. Bihormonal insulin pumps may help alleviate hypoglycemia risk in persons after total pancreatectomy. Total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation reduces the risk of diabetes and diminishes insulin requirements but does not restore glucagon response to hypoglycemia. The risk of developing diabetes after partial pancreatectomy is related to the location and extent of pancreatic resection, with distal resection imparting the most risk. Diabetes can also occur after traumatic pancreatic injury. Additionally, there are extremely rare genetic conditions causing congenital pancreatic agenesis (see OMIM#260370).
Unique treatment considerations for pancreatogenic diabetes and its most common causes are highlighted in Table 2, including relevant practice guidelines.
Unique management considerations for pancreatogenic diabetes
Cause	Considerations	 	Any cause	Treatment of underlying condition or causeCareful attention to nutritional statusPERT if pancreatic exocrine insufficiencyInsulin is indicated when diabetes is uncontrolled	 	Pancreatitisa	Alcohol abstinenceConsider gastroenterology referral for pancreatitis management	 	PDACa	Tumor resection sometimes associated with diabetes resolution	 	CFRDb	Treatment with insulin or repaglinide	 	Pancreatectomyc	TPIATInsulin
Abbreviations: CFRD, cystic fibrosis-related diabetes; PDAC, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma; PERT, pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy; TPIAT, total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation.
a
Medical diabetes treatments not specified because there are no contemporary practice guidelines for pancreatogenic diabetes due to pancreatitis or PDAC.
b
CFRD treatment guidelines uniformly endorse insulin therapy as an evidence-based therapy, while repaglinide is endorsed only by the most recent guideline. Additional agents are under active study.
c
Without TPIAT, total pancreatectomy leads to lifelong insulin requirement.

Fibrocalculous Pancreatic Diabetes
Fibrocalculous pancreatic diabetes (FCPD) is characterized by exocrine insufficiency, radiographically evident pancreatic calcifications, and diabetes. FCPD occurs primarily in various tropical regions. The underlying etiology is unclear. Exocrine pancreatic symptoms arise before diabetes, sometimes by years. Malnourishment is common at diabetes presentation. The characteristics and epidemiology of FCPD are likely changing with economic development. With global migration, clinicians outside of endemic regions should be aware of the possibility of FCPD in immigrants from the tropics.

Monogenic Diabetes With Exocrine Pancreas Disease
Deleterious variants in the CEL gene cause pancreatic exocrine deficiency and autosomally inherited diabetes.

Conclusion
Various exocrine pancreatic pathologies are associated with diabetes. Given the extensive overlap with the presentation and symptoms of the more common nonpancreatic forms of diabetes, clinicians should be vigilant for the possibility of exocrine pancreatic disease in patients with diabetes. When abdominal pain is present, the possibility of pancreatitis should be considered. It remains especially challenging to distinguish adults with recent-onset T2DM from those with underlying PDAC. Reliable biomarkers that distinguish between pancreatogenic diabetes and more common forms of diabetes are currently lacking. Likewise, optimal screening protocols for persons with exocrine pancreatic disease are not fully optimized. For persons with exocrine pancreatic disease, preventative strategies that will delay or stop the onset of diabetes have yet to be uncovered. All of these areas of uncertainty highlight the need for ongoing clinical and basic science research.

Funding
Support for this work included the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (A.W.N. SUN22G0-CFRD; K.L.O. STOLTZ4R0) and National Institutes of Health (Y.I. R01DK090490; K.L.O. P30DK054759).

Disclosures
The authors declare that they have no relevant disclosures.

Data Availability
Not applicable, as no data was generated for this review.

References
2. Diagnosis and classification of diabetes: standards of care in diabetes-2025
Type 3c (pancreatogenic) diabetes mellitus secondary to chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer
Incidence, demographics, and clinical characteristics of diabetes of the exocrine pancreas (type 3c): a retrospective cohort study
Remarks on two cases of pancreatic diabetes: the one exceptionally acute, the other markedly chronic
Identification of a risk profile for new-onset diabetes after acute pancreatitis
Development of a clinical prediction model for diabetes in chronic pancreatitis: the PREDICT3c study
Diabetes in chronic pancreatitis: risk factors and natural history: risk factors and natural history
Analysis of INSPPIRE-2 cohort: risk factors and disease burden in children with acute recurrent or chronic pancreatitis
L-asparaginase: therapeutic and toxic effects in patients with neoplastic disease
Acute pancreatitis
The global, regional, and national burden of pancreatitis from 1990 to 2021: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2021
How alcohol induces human acute alcoholic pancreatitis-problem solved?
Alcoholic pancreatitis: new insights into the pathogenesis and treatment
Chronic and idiopathic pancreatitis-A personalized treatment approach
Differential diagnosis of ketoacidosis in hyperglycemic alcoholic diabetic patient: role of insulin
Acute pancreatitis during and after pregnancy: a review
Diabetes of the exocrine pancreas related to hereditary pancreatitis, an update
Hereditary pancreatitis in the United States: survival and rates of pancreatic cancer
Islet autoantibodies and their association with β-cell function and diabetes measures in children with acute recurrent and chronic pancreatitis
Risk factors and mechanisms for diabetes in pancreatitis
Diabetes mellitus as a consequence of acute severe pancreatitis: unraveling the mystery
Trajectories of glycaemia following acute pancreatitis: a prospective longitudinal cohort study with 24 months follow-up
Risk of major adverse cardiovascular events, severe hypoglycemia, and all-cause mortality in postpancreatitis diabetes mellitus versus type 2 diabetes: a nationwide population-based cohort study
A tale of two pancreases: exocrine pathology and endocrine dysfunction
Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists and pancreatitis: a reconcilable divorce
Treatment outcomes with oral anti-hyperglycaemic therapies in people with diabetes secondary to a pancreatic condition (type 3c diabetes): a population-based cohort study
Challenges of managing type 3c diabetes in the context of pancreatic resection, cancer and trauma
Distinguishing diabetes secondary to pancreatic diseases from type 2 diabetes mellitus
Risk factors for drug-related acute pancreatitis: an analysis of the FDA adverse event reporting system (FAERS)
Model to determine risk of pancreatic cancer in patients with new-onset diabetes
Estimated projection of US cancer incidence and death to 2040
Early detection of pancreatic cancer
Fasting blood glucose levels provide estimate of duration and progression of pancreatic cancer before diagnosis
Pancreatic cancer-associated diabetes mellitus: prevalence and temporal association with diagnosis of cancer
Association between unstable diabetes mellitus and risk of pancreatic cancer
The systematic role of pancreatic cancer exosomes: distant communication, liquid biopsy and future therapy
Beta-cell function and insulin resistance evaluated by HOMA in pancreatic cancer subjects with varying degrees of glucose intolerance
Microenvironmental determinants of pancreatic cancer
Gene dysregulation and islet changes in PDAC-associated type 3c diabetes
Paraneoplastic β cell dedifferentiation in nondiabetic patients with pancreatic cancer
Resolution of diabetes after pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with and without pancreatic ductal cell adenocarcinoma
Current paradigm and futuristic vision on new-onset diabetes and pancreatic cancer research
A reduced pancreatic polypeptide response is associated with new-onset pancreatogenic diabetes versus type 2 diabetes
Risk of pancreatic cancer in people with new-onset diabetes: a Danish nationwide population-based cohort study
Weight loss precedes cancer-specific symptoms in pancreatic cancer-associated diabetes mellitus
Drug repurposing, an attractive strategy in pancreatic cancer treatment: preclinical and clinical updates
Exploring the role of SGLT2 inhibitors in cancer: mechanisms of action and therapeutic opportunities
Chronic GLP-1 receptor activation by exendin-4 induces expansion of pancreatic duct glands in rats and accelerates formation of dysplastic lesions and chronic pancreatitis in the Kras(G12D) mouse model
The use of glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus does not increase the risk of pancreatic cancer: a U.S.-based cohort study
Glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonists and 13 obesity-associated cancers in patients with type 2 diabetes
Pancreatic endocrine function in cystic fibrosis
. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Accessed August 26, 2025. https://www.cff.org/medical-professionals/patient-registry
ISPAD clinical practice consensus guidelines 2022: management of cystic fibrosis-related diabetes in children and adolescents
Hypoglycaemia in cystic fibrosis: an analysis of a single centre adult cystic fibrosis clinic
Survival in a bad neighborhood: pancreatic islets in cystic fibrosis
Oxidative stress and impaired insulin secretion in cystic fibrosis pig pancreas
Pancreas and islet morphology in cystic fibrosis: clues to the etiology of cystic fibrosis-related diabetes
Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes is associated with reduced islet protein expression of GLP-1 receptor and perturbation of cell-specific transcriptional programs
Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes workshop: research priorities spanning disease pathophysiology, diagnosis, and outcomes
Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes is associated with worse lung function trajectory despite ivacaftor use
Cystic fibrosis-related diabetes: a first Canadian clinical practice guideline
Clinical care guidelines for cystic fibrosis-related diabetes: a position statement of the American Diabetes Association and a clinical practice guideline of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, endorsed by the Pediatric Endocrine Society
Diabetes mellitus in children with acute recurrent and chronic pancreatitis: data from the INternational study group of pediatric pancreatitis: in search for a CuRE cohort
Prevalence of abnormal glucose metabolism in pediatric acute, acute recurrent and chronic pancreatitis
Genetic modifiers of cystic fibrosis-related diabetes have extensive overlap with type 2 diabetes and related traits
Glucose counterregulation in patients after pancreatectomy. Comparison with other clinical forms of diabetes
Bihormonal artificial pancreas with closed-loop glucose control vs current diabetes care after total pancreatectomy: a randomized clinical trial
Deficient glucagon response to hypoglycemia during a mixed meal in total pancreatectomy/islet autotransplantation recipients
Risk factors for development of diabetes mellitus (type 3c) after partial pancreatectomy: a systematic review
The role of total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation in the treatment of chronic pancreatitis: a report from the international consensus guidelines in chronic pancreatitis
Two new mutations in the CEL gene causing diabetes and hereditary pancreatitis: how to correctly identify MODY8 cases

Abbreviations
AP
acute pancreatitis
ARP
acute recurrent pancreatitis
CF
cystic fibrosis
CFRD
cystic fibrosis-related diabetes
CP
chronic pancreatitis
DKA
diabetic ketoacidosis
FCPD
fibrocalculous pancreatic diabetes
GLP-1
glucagon-like peptide-1
HbA1c
hemoglobin A1c
HEMT
highly effective modulator therapy
NOD
new-onset diabetes
PDAC
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
PPDM
postpancreatitis diabetes
PwCF
people with cystic fibrosis
SGLT2
sodium-glucose cotransporter 2
T2DM
type 2 diabetes mellitus