Evaluation of eHealth Interventions to Prevent Pressure Injuries: A Scoping Review
ABSTRACT
The aim of this scoping review was to map the literature pertaining to the use of eHealth interventions to prevent pressure injuries in populations at risk of the complication, and describe the interventions encountered with the help of Greenhalgh et al.'s Nonadoption, Abandonment, Scale‐up, Spread and Sustainability framework. Articles were retrieved using database queries to CINAHL, Medline, ScienceDirect and the Cochrane library with a search string strategy that considered articles from the inception of each database until the 29th of January 2024. The interventions from the 27 included studies were then evaluated using the Nonadoption, Abandonment, Scale‐up, Spread and Sustainability framework. The included studies had a publication date range from 1997 to 2023 and included diverse study designs encompassing experimental trials, qualitative designs, mixed‐methods, cohort studies and randomised control trials (including secondary analyses). There was a preference for app‐based interventions (15/27) that are installed on smartphones, while other interventions encompassed a bed with sensors that automatically adjusted air cell pressure, clinical support algorithms and continuous sensing devices. In conclusion, this scoping review provides an overview of the various technological solutions currently available for pressure injury prevention as well as recommendations for improving the long‐term adoption of future eHealth interventions.

Summary
Innovations such as smart sensors or wearable devices may allow for continuous monitoring of at‐risk patients, helping to alert healthcare professionals to make prevention efforts more efficient by reducing human error.
Leveraging technology can also reduce the labour‐intensive nature of manual monitoring and educating/actively repositioning patients.
Twenty seven studies were evaluated, and an analysis provided an overview of the various technological solutions currently available for pressure injury prevention as well as recommendations for improving the long‐term adoption of future eHealth interventions.

Introduction
Pressure injuries (PIs) are manifestations of sustained pressure loading causing damage to skin, tissue, muscles, and bone structures; associated with a constellation of risk factors that include both physiologic (e.g., microcirculation) as well as non‐physiologic (e.g., age, limited sensation/mobility and urinary incontinence) characteristics affecting an individual.
PIs continue to be an important quality and safety issue for health systems both in Australia/New Zealand and across the globe. The costs of these injuries to individuals are well documented in terms of increased financial burden and reduced quality of life. For healthcare providers, PIs have a significant monetary impact and promote negative perceptions of the quality of health services. Generally, the development of PIs in healthcare is associated with increased costs for wound treatment, financial penalties on the provider and in some cases, legal action or litigation.
Despite increasing awareness of the aetiology of and socioeconomic impacts attributed to PIs, most remediation/prevention strategies rely on manual interventions that further burden already time‐poor healthcare workers. We now live in a time where machine learning/artificial intelligence, sensors and other technologies continue to evolve in capabilities as well as affording enhanced mainstream accessibility. Today, many opportunities exist for the creation of solutions that use one or multiple technological components to address (and ultimately prevent) the incidence of PIs. However, to date there has not been any publicly available research that maps the available solutions that aim to not only manage, but prevent PIs from developing in individuals; especially those who are most vulnerable due to their mobility status, skin integrity, age or other factors. These ‘eHealth’ interventions can be broadly defined as:
“An emerging field in the intersection of medical informatics, public health and business, referring to health services and information delivered or enhanced through the Internet and related technologies. In a broader sense, the term characterises not only a technical development, but also a state‐of‐mind, a way of thinking, an attitude, and a commitment for networked, global thinking, to improve healthcare locally, regionally, and worldwide by using information and communication technology”.
New methodological tools such as Greenhalgh et al.'s Nonadoption, Abandonment, Scale‐up, Spread and Sustainability (NASSS) framework enable researchers to evaluate any specific technological intervention for its potential challenges/utility in large‐scale, sustained adoption as well as to understand the root cause(s) of previous attempts meeting limited success. Understanding previous attempts at utilising eHealth technologies for PI prevention is essential to chart future steps towards a more comprehensive and effective solution to the persistent issue of PIs. Therefore, the aim of this scoping review was to map the literature pertaining to the use of eHealth interventions to prevent PI in populations at risk of the complication, and describe the interventions encountered with the help of the NASSS framework.

Methods
Following the principles outlined by Arksey and O'Malley, the 5 standardised stages of a scoping review from specifying the research question to final summary, synthesis and reporting were structured using a teams‐based approach.
This scoping review was necessary to identify and synthesise the range of evidence within the field of eHealth interventions that focus on preventing PI; providing an early assessment of the available literature and whether the quantity of relevant articles could warrant a more detailed systematic review while simultaneously identifying gaps that can prevent redundant research from being performed inadvertently.
Covidence, a web‐based collaboration software platform that streamlines the production of systematic and other literature reviews, was utilised to support the conduct of the review process.
Studies included in this review adhered to the following criteria:
Studies exploring the use of e‐support(s) as an intervention to prevent or as part of a strategy to manage the incidence of PI.
All types of studies exploring the patient or practitioner experience of an e‐support.
All adult patient populations and all service settings (i.e., hospital, community and residential aged care).
Inclusion:
Studies that predominantly focused on other wound types (i.e., diabetic foot ulcer, skin tear, leg ulcer).
Studies that relate to the management of existing PIs only.
Studies completed in children or those under 18 years old.
Exclusion:
One author conducted the literature search and extracted the title and abstract data into Covidence (PT). Three authors then screened the titles and abstracts for inclusion according to the criteria (PT, AR and AK). If differences arose, a third party judged the abstract for inclusion or exclusion (PT, AR or AK). Full texts of relevant studies were then obtained, and two authors screened these for relevance, with differences judged by a third party (PT, AR or AK). A data extraction template was formulated, and two reviewers independent of each other completed the data extraction (AH, AR, ER and AK). Authors of papers that contained missing data or unclear information were contacted.

Search Strategy
Databases included CINAHL, Medline, ScienceDirect, and the Cochrane library. Search terms were derived for Medline and adjusted for other databases accordingly. A full log of search terms used in this study is available in Appendix S4. No language or date limiter was applied, with studies from the inception of each database until the 29th of January 2024 included. Individual reference lists from suitable articles were also manually searched for relevant sources appropriate for the aims of this study.

Data Extraction
2A. What are the key features of the technology?
2C. What knowledge and/or support is required to use the technology?
2D. What is the technology supply model?
3B. What is its desirability, efficacy, safety, and cost effectiveness (demand‐ side value)?
4A. What changes in staff roles, practices, and identities are implied?
4B. What is expected of the patient (and/or immediate caregiver) and is this achievable by, and acceptable to, them?
7A. How much scope is there for adapting and coevolving the technology and the service over time?
For each eligible study, the following data was extracted: year of publication, title, country of study, type of study design, and intervention aims/implications (See Table 1). Other data extracted included the setting/context for the intervention, study design (including limitations), participant information, comparator, pressure injury stage, design, participant numbers, randomisation information, age (mean and range) and key results (See Appendix S1). Following this, each included study was evaluated with the NASSS framework by grading them according to domains that either facilitate or limit the adoption, favourability, and utility/value proposition of a given technology. These domains are scrutinised via the following questions:
Overview of included studies.
Author/Year	Country in which the study was conducted/paper was published	Study design	Study aims	Description of eHealth intervention	Important implications/recommendations	 	MouraJunior et al., 2022	Other: Brazil	Design Science, used as methodological basis, which recommends artefact creation to solve outlined problems. Data collected via survey and platform's database.	To validate a collaborative gamified platform to prevent PI based on the gamified collaborative practices model to prevent PI.	A gamified collaborative app, ColaborAtiva, for the prevention of pressure injuries	Technical difficulties in development included limitations within the app development platforms for handling date inputs and programming errors that delayed creation of the platform.This study does not provide absolute results and it is expected that 16 wheelchair users do not represent the entirety of potential users.Additional work could include creating new versions of the app that can be listed both in the Google Play and Apple Stores using the suggestions proposed by wheelchair users in their evaluations as well as constructing a software agent equipped with artificial intelligence capable of managing the collective and individual dynamics of ColaborAtiva users learning their routine and suggesting actions that benefit them about their health.ColaborAtiva may benefit from integrating with devices capable of providing data and information such as pillows and mattresses with sensors or wearable devices that provide body pressure measurements against surfaces.Another possibility is using the smartphone's accelerometer to assist pressure relief manoeuvres execution and automatically mark at check‐in, on platform, the “pressure relief manoeuvres” item when finishing the activity.As for the gamification aspect, it is possible to include short narratives to contextualise and involve the subjects from the perspective of health promotion and quality of life at a challenge.	 	Ocampo et al., 2022	Canada	Secondary analysis of a randomised control trial.	To report on the opinions of healthcare providers and patients or family members about continuous pressure imaging.	Continuous pressure imaging. ForeSitePT (XSESNSOR) which includes a thin mattress cover with embedded sensors that was positioned under a fitted hospital sheet and a liquid crystal display (LCD) monitor that was mounted at the head of the bed and displayed the information the sensors received.	A total of 125 healthcare providers and 525 patients/family members completed the surveys. Of the healthcare providers, 95% either agreed/strongly agreed that the CPI technology was easy to use and 65% stated that the device improved how they provided pressure relief for patients. Over a quarter of the patient/family respondents agreed/strongly agreed that the device influenced how pressure relief was provided. This response was statistically associated with whether the monitor was turned on (intervention arm; 52.7%) or off (control arm; 4.2%) Most respondents had not used the device before. Notwithstanding this few requested that the sensor mat be removed (n = 14, 2.7%) or that the LCD monitor be turned off (n– 2, 0.4%). When asked how comfortable the mattress cover was to lie or sleep on, 51.2% agreed that it was comfortable while 43.9% neither agreed nor disagreed. When the monitor was on most respondents (137/260, 52.7%) agreed/strongly agreed that the system influenced pressure injury care compared to less than one in twenty (11/261, 4.2%) when the monitor was off (chi‐square statistic 157, p < 0.001).	 	Cuddigan et al., 2022	Other: Multiple countries/Developed in the United States	Report on early development and evaluation of a smartphone app.	To describe the development, dissemination and formative evaluation of a mobile app providing evidence‐based recommendations for pressure injury prevention, assessment/classification, and treatment at the point of care.	A guideline smartphone app, designed to support dissemination of the 2019 guidelines and evidence‐based practice	The InterPIP App is unique in its provision of current evidence‐based guidelines in multiple languages. During formal evaluation of user experiences, the app was rated positively on criteria of: information/content; usability; design; functionality; ethics; and security/privacy (median = 4 on a 1–5 Likert scale). Overall perceived value was ranked lower with a median of three. Users provided suggestions for ongoing app enhancement. On most‐liked app features, 16 open‐ended responses referred to usability, primarily referring to ease of use, for example: ‘I do not have to carry a larger device or paper to use it’. Reduced pricing as an improvement opportunity was also referred to in 11 open‐ended responses.	 	Sundaram et al., 2023	United States	Participatory action design and engineering approach (PADE)	To build upon previous research and development to create a more effective device for improving pressure relief training and adherence to clinical practice guidelines among manual wheelchair users.	The Manual Wheelchair Virtual Coach (MW‐VC) is comprised of a mechanical assembly instrumented with load cells, an electronics package, a smartphone application, and an online database	Discussion points reflecting areas for improvement or refinement included: Contextual awareness to not prompt the user to do a PR while the wheelchair is being propelled, will be addressed in future iterations of the system Several comments were related to modalities for issuing PR alerts. Some users reported disagreement with the system regarding whether or not they were doing a PR; it is possible that the MW‐VC algorithm did not track all the user PR behaviour. During set up for this study, users' centre of pressure (CoP) when sitting optimally was not taken Improving access to the reboot button and usability of the button and/or for varying dexterity could improve the user experience. Another area noted for improvement was related to charging the MW‐VC device. Connection stability improvements were made throughout the course of the studies but could be further improved More extensive interaction with the MW‐VC from a smartwatch and smartphone and for real‐time display to improve technique needed It is possible that the MW‐VC did not track all the users' PR behaviour. The PR determination algorithm only considered left, right, and forward leans. If participants did push‐ups or other manoeuvres for PR, these would not have been indicated. During set up for this study, users' CoP when sitting optimally was not taken. Further, the CoP could vary a small amount each time the user transferred into the wheelchair. These different starting positions may have a small effect on how far in any direction the user would have to lean to be counted as a PR.	 	Reeder et al., 2020	United States	Participatory design	To design and evaluate low‐fidelity prototypes of clinical dashboards to inform high‐fidelity prototype designs to visualise integrated risks based on patient profiles.	Clinical dashboard that visualises integrated risks based on patient profiles	Five themes were identified from participatory design sessions: Need for Integrated Hospital‐Acquired Condition Risk Tool, Information Needs, Sources of Information, Trustworthiness of Information, and Performance Tracking Perspectives. Participants preferred visual displays that represented patient comparative risks for hospital‐acquired conditions using the familiar design metaphor of a gauge and green, yellow, and red “traffic light” colours scheme. Visual displays of hospital‐acquired conditions that are familiar in display and simplify complex information such as the green, yellow, and red dashboard are needed to assist clinicians in fast‐paced clinical environments and be designed to prevent alert fatigue. Participants at both sites acknowledged that there is currently no tool in the EHR to understand the interaction of risks for CAUTI, HAPI, and falls. There was general agreement by participants across sessions that such a tool would be useful. Potential uses of the tool were to support novice nurses, to facilitate interprofessional communication, and to serve as a training tool.	 	Phillips et al., 1999	United States	Experimental trial	To determine which of three approaches to care produces the lowest incidence of pressure ulcers, promotes the most effective care of sores that develop, and leads to the fewest hospitalizations in newly injured patients with spinal cord injury after discharge.	AT&T Picasso Still‐Image video phone, which transmits images over ordinary telephone lines. Nurses are able to visually check the condition of the patient's skin and to monitor him or her for ulcers. Through visual contact the nurse could also help resolve problems related to wheelchairs, mattresses and mobility about the house.	The AT&T Picasso Still‐Image video phone was successful at identifying ulcers, even at stage I. Depth and circumference proved to be measurable from photographs, and wound conditions were monitored over time successfully. People in rural locations were able to use the unit with no additional infrastructure investment; however, sending a trained technician to set up the equipment over long distances was costly. The video group had the greatest number of reported and identified pressure ulcers. Differences in health care utilisation between the video and telephone telehealth groups were small. The standard care group reported the lowest number of pressure ulcers and lowest frequency of health care utilisation. Substantial differences existed in employment rates before and after injury. The video group had the lowest pre‐injury rate of employment and the highest post‐injury rate of employment. Telehealth interventions appear to improve ulcer tracking and management of all ulcer occurrences. Video interventions may affect outcomes, such as employment rates, which are not conventionally measured.	 	Pellerito 2003	United States	Time‐lagged control study	To explore the viability of using computer‐aided instruction (CAI) as an educational tool for promoting independent skin care in adults with paraplegia.	Computer‐aided instruction (CAI) for knowledge acquisition and skills demonstration (multimedia presentation incorporating print media, digital images and movies, animation, and an optional audio narration)	The results of this study indicate that educational methods traditionally used to impart information on basic pathophysiology and prevention of pressure sores is less effective than CAI. In this study, measurements of target behaviours including initiation and performance of pressure‐relieving techniques while seated in or out of a wheelchair and the completion of a daily skin inspection indicate that CAI was more effective than traditional education methods for two out of three participants. Neither treatment condition proved to be effective in increasing target behaviours for participant 1. This could have been due to the effects of medication, a prior history of sustaining a mild traumatic brain injury, and/or an unspecified psychiatric condition. The study suggests that CAI can be an effective method to engage participants in the learning process to ensure the acquisition of targeted concepts. Knowledge of skincare concepts following the CAI phase was higher for all three participants over baseline or traditional education phases. CAI afforded the participants privacy in the learning environment and made instruction available when the participants were ready to learn. During the baseline, none of the participants answered ‘yes’ when asked whether they had done a skin inspection. Participant 1 reported that she had not performed a skin inspection during the traditional education phase. Participant 2 reported that he had performed skin inspection for the two days immediately following the traditional education intervention but not for the remaining three days of this treatment condition. During the CAI, participant 1 continued to report that she had not performed skin inspection. Participant 2 reported that he did perform skin inspection over the first two days after the intervention but not over the remaining three days. Participant 3, who received only the CAI, responded ‘no’ when asked whether he had performed skin inspection after the first day and ‘yes’ after the second day.	 	Maklebust et al., 2009	United States	Experimental trial	1. To determine whether differences in the correct endorsement of pressure ulcer preventive interventions observed in the pretest period might be attributable to familiarity (regular user versus new users) with the Braden Scale after controlling for the reliability of Braden Scale risk assessments2. To evaluate the effect of web‐based Braden Scale training on the correct endorsement of pressure ulcer preventive interventions among regular and new users of the Braden Scale after controlling for the reliability of the Braden Scale risk assessment3. To determine whether differences in the correct endorsement of pressure ulcer preventive interventions observed in the posttest period might be attributable to familiarity (regular user versus new users) with the Braden Scale after controlling for the reliability of Braden Scale risk assessments.	Web‐based Detroit Medical Centre Braden Scale Training on staff nurses' ability to correctly endorse the use or non‐use of 10 commonly‐used risk‐based pressure ulcer preventive interventions for patients at different levels of risk for pressure ulceration.	Web‐based Braden Scale training had a statistically significant effect on new users' total correct endorsement of pressure ulcer preventive interventions. Training substantially improved ability to correctly endorse interventions, but for new users only. Importantly, patients at midlevels of risk may be more vulnerable to pressure ulceration than their risk assessments indicate simply because nurses have great difficulty determining which preventive interventions should be implemented for this group of patients. Alternative approaches to training are needed to ensure that regular users of the Braden Scale are adequately prepared to use risk‐based information to effectively plan pressure ulcer prevention. The importance of these statistically significant findings needs to be interpreted with caution because what appears to be a statistically significant effect of web‐based Braden Scale training on total correct endorsements among patients at midlevel and high/very high levels of risk might virtually disappear if the true effects of reliable Braden Scale risk assessments could be factored out of the equation. Collectively, these findings suggest that technology‐assisted Braden Scale training is an efficient and clinically relevant means of minimising errors of planning in pressure ulcer prevention among new users.	 	Loudet et al., 2017	Other: Argentina	Quasi‐experimental, before‐and‐after study	To determine the effectiveness of a quality management program in reducing the incidence and severity of pressure ulcers in critical care patients.	Use of Whatsapp as a telemedicine tool for lesion oversight	Incorporating WhatsApp enabled the team to maximise the limited time of the specialist by focusing on the most severe lesions. Photographs of the lesions were simultaneously sent to all staff members, which allowed for timely monitoring and instantaneous comparison with the prior state of the lesion. The sheer number of photographs that were evaluated during the study dramatically increased the less‐trained staff's exposure to the evaluation and treatment of PUs since not all personnel had the same knowledge on the prevention and treatment of this complication. This discrepancy in knowledge has also been noted in other studies.	 	Kim et al., 2017	Other: South Korea	Randomised control trial	To develop a self‐efficacy enhancement program and evaluate its effects on the self‐care behaviours, self‐care knowledge, and self‐efficacy regarding pressure ulcer prevention in patients with spinal cord injury.	Self‐efficacy enhancement program in promoting self‐care knowledge, self‐efficacy, and self‐care behaviours for preventing pressure ulcers in patients with a spinal cord injury consisting of small‐group face‐to‐face intervention (education and skills training), education with computer animation, phone counselling, face‐to‐face counselling, and self‐management records	The experimental group showed a significantly greater improvement in self‐care knowledge, self‐ efficacy, and self‐care behaviours for pressure ulcer prevention than did the control group. One participant in the control group developed a pressure ulcer, while none of the participants in the experimental group developed a pressure ulcer; this difference was not statistically significant.	 	Fiordelli et al., 2020	Other: Switzerland	Case study using consensus development method.	To present a procedure for the participatory identification of evidence‐based content to ground the development of a self‐management app.	Development of a self‐management app for pressure injury prevention	At the end of the three‐step procedure (systematic review and categorization of evidence, consensus meeting, and consolidation of results), the content for an mHealth intervention (app) was selected in the form of 98 recommendations. This study stresses the challenge of selecting the evidence base for the prevention of a complication in the context of a complex chronic condition. Indeed, when selecting the prevention measures for PIs, experts have to take into consideration all aspects of self‐management as well as feasibility issues. doing pushup exercise to relieve the skin is good for preventing PIs, but it could cause damage to the shoulders in the long term. These examples illustrate the complexity and sometimes conflicting nature of evidence‐based recommendations that are feasible for community‐dwelling individuals and that ensure a comprehensive approach to the self‐management of SCI. Narrow focus of existing evidence doesn't consider real‐life situations. In order to overcome these limitations and achieve a comprehensive approach to self‐management, it is fundamental for experts from all relevant specialties as well as the persons affected by the health condition to be involved in the selection of the evidence for mHealth interventions. However, for the discussion to be constructive and achieve agreement on a shared decision, a structured process is needed	 	Catz et al., 1999	Other: Israel	Experimental trial	To evaluate the feasibility of a computerised mattress system based on a novel concept in sore prevention: continuous monitoring and adjustment of the interface pressure in small segments of contact between the skin and the supporting surface.	High‐resolution, lightweight (20 kg) mattress with 216 independent air cells that cover the entire bed surface area and are computer controlled.	Two patients complained of discomfort, which was relieved by adjusting the mattress. One patient complained of a disturbing sound at night. The staff found the operation of the computer system easy and did not face any special difficulties in their treatment of the patients on the new mattress. The results indicate that the system is safe and may allow for greater intervals between bed positionings.	 	Amann et al., 2020	Other: Switzerland	Qualitative focus group with individuals with SCI and health care professionals.	To identify the perceived benefits of a co‐designed self‐management app that could promote its uptake and to explore the factors that may impede adoption	Self‐management app prototype for the prevention of pressure injuries	Three concrete use cases highlighting the benefits of the app for different audiences: (1) a companion for newly injured individuals, (2) an emergency kit and motivational support, and 3) a guide for informal caregivers and family members. We also uncovered several challenges that might impede the adoption of the self‐management app in practice, including (1) challenges in motivating individuals to use the app, (2) concerns about the misuse and abuse of the app, and (3) organisational and maintenance challenges.	 	Amann et al., 2020	Other: Switzerland	Co‐design approach to develop an evidence‐based app prototype.	To (1) establish a co‐design approach for developing a high‐fidelity prototype app for the self‐management of individuals with spinal cord injury, (2) design the prototype that resulted from this process, and(3) conduct the first usability assessment of the prototype app.	Smartphone application with two key components: a self‐management component and a communication component	The co‐design process resulted in a high‐fidelity prototype with two key components: a self‐management component and a communication component. The final prototype included a combination of features to support individuals with spinal cord injury in the prevention of pressure injuries, namely a smart camera, pressure injury diary, expert consultation, reminders, and knowledge repository. Findings of the usability testing showed that most participants navigated the app fluently with little back and forth navigation and were able to successfully complete a set of assigned tasks.	 	Zielstorff et al., 1997	United States	Experimental trial	To evaluate a clinical decision support system from several perspectives, including (a) instructional adequacy, (b) impact on clinicians' knowledge; (c) impact on clinical decision‐making; (d) impact on processes of care; (e) clinicians' perceptions of the system.	Algorithmic clinical decision support system	The system is being evaluated from several perspectives, including (a) instructional adequacy, (b) impact on clinicians' knowledge; (c) impact on clinical decision‐making; (d) impact on processes of care; (e) clinicians' perceptions of the system. In addition, a detailed log of usage and screen accesses is being kept in order to characterise system use. In an orthogonal design, some of the measures will be taken prior to and after implementation, on both the experimental unit and on a control unit similar to the experimental one. While impact on patient outcomes such as incidence or severity of pressure ulcers would be a logical evaluation parameter, the small sample size of patients and the low prevalence of actual pressure ulcers makes that unfeasible in the present study. Tierney and colleagues discuss the problems with trying to adapt generic guidelines for computer‐based, patient‐specific decision making. These can be categorised as incongruity with local standards, insufficient specificity and insufficient comprehensiveness.	 	vanGaal et al., 2009	Other: The Netherlands	Randomised control trial	To develop and test such an integral patient safety program that addresses several AEs simultaneously in hospitals and nursing homes. This paper reports the design of this study	Digital registration and feedback system to provide nurses on the ward with feedback on the performance of guideline based care	Effects of the computerised registration system and process/outcome digital feedback system cannot be discerned from other components of the ‘bundle’	 	Houlihan et al., 2013	United States	Randomised control trial	To evaluate the efficacy of a novel telehealth intervention, ‘CareCall’, on reducing pressure ulcers and depression and enhancing the use of appropriate health care.	CareCall system‐ interactive voice response system to generate digitised speech over the telephone, speech recognition software, a conversation control system that directs the content and flow of individual conversations with users and a database management system for storing user information and call logs.	CareCall did not increase the use of preventative outpatient health care, nor reduce emergency room visits and hospitalizations Study participants reported increased levels of health‐care availability. CareCall demonstrated efficacy on both pressure ulcer prevalence and severity of depression. Analyses revealed that the CareCall intervention reduced the number of pressure ulcers among women but not for men. Men in the CareCall group made a similar number of calls as women, and the average call length was similar. However, there was a borderline significant trend of more calls by women to the telerehabilitation coordinator (17.8 ± 15.2) than men (11.4 ± 7.5) (p = 0.08). Moreover, within the intervention group, we observed a rather counterintuitive finding: the odds of men reporting turning in bed every 2–4 h were 4.5 times higher than for women (p = 0.008), even though it was women who demonstrated reduced pressure ulcer prevalence. Other reported skin care behaviours, such as pressure relief while seated, demonstrated no significant difference by gender in the intervention group. The lack of an effect on pressure ulcers among men suggests that the basic strategies employed by CareCall to provide ongoing feedback to improve skin care behaviours, and support to overcome barriers, ultimately may not be effective for men. CareCall is the first IVR intervention that targets persons with SCD to reduce depression, and the first to show a significant improvement at 6 months. Despite no evidence that health‐care utilisation was directly affected by CareCall, intervention group participants reported that health care was more available to them post‐intervention. Possibly, subjects viewed receipt of CareCall itself as increasing their access to services, particularly given CareCall's provision of telerehabilitation coordinator telephone follow up.	 	Hubli et al., 2021	Other: Switzerland	Prospective cross‐sectional pre‐post pilot study.	To evaluate the potential for improving pressure relief behaviour in wheelchair users withspinal cord injury (SCI) using a novel feedback system based on textile pressure sensor technology	Wheelchair‐based feedback system	The results clearly indicate that by using the feedback system, the frequency and duration of pressure relief behaviour was improved for all participants. Although none of the participants performed the OT's recommended number of reliefs in week 1, all of them benefited from the feedback system in terms of successful reliefs performed per day, as indicated by a significantly increased relief frequency.	 	Kryger et al., 2019	United States	Randomised control trial	To determine if the use of iMHere would be associated with improved health outcomes over a 9‐month period. A secondary objective was to determine if the use of iMHere would be associated with improved psychosocial outcomes. Phone usage, app usage, and training time data were also collected to analyse trends in iMHere use.	The Interactive Mobile Health and Rehabilitation (iMHere) mobile health (mHealth) system was developed to support self‐management for individuals with disabilities.	No other primary outcome measures were found to change significantly in the intervention or control groups. COPM scores improved slightly in the intervention group and decreased substantially in the control group, suggesting overall that participants in the intervention group perceived their self‐care, productivity, and leisure to be maintained after 9 months, whereas those in the control group had declined in this perception. iMHere compliance rates were not related to psychosocial outcomes or the amount of phone usage.	 	Shirai et al., 2022	Canada	Exploratory qualitative design	To explore the experiences of individuals living with spinal cord injury/disease the use of Pressure Ulcer Target (PUT), a mobile educational app for PI prevention and management.	Pressure Ulcer Target (PUT), a mobile educational app for PI prevention and management.	PUT provides a review of previously acquired PI knowledge, PUT should be introduced early in rehabilitation; and PUT can motivate users to prevent PIs. PUT did not provide participants with novel information; instead, it was a useful tool to reinforce and remind participants about the knowledge they had previously acquired from HCPs. Participants predominantly thought the ideal time to introduce the app was earlier in rehabilitation suggesting there is a window of opportunity that would maximise the effectiveness of PUT Currently, there are no guidelines for the development of mHealth technologies for users living with SCI/D. Human Interface Guidelines advocate for the use of standard gestures which are consistent across systems and apps. For example, gestures like tapping and swiping allow users to interact with iOS devices and help users navigate through apps. Participants in this study recommended zoom‐in and audio functions to facilitate navigation. Additionally, participants suggested that clarity of navigation may be improved by highlighting the current progress in the app or through a numbering or lettering system. Some users recommended the option of printing certain modules (e.g., “Check” List) which they could share with caregivers and HCPs. PUT recommendations extracted: Inclusion of additional information: Specific examples of exercises which can be performed in a wheelchair Education on nutrition including specific diet and supplementation for adequate skin care Additional physical activity and exercise resources for individuals with SCI/D from a reputable source Guidance on skin care (i.e., cleaning techniques) Equipment modification (i.e., proper seating in wheelchair) Changes to the visuals and aesthetics: Additional visuals under the “Management” module Inclusion of real images and videos Changes to the accessibility: Ability to print‐off “Check” List Ability to enlarge or zoom‐in Use of an audio feature which reads the text aloud Numbering system or lettering scheme to guide users through app	 	Goodwin et al., 2021	United States	Two cohort studies (A&B) in a 7 day user interaction study	To use visualisation techniques to understand the daily distributions of user interaction with a mobile pressure mapping application for wheelchair users at‐risk for pressure injuries.	The Assisted Weight Shift system consists of a 22‐in. commercially available pressure mat encased in a custom seat cover, a mobile app on a mobile phone (iOS or Android) and a Raspberry Pi minicomputer with integrated battery.	Participant 1 brought the app to the foreground the most times (153 times) and had the highest rate of weight shift prompts. On average, users brought the app to the foreground of their phone between five and 22 times per day.Multiple participants had alerts triggered in succession. After the first day of system use, participant 2's alerts began to decrease and stabilise. Participants 1 and 6 followed a similar trend, with overall decreased alerts through‐ out the week. Global alerts were the most frequent alert for all participants. All participants experienced daily alerts of disconnection between the phone and the AW‐Shift system. Participants brought the app to the foreground of their phone in different patterns of daily use. For example, participants 1 and 6 utilised the app relatively evenly through‐ out the day. In contrast, participants 3 and 4 had peaks of use in the morning (before 8 am). Participant 5 had high use patterns on day one with decreased use occurring during the remaining days of the study. While participants 1 and 4 set the system to prompt a weight shift almost every hour, participants 2 and 5 set the app to rarely (greater than every 12 h) prompt a weight shift. Participant 6 was the only participant to indicate she completed the majority of the weight shift reminders throughout the week. All other participants had low indication of completing the weight shift reminders throughout the week. When receiving an alert participant 3 was the most likely participant to interact with the app. Participants 1 and 6 inter‐ acted with the app a higher percentage of times on the first day than subsequent days. Participant 5 received no alerts the first three days and rarely interacted with their phone following alerts on subsequent days. All participants had a low rate of setting changes after receiving an alert. Specifically, participant 2 who made the most changes did not make them within two minutes of receiving an alert.	 	Schladen et al., 2011	United States	Key informant interviews,advisory board review, consumer polls and exploratory analysis of consumer interest and engagement in SCI‐focusedmedia over YouTube	To explore the use of YouTube in mobilising knowledge on cardiometabolic disease (e.g., cardiovascular disease, obesity, hypertension, diabetes) and pressure ulcer management for the greater SCI community.	Use of YouTube as a vehicle for delivering accessible andliteracy‐neutral information on topics important to the health of people with SCI.10x ‘How to’ videos (HtVs) accessed via YouTube for key areas for people with SCI, including:—How to Drive a Car and Do a Transfer from a Car to a Wheelchair—Pressure ulcer prevention—Diet self‐management—How to Transfer from Wheelchair to Bed and Bed Mobility—How to Perform Pressure Reliefs in a Wheelchair.	Despite the importance of managing diet and skin health in SCI, the HtVs addressing these subjects were the least viewed on the Healthy Tomorrow YouTube channel. Key informants' avoidance of cooking suggested that persons with SCI do not have a strong desire to manage their diet by preparing their own meals. Persons with SCI may perceive the kitchen as a hazardous place. Lack of viewer interest in the pressure relief video and lack of enthusiasm for pressure reliefs expressed by key informants and survey respondents suggest a barrier that may have to be overcome in any resource aimed at teaching an optimal approach to pressure relief. The RRTC consumer poll revealed significant concern among people with SCI about their ability to perform pressure reliefs discretely in a variety of social settings, particularly those in which they were being evaluated, such as in a job interview. Generalised failure of communication and timely transfer of knowledge and information among providers was a theme common to the discourse of all key informants. Two individuals related serious reactions to inappropriate medication administered during acute care episodes because up‐to‐date records were not available to providers. Lack of understanding of the often special circumstances of care needed by persons with SCI was universally noted. Among the identified skills were techniques appropriate to persons with paraplegia for transferring from wheelchair to automobile and techniques for the same individuals transferring between wheelchair and the floor. Therapists' perceptions were validated by the fact that HtVs demonstrating those particular skills subsequently became the most popular and have logged tens of thousands of views since their publication to YouTube.	 	Stern et al., 2014	Canada	Multi‐method study comprised of a pragmatic stepped‐wedge cluster‐ randomised trial, ethnographic observation and in‐depth interviews, and an economic evaluation.	To determine the clinical and cost effectiveness of enhanced multi‐disciplinary teams (EMDTs) vs. ‘usual care’ for the treatment of pressure ulcers in long term care (LTC) facilities inOntario, Canada.	Enhanced Multidisciplinary Team supported by telemedicine. The wound care lead was to assess pressure ulcers, complete assessment and treatment forms, take digital photos, and transmit de‐identified data via email to the advanced practice nurses every 2 weeks. Advanced practice nurses reviewed cases with the wound care lead via telephoneand email, reviewing referral criteria with them, and consulting with the expert team accordingly. Advanced practice nurses would visit the facility when necessary or if requested to do so by the facility wound care lead.	Pressure ulcers tend to be largely overlooked as LTC facility staff are busy reacting to more pressing issues (e.g., disruptive behaviours, falls), and due to incentives in the reimbursement policies in place at the time this study was conducted, facilities could get extra costs related to wound care covered by the MOHLTC (e.g., costs for NPWT) once residents had advanced PU's, reducing the incentive to address wounds proactively. Incentives to prevent wounds across health care sectors might be needed as a precursor to interventions such as EMDTs. Our study findings suggest that policy makers should shift their focus away from specialty multi‐disciplinary wound care teams external to facilities and direct their attention towards strengthening evidence based primary care within LTC. Use of outreach APNs to increase the capacity of existing staff in LTC to prevent wounds may be a more sustainable and effective model, providing effective management teams are in place and APNs are readily available to facilities for an extended period of time.	 	Mercier et al., 2015	United States	Randomised control trial	To compare outcomes and patterns of engaging with a telehealth intervention (CareCall) by adult wheelchair users with severe mobility limitations with a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) or spinal cord injury (SCI).	CareCall‐ an interactive telephone intervention	Overall, CareCall showed a positive effect in reducing depression severity over the 6‐mo intervention for participants with either diagnosis. CareCall increased participants' physical independence among those with MS but not for those with SCI. Participants with MS completed nearly double the amount of calls per person than those with SCI, although the average length of call did not vary by diagnosis. Although CareCall was available to participants 24 h a day, demands for time might also contribute to explaining why those with SCI missed more calls on average. The participants with MS may have had more free time to make calls and participate in CareCall as they were less frequently employed or engaged in other vocational activities. CareCall alerts to the NTC indicated that participants with SCI required more extensive follow‐up and individualised assistance beyond the automated intervention than those with MS. This study joins others in demonstrating participants' overall satisfaction with a telehealth intervention. The prescriptive tone used in some CareCall scripts may be less suitable for engaging men. Although CareCall incorporated automated vignettes from both peers and health care providers, future interventions may have greater success engaging those with SCI through more extensive use of a virtual live peer or coach. Methods using virtual coaches, live video streaming interactions, educational videos, and mobile device data collection are becoming more accessible, and perhaps more engaging, to promote health behaviours and wellness outcomes among adults with neurologic conditions. CareCall had a positive effect of decreasing depression severity across diagnostic groups when taking into account baseline severity. After participation in the CareCall intervention, the experimental subjects with MS had experienced increased skin integrity to the point of leaving no areas of skin damage. Despite CareCall's integration of individualised components to acknowledge the above factors and enhance the intervention's success with adults who have unstable life circumstances or who belong to minority groups, intrapersonal factors beyond knowledge are necessary to promote health behaviour change. CareCall has the potential to bypass health care access barriers for adults with SCD through in‐home delivery of the individualised, automated, telephone‐based intervention and could be widely distributed through disability organisations.	 	Olney et al., 2019	United States	Multi‐staged and used a mixed methods approach governed by experienced‐based design methodology. Conducted over 3 years with Phase 1 studying a focus group and Phase 2 focusing on in‐home interviews.	To report the iterative redesign, feasibility and usability of the Comprehensive MobileAssessment of Pressure (CMAP) system's mobile app used by Veterans with SCI.	Comprehensive mobile assessment of pressure (CMAP) system. Consisting of 1) a pressure mat 2) a portable power bank 3) a mobile app on an iOS mobile phone 4) raspberry Pi minicomputer.	Phase 1: 5 key themes. Veteran users confirmed that skin ulcer prevention is important and expressed their interest in its prevention through pressure reliefs and reminders. (2) Veteran users' desired CMAP to be simple to use, especially because some users may have limited experience with smartphones. Veterans welcomed app customization to the extent that it not make things more complex. (3) Veterans' desired a more integrated system where the many components of the technology integrate and work reliably. (4) Veteran users viewed the real‐time pressure mapping as the primary asset of the app as it could be seen and responded to almost‐automatically. (5) Veteran users saw CMAP as a medical adjunct that their doctor/therapist would introduce to them and instruct them on. There were no major concerns about privacy or sharing any data that would be collected with their health care provider. A comparable pressure mapping/monitoring system for patient use may be challenging as the apps currently available are primarily aimed at helping healthcare providers manage existing pressure injuries, not the person with SCI.	 	Houlihan et al., 2011	United States	Brief report	To describe the design anddevelopment of Care Call, its novel features, and promising preliminary results ofour pilot testing	Telerehabilitation intervention system toscreen for pressure ulcers and depressive symptoms, educate about the prevention of depression and pressure ulcers and the appropriate use of heath care services, and alert a nurse telerehabilitation coordinator, when appropriate, for direct medical or mental health attention.	The results of the voice quality testing showed that Care Call was able to understand all voice characteristics except very soft‐spoken speech. In particular, the TLC system had difficulty hearing and understanding the responses of a soft‐spoken user. After inquiring twice without being able to under‐ stand one of the response options provided, the system stated that there were technical difficulties and discontinued the call, per protocol. Voice quality results confirmed that the study could enrol subjects with a wide range of voice quality. In the beta test, pilot study subjects found Care Call to be an acceptable intervention overall. They felt that Care Call could be useful particularly for people who were depressed, those with a new injury (SCI), and those without access to quality care. Several subjects mentioned repetition of information but recognised at the same time how this could be helpful for those with limited education in, for example, the topic of skin breakdown. In terms of modifying content for sensitivity to individual differences, there was consensus that language needed to be softened related to feedback and education on adherence to skin care. Test callers felt that the weekly repetition of this content was reinforcement enough, such that the language itself should be less forceful, asking users if they would be willing to try to do more in the week ahead, rather than stating that they should.	 	Falgenhauer et al., 2013	Other: Austria	Feasibility study	To develop a person‐centered decubitus prevention system for medium risk persons – capable of monitoring several risk factors such as nutrition, physical activity and mobility in terms of micro and macro movements.	Unobtrusive sensor system and a tablet for manual input of decubitus relevant data concerning nutrition, drinking behaviour and physical activity. It consisted of an accelerometer and pressure based motion detection system and a tablet based home terminal (Archos80G9). The home terminal featured an Android app, which received the sensor data and enabled the users to manually enter information about their physical activities, nutrition and fluid‐ intake on a daily base. Data could be inspected locally and they were forwarded to a Web‐based backend system via Universal Mobile Telecommunications System.	Issues concerning usability, feasibility, earned value, costs, and stability were discussed in moderated talks and by the use of questionnaires handed to the experts. Log files were recorded while users performed several typical tasks. While the protocol could have been completed with at least 20 clicks, on average, 25.0 ± 3.9 clicks were needed by the experts. Finally, sensors were tested at users' homes for four nights by three volunteers (0f, age 25 ± 2 y). No problems concerning comfort were identified. In two cases, one of the accelerometers was not initialized correctly. When eliminating these channels, the mean number of movements found per hour was 16 ± 10.
For ease of analysis and brevity of content, the seven preceding questions were considered the most relevant for this paper's discussion of included studies to evaluate the specific contexts and factors influencing the adoption of a given technology (See Table 2).
Responses to NASSS framework (Limited to most relevant questions).
Author/Year	Description of eHealth intervention	2A. What are the key features of the technology?	2C. What knowledge and/or support is required to use the technology?	2D. What is the technology supply model?	3B. What is its desirability, efficacy, safety, and cost effectiveness (demand‐ side value)?	4A. What changes in staff roles, practices, and identities are implied?	4B. What is expected of the patient (and/or immediate caregiver) and is this achievable by, and acceptable to, them?	7A. How much scope is there for adapting and coevolving the technology and the service over time?	 	MouraJunior et al., 2022	Gamified collaborative app for the prevention of PIs	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Complex	Simple	 	Ocampo et al., 2022	Continuous pressure imaging. ForeSitePT (XSESNSOR) which includes a thin mattress cover with embedded sensors that was positioned under a fitted hospital sheet and a liquid crystal display (LCD) monitor that was mounted at the head of the bed and displayed the information the sensors received.	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Complicated	Complex	Simple	 	Cuddigan et al., 2022	A guideline smartphone app, designed to support dissemination of the 2019 guidelines and evidence‐based practice	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	 	Sundaram et al., 2023	The Manual Wheelchair Virtual Coach (MW‐VC) is comprised of a mechanical assembly instrumented with load cells, an electronics package, a smartphone application, and an online database	Complex	Complicated	Complicated	Simple	Complicated	Complex	Simple	 	Reeder et al., 2020	Clinical dashboard that visualises integrated risks basedon patient profiles	Complicated	Complicated	Complex	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	 	Phillips et al., 1999	AT&T Picasso Still‐Image video phone, which transmits images over ordinary telephone lines. Nurses are able to visually check the conditionof the patient's skin and to monitor him or her for ulcers. Through visual contact the nurse could also help resolve problems related to wheelchairs, mattresses and mobility about the house.	Simple	Simple	Simple	Simple	Simple	Simple	Simple	 	Pellerito 2003	Computer‐aided instruction for knowledge acquisition and skills demonstration (multimedia presentation incorporating print media, digital images and movies, animation, and an optional audio narration)	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Simple	Complex	Simple	 	Maklebust et al., 2009	Web‐based DMC Braden Scale Training on staff nurses' ability to correctly endorse the use or non‐use of 10 commonly‐used risk‐based pressure ulcer preventive interventions for patients at different levels of risk for pressure ulceration.	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	 	Loudet et al., 2017	Use of Whatsapp as a telemedicine tool for lesion oversight	Simple	Simple	Simple	Simple	Complicated	Complex	Simple	 	Kim et al., 2017	Self‐efficacy enhancement program in promoting self‐care knowledge, self‐efficacy, and self‐care behavioursfor preventing pressure ulcers in patients with a spinalcord injury consisting of small‐group face‐to‐face intervention (education and skills training), education with computer animation, phone counselling, face‐to‐face counselling, and self‐management records	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Complicated	Complex	Simple	 	Fiordelli et al., 2020	Development of a self‐management app for pressure injury prevention	Complicated	Simple	Complex	Complex	Complicated	Complex	Complicated	 	Catz et al., 1999	High‐resolution, lightweight (20 kg) mattress with 216 independent air cells that cover the entire bed surface area and are computer controlled.	Complicated	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Simple	Complicated	 	Amann et al., 2020	Self‐management app prototype for the prevention of pressure injuries	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Complex	Complicated	 	Amann et al., 2020	Smartphone application with two key components: a self‐management component and a communication component	Complicated	Complicated	Complex	Complicated	Complicated	Complex	Complicated	 	Zielstorff et al., 1997	Algorithmic clinical decision support system	Complicated	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	 	vanGaal et al., 2009	Digital registration and feedback system to provide nurses on the ward with feedback on the performance of guideline based care	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	 	Houlihan et al., 2013	CareCall system‐ interactive voice response system to generate digitisedspeech over the telephone, speech recognition software, a conversationcontrol system that directs the content and flow of individual conversations with users and a database management system for storing user information and call logs.	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Complex	Simple	 	Hubli et al., 2021	Wheelchair‐based feedback system	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Simple	Complicated	Complex	Simple	 	Kryger et al., 2019	The Interactive Mobile Health and Rehabilitation (iMHere) mobile health (mHealth) system was developed to support self‐managementfor individuals with disabilities.	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Simple	Complicated	Complex	Complicated	 	Shirai et al., 2022	Pressure Ulcer Target (PUT), a mobile educational app for PI prevention and management.	Simple	Complicated	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Complex	Simple	 	Goodwin et al., 2021	The Assisted Weight Shift (AW‐Shift) system consists of a 22 in. commercially available pressure mat encased in a custom seat cover, a mobile app on a mobile phone (iOS or Android) and a Raspberry Pi minicomputer with integrated battery.	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Simple	Complicated	Complex	Complicated	 	Schladen et al., 2011	Use of YouTube as a vehicle for delivering accessible andliteracy‐neutral information on topics important to the health of people with SCI.10x ‘How to’ videos (HtVs) accessed via YouTube for key areas for people with SCI, including:‐ How to Drive a Car and Do a Transfer from a Car to a Wheelchair—Pressure ulcer prevention—Diet self‐management—How to Transfer from Wheelchair to Bed and Bed Mobility—How to Perform Pressure Reliefs in a Wheelchair.	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Simple	Simple	Simple	 	Stern et al., 2014	Enhanced Multidisciplinary Team supported by telemedicine. The wound care lead was to assess PUs, complete assessment and treatment forms, take digital photos, and transmit de‐identified data via email to the APNs every 2 weeks. APNs reviewed cases with the wound care lead via telephoneand email, reviewing referral criteria with them, and consulting with the expert team accordingly. APNs would visit the facility when necessary or if requested to do so by the facility wound care lead.	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Complicated	Simple	Simple	 	Mercier et al., 2015	CareCall‐ an interactive telephone intervention	Simple	Complicated	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Complex	Simple	 	Olney et al., 2019	Comprehensive mobile assessment of pressure (CMAP) system. Consisting of 1) a pressure mat 2) a portable power bank 3) a mobile app on an iOS mobile phone 4) raspberry Pi minicomputer.	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Complex	Simple	 	Houlihan et al., 2011	Telerehabilitation intervention system toscreen for pressure ulcers and depressive symp‐toms, educate about the prevention of depression and pressure ulcers and the appropriate use of heath care services, and alert a nurse telerehabilitation coordinator, when appropriate, for direct medical or mental health attention.	Complicated	Complicated	Complicated	Simple	Simple	Complex	Simple	 	Falgenhauer et al., 2013	Unobtrusive sensor system and a tablet for manual input of decubitus relevant data concerning nutrition, drinking behaviour andphysical activity. It consisted of an accelerometer and pressure based motion detection system and a tablet based home terminal (Archos80G9). Thehome terminal featured an Android app, which received the sensor data and enabled the users to manually enter information about their physical activities, nutrition and fluid‐ intake on a daily base. Data could be inspected locally and they were forwarded to a Web‐based backend system via UMTS.	Complicated	Simple	Complicated	Complex	Complicated	Complex	Simple
All of the 19 NASSS framework questions were answered during the data extraction stage and the full set of questions/domains was completed as per design. Appendix S2 lists the remaining questions that were less relevant for this paper's analysis with a brief rationale of why each one was omitted, while Appendix S3 shows the captured responses for every question within the NASSS framework in addition to the consensus‐derived rationale for grading an intervention as recorded.
All data extracted are presented in tables before the evidence is further synthesised and summarised. The tables used to present findings in this paper mirror the raw data from the Covidence data extraction template. Where data (e.g., mean age) was unavailable during data extraction, these are denoted separately.

Data Summary, Synthesis and Reporting of Results
Following data extraction in Covidence, an overall narrative was constructed and reported in this paper. The findings from both individual studies and the larger patterns that emerged across the studies allowed the original intent of this paper (i.e., to outline the various eHealth interventions that can be encountered in the literature) to be met with better clarity through a new classification system that describes the types of technology commonly encountered during the literature search. The final synthesis of the extracted data into more discrete themes/categories was formed through consensus between AR and AA, which also contributes to the different perspectives that were included in the discussion section of this paper. The broader team's input was then used to cross‐check the various elements of results and discussion that are included in this paper.

Results
A PRISMA flowchart was generated at the conclusion of data extraction and presented in Figure 1. From the initial search yielding n = 876 studies, article de‐duplication and data screening resulted in n = 27 studies included for discussion within this paper. Of the n = 27 studies that were under review, Table 1 shows that 48%(n = 13) of included studies were composed of studies originating in the USA and approximately 15% (n = 4) of studies reported on studies conducted in Switzerland, with all other studies representing other countries including Canada, Israel, Argentina, South Korea, the Netherlands, Austria, and Brazil. The included studies had a publication date range from 1997 to 2023 and included diverse study designs encompassing experimental trials, qualitative designs, mixed‐methods, cohort studies, and randomised control trials (including secondary analyses).
PRISMA flowchart.
The NASSS framework formed a part of our data extraction process by providing validated questions that articulate different aspects of a given intervention to critique its long‐term viability as a solution to a given issue of interest. After mapping NASSS domains to each included study (See Table 2), approximately 67% of included articles noted complicated or complex requirements on patients (i.e., patients are expected to perform/adhere to routine tasks to complete the intervention) while more than 75% of included articles involve the use of technologies that have a wide scope for adaptation and co‐evolution over time.
The types of interventions encountered in this review required a simpler way of grouping similar interventions to aid in understanding the variety of eHealth technologies reported in the literature. To achieve this, we provide an overview in Table 3 that details the specific and/or overarching intervention types as well as technical features grouped from the interventions observed during data extraction. Thematic findings from Table 3 were used to help classify the eHealth interventions (i.e., software/communications‐focused, clinical support‐focused or bespoke software/hardware fusions). For example, a study investigating the use of a video telephone device to prevent PIs in 1999 carries a similar purpose to a study of telemedicine via video link to support PI management and prevention in 2014; thus, both of these interventions could be clustered together based on their emphasis on creating said video link to help prevent PI incidence or development.
Solution classifications encountered during review.
Type	Features (Number of papers cited)	Cited papers	 	Smartphone apps or Web/Telephony interventions (software/communications‐focus)	Health team coordination/communication (5)	16–20	 	Combined app (for participant use) and web‐based portal (for clinician use) (2)	29, 30	 	Patient education/Computer aided instruction (4)	25–28	 	Automated telephone calling system (2)	21, 22	 	Email, telephone, video link (2)	23, 24	 	Knowledge support (clinical‐focus)	Clinical dashboard/visual displays for patient status (2)	31, 32	 	Treatment plan development and health professional education (Training modules/Evidence‐based Guidelines) (4)	33–36	 	Bespoke hardware or software	Raspberry Pi + Sensors (2)	38, 39	 	Sensor system and tablet/phone (3)	40–42	 	Mattress with automated sensors and adjustable air cells (1)	37
The first type of solution class includes smartphone apps or web‐based/telephone‐based eHealth interventions that primarily aim to facilitate communication between the patient, their family, and the healthcare team. This represents the largest proportion of eHealth interventions encountered in included studies (15/27). Since modern technology also allows for both synchronous and asynchronous communication, other eHealth interventions (within this class) encountered in our review investigated automated counselling and response systems as possible eHealth functions that could complement traditional hospital interventions for PI prevention. In the year 2000, a study featured a video camera device installed onto TV sets in the living room, thereby allowing health professionals to provide video consultations and conduct ongoing observations of a patient's health status all from the comfort of their home dwelling. In 2014, other researchers trialled the use of email, telephone, and video links to support an enhanced multidisciplinary team with telehealth. Other studies focused on apps providing patient education (i.e., acting as a repository or knowledge base for information that would previously only be acquired from visiting a general practitioner or attending a hospital visit). These studies focused on delivering health education via YouTube and detailing how the public accesses health information on these types of social media sites, computer‐aided instruction to promote skin integrity/self‐care for PI prevention and a mobile educational tool for PIs. Another type of eHealth intervention in this class adopted a social‐centric model by using communication features to link patient communities with healthcare professionals for collaboration in promoting better health outcomes and health literacy/empowerment through positive social pressure. Lastly, we encountered eHealth interventions in this category connecting users directly to healthcare professionals in a more holistic way by combining multiple functions including smart camera, PI diary, knowledge repository, and reminder functionality.
The second type of eHealth intervention centers on knowledge and clinical support to drive a data‐driven approach to optimal care. One such intervention explored the use of a simple ‘red, yellow, green’ traffic light system to alert healthcare workers to patients that are vulnerable to hospital‐acquired infections. Beyond this is an intervention that utilises continuous monitoring of patient pressure data to provide healthcare professionals and patients/caregivers with access to live readings of the pressure being exerted upon bed interfaces in order to visualise potentially dangerous build‐up of pressure on bodily areas that are vulnerable to developing PIs. Another paper investigated treatment plan support via clinical algorithms in 1997 as a system that supports nurses to develop personalised and evidence‐based treatment plans for patients who have or are at‐risk of developing PIs. Health professional education is also a focus for eHealth apps in the form of a web‐based training system, a guideline reference app for PI prevention and a digital feedback system that tracks the healthcare team's alignment with incorporating the latest evidence‐based guidelines to prevent PIs.
The third type of eHealth intervention seen in this review combines software with custom hardware configurations to create bespoke solutions. In contrast to the first and second eHealth classifications that usually depend on mainstream hardware owned by the end‐user (e.g., a healthcare professional or patient with a smartphone), this third class of eHealth intervention utilises dedicated hardware, such as Raspberry Pi mini‐computers, sensors, or bed mattress systems. For example, the Matrix 200 system was considered a novel approach to PI prevention among patients with spinal cord lesions. By using a computer programmed to monitor and react to changes in weight distribution, the Matrix 200 adjusts an array of air cells on a mattress to redistribute pressure according to the sustained pressure measured at specified anatomical sites. Other researchers have also explored the development of sensors and pressure sensing mats that interface with a dedicated tablet or Raspberry Pi minicomputer for data collection. These computer systems can be programmed to respond via alerts and reminders to encourage users vulnerable to PIs to perform protective behaviours (e.g., weight shifting, and/or otherwise avoid pressure build‐up known to contribute to PI).

Discussion
This scoping review aimed to map current research evidence pertaining to the use of eHealth interventions to prevent PIs in vulnerable populations. A total of 27 studies were elucidated from the initial search of articles before proceeding with an analysis using the NASSS framework to inform our evaluation of each intervention. The NASSS framework will enable research teams to better plan for future intervention development by allowing for a detailed understanding of the factors needed to transition from experimental prototypes to more mainstream and scaled‐up projects; thus, an eHealth intervention becomes sustainable when it can maintain its relevance over the long term. This point regarding sustainability over time not only represents the opportunity to take advantage of emerging technologies and capabilities to manifest more functionally powerful and diverse interventions, but also highlights the threat of non‐adoption due to overly complicated interventions. More complicated eHealth interventions tend to be harder to implement and may also overburden patients with reminders or pressure them into medical adherence. In short, interventions with comprehensive and diverse functions can enable PI prevention through a multi‐pronged approach but must be carefully designed with accessibility, ergonomics, and ease‐of‐use in mind for it to be successfully adopted by the greatest number of stakeholders.
Most of the studies we encountered focused on smartphone applications as interventions to prevent PI, usually incorporating some degree of web‐based or telephony functions. This category of intervention encompasses a variety of functions allowing for rapid information sharing enabled through modern technologies, including the high‐resolution cameras found in many smartphones/mobile devices today and widespread Internet accessibility. Whatsapp and similar Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) apps have become an attractive option for patients and the healthcare team to communicate and coordinate with one another either in real time (synchronously) or with a time lag (asynchronously); both modes have their respective advantages and disadvantages but ultimately serve the same goal of achieving better teamwork in the therapeutic alliance.
Fundamentally, the potential of using apps that are portable and follow the user presents opportunities for health professionals to deliver responsive education and accomplish tasks that would otherwise have been limited to interactions within the healthcare site. Beyond the patient education context, a recent trend can be seen with learning apps such as Duolingo or Coursera, which provide evidence that different paradigms exist to educate/upskill the public, even in modest amounts over a longer period of time. An app with a preventative focus on PI education could, in theory, follow a predefined pattern to provide information ‘just‐in‐time’ in response to anticipated or previously defined risk factors.
In today's clinical landscape, health professionals work in a high‐stress environment that places high cognitive load by way of managing all facets of a patient's care. With greater insight into healthcare priorities, computerised systems offer a clear benefit to help with automated triage and prevent health states from deteriorating outside the awareness of healthcare professionals. Since these types of systems rely on patient charts and other internal data that are constantly being updated, it is logical that treatment plan recommendations can be generated based off previous successes and current trends.
eHealth interventions can aid healthcare teams to develop evidence‐based treatment plans and provide timely education (e.g., reminders or highlighting critical information for PI risk) to healthcare professionals in response to emerging patient data or statistics. Algorithmic clinical support not only distils critical intelligence across many different areas of interest/concern, it also reduces the cognitive burden on healthcare professionals needing to balance procedural flexibility for client‐centred practice with adherence to established clinical guidelines. With these algorithms, guidelines and living meta‐analyses/systematic review evidence can be rapidly adopted into standard practice as clinical decision or knowledge support systems can be instantly recalibrated to bring these changes to the forefront in an intuitive and user‐friendly manner.
In contrast to personal smartphones that are multi‐purpose computing devices, dedicated computing platforms such as the Raspberry Pi (A single‐board computer) allow for bespoke hardware and software development to take place. The study of computerised mattress systems in 1999 demonstrates an interest in eHealth interventions since the dawn of the century. Such a system would have made use of rudimentary custom programming and hardware sensors to achieve its intended outcomes; a feat that could be replicated today with all the advancements and progress acquired over the years in the hands of the right development team. Bespoke hardware and software fusions may also be preferred to offer a single combined solution for commercial sale or other uses. Since both components are designed to work with each other, a higher degree of functionality and reliability can be expected as opposed to ensuring compatibility when there are many permutations to the end‐user's hardware or software environment.

Strengths and Limitations
One of the strengths of this review is that it comprehensively maps the current eHealth solutions available to prevent PIs and evaluates them using a validated framework. This review's use of the NASSS framework provides validity to our investigation as it provided the structure for our data extraction process in terms of domain‐based questions when evaluating the sustainability of a given intervention. Another strength of our paper is the inclusion of a transdisciplinary team of reviewers who contributed specific expertise in the domains of wound care, spinal cord injury, community pressure care, occupational therapy, and software/hardware lifecycles. Furthermore, our search strategy was developed and cross‐checked with experienced research librarians to ensure that appropriate keywords were selected.
However, this review also inherits limitations from the pool of papers sampled. Since most studies included in this review were conducted in the USA and Switzerland, this may have introduced a geographical bias towards preventative technologies that are developed and trialled primarily in those countries. Non‐English and non‐published journal articles were also omitted from inclusion. Despite this, we believe sufficient care was taken to consider studies from all countries (including reports where their abstracts were written in languages other than English) during our initial search and where possible, efforts were made to contact authors of elusive papers that were uncovered through manual hand searches of reference lists. It can be argued that the vast majority of solutions have already been represented in our report and that new innovations that may be reported in studies missed by our search strategy take the form of artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML) improvements, in line with trends in the computing industry, that do not change the specific type of solution that would have been identified (e.g., an app with AI/ML is still an app irrespective of its intended setting for use).
Another limitation is that the nature of this scoping review does not account for the rigour and clinical effectiveness/efficacy of the interventions mentioned, as its main goal is to report on the different interventions that have been mentioned in the literature. Thus, any evidence for/against a specific intervention type should be precisely retrieved as part of any further research spurred by this review.

Local Context/Implications
After analysis of our results, we can identify several implications for future research that can be applied to the local context in Australia (and abroad more generally). Future research targeting PI prevention should take into consideration the different population and policy parameters experienced locally. Research and development of interventions should also factor in existing technological capabilities such as any national infrastructure (e.g., Australia's myHealthRecords) to improve developmental efficiencies and to avoid security and integrity pitfalls that may exist in a from‐scratch solution.
According to the NASSS framework, an intervention that exhibits complexity in multiple domains is predicted to experience challenges in adoption over time. Besides the potential demotivating factor of being unable to achieve the ‘ideal’ therapeutic trajectory of using complex interventions, designing eHealth interventions in this manner reflects the trend of self‐quantification passively revealing data about health states without offering the active support/personalised recommendations to actually improve identified issues. A similar phenomenon occurs in users of fitness tracking apps whereby its gamification features include leaderboards/rankings that are designed to celebrate the most active users while merely offering an ‘ideal’ for less active users to aspire towards; potentially leading to feelings of frustration and shame. To overcome the perils of users losing motivation to engage with PI prevention, ethical user experience and design principles should be applied to compensate for the requisite active participation in PI prevention.
The rising accessibility to high‐speed internet over the past decade may enable the use of virtual coaches (i.e., digital representations or ‘avatars’ of health professionals) that can act in ways to promote positive health behavioural change. Virtual coaching can increase access to these eHealth consultations regardless of geographical locality. Furthermore, solutions today emphasise ‘open‐source’ design that makes use of freely distributable software and hardware developers can assemble into bespoke configurations. This process of democratisation may enable more rapid innovation to take place while reducing barriers associated with the previously high costs of development and/or access to these options for users.
Today's technological advancements also usher in a new era for computer‐assisted decision making based on Big Data (i.e., health informatics) and integration with large language models (e.g., ChatGPT); two different methods to optimise clinical administration workflows and enable the healthcare team to focus on the patient, enhanced with recommendations and insights from a computer database.

Conclusion
Interventions in the eHealth domain can be broadly classified into three categories that reflect the focus of their functionality. All the eHealth solutions encountered during this scoping review demonstrate varying levels of utility and effectiveness; however, no one solution fully addresses the criteria of the NASSS framework that promote long‐term adoption of said solution. Overall, our findings suggest that additional research and development are warranted to harness the successful features implemented in prior works while mitigating pitfalls that could lead to underutilisation or abandonment of the intervention in question.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge funding from the School of Health Sciences, and the College of Health Medicine and Wellbeing, University of Newcastle that has made this research paper possible (University of Newcastle, College of Health, Medicine and Well‐being: CWMWB Industry Pilot Grant G2300448). Open access publishing facilitated by The University of Newcastle, as part of the Wiley ‐ The University of Newcastle agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.

Ethics Statement
N/A. The authors wish to assert that this study is based on secondary analysis of papers describing interventions of interest based on inclusion/exclusion criteria discussed, and that the conduct of this study did not involve, nor expose any participants to harms, directly or indirectly.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
The data that supports the findings of this study are available in the supplementary material of this article.

References
Our Contemporary Understanding of the Aetiology of Pressure Ulcers/Pressure Injuries
Pressure Injuries in Australian Public Hospitals: A Cost of Illness Study
Systematic Review of Pressure Injury Prevalence in Australian and New Zealand Hospitals
The Global Burden of Pressure Ulcers Among Patients With Spinal Cord Injury: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Pressure Ulcer Related Pain in Community Populations: A Prevalence Survey
Impact of Pressure Ulcers on Quality of Life in Older Patients: A Systematic Review
Pressure Ulcers From the Medico‐Legal Perspective: A Case Report and Literature Review
Effectiveness on Hospital‐Acquired Pressure Ulcers Prevention: A Systematic Review
Evolutionary Trends in Progressive Cloud Computing Based Healthcare: Ideas, Enablers, and Barriers
What Is e‐Health?
Beyond Adoption: A New Framework for Theorizing and Evaluating Nonadoption, Abandonment, and Challenges to the Scale‐Up, Spread, and Sustainability of Health and Care Technologies
Eliminating Avoidable Pressure Ulcers: NICE Quality Standard 89
From Arksey and O'malley and Beyond: Customizations to Enhance a Team‐Based, Mixed Approach to Scoping Review Methodology
Scoping Studies: Towards a Methodological Framework
Covidence systematic review software. Melbourne, Australia
Co‐Designing a Self‐Management App Prototype to Support People With Spinal Cord Injury in the Prevention of Pressure Injuries: Mixed Methods Study
Opportunities and Challenges of a Self‐Management App to Support People With Spinal Cord Injury in the Prevention of Pressure Injuries: Qualitative Study
Selecting Evidence‐Based Content for Inclusion in Self‐Management Apps for Pressure Injuries in Individuals With Spinal Cord Injury: Participatory Design Study
Differential Impact and Use of a Telehealth Intervention by Persons With MS or SCI
Reducing Pressure Ulcers in Patients With Prolonged Acute Mechanical Ventilation: A Quasi‐Experimental Study
A Telerehabilitation Intervention for Persons With Spinal Cord Dysfunction
A Pilot Study of a Telehealth Intervention for Persons With Spinal Cord Dysfunction
Using Telehealth Interventions to Prevent Pressure Ulcers in Newly Injured Spinal Cord Injury Patients Post‐Discharge: Results From a Pilot Study
Pressure Ulcer Multidisciplinary Teams via Telemedicine: A Pragmatic Cluster Randomized Stepped Wedge Trial in Long Term Care
Toward Literacy‐Neutral Spinal Cord Injury Information and Training
The Effects of Traditional and Computer‐Aided Instruction on Promoting Independent Skin Care in Adults With Paraplegia
Evaluation of a Self‐Efficacy Enhancement Program to Prevent Pressure Ulcers in Patients With a Spinal Cord Injury
The Use of a Mobile Educational Tool on Pressure Injury Education for Individuals Living With Spinal Cord Injury/Disease: A Qualitative Research Study
Colaborativa: A Platform Based on Gamified Collaborative Practices to Prevent Pressure Injuries for Wheelchair Users
The Effect of the Interactive Mobile Health and Rehabilitation System on Health and Psychosocial Outcomes in Spinal Cord Injury: Randomized Controlled Trial
Design and Evaluation of Low‐Fidelity Visual Display Prototypes for Multiple Hospital‐Acquired Conditions
Healthcare Provider and Patient/Family Perceptions of Continuous Pressure Imaging Technology for Prevention of Pressure Injuries: A Secondary Analysis of Patients Enrolled in a Randomized Control Trial
A Knowledge‐Based Decision Support System for Prevention and Treatment of Pressure Ulcers
A Quasi‐Experimental Study to Assess the Effect of Technology‐Assisted Training on Correct Endorsement of Pressure Ulcer Preventive Interventions
Development, Dissemination and Evaluation of a Smartphone‐Based App for Pressure Ulcer/Injury Prevention and Treatment for Use at the Bedside
The Design of the SAFE or SORRY? Study: A Cluster Randomised Trial on the Development and Testing of an Evidence Based Inpatient Safety Program for the Prevention of Adverse Events
Feasibility Study of a Novel Approach to Sore Prevention in Patients With Spinal Cord Lesions: The Computerized Dynamic Control Matrix 200 System
Development of a Comprehensive Mobile Assessment of Pressure (CMAP) System for Pressure Injury Prevention for Veterans With Spinal Cord Injury
A Patient Centered System for Decubitus Prevention Based on Nutrition, Drinking, Physical Activity and Sleep Monitoring
Visualization of User Interactions With a Pressure Mapping Mobile Application for Wheelchair Users at Risk for Pressure Injuries
Feedback Improves Compliance of Pressure Relief Activities in Wheelchair Users With Spinal Cord Injury
Participatory Action Design and Engineering of a Manual Wheelchair Virtual Coach Including In‐Home and Community Usage
Mobile Apps: An Effective, Inclusive and Equitable Way of Delivering Patient and Nurse Education?
Uses and Gratifications of Educational Apps: A Study During COVID‐19 Pandemic
Educating Patients by Providing Timely Information Using Smartphone and Tablet Apps: Systematic Review
Burnout Related to Electronic Health Record Use in Primary Care
Cognitive Ergonomics: A Review of Interventions for Outpatient Practice
A Review of Enabling Technologies for Internet of Medical Things (IOMT) Ecosystem
Deploying Digital Health Tools Within Large, Complex Health Systems: Key Considerations for Adoption and Implementation
Clinical and Healthcare Improvement Through My Health Record Usage and Education in General Practice (CHIME‐GP): A Study Protocol for a Cluster‐Randomised Controlled Trial
Self‐Tracking for Health and the Quantified Self: Re‐Articulating Autonomy, Solidarity, and Authenticity in an Age of Personalized Healthcare
Health Wearables, Gamification, and Healthful Activity
First Ever SCI Virtual Coach Improves Health Self‐Management in Feasibility Trial
Open‐Source Hardware for Medical Devices
Revolutionizing Healthcare: The Role of Artificial Intelligence in Clinical Practice