Positron Emission Tomography Imaging in Clinical Trials for Parkinson's Disease: Applications of Metabolic Brain Network Approach
ABSTRACT
Neuroimaging with positron emission tomography (PET) has been instrumental in elucidating neurobiological mechanisms behind therapeutical trials in Parkinson's disease (PD). A variety of medical and neurosurgical interventions have been evaluated using many radioligands that reveal molecular basis for target engagement and brain responses in relation to clinical outcome measures. This review article describes major applications of metabolic brain network analysis in therapeutical studies in non‐demented PD to restore functional abnormality by drug therapy, ablative lesioning, deep brain stimulation, gene therapy, and cell transplantation alongside placebo effects. The findings with brain network biomarkers using multivariate analysis are supported by regionally specific metabolic changes and clinical correlations detected by complementary univariate analysis. The review demonstrates a powerful methodology of combining multimodal neuroimaging data and network modeling approaches followed by some perspectives on future directions in this specialty area of translational research. Different neuroimaging biomarkers have been compared in light of recent advances in biofluid biomarkers. These efforts not only bring more precise understanding on mechanisms of action associated with different therapies, but also provide a road map for conducting successful clinical trials of emerging disease‐modifying therapies in PD and related disorders. © 2025 The Author(s). Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.
In late 1930s, dopamine systems dysfunction was discovered as the main cause of Parkinson's disease (PD) with the role of dopamine elucidated subsequently. Consequently, PD had been successfully treated using levodopa many years after the discovery of dopamine deficiency in the parkinsonian brain. The pathological hallmark of idiopathic PD is primarily aggregated α‐synuclein protein in the brain, leading to chronic neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration of neurotransmission systems. Many approaches have been developed for the treatment of PD, including medications, neurosurgical interventions of deep brain stimulation (DBS), cell transplantation and gene therapies, and non‐invasive stimulation. In these trials, the gold standard has been clinical improvements in motor function and to a lesser degree in cognition. Positron emission tomography (PET)/single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) imaging of dopaminergic uptake/storage, transporter reuptake, D2 receptor density, monoaminergic vesicular transport/storage, and neuroinflammation could assess dysfunction and therapeutic effects in PD trials. These biomarkers described localized dysfunction in the nigrostriatal system/related pathways and contributed extensively to the early differential diagnosis of PD. However, information about abnormal brain circuitry was limited because of poor radiotracer uptake in off‐target regions.
One of the most robust and versatile biomarkers of brain function has been glucose metabolism measured by [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) with PET. FDG‐PET reveals neuronal activity with the highest signal‐to‐noise ratio among many neuroimaging biomarkers. Cerebral blood flow (CBF) resembles FDG to a great extent because of neurovascular coupling, but this similarity may be compromised with neurodegeneration and medications. CBF has higher time resolution, but is more variable. H2 15O PET has been the gold standard for quantifying CBF although this can also be measured with perfusion SPECT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Nonetheless, useful brain network information can be extracted from metabolic and CBF images acquired off medications for investigating subcortical–cortical activity related to disease function and recovery following medical/neurosurgical therapies.
The most reliable approach to discerning brain network systems has been multivariate spatial covariance analysis of PET/SPECT and functional MRI data using scaled subprofile modeling and principal component analysis (SSM‐PCA) developed and refined since mid‐1990s. This method can identify a phenotypical pattern of spatial covariance by capturing subtle differences in the variance of neuroimaging data and uses a simple metric to assess global expression of this pattern in individual scans under different conditions. SSM‐PCA has produced unique metabolic patterns associated with major forms of neurodegenerative parkinsonism and made significant contributions to PD differential diagnosis, progression, and therapeutic studies. More specific effects of the brain network are better understood by detecting discrete regional changes in the mean of neuroimaging data using univariate analysis with statistical parametric mapping (SPM). This method can reveal brain regions with altered mean signal, but is limited by ignoring inherent spatial relationships and the problems of over‐fitting and multiple comparisons. SSM‐PCA can overcome these limitations (see the next section) and provide more stable and reproducible biomarkers than regional metabolism/perfusion detected by SPM in neurodegenerative disorders with FDG‐PET and perfusion MRI. Nonetheless, these complementary techniques have advanced many exciting areas of translational research with neuroimaging in PD and related disorders.

Spatial Covariance Analysis
SSM‐PCA is a supervised data reduction technique for multimodal brain images commonly used in cross‐sectional studies with patients and healthy subjects. Ordinal trends canonical variates analysis (OrT‐CVA) is another form of SSM‐PCA for longitudinal imaging studies. In both scenarios, the dataset in training samples are subtracted by mean values across subjects and voxels, and the transposed covariance matrices of these difference images undergo PCA. A covariance pattern is determined by logistic regression from a set of principal components (PCs) whose pattern expression values (subject scores) can maximally (1) discriminate groups or correlate with behavior variables; and (2) detect monotonic changes in subject scores associated with disease progression or therapeutic interventions. The selected PCs are linearly combined to produce the covariance pattern associated with disease state, severity, progression, and treatment. Each pattern includes voxels with positive/negative loading representing the degree of covariation among brain regions with relatively increased/decreased metabolic activity across images. The voxel loadings are not altered in any way and remain intact as group invariant characteristics. Subject scores are computed by multiplying the pattern with individual images that may change under different conditions.
SSM‐PCA can minimize the problems of overfitting and multiple comparisons by removing the largest source of variability in mean signal and reducing the complex neuroimaging data into quantifiable network scores. Voxel‐based resampling schemes are implemented for the identification and validation of a brain network pattern. This ensures the reliability and reproducibility of the voxel loadings on the pattern. Subject scores of the resulting pattern are quantified in testing samples automatically, blinded to participant, clinical information, time point, and treatment condition.
This network approach has helped establish (Table 1) PD‐related motor pattern (PDRP) (Fig. 1A) and PD‐related cognitive pattern (PDCP) (Fig. 1B) using international FDG‐PET datasets. As surrogate biomarkers of disease onset/progression, PDRP/PDCP scores correlated with clinical motor symptoms/cognitive dysfunction and with specific molecular imaging markers of putamen/caudate dopaminergic abnormality in cross‐sectional and longitudinal studies. Clinical correlates of PDRP activity involved bradykinesia and rigidity but not tremor, supported by SPM analysis. PDRP/PDCP scores showed strong correlations between metabolic and CBF images and excellent test–retest reliability (intraclass correlation coefficient [ICC] ≥0.94, P < 0.001) with FDG and H2 15O PET scans, irrespective of clinical stages and therapeutic status. Analogous PDRP/PDCP were also derived with perfusion SPECT and MRI. OrT‐CVA is particularly useful for investigating disease progression and interventions. Both PDRP/PDCP network and OrT‐CVA methods have been instrumental in advancing neuroimaging studies of therapeutical trials in PD.
Metabolic covariance patterns associated with therapeutical studies in PD
Metabolic covariance pattern	Positive loading	Negative loading	Subject scores and clinical correlates	References	 	PDRPa	Putamen, pallidum, thalamus, sensorimotor cortex, pons, and cerebellum	Lateral premotor cortex, supplementary motor area, posterior association cortices	Correlate with the severity of akinesia/rigidity; elevate/increase with disease progression; decrease with the targeted treatment; interval changes correlate with motor outcomes	Ma et al; Wu et al; Tomse et al. Mathew et al; Meles et al.; Shin et al; Asanuma et al; Trost et al; Rodriguez‐Rojas et al; Ge et al; Luo et al.	 	PDCPa	Cerebellar vermis and dentate nuclei	Dorsal prefrontal, premotor, and posterior parietal regions	Correlate with cognitive dysfunction; increase slowly with disease progression; decrease with the targeted treatment; baseline values correlate with cognitive outcomes	Huang et al; Mattis et al; Meles et al.	 	PDTPb	Putamen, pallidum, dorsal pons, anterior cerebellum, dentate nucleus, primary motor cortex	No regions contribute significantly to the network topography	Correlate with the amplitude/severity of tremor; decrease with the targeted treatment for tremor suppression	Mure et al.	 	GADRPb	Premotor (BA 6) region extending into the motor cortex (BA 4) and the supramarginal gyrus (BA 40/39)	Caudate, anterior putamen and pallidum; ventral anterior and medial dorsal thalamus; and inferior frontal gyrus (BA 47/44) abutting on the insula	Increase following AAV2‐GAD gene therapy; interval changes correlate with motor outcomes	Niethammer et al.	 	SSRPb	Anterior cingulate cortex (BA 32/24), subgenual cingulate gyrus (BA 25), inferior temporal cortex (BA 37/19), hippocampus, amygdala, and cerebellar vermis	Occipital/temporal (BA 39/19), cuneus (BA 18/19) and parahippocampal (BA 37) regions	Increase following sham surgery under the blind; baseline values/interval changes correlate with motor outcomes	Ko et al.	 	NRRPb	No regions contribute significantly to the network topography	Caudate, putamen, globus pallidus, and thalamus, precuneus (BA 7), medial frontal cortex (BA 9/10), anterior cingulate area (BA 24/32), and posterior cingulate gyrus (BA 31)	Increase after nicotinamide riboside therapy; interval changes correlate with motor outcomes	Brakedal et al.
Note: Open‐label observation study: PDRP, PDCP, and PDTP. Double‐blind placebo‐controlled study: GADRP, SSRP, and NRRP.
Derivation with single FDG‐PET images per subject using SSM‐PCA.
Derivation with serial FDG‐PET images per subject using OrT‐CVA.
Abbreviations: PD, Parkinson's disease; PDRP, PD related motor pattern; PDCP, PD related cognitive pattern; PDTP, DBS‐mediated tremor suppression pattern; GADRP, GAD related pattern; AAV2, adeno‐associated virus serotype 2; GAD, glutamic acid decarboxylase; SSRP, sham surgery related pattern; NRRP, nicotinamide riboside related pattern; DBS, deep brain stimulation; BA, Brodmann area; FDG, [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose; PET, positron emission tomography; SSM‐PCA, scaled subprofile modeling and principal component analysis; OrT‐CVA, ordinal trends canonical variates analysis.
Metabolic network modulation and relationship with clinical outcome following medical therapy in Parkinson's disease (PD). (A) PD motor‐related metabolic pattern (PDRP) showing positive loading (red) in the putamen/globus pallidus (Put/GP), thalamus, associated with negative loading (blue) in the lateral premotor and posterior parieto‐occipital areas. (B) PD cognition‐related metabolic pattern (PDCP) displaying positive loading (red) in the cerebellar vermis and dentate nuclei (DN) associated with negative loading (blue) in the dorsal prefrontal, premotor, and posterior parietal regions. (PMC, premotor cortex; pre‐SMA, pre‐supplementary motor area). Extracted from Feigin et al and used with permission (Copyright 2007–National Academy of Sciences). (C,D) Differences in levodopa (LD)‐related changes in PDRP/PDCP scores between the two subgroups. (E) Higher baseline PDCP scores correlating with greater improvement in cognitive functioning after LD in the clinical responders (squares) and non‐responders (triangles). The horizontal and vertical dashed lines mark the cutoff for meaningful treatment‐induced change in verbal learning and the corresponding baseline PDCP score, respectively. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. Student's t tests of network activity in each subgroup versus corresponding healthy control values. Modified from Mattis et al and used with permission from Wolters Kluwer Health.
This review will summarize the applications of covariance analysis methodology to drug trials and neurosurgical interventions in PD. Neuroimaging and clinical evaluation are usually performed off anti‐PD medications to minimize their effects on brain network biomarkers and standardized clinical rating scales. This line of work has provided novel understanding on the involvement of projection pathways in the cortico‐basal ganglia‐thalamic‐cortical loop and paved the way for optimizing the clinical trial design.

Drug Trials
There have been numerous drug trials over the last several decades with clinical improvements as the primary end points and neuroimaging data adding supplemental information on changes in neurochemistry or neuronal function. Network approach has brought novel insight about the underlying physiology in dopamine therapy.
Metabolic brain network modulation by medications was investigated in two studies with FDG‐PET in early PD (n = 7–9) under intravenous levodopa infusion. PDRP scores declined (P = 0.01) with changes correlating (r = −0.78, P < 0.04) with clinical motor outcomes. This was attributed to changes in metabolism that decreased in putamen/pallidum, thalamus, and cerebellum, but increased in precuneus. Metabolic network correlates of cognitive responses were subsequently examined in early PD (n = 17) with levodopa. PDRP scores decreased (Fig. 1C,D) in both cognitive responders (n = 8; P < 0.001) and non‐responders (n = 9; P = 0.03) with PDCP scores reduced only in the responders (P = 0.008). Of note, baseline PDCP scores identified cognitive responders with levodopa (r = 0.70; P = 0.002) (Fig. 1E).
CBF biomarkers can also evaluate brain responses to pharmacotherapy in PD. In a dual‐tracer PET study of moderate PD patients (n = 11) receiving levodopa infusion, PDRP scores decreased in FDG, but increased in H2 15O scans. This finding implied potential levodopa‐related neurovascular dissociation as supported by opposite regionally specific changes in brain metabolism and perfusion in key nodes of PDRP. The effect was greater in patients with levodopa‐induced dyskinesia (LID) than without LID and confirmed independently using FDG‐PET and perfusion MRI. LID may stem from an overactive vasomotor response to levodopa in the putamen amid increased baseline sensorimotor cortical activity.
In aggregate, metabolic brain network modulation is a common mechanism underlying PD motor and cognitive improvements following medical therapies with levodopa. Changes in PDRP scores correlate reliably with clinical motor outcomes. PDCP scores at baseline may provide a prognostic biomarker of cognitive response to levodopa.

Neurosurgical Trials
Dopaminergic loss in substantia nigra (SN) pars reticulata in PD disrupts excitatory (glutamergic) and inhibitory (GABAergic) signals, ultimately reducing the GABA signals from external globus pallidus to subthalamic nuclei (STN). This causes hyperactivity in STN, internal globus pallidus (GPi), thalamus, and downstream motor cortical regions. Surgical options to reduce the activity of these targets include ablative lesions, DBS, and gene therapy. Network analysis of FDG‐PET data has brought a novel understanding of local metabolic changes within and outside the basal ganglia region following specific interventions.

Ablative Surgery
Since the 1950s, pallidotomy has been one of the oldest surgical approaches to PD symptomatic relief, particularly for tremor. Despite its non‐reversibility, this procedure has advantages for rural areas where patients may not easily travel to major hospital/clinics for frequent adjustments of DBS electrodes and follow‐ups. To understand the pathophysiology of clinical outcome, advanced PD patients (n = 10) were scanned preoperatively and 6 to 8 months following unilateral pallidotomy in the 1990s. SSM‐PCA analysis disclosed a metabolic covariance pattern showing negative loading in ipsilateral lentiform/thalamus and positive loading bilaterally in supplementary motor cortex. Changes in pattern scores correlated negatively with motor outcomes bilaterally (r ≥ 0.94, P < 0.0005). Preoperative lentiform metabolism correlated with improvement in contralateral motor scores from 1 week to 3 and 6 months post‐surgery (P < 0.03). Postoperatively, metabolism increased ipsilaterally in the primary motor, lateral premotor, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortices (P < 0.01). Improvement in contralateral motor scores correlated with surgical declines in thalamic metabolism (P < 0.01) and increases in lateral frontal metabolism (P < 0.05). The findings indicated that pallidotomy reduced the preoperative overaction of the inhibitory pallidothalamic projection. Clinical improvement may be associated with modulations in a specific metabolic network and regional brain metabolism remote from the lesion site.
Since the early 2000s, ablative procedures have also been evaluated for PD in other neurosurgical targets. PDRP (Fig. 1A) was modulated in advanced PD at 3 to 12 months following unilateral subthalamotomy. Metabolism increased or decreased with neurosurgery in corresponding PDRP regions with positive or negative loading, in line with levodopa therapy. These results were also replicated in an European study in early PD with asymmetrical symptoms (n = 8), following unilateral subthalamotomy delivered by MRI–guided focused ultrasound. Total/contralateral motor ratings improved by 40% to 57% (P < 0.002) within 3 months. Concurrently, PDRP scores declined (P < 0.05) (Fig. 2A) with changes correlated with improvement in motor ratings (r = 0.76, P = 0.02) (Fig. 2B), regardless of lesion volume and the size of its overlap with STN. Subcortical–cortical metabolism was partially restored according to nonparametric SPM. Metabolic decreases in the STN correlated with improved motor outcome overall (r = 0.97, P < 0.001) and contralaterally (r = 0.82, P = 0.011).
Metabolic network modulation and clinical correlation in an independent European study following subthalamotomy delivered unilaterally by magnetic resonance imaging‐aided focused ultrasound. (A) Subject scores of Parkinson's disease (PD) metabolic pattern related to motor symptoms (PDRP) decreased from baseline by unilateral neurosurgical intervention (Wilcoxon signed‐rank test). (B) Changes in these pattern scores correlated with clinical improvement measures of Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) total ratings in individual patients (Spearman test). Extracted from Rodriguez‐Rojas et al and used with permission from Springer Nature.
The main findings of this line of work are that post‐surgical success in individual patients may be related to regional hypermetabolism in pre‐surgical scans. Subject scores of metabolic covariance patterns provide a reliable biomarker of treatment responses and their changes correlate consistently with clinical outcomes.

DBS
DBS, developed in the 1980s, has the distinct advantage of reversibility, precise control of stimulation levels/locations and adjustability over time. This is the most popular neurosurgical modality with proven long‐term clinical benefits and reduced doses of dopaminergic medications. A better understanding of the underlying mechanisms of the basal‐ganglia circuits with PET/SPECT has provided the theoretical framework for this methodology. DBS at GPi and STN consistently suppressed PDRP activity whose operative changes corrected with clinical outcomes. The metabolic network effects were supported by regional metabolic/perfusion changes reported in these studies and elsewhere. Despite comparable clinical responses, PDRP reduction was much smaller with GPi DBS, but greater with STN DBS versus levodopa infusion, and marginally less with DBS than ablative lesioning at the same targets. Therefore, network modulation and clinical outcome are associated with the suppression of synaptic connections trigged at surgical sites, given the positive relationships between PDRP scores/regional metabolism and single cell activity recorded at GPi and STN. STN DBS reduced PDRP activity similarly with both FDG and H2 15O PET scans suggesting the absence of neurovascular dissociation detected with levodopa. Bilateral STN DBS in three independent series of advanced PD patients (n = 5/9/12) improved Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor ratings and lowered PDRP scores at 3, 6, and 12 months. It is unknown whether PDRP suppression seen in the short term could predict clinical outcomes in patients at 12 months and beyond.
The circuit changes that mediate PD tremor likely differ from those underlying akinesia and rigidity. To identify a specific metabolic brain network, OrT‐CVA was performed using FDG‐PET scans in nine tremor dominant PD patients at baseline and during DBS at ventral intermediate (Vim) thalamus. There was a significant spatial covariance network associated with DBS‐induced tremor suppression called PD‐tremor pattern (PDTP) (Supplementary Fig. S1A; Table 1). Vim DBS reduced PDTP scores consistently (P < 0.005). Without stimulation, accelerometric measurements of tremor amplitude correlated with PDTP (r = 0.85, P < 0.02), but not PDRP scores.
PDTP scores exhibited high test–retest reliability (ICC = 0.86, P < 0.0001) over 2 months in independent PD patients (n = 14) and rose in other PD patients (n = 41; P < 0.001) (Supplementary Fig. S1B) from healthy controls (n = 20), and correlated with UPDRS tremor ratings (r = 0.54, P < 0.001) (Supplementary Fig. S1C), but not with akinesia‐rigidity ratings. Moreover, PDTP scores increased in tremor dominant patients versus their akinetic‐rigid counterparts (P < 0.02) and healthy controls (P < 0.001) assessed with perfusion SPECT (n = 9/group).
The natural history of PDTP scores was evaluated in early PD using 4‐year longitudinal FDG‐PET scans. PDTP scores increased (P < 0.01) over time, but the rate of progression was slower (P < 0.001) than for PDRP (ie, akinesia/rigidity). PDTP scores were unchanged at 2 years from baseline, but increased at 4 years (P < 0.05). However, PDRP scores increased at both two (P < 0.05) and 4 (P < 0.0001) years. These findings agreed with the trajectories of UPDRS tremor subscale and total motor ratings and corresponding longitudinal changes.
To determine whether PDTP scores are modulated by interventions specifically directed at PD tremor, we compared the patients undergoing Vim DBS and STN DBS. PDTP scores (Supplementary Fig. S1D) (P < 0.001) declined in both DBS groups (Vim: P < 0.001; STN: P = 0.01) versus the test–retest PD controls. The suppression was greater by Vim than by STN stimulation (P < 0.05). PDRP scores (Supplementary Fig. S1E) declined (P < 0.05) with STN DBS, but not with Vim DBS. Although Vim DBS was associated with changes in PDTP (P < 0.001), but not PDRP scores, STN DBS reduced both network scores (P < 0.05).
In summary, PD tremor is characterized by a distinct metabolic network involving primarily cerebello‐thalamo‐cortical pathways. Effective treatment of tremor is associated with significant reduction in PDTP scores. Both PDTP and PDRP scores can evaluate the effects of novel anti‐PD interventions on the different motor features of the disorder.

Adeno‐Associated Virus Serotype 2‐Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase Gene Therapy
The subthalamic hyperactivity in PD can be suppressed by using adeno‐associated virus serotype 2 (AAV2) to deliver the glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) gene directly into STN. Network analysis approach with FDG‐PET data has shown modulation of widely distributed metabolic substrates after the normalization of STN activity by this therapy.

Phase‐1 trial
The safety and tolerability of AAV2‐GAD technique was demonstrated in a dose‐escalation study in advanced PD (n = 12). Patients (n = 4/group) received unilateral infusion of AAV2‐GAD at low (1 × 1011 viral genomes per milliliter [vg/mL]), medium (3 × 1011 vg/mL) and high (1 × 1012 vg/mL) doses. FDG‐PET was performed before and at 6 and 12 months post‐neurosurgery to detect local and distal metabolic changes. After gene therapy, PDRP activity in the operated hemisphere decreased at 6 months, but increased from 6 to 12 months, in parallel with the trajectory on the unoperated side where network activity rose steadily over 12 months (Supplementary Fig. S2A). After correcting for the rates of progression to reflect the true effect of STN AAV2‐GAD, PDRP scores decreased significantly at both 6 and 12 months from baseline (Supplementary Fig. S2B), with the changes correlated with clinical outcome over the course of the study (r = 0.45, P < 0.03). Network scores declined continuously in patients receiving high‐dose, but not in those with low or medium doses (Supplementary Fig. S2C). PDCP activity was stable in either hemisphere after neurosurgery (Supplementary Fig. S2D), indicating the unaltered cognitive functioning. Hence, modulation of abnormal network activity underlies and tracks the clinical outcome after unilateral STN AAV2‐GAD gene therapy.
Differences in PDRP scores were supported by downstream metabolic changes, which decreased in thalamus but increased in motor/premotor regions in the treated versus untreated hemispheres. Thalamic metabolism decreased with both STN lesioning and AAV2‐GAD in the treated hemispheres, with pallidal metabolism declined only with lesion. No significant differences between interventions were present on the unoperated hemispheres. The findings suggest that AAV2‐GAD not lesioning at STN is responsible for the clinical benefits and network modulation in this trial.

Phase‐2 trial
The clinical efficacy of AAV2‐GAD was evaluated in a multicenter trial in advanced PD.14A total of 45 subjects received AAV2‐GAD (n = 22) and sham (n = 23) bilaterally in STN and were assessed under the blind for 6 months and after unblinding for 12 months. Clinical and FDG‐PET data were analyzed in 16 AAV2‐GAD and 21 sham subjects successfully completed the neurosurgical protocol. The patients receiving AAV2‐GAD had persistent clinical improvement at 6 and 12 months from sham controls (P < 0.04). PDRP scores increased similarly over the course of the study in both treatment groups. Hence, gene therapy did not modulate PDRP reflecting continued disease progression. To determine whether clinical improvement with AAV2‐GAD involved a different mechanism of action, we identified a unique metabolic network called GAD gene therapy related pattern (GADRP) (Fig. 3A; Table 1) by OrT‐CVA in patients (n = 15) with complete FDG‐PET scans, after removing contributions to imaging data from progression‐related PDRP (Fig. 1A) metabolic network.
Adeno‐associated virus serotype 2 (AAV2) glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) subjects exhibit a treatment‐related metabolic brain network. (A) GAD‐related pattern (GADRP) exhibited positive loading (red) in the premotor region extending into the motor cortex and the parietal region, with negative loading (blue) in the striatum, thalamus, and inferior frontal gyrus. (B) Baseline‐corrected GADRP scores for trial participants receiving gene therapy or sham surgery over time (****P < 0.0001, post hoc Bonferroni tests relative to baseline). (C) GAD therapy improves clinical symptoms without suppressing Parkinson's disease‐related motor pattern (PDRP) scores. Changes in GADRP scores (ΔGADRP, left) and PDRP scores (ΔPDRP, right) after subthalamic nuclei (STN) AAV2‐GAD, sham surgery and STN deep brain stimulation (DBS). *P < 0.05, ****P < 0.0001; post hoc Bonferroni tests compared to the two other treatments. Extracted from Niethammer et al and reprinted with permission from AAAS.
Baseline‐corrected GADRP scores increased from baseline at 6 and 12 months after gene therapy (P < 0.0001) (Fig. 3B) but not sham surgery. The time course over 12 months for the sham group coincided with the 4‐year PD natural history data. GADRP scores at 12 months were higher in the GAD than sham surgery groups (P < 0.0001). The rates of change in GADRP scores in the GAD group were also greater than in the sham surgery and progression groups (P < 0.0001). Clinical outcome correlated with changes in GADRP (P < 0.0005), but not PDRP scores.
Changes in GADRP or PDRP scores over 12 months after gene therapy and sham surgery were compared with PD patients (n = 12) after bilateral STN DBS (Fig. 3C). GADRP scores increased after STN AAV2‐GAD, but did not change after sham surgery and STN DBS (P < 0.0001). PDRP scores rose to a similar degree after STN AAV2‐GAD or sham surgery, but declined in response to STN DBS (P < 0.03 vs. AAV2‐GAD; P < 0.006 vs. sham). This suggests that GADRP modulation is facilitated by STN gene therapy.
SPM analysis of all FDG‐PET images over 12 months revealed metabolic decreases (P < 0.001) in the thalamus, striatum, and prefrontal, anterior cingulate, and orbitofrontal cortices in the AAV2‐GAD versus the sham group. These differences resulted from metabolic decrements only in the AAV2‐GAD group (P < 0.005), where baseline prefrontal metabolism correlated with improvement in UPDRS motor ratings at 6 (r = −0.51, P < 0.05) and 12 (r = −0.71, P < 0.003) months.
AAV2‐GAD gene therapy at STN is associated with a unique metabolic covariance pattern depicting treatment‐dependent synaptic brain circuits in advanced PD. GADRP scores rise from baseline at 6 and 12 months and correlate with sustained clinical improvements following gene therapy versus sham surgery. Higher baseline prefrontal metabolism may predict better clinical outcomes post AAV2‐GAD therapy. The topography of GADRP is independent of PDRP describing disease progression in both patient groups related with dopaminergic dysfunction in PD.

Placebo Effects in Sham Therapy
Placebo effects are common in PD clinical trials particularly for neurosurgical interventions versus noninvasive medical therapies. The placebo responses are often robust enough to negatively impact the primary clinical outcomes in blinded early‐phase trials. Neuroimaging analysis has shed some light on this phenomenon although the neurobiological mechanism is unknown. This was first reported using [11C]Raclopride/PET in human PD patients detecting significant endogenous dopamine release in the striatum in response to placebo (19% for putamen). Potential effects of network modulation and clinical correlates were assessed in 12 early PD patients undergoing placebo treatment. Changes in verbal learning improved for cognitive‐responders (n = 7) versus non‐responders (n = 5) to placebo (P = 0.003). PDRP/PDCP scores remained unchanged in either subgroup suggesting that the placebo responses may be mediated by a different metabolic brain network.
Using FDG‐PET data in a phase‐2 trial of AAV2‐GAD therapy, we demonstrated a distinct network pattern specific to the placebo effect. A total of 23 patients receiving sham surgery were divided into responders (SHAMR; n = 16) and non‐responders (SHAMNR; n = 7) by robust 6‐month changes in motor ratings under the blind. This sham surgery‐related pattern (SSRP) (Supplementary Fig. S3A; Table 1) was identified by OrT‐CVA of metabolic images in clinical sham‐responders (n = 8) at baseline and 6 months in a space orthogonal to PDRP to minimize confounds from disease progression. A significant ordinal trend in SSRP scores was seen in the eight sham‐responders and in the eight testing sham‐responders. Each subject exhibited increased network score under the blind at 6 months (P < 0.01) except for the SHAMNR subjects.
SSRP scores had excellent test–retest reliability (ICC = 0.94, P < 0.001) over 2 months in independent PD subjects (n = 14). Despite worsened motor symptoms, SSRP scores remained unchanged in early‐state PD (n = 15) over 2 years. SSRP modulation in the testing sample of sham‐responders was greater than in the separate patients after levodopa infusion (n = 9; P = 0.036) (Supplementary Fig. S3B), albeit similar motor improvement. This was substantiated by SSRP scores computed under the blind at 6 months in the 16 sham responders and 14 of 16 subjects with successful AAV2‐GAD delivery (Supplementary Fig. S3C), showing greater SSRP modulation in the SHAMR group (P = 0.002). Therefore, SSRP is specific to the placebo responses to sham surgery and independent to disease progression and improved motor symptoms following other medical/surgical interventions.
Clinical outcomes at 6 months under the blind correlated with concurrent changes in SSRP scores (r = −0.75, P < 0.001, n = 23) (Supplementary Fig. S3D), with greater increase indicating better clinical improvement. This was seen separately in either SHAMR subgroup, but not in the SHAMNR and GADR groups. Baseline SSRP scores in the SHAM‐subjects correlated with the changes in blinded motor outcome at 6 months (r = 0.46, P = 0.028, n = 23), with lower scores suggesting better clinical outcomes. The baseline SSRP scores were similar in the SHAM‐responders and the AAV2‐GAD subjects, but lower than in the SHAM non‐responders (P = 0.001) (Supplementary Fig. S3E). The sample size was estimated using SSRP scores below the median baseline value in sham‐responders for a hypothetic phase‐2 trial with the same effect size as in the AAV2‐GAD trial. The number of required sham surgeries could be lowered by >50% after excluding all such sham‐susceptible individuals before randomization.
Local metabolic changes in SSRP nodal regions were evaluated over 6 months under the blind. Regional metabolism increased after SHAM in anterior cingulate cortex (BA‐32/24; P = 0.015) and in posterior cerebellar vermis (lobule VII/crus II; P = 0.035). Metabolic changes at the cerebellar node correlated with motor outcomes under the blind (r = −0.46, P = 0.031).
A distinct cerebello‐limbic circuit is underlying the sham response that correlated with clinical ratings and the network scores declined toward baseline after the unblinding of the subjects. Baseline network scores can predict sham outcomes opening the possibility of identifying sham responders before randomization and resulting in smaller number of subjects needed to demonstrate treatment efficacy.

Regenerative Therapies Targeting Dopaminergic Systems
Cellular‐ and gene‐based therapies on dopaminergic systems have received much attention in regenerative medicine over the last two decades. This ranged from fetal and human retinal pigment epithelial (hRPE) cell implantation to gene therapy in nigrostriatal regions to restore dopaminergic dysfunction for advanced PD. Previous randomized, placebo‐controlled trials reported that the cell implantation benefited some patients, but gene transfer with glia cell line‐derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) failed despite the consistently increased [18F]FDOPA uptake in the putamen. Long‐term graft survival/viability in putamen and improved clinical motor ratings over 5 years were seen in open‐label longitudinal studies with dopaminergic PET imaging after cell transplantation and gene therapy targeting aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC).
There are no reports on brain network analysis in cell transplantation or GDNF/AADC gene therapies for PD given that dopaminergic biomarkers such as [18F]FDOPA PET has been used as primary imaging inclusion and outcome measures. Nevertheless, network approach can be used in this context according to the preclinical work with FDG‐PET in primate models of PD. PDRP scores was elevated (P < 0.0001) in parkinsonian monkeys, but suppressed (P < 0.005) after dopamine hRPE cell implantation (Fig. 4). This has become more relevant with novel clinical trials including stem cell transplantation and GDNF/AADC gene therapies.
Parkinsonism‐related metabolic pattern and modulation by dopaminergic cell transplantation. (A) Spatial covariance pattern identified in non‐human primate models of Parkinson's disease (PD) following MPTP lesioning using the scaled subprofile modeling and principal component analysis (SSM‐PCA). This parkinsonism‐related pattern (PRP) was characterized by positive loading (red) in the lentiform and thalamus covarying with negative loading (blue) in the parieto‐occipital regions using either unilateral or bilateral analysis. (B) PRP scores were elevated (P < 0.00005) in the untreated MPTP hemispheres (n = 7) compared with the normal controls (n = 8), but declined consistently (P < 0.005) in the contralateral MPTP hemispheres (n = 6) after putamen implantation of human retinal pigment epithelial cells. Extracted from Peng et al and used with permission of SNMMI.

Therapeutic Studies Involving Non‐Dopaminergic Systems
PET imaging has been useful in evaluating therapeutics in PD targeting other non‐dopaminergic systems. One promising target is mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in PD. AZD3241 is a selective/irreversible inhibitor of myeloperoxidase, involved in generating reactive oxygen species and expressed by microglia. A phase‐2a study performed [11C]PBR28 imaging in early PD patients receiving AZD3241 orally twice daily or placebo for 8 weeks. [11C]PBR28 binding was reduced from baseline at 4 and 8 weeks (P < 0.05) in the nigrostriatal, thalamus, cerebellar, and cortical regions in the treatment (n = 18), but not the placebo (n = 6) groups. A longitudinal study reported that [11C]DPA713 binding in PD was elevated at baseline from healthy controls across the brain and increased over 3 years, but was reduced (P < 0.05) comparing the patients treated with (n = 8) versus without (n = 8) zonisamide. These results suggest that both drugs may reduce oxidative stress, suppress chronic neuroinflammation, and support further studies in PD.
A phase‐1 trial of oral nicotinamide riboside (NR) was reported to replenish nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) in drug‐naïve PD. NAD is reduced in PD as a coenzyme regulating the maintenance of cellular metabolism. FDG‐PET and 31‐phosphorous‐magnetic resonance spectroscopy ([31P]MRS) were acquired on a PET/MRI scanner in patients receiving NR (n = 15) or placebo (n = 15) daily for 30 days. NR increased cerebral NAD levels versus placebo on [31P]MRS data (P = 0.025). To determine whether NR induced a specific brain network, OrT‐CVA was performed using paired metabolic images in NR recipients showing increased brain NAD (n = 10). This NR‐related metabolic pattern (NRRP) was dominated by negative loading in subcortical and cortical regions (Table 1). NRRP scores were stable after placebo, but increased (P = 0.027) after NR with treatment‐related changes correlating with motor outcome (r = 0.59, P = 0.026). The findings suggest the association of NR with brain metabolic changes and mild clinical improvement and support NR as a potential neuroprotective treatment for PD.

New Strategies for Optimal Clinical Trial Design
The continued innovations in PET/SPECT neuroimaging methodology over the last decade have made it possible to implement several strategies for reducing sample sizes and improving outcomes of clinical trials in PD. These entail patient screening, target engagement, treatment response, and clinical correlations with metabolic brain network and molecular imaging biomarkers separately and together (Fig. 5).
A schematic combining brain metabolic and molecular positron emission tomography (PET) imaging data to help optimize the design of clinical trials in parkinsonism. Both are potentially useful for preselecting trial participants, assessing therapeutic responses and evaluating relationships between changes in network/molecular imaging biomarkers and clinical descriptors associated with treatment. Molecular PET images can confirm target engagement based on clinical reading and volumetric analysis in the native brain space. Both metabolic or/and molecular PET imaging data more frequently undergo atlas‐ and voxel‐based brain mapping analysis in the standard anatomic space using multivariate scaled subprofile modeling and principal component analysis and univariate statistical parametric mapping, respectively. Brain network analysis involves computing subject scores of different metabolic patterns or identifying a treatment‐specific pattern.

Complementary Relationships between Imaging Biomarkers
As an indirect marker of synaptic activity, regional metabolism measured with FDG‐PET is sensitive to capture systemic disruption of neuronal function and correlate with clinical manifestation of motor and non‐motor symptoms. This modality is more widely available and less costly than specific neuroimaging biomarkers that are indispensable pathologically for confirming patient selection and target engagement in clinical trials. Metabolic network scores represent biomarkers for symptomatic relief and disease‐modifying therapies given the dose‐dependent suppression of PDRP by gene therapy (Supplementary Fig. S2C) and its modulation by dopaminergic cell transplantation (Fig. 4). PDRP/PDCP scores increased but [18F]FDOPA uptake/dopamine transporter (DAT) binding in caudate/putamen declined with disease progression of PD. These suggest that metabolic network biomarkers provide more dynamic ranges to track therapeutic responses and clinical correlates than any molecular biomarkers showing flooring effects. In drug‐naïve PD, metabolic values from FDG‐PET correlated with striatal dopaminergic or thalamic serotonergic biomarkers from [123I]FPCIT binding (DAT‐SPECT). Correlations of caudate dopaminergic/thalamic serotonergic innervations with temporoparietal/prefrontal metabolism were mediated by metabolic values in the caudate and thalamus, respectively.
Parallel changes in synaptic vesicle protein 2A (SV2A) and microglia activation have been compared with dopaminergic function in the nigrostriatal and related pathways in multi‐tracer PET studies. SV2A binding by [11C]UCB‐J decreased in the SN in early PD and correlated with DAT binding by [18F]FE‐PE2I in the SN and caudate, but did not change over 1 to 2 years. Synaptic density in caudate was reduced in early PD and correlated with lower DAT binding and glucose hypometabolism in this region with [18F]SynVesT‐1, [18F]FPCIT, and FDG. Although elevated [11C](R)‐PK11195 binding in the midbrain correlated with [11C]CFT binding in the putamen in drug‐naive PD, this was not seen in early PD with more specific tracers of [11C]PBR28 or [18F]DPA‐714 and [18F]FE‐PE2I or [11C]PE2I in the midbrain and nigrostriatal regions. It is still unknown whether PET imaging of SV2A binding and microglia can track disease progression and therapeutic responses as described for metabolic network biomarkers in this review.
The dual‐modality imaging approach has been rarely used in clinical trials because of high costs. One study compared changes from baseline after STN DBS in vesicular monoamine transporter 2 (VMAT2) and glucose metabolism using PET with [11C]DTBZ and FDG. VMAT2 decreased in striatal, extra‐striatal, cortical, and limbic regions. Relative metabolism decreased in striatum, but increased in temporo‐parietal cortices and cerebellum. Reduced striatal VMAT2 correlated with decreased striatal and increased cortical/limbic metabolism. Improvement in depressive symptoms correlated with decreased VMAT2 in striatal and extra‐striatal regions and with decreased striatal and increased cortical metabolism. This study has revealed the molecular‐network modulation of monoaminergic system and synaptic activity simultaneously by neurosurgical intervention.

Dual‐Phase PET Imaging
Dynamic PET imaging data over 0 to 10 minute post‐injection of molecular radioligands resembled brain perfusion such that early‐ and late‐phase images can evaluate changes in metabolism and striatal monoaminergic function, synaptic density, or amyloid loading simultaneously. This may improve PD diagnosis of trial participants and better predict clinical outcomes as part of inclusion criteria using hybrid imaging biomarkers. Dual‐phase PET imaging may provide an economic means to gauge target engagement and quantify network modulation in PD following novel therapeutics.

Preselection of Trial Participants
It is necessary to ascertain PD diagnosis and exclude patients with atypical parkinsonism like multiple system atrophy (MSA), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and corticobasal degeneration (CBD). This is important given greater emphasis on therapeutic interventions in early‐stage PD where accurate clinical diagnosis is more challenging. Dopaminergic PET/SPECT biomarkers are helpful for confirming PD and differential diagnosis. FDG‐PET network analysis facilitated differential diagnosis using characteristic metabolic patterns for PD and atypical parkinsonism. A single‐case differential diagnosis method has been developed and validated in independent populations of clinically uncertain parkinsonian patients at early clinical stages. Molecular PET imaging may identify clinical motor responders to dopaminergic cell transplantation and STN DBS. Metabolic network analysis may help select clinical responders with improved motor and cognitive function with levodopa and GPi/STN DBS or exclude placebo responders.

Evaluation of Treatment Responses
In addition to PET/SPECT neuroimaging biomarkers of neuropathology, the efficacy of PD therapies can be assessed by detecting modulation and clinical correlates of PD‐related metabolic networks underlying motor, cognition, and tremor dysfunction and placebo responses. When these brain networks are not modulated sufficiently due to lower doses, restricted target engagement, weaker brain responses, or different mechanisms of action, it is necessary to identify specific brain networks associated with particular interventions using OrT‐CVA based on SSM‐PCA (Fig. 3, Supplementary Figs. S1 and S3; Table 1). Abnormal brain circuitry and motor symptoms are reversed by medical and neurosurgical treatments that mediate the reorganization of functional brain connectivity.

Biofluid Biomarkers for Clinical Trials
There have been heightened global efforts to develop and validate biofluid biomarkers for assessing disease profiles and therapeutical trials in PD. Both cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood samples provide a wide variety of peripheral biomarkers associated with neuropathology and neuroinflammation in parkinsonism. Prodromal or symptomatic stages of synucleinopathies may be identified reliably using α‐synuclein seed amplification assay (SAA) in CSF/skin tissue, phosphorylated α‐synuclein assayed from skin biopsy, and neurodegenerative marker of neurofilament light (NfL) chains in CSF and plasma. These biomarkers can accurately discriminate PD from healthy controls and/or atypical parkinsonism and correlate with some motor and cognitive symptoms. CSF biomarkers of Aβ and tau are mostly present in PD dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies and useful as biomarkers of cognitive dysfunction and progression. Inflammatory biomarker of neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR) in plasma was elevated in de novo PD patients and associated with clinical ratings of motor symptoms, but not cognitive impairment.
Some of these biomarkers have been tested in active or passive immunotherapy trials in early‐stage PD targeting α‐synuclein aggregates. Vaccination with UB‐312 did not affect clinical scales, but reduced α‐synuclein SAA in CSF in some patients versus placebo. Lu‐AF82422 induced rapid reduction in the plasma of free α‐synuclein and free‐to‐total α‐synuclein ratio in PD and healthy cohorts and in the CSF of the free‐to‐total α‐synuclein ratio in the high‐dose PD cohort. These trials have confirmed high positivity rates of α‐synuclein or SAA in blood, CSF and skin samples providing biomarkers of peripheral target engagement.

Comparison of Biofluid and Molecular Imaging Biomarkers
PET/SPECT biomarkers provide high specificity/sensitivity for assaying a variety of molecular targets in the brain for diagnosis and therapy. Despite proven reliability and reproducibility, they are susceptible to the complexity of technology, the limited availability, and the burden of radiation exposure and high cost. CSF/blood biomarkers can potentially overcome these limitations, but have high variability and low sensitivity to capture subtle regional abnormality and therapeutic responses in the brain. Lumbar puncturing for CSF is invasive and costly and viable biomarkers from blood and other tissue samples are still lacking particularly for tracking disease progression. It is necessary to develop more efficient and economical assay technologies and validate their test–retest reliability/reproducibility across different testing platforms before establishing robust biofluid biomarkers for advancing clinical trial design.
Some biofluid biomarkers have been compared with neuroimaging biomarkers of inflammation and dopaminergic dysfunction in the brain. Pro‐inflammatory biomarkers in plasma/CSF in de novo PD correlated with [18F]DPA‐714 PET biomarker of neuroinflammation in the putamen, thalamus, hippocampus, brainstem, and SN. Serum NfL levels also correlated with the rate of motor decline, the emergence of other clinical features, and the progression of striatal DAT‐SPECT with plasma NLR related to striatal DAT‐SPECT in de novo PD in the Parkinson's Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI) cohort. It is plausible that some biofluid biomarkers may complement or even correlate with metabolic brain network biomarkers given their shared associations with striatal DAT binding. More rigorous validations are needed against other neuroimaging biomarkers such as synuclein, amyloid, and tau.
Select clinical trials on immunotherapy in early PD have used both neuroimaging and peripheral biomarkers. Striatal DAT‐SPECT was used to confirm neurodegenerative PD and track treatment responses against natural history data in the PPMI cohort. Cinpanemab induced no changes from baseline versus placebo in clinical outcomes and CSF/plasma biomarkers of total α‐synuclein, SAA, NfL, striatal DAT‐SPECT, and MRI measures of nigrostriatal degeneration and regional brain atrophy. By contrast, Prasinezumab caused acute dose‐dependent changes from baseline versus placebo: reduction in free and increase in total serum α‐synuclein, with some changes in CSF of free and total α‐synuclein, total Aβ/Aβ42, and striatal DAT‐SPECT. However, Prasinezumab did not change clinical outcomes and striatal DAT‐SPECT versus placebo in a phase‐2 trial, but showed neuroprotection and striatal DAT reservation over 4 years compared to the PPMI cohort in an open‐label extension study. A phase‐2 trial in drug‐naïve PD reported that iron chelator deferiprone reduced nigrostriatal iron content on T2‐star MRI, did not change striatal DAT‐SPECT, but worsened Movement Disorder Society‐UPDRS total score compared to placebo. This was corroborated by greater decreases in plasma ferritin and increases in plasma prolactin (indicating inhibition of dopamine synthesis) with deferiprone than with the placebo. PET imaging of neuroinflammation and metabolic brain network analysis have yet to play a role in this therapeutic area.
CSF/blood biomarkers have also been assayed in the phase‐1 trial on NR in the de novo PD. NR led to significant increases in related metabolites in CSF in line with increased cerebral NAD levels measured by [31P]MRS. NR augmented the NAD metabolome and induced transcriptional upregulation of mitochondrial, lysosomal, and proteasomal function in blood cells and/or skeletal muscle. NR decreased the levels of inflammatory cytokines in serum and CSF. It is not known how these biofluid biomarkers relate to NRRP scores and regional metabolism in this cohort (see the section above on Therapeutic Studies Involving Non‐dopaminergic Systems).

Conclusion
In the last 20 years, metabolic neuroimaging biomarkers and covariance network analysis have been successfully applied to PD clinical trials. This methodology can help confirm diagnosis and preselect optimal trial participants and assess therapeutic responses and clinical correlates using PET/SPECT images of cerebral glucose metabolism and blood flow. The corresponding metabolic patterns delineate widely distributed network abnormality and post‐treatment restoration in the cortico‐striato‐pallido‐thalamo‐cortical and cerebello‐thalamo‐cortical pathways. To date, metabolic brain network modulation has been reported in medical therapy and neurosurgical procedures of DBS, lesioning, gene therapy, sham treatment, and cell transplantation. Specific effects of interventions on different motor or cognitive features of PD can be evaluated by determining changes in regional metabolic activity. These complementary approaches open new avenues to understand neurobiological mechanisms of action underlying treatment responses and clinical correlations. Better study outcomes may be delivered by combining brain network and molecular imaging biomarkers. The same strategy is applicable to clinical trials of other therapeutic solutions such as immunotherapy for PD and emerging therapies for atypical parkinsonism (ie, MSA, PSP, and CBD). There is currently a knowledge gap on the application of metabolic brain network in these therapeutic areas. With further validation against clinical variables and neuroimaging data, novel biomarkers from biofluids may supplement and even replace some PET/SPECT imaging biomarkers to simplify the design of clinical trials.

Author Roles
(1) Research project: A. Conception, B. Organization, C. Execution; (2) Statistical analysis: A. Design, B. Execution, C. Review and critique; (3) Manuscript: A. Writing of the first draft, B. Review and critique.
V.D.: 1B, 1C, 2B, 3A.
S.P.: 1B, 1C, 2B, 3A.
P.G.S.: 1C, 2A, 2B, 3B.
D.E.: 1A, 2A, 2C, 3B.
Y.M.: 1A, 1B, 1C, 2B, 2C, 3A, 3B.
All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

Financial Disclosures of All Authors (for the Preceding 12 Months)
D.E. serves on the scientific advisory board of and has received fees from Aspen Neuroscience; has received grants from the National Institutes of Health (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases) and The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research; and is the coinventor of patents re: Markers for use in screening patients for nervous system dysfunction and a method and apparatus for using same, without financial gain. Y. M. has received research support for neuroimaging studies in early‐phase clinical trials of gene‐ and stem cell‐based therapies in Parkinson's disease from AskBio, BlueRock and Aspen Neuroscience. He has also served as a paid consultant for Novo Nordisk. All other authors have no financial disclosure.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

References
The discovery of dopamine deficiency in the parkinsonian brain
Aromatic amino acids and modification of parkinsonism
Imaging alpha‐synuclein pathologies in animal models and patients with Parkinson's and related diseases
The alpha‐synuclein PET tracer [18F] ACI‐12589 distinguishes multiple system atrophy from other neurodegenerative diseases
Increased microglial activation in patients with Parkinson disease using [(18)F]‐DPA714 TSPO PET imaging
Brain and systemic inflammation in de novo Parkinson's disease
Translational molecular imaging and drug development in Parkinson's disease
Molecular imaging of the cholinergic system in Parkinson's disease
International Parkinson and movement disorder society evidence‐based medicine review: update on treatments for the motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease
Parkinson's disease: etiopathogenesis and treatment
How should we be using biomarkers in trials of disease modification in Parkinson's disease?
Long‐term outcomes (15 years) after subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation in patients with Parkinson disease
Transplantation of embryonic dopamine neurons for severe Parkinson's disease
AAV2‐GAD gene therapy for advanced Parkinson's disease: a double‐blind, sham‐surgery controlled, randomised trial
Gene delivery of neurturin to putamen and substantia nigra in Parkinson disease: a double‐blind, randomized, controlled trial
Effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on motor symptoms in Parkinson disease: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
Effect of rTMS on Parkinson's cognitive function: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
Blinded positron emission tomography study of dopamine cell implantation for Parkinson's disease
Dopamine transporter brain imaging to assess the effects of pramipexole vs levodopa on Parkinson disease progression
Microglial activation and dopamine terminal loss in early Parkinson's disease
Dopamine PET imaging and Parkinson's disease
Effect of the myeloperoxidase inhibitor AZD3241 on microglia: a PET study in Parkinson's disease
GDNF and Parkinson's disease: where next? A summary from a recent workshop
Effect of STN DBS on vesicular monoamine transporter 2 and glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease
The study of noninvasive brain stimulation using molecular brain imaging: a systematic review
Molecular imaging to track Parkinson's disease and atypical parkinsonisms: new imaging frontiers
Brain network markers of abnormal cerebral glucose metabolism and blood flow in Parkinson's disease
The neurovascular unit coming of age: a journey through neurovascular coupling in health and disease
Dynamic (18)F‐FPCIT PET: quantification of Parkinson's disease metabolic networks and nigrostriatal dopaminergic dysfunction in a single imaging session
Dissociation of metabolic and neurovascular responses to levodopa in the treatment of Parkinson's disease
Flow‐metabolism dissociation in the pathogenesis of levodopa‐induced dyskinesia
Blood flow and glucose metabolism dissociation in the putamen is predictive of levodopa induced dyskinesia in Parkinson's disease patients
Comparison of cerebral blood flow measurement with [15O ]‐water positron emission tomography and arterial spin labeling magnetic resonance imaging: a systematic review
Brain perfusion differences in parkinsonian disorders
Perfusion brain SPECT in assessing motor improvement after deep brain stimulation in Parkinson's disease
Spatial covariance of cholinergic muscarinic M(1) /M(4) receptors in Parkinson's disease
Multivariate and univariate analysis of continuous arterial spin labeling perfusion MRI in Alzheimer's disease
Parkinson's disease spatial covariance pattern: noninvasive quantification with perfusion MRI
Arterial spin labelling reveals an abnormal cerebral perfusion pattern in Parkinson's disease
The metabolic topography of parkinsonism
Application of the scaled subprofile model to functional imaging in neuropsychiatric disorders: a principal component approach to modeling brain function in disease
Multivariate and univariate neuroimaging biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease
Identification of disease‐related spatial covariance patterns using neuroimaging data
Abnormal metabolic network activity in Parkinson's disease: test‐retest reproducibility
Abnormal metabolic networks in atypical parkinsonism
A disease‐specific metabolic brain network associated with corticobasal degeneration
Differential diagnosis of parkinsonism: a metabolic imaging study using pattern analysis
Abnormal regional brain function in Parkinson's disease: truth or fiction?
Scaled subprofile modeling of resting state imaging data in Parkinson's disease: methodological issues
A new approach to spatial covariance modeling of functional brain imaging data: ordinal trend analysis
The quantitative evaluation of functional neuroimaging experiments: the NPAIRS data analysis framework
Validation of parkinsonian disease‐related metabolic brain patterns
FDG PET Parkinson's disease‐related pattern as a biomarker for clinical trials in early stage disease
Metabolic brain networks associated with cognitive function in Parkinson's disease
Characterization of disease‐related covariance topographies with SSMPCA toolbox: effects of spatial normalization and PET scanners
Network imaging biomarkers: insights and clinical applications in Parkinson's disease
Abnormal pattern of brain glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease: replication in three European cohorts
Executive processes in Parkinson's disease: FDG‐PET and network analysis
Metabolic brain network in the Chinese patients with Parkinson's disease based on 18F‐FDG PET imaging
Abnormal metabolic brain network associated with Parkinson's disease: replication on a new European sample
Abnormal metabolic pattern associated with cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease: a validation study
Parkinson disease‐related brain metabolic patterns and neurodegeneration in isolated REM sleep behavior disorder
The NADPARK study: a randomized phase I trial of nicotinamide riboside supplementation in Parkinson's disease
Changes in network activity with the progression of Parkinson's disease
Dopaminergic correlates of metabolic network activity in Parkinson's disease
Metabolic network expression in parkinsonism: clinical and dopaminergic correlations
Clinical, dopaminergic, and metabolic correlations in Parkinson disease: a dual‐tracer PET study
The metabolic substrates of bradykinesia and tremor in uncomplicated Parkinson's disease
Functional imaging of cerebral blood flow and glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease
Parkinson's disease‐related perfusion and glucose metabolic brain patterns identified with PCASL‐MRI and FDG‐PET imaging
Metabolic network as a progression biomarker of premanifest Huntington's disease
Parkinson's disease tremor‐related metabolic network: characterization, progression, and treatment effects
Network modulation following sham surgery in Parkinson's disease
Gene therapy reduces Parkinson's disease symptoms by reorganizing functional brain connectivity
Circuits and circuit disorders of the basal ganglia
Direct and indirect pathways of basal ganglia: a critical reappraisal
Metabolic correlates of levodopa response in Parkinson's disease
Network modulation in the treatment of Parkinson's disease
Network correlates of the cognitive response to levodopa in Parkinson disease
Regional metabolic correlates of surgical outcome following unilateral pallidotomy for Parkinson's disease
Metabolic changes following subthalamotomy for advanced Parkinson's disease
Evolving metabolic changes during the first postoperative year after subthalamotomy
Network modulation by the subthalamic nucleus in the treatment of Parkinson's disease
Functional impact of subthalamotomy by magnetic resonance‐guided focused ultrasound in Parkinson's disease: a hybrid PET/MR study of resting‐state brain metabolism
Neurobiological effects of deep brain stimulation: a systematic review of molecular brain imaging studies
Networks mediating the clinical effects of pallidal brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease: a PET study of resting‐state glucose metabolism
Common and unique responses to dopamine agonist therapy and deep brain stimulation in Parkinson's disease: an H(2)(15)O PET study
Effects of STN‐DBS surgery on cerebral glucose metabolism and distribution of DAT in Parkinson's disease
Metabolic correlates of pallidal neuronal activity in Parkinson's disease
Metabolic correlates of subthalamic nucleus activity in Parkinson's disease
Modulation of metabolic brain function by bilateral subthalamic nucleus stimulation in the treatment of Parkinson's disease
Metabolic network as an objective biomarker in monitoring deep brain stimulation for Parkinson's disease: a longitudinal study
Safety and tolerability of gene therapy with an adeno‐associated virus (AAV) borne GAD gene for Parkinson's disease: an open label, phase I trial
Modulation of metabolic brain networks after subthalamic gene therapy for Parkinson's disease
Placebo influences on dyskinesia in Parkinson's disease
Intrastriatal transplantation of microcarrier‐bound human retinal pigment epithelial cells versus sham surgery in patients with advanced Parkinson's disease: a double‐blind, randomised, controlled trial
Challenges of differential placebo effects in contemporary medicine: the example of brain stimulation
Expectation and dopamine release: mechanism of the placebo effect in Parkinson's disease
An update on gene therapy approaches for Parkinson's disease: restoration of dopaminergic function
Randomized controlled trial of intraputamenal glial cell line‐derived neurotrophic factor infusion in Parkinson disease
Randomized trial of intermittent intraputamenal glial cell line‐derived neurotrophic factor in Parkinson's disease
Dopamine cell implantation in Parkinson's disease: long‐term clinical and (18)F‐FDOPA PET outcomes
Long‐term evaluation of a phase 1 study of AADC gene therapy for Parkinson's disease
Dopamine cell transplantation in Parkinson's disease: challenge and perspective
Abnormal metabolic brain networks in a nonhuman primate model of parkinsonism
Modulation of abnormal metabolic brain networks by experimental therapies in a nonhuman primate model of Parkinson disease: an application to human retinal pigment epithelial cell implantation
Designing stem‐cell‐based dopamine cell replacement trials for Parkinson's disease
The future of stem cell therapies for Parkinson disease
Phase I/II trial of iPS‐cell‐derived dopaminergic cells for Parkinson's disease
Phase I trial of hES cell‐derived dopaminergic neurons for Parkinson's disease
Magnetic resonance imaging‐guided phase 1 trial of putaminal AADC gene therapy for Parkinson's disease
Neuroinflammation following anti‐parkinsonian drugs in early Parkinson's disease: a longitudinal PET study
Dopaminergic and serotonergic degeneration and cortical [(18) F]Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography in de novo Parkinson's disease
Loss of presynaptic terminal integrity in the substantia Nigra in early Parkinson's disease
Mitochondrial complex 1, sigma 1, and synaptic vesicle 2A in early drug‐naive Parkinson's disease
Longitudinal positron emission tomography imaging of presynaptic terminals in early Parkinson's disease
Presynaptic terminal integrity is associated with glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease
Combined striatal binding and cerebral influx analysis of dynamic 11C‐raclopride PET improves early differentiation between multiple‐system atrophy and Parkinson disease
Use of 11C‐PE2I PET in differential diagnosis of parkinsonian disorders
Quantitative study of (18)F‐(+)DTBZ image: comparison of PET template‐based and MRI based image analysis
Validation of dynamic [(18)F]FE‐PE2I PET for estimation of relative regional cerebral blood flow: a comparison with [(15)O]H(2)O PET
Differential implications of cerebral hypoperfusion and hyperperfusion in Parkinson's disease
Synaptic loss and its association with symptom severity in Parkinson's disease
Early‐phase amyloid PET reproduces metabolic signatures of cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease
Subregional patterns of preferential striatal dopamine transporter loss differ in Parkinson disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, and multiple‐system atrophy
Reproducible network and regional topographies of abnormal glucose metabolism associated with progressive supranuclear palsy: multivariate and univariate analyses in American and Chinese patient cohorts
Reproducible metabolic topographies associated with multiple system atrophy: network and regional analyses in Chinese and American patient cohorts
Abnormal metabolic covariance patterns associated with multiple system atrophy and progressive supranuclear palsy
Automated differential diagnosis of early parkinsonism using metabolic brain networks: a validation study
Differential diagnosis of parkinsonian syndromes: a comparison of clinical and automated ‐ metabolic brain patterns' based approach
Neuropathological correlation supports automated image‐based differential diagnosis in parkinsonism
Increased anteroventral striatal dopamine transporter and motor recovery after subthalamic deep brain stimulation in Parkinson's disease
Parkinson disease‐related pattern of glucose metabolism associated with the potential for motor improvement after deep brain stimulation
Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus for Parkinson's disease: a network imaging marker of the treatment response
Network structure and function in Parkinson's disease
Fluid and biopsy based biomarkers in Parkinson's disease
Alpha‐Synuclein seed amplification assays for diagnosing synucleinopathies: the way forward
Alpha‐synuclein seed amplification in Parkinson's disease ‐ authors' reply
Cutaneous alpha‐synuclein signatures in patients with multiple system atrophy and Parkinson disease
Skin biopsy detection of phosphorylated alpha‐synuclein in patients with synucleinopathies
Blood‐based NfL: a biomarker for differential diagnosis of parkinsonian disorder
Neurofilament light chain and alpha‐synuclein RT‐QuIC as differential diagnostic biomarkers in parkinsonisms and related syndromes
Peripheral inflammation is associated with dopaminergic degeneration in Parkinson's disease
Target engagement and immunogenicity of an active immunotherapeutic targeting pathological alpha‐synuclein: a phase 1 placebo‐controlled trial
Randomized phase I trial of the alpha‐Synuclein antibody Lu AF82422
Serum NFL levels predict progression of motor impairment and reduction in putamen dopamine transporter binding ratios in de novo Parkinson's disease: an 8‐year longitudinal study
Trial of Cinpanemab in early Parkinson's disease
Trial of Prasinezumab in early‐stage Parkinson's disease
Cinpanemab in early Parkinson disease: evaluation of biomarker results from the phase 2 SPARK clinical trial
Safety and tolerability of multiple ascending doses of PRX002/RG7935, an anti‐alpha‐synuclein monoclonal antibody, in patients with Parkinson disease: a randomized clinical trial
Sustained effect of prasinezumab on Parkinson's disease motor progression in the open‐label extension of the PASADENA trial
Trial of Deferiprone in Parkinson's disease