Evaluation of titanium-prepared platelet-rich fibrin incorporated with amoxiclav, metronidazole, and neem gel on bone regeneration in Wistar rats: a pilot study
Objectives
Titanium platelet-rich fibrin (T-PRF) usage as sustained drug delivery system (SDDS) has been recently started. Hence present study aimed to evaluate hard tissue regenerative efficacy of T-PRF clots incorporated with amoxiclav (AMX)/metronidazole (MET)/neem (NE) gels individually in osseous defects created in Wistar rats.
Materials and Methods
In this in vivo animal model trial, 12 female Wistar rats were procured and subjected to ligature induced periodontitis. Bone defects were created and incorporated with T-PRF plain, T-PRF clots+AMX/MET/NE gels individually. Rats were sacrificed after 2 months and checked under light microscopy and micro (µ)-computed tomography analysis for bone regeneration. Frequency distribution percentages, chi-square test, ANOVA and un-paired t-test were used for conducting the statistical analysis.
Results
Inflammatory response was reported in T-PRF+MET Group followed by AMX Group and no inflammatory response was recorded for T-PRF plain with statistical significance (P=0.008), for mineralized and un-mineralized bone formation there was no significant difference (P=0.133). Mean comparisons of bone density there was no significant difference (P=0.545) among all (AMX=551.00±18.68, MET=578.00±18.25, NE=569.00±24.58, T-PRF plain=507.67±118.50). For gene expression significantly (P<0.001) higher alkaline phosphatase and bone morphogenetic protein-2 levels were recorded for T-PRF+NE Group (7.60±3.04, 10.85±1.28) followed by MET (4.65±1.52, 4.64±0.45)>AMX (2.47±0.84, 1.89±0.18)>T-PRF plain (1.00±0.00, 1.00±0.00).
Conclusion
Research results showed that T-PRF can be a SDDS and addition of antibiotics or herbal extract didn’t alter the hard tissue healing property of T-PRF and resulted in new bone formation.

I. Introduction
Periodontitis is a multifactorial disease that results in attachment loss and bone loss. Plaque and calculus were the main culprits that cause this destruction. Improper oral hygiene, faulty brushing techniques, anatomical biotypes play a role in the maintenance of healthy periodontium. If there is any abnormality in this balance then it results in the formation of clinical attachment loss, intra bony defects (IBDs) and finally tooth loss. To tackle this disease, various treatment strategies such as non-surgical and surgical periodontal therapies (non surgical therapy [NST] and surgical periodontal therapies [SPT]) have been employed to achieve long term stability of teeth and improved social positivity of the patient. Usage of systemic antibiotics such as amoxicillin, metronidazole (MET), cephalosporins, azithromycin, clindamycin etc has been employed in the treatment of periodontitis as an adjunct to NST or SPT. Though, the previously published studies have reported better outcomes, but because of their reported side effects researchers have shifted to deliver the drugs locally (as local drug delivery) and concentrate at the sulcular area. For delivering these drugs various vehicles like collagen microspheres, fibres, hydrogels, collagen plugs have been employed by incorporating the drugs into them. But because of increased sensitivity in commercially prepared forms there was always a search of better autologous biomaterial. This led to the introduction of platelet concentrates (PCs) in the field of dentistry. Leukocyte platelet-rich fibrin (L-PRF) is a second-generation PC introduced by Choukroun et al.. It had created a history and was used in all treatment modalities such as endodontic (pulpal regeneration) and periodontal regenerative techniques (IBD, root coverage treatments, sinus augmentation procedures, horizontal and vertical ridge soft and hard tissue augmentations), post 3rd molar extraction, socket preservation techniques and achieved good results. Incorporation of antibiotics has been initially tried in PRF. Polak et al. utilized L-PRF as a vehicle by incorporating antibiotics into blood before centrifugation. They concluded that antibiotic incorporated PRF clot helped in extended antimicrobial activity. Bennardo et al. in their study incorporated antibiotics like vancomycin, gentamycin and linezolid drug into L-PRF and concluded the gradual release of the drug with lower post-operative pain and no infection when placed at 3rd molar extraction socket. Though it has a three-dimensional (3D) fibrin structure, membrane is thinner, has a shorter resorption time and a possible silica contamination in the L-PRF membrane.
This led to the search for a better material by the researchers. They got attracted to titanium and it was used for centrifugation instead of silica coated plastic tubes or silica tubes alone. Titanium is a novel material, better haemo-compatible and has been regularly used in the field of medicine and dentistry. Hence, titanium platelet-rich fibrin (T-PRF) was introduced by Tunalı et al.. This 2nd generation PC had a thicker fibrin network, greater fibrin border area and thicker membrane when examined through Light and Scanning Electron Microscopy techniques (light microscopy [LM] and scanning electron microscopy [SEM]). With the above established positivity, Ercan et al. utilized T-PRF as sustained drug delivery system (SDDS) by incorporating doxycycline hyclate liquid into T-PRF clots. They concluded that T-PRF helped in sustained release of the drug with greater antimicrobial activity against the Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus. Recent studies done by Gummaluri and collegues incorporated these amoxiclav (amoxicillin+clavulanate, AMX), MET and neem (NE) gels into T-PRF clots and reported that T-PRF membrane structure integrity was well maintained and fibrin structure was intact when examined under LM. When surface morphology was examined through SEM proper coating of the drug was observed through the images in the form of haziness indirectly indicating that T-PRF holds the drugs and help in SDDS. Recent study done by Yaşar et al. on rabbit model for bone regeneration state that both T and L-PRF’s contribute the bone regeneration but by histological examination advanced healing stage and mineralized callus bone formation was noted more in L-PRF than T-PRF. They also concluded that L-PRF was superior to T-PRF in bone defect healing. Before performing a human clinical trial, it is always better to check the newer treatment strategies on animals to create a mammalian environment. As much number of studies were not performed, there was always a room for attempting additional experiments to standardize the conclusion. Null hypothesis of the current study state that there would be no additional benefit of using T-PRF infused with antibiotics or herbal extract at the bone defects and no hard tissue healing can be appreciated. Hence, present study aimed to evaluate the healing of bone in Wistar rats by incorporating T-PRF infused with AMX/MET/NE gels individually at the bone defects and compared with T-PRF alone that were created after the ligature induced periodontitis. Further confirmation of new bone formation was done using gene expression for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2).

II. Materials and Methods

1. Type of study, sample size and ethical clearance
Present study was a primitive in vivo animal randomized controlled trial. This was performed at the Biomedical Research Laboratory Animal Centre (BRULAC), Saveetha Dental College and Hospital, Chennai. Prior to the conduction of the study ethical clearance was obtained from Institutional Animal Ethical Committee and Review Board of Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences (SU/CLAR/RD/01/2024). The sample size calculation was based on prior published study and pilot data, aiming to detect a clinically meaningful difference in bone density (BD) with a power of 80% and a significance level of α=0.05. The sample size formula for ANOVA designs resulted in n=3 animals per group, in accordance with ethical animal research practices and resource availability. Twelve female Wistar rats were considered for the conduction of the study. Female rats of 8 to 12 weeks old with a weight of 200 to 250 g were procured from the Centre for Laboratory Animal Research, Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences (Ref No. 1183/PO/Re/S/08/CPCSEA). Study was performed during the tenure of December 2024 to March 2025. Current study belongs to GITAM Dental College and Hospital, Visakhapatnam, and Saveetha Dental College and Hospital, Chennai. Study was performed according to Animal Research: Reporting of In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE) guidelines so that standardization to the most extent can be established. Simple random sampling type of randomization was considered with flip of a coin technique to allocate in the test or control groups.
Two experienced raters independently evaluated subjective measurements such as grading of inflammatory response and osteoblastic rimming. Inter- and intra-rater reliability were quantified using Cohen’s kappa coefficient on a randomly selected subset of samples (10% of the total). Kappa values consistently exceeded 0.8, indicating excellent agreement and high reliability of the scoring system.

2. Inclusion and exclusion criteria
Female Wistar rats having a weight of 200 to 250 g with 8 to 12 weeks of age were considered in the study. Any sought of illness with and without signs and symptoms if noted rats were excluded.

3. Antibiotic gel and Herbal extract preparations
AMX gel, MET gel and NE gel were prepared and procured from PerioBiologics Lab, Hyderabad. Based on previous studies done by Gummaluri and collegues and Nimbulkar et al., antibiotic/herbal extract gels were prepared. AMX gel was prepared by mixing amoxicillin and clavulanate powders in 7:1 ratio. To this, additional substances like carboxymethyl cellulose, magnesium stearate were added blended into a mixture. Further polycarbophil powder and glycerine were added to form a 18% concentrated gel. MET gel of 30% concentration was prepared using propylene glycol, MET, poloxamer 123, methylisothiazolinone and distilled water. For 12% concentrated NE gel, NE leaves were boiled in water to obtain 100 g of NE extract. To this NE extract, freshly prepared base gel using Carbopol 934p and distilled water was added. Later calcium chloride and sodium chloride were further added to obtain the final NE gel.

4. Surgical procedure
Before performing the surgery, all the Wistar rats were kept under observation of quarantine to rule out the healthy state of the animals. Later, under anaesthesia 4.0 silk sutures (Ethicon Mersilk; Johnson & Johnson) were tied around the lower incisors of these animals by creating wounds in gingiva to induce periodontitis. After 14 days, periodontal flap surgeries were performed at the lower incisor region. Before the incisions all the animals were anaesthetized as follows: a combination of ketamine (40 mg/kg, Ketamax; Troikaa Pharmaceuticals) and xylazine (5 mg/kg, Xylaxin; Indian Immunologicals) was used to achieve a proper anaesthesia. Additional two rats were taken to obtain the 2 mL blood from superficial femoral vein, immediately transferred to medical grade titanium tubes (Grade II titanium test tubes; Supra Alloys) and centrifuged (Remi R 8C; REMI ELECTROTECHNIK LIMITED) according to modified Tunalı et al., Gummaluri and collegues protocols (3,500 rpm for 15 minutes). Further T-PRF clots were broken into small pieces and accordingly AMX gel/MET gel/NE gel was injected into the respective T-PRF clots. As a part of control group T-PRF clot alone without any antibiotics/herbal extract was also done.
Flap was reflected using a 15 no blade, as a part of defect creation 3 mm depth bone defects (length and breadth) were created using a tungsten carbide straight fissure bur with a proper saline irrigation on the right side below the root of the incisor. Further the above prepared T-PRF clots were placed at the surgical bone defect and tissue was sutured with 4-0 silk suture (Ethicon Mersilk). Four groups were studied in this current animal in vivo model (T-PRF+AMX, T-PRF+MET, T-PRF+NE, and T-PRF alone). Rats were fed on routine laboratory food and water ad libitum during the entire duration of the study. At the end of the 2 months all the rats were sacrificed using excessive inhalation of isoflurane (Aerrane; Baxter Healthcare). The mandibles obtained after the sacrifice, were placed in the 10% formalin solution (Formaldehyde Solution; Fisher Scientific) for tissue fixation and transferred to the oral pathology department for histological analysis and Palamur Biosciences, Mahabubnagar, for micro-computed tomography (µ-CT) analyses.(Fig. 1)

5. Micro-CT analysis procedure
Before subjecting the samples to histological analysis, test site in the mandibles of the all the groups were subjected to µ-CT analysis using ZEISS Xradia (ZEISS) 3D tomography µ-CT equipment. The tissue samples were scanned at 12 µm voxel resolution with an integration time of 450 ms at 90 keV with 200 µA current and data were expressed in Hounsfield units (HU). Two-dimensional images were taken in vertical direction to formulate the data. Software used for image acquisition was Avizo (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The non-treated sites (opposite sides) of mandible were also exposed to the µ-CT equipment so that comparison can be obtained to depict the new bone formation at surgical site 2 months postoperative. A periodontist (V.R.) who has a proper knowledge regarding the µ-CT analysis sat along with radiologist and came to a common agreement regarding the values of BD. Three exposures were taken for test and control site (contralateral non-treated) using the equipment so that average value will be considered for statistical analysis.

6. Brief decalcification procedure; haematoxylin & eosin (H&E) staining and Masson trichome staining procedures for LM
For decalcification procedure 10% formic acid solution (Prakash Chemicals Agencies) was used and it was replaced every three days. Mandibles were taken out and checked for softness by mechanical methods like mild probing with metal instrument. When those samples achieved softness, they were washed under running tap water to remove the excessive chemical. Further, decalcified mandibles were treated with various grades of alcohol (25%, 50%, 75%, 90% and 100%) to remove the excessive moisture. These dehydrated mandibles were subjected to paraffinization procedure so that wax blocks embedded with samples were obtained. Five micrometer thickness sections were prepared from the paraffin blocks and subjected for H&E staining to check for hard tissue healing. Further bone mineralization assessment was done using Mason trichome staining.
Obtained sections were rehydrated in downward alcohol concentrations and reduced to distilled water. Further, haematoxylin (Harris hematoxyline solution; Merck Life Science) staining was performed and left for 15 minutes. For excessive removal of stain, slides were placed under running tap water for 10 minutes to ensure bruising. Eosin stain (Eosin Yellow stain solution-2% W/V; Nice Chemicals) was further added for 2 minutes and passed through the rising ethanol series and mounted with cover slip. Further slides were left out for drying and assessed for hard tissue healing under penta-head microscope. An experienced oral pathologist along with a knowledgeable periodontist regarding the histological assessment of bone tissue sat together and decided the data that would be further subjected to statistical analysis. Inflammatory response (severe, mild, moderate, nil), nature of inflammatory cells (presence of lymphocytes or lymphoplasmacytic cells or none), mineralized and un-mineralized bone formation semi-quantification (0%-24%, 25%-50%, 51%-69% and ≥70%) was performed at ×10 magnification at 3 different fields. Further osteoblastic rimming presence (yes/no) and percentages (%) of viable osteocytes were determined. Images were captured at ×10 and ×40 magnifications. Persons who have assessed the histology and µ-CT samples were blinded and didn’t know what were the groups to which the samples belong to.

7. Ribonucleic acid (RNA) extraction and protocol for gene expression of ALP and BMP-2
For RNA extraction (RecoverAll Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit for Formalin Fixed Paraffin Embedded [FFPE] [Cat. No. AM1975; Thermo Fisher Scientific]), sections were deparaffinized with two xylene washes (10 minutes each) followed by graded ethanol rehydration (100%→95%→70%) and air-dried; total RNA was isolated using an FFPE-compatible silica-membrane kit with on-column DNase treatment according to the manufacturer’s protocol, including proteinase K digestion and heat-induced crosslink reversal (≥80°C, 15-30 minutes). RNA quantity and purity were assessed by spectrophotometry (A260/280≈1.8-2.1, NanoDrop One Microvolume UV-Vis Spectrophotometer [Thermo Fisher Scientific]) and integrity by successful amplification of short amplicons (RNA integrity number not required for FFPE). Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized from 200-500 ng RNA using random hexamers and RNase inhibitor (20 µL reaction: 25°C, 10 minutes; 42°C-50°C, 30-45 minutes; 85°C, 5 minutes). Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed in 10 µL SYBR Green reactions (Applied Biosystems, Cat. No. A25742; Thermo Fisher Scientific) (×1 master mix, 200-400 nM primers, 1-2 µL diluted cDNA) on a 96-well platform with cycling: 95°C 2 minutes, then 40 cycles of 95°C 10 seconds and 60 °C 30 seconds, followed by a melt curve (65°C-95°C, 0.5 °C/step) to confirm single products. PCR was performed using CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Primer pairs targeted ALP and BMP-2, with GAPDH as the reference gene all amplicons were 70-110 bp to accommodate FFPE fragmentation and were validated for efficiency (90%-110%) using 5-point serial dilutions and for specificity by single melt peak and (optionally) 2% agarose gel electrophoresis. Each biological sample was run with three technical replicates; no-template and no-reverse transcriptase control controls were included in every run and remained undetermined. Data were analyzed by the ΔCt method (Cttarget–CtGapdh), normalized to the T-PRF Plain group via ΔΔCt, and expressed as fold change (2-ΔΔCt).

8. Statistical analysis
Data was gathered and transferred to Microsoft Excel (Version 2019; Microsoft) spread sheet. Data was expressed in frequency distribution percentages and chi-square test was performed to find the association among all the groups for inflammatory response, inflammatory cells, mineralized and un-mineralized bone formation. Viability of osteocytes were noted in frequency percentages. Bone density through µ-CT was expressed in mean and standard deviations. Before parametric analysis (one-way ANOVA and un-paired t-tests), data normality was verified using the Shapiro–Wilk test, and homogeneity of variances was checked by Levene’s test. All variables included in parametric tests satisfied these assumptions. One-way ANOVA was performed to depict the BD comparisons among all the groups. Un-paired t-test was performed to compare the results of tests and respective contralateral non treated control sites of Wistar rat mandibles. For gene expression of ALP and BMP-2, there was usage of one-way ANOVA and Tukey’s post hoc for pair wise comparisons. Post hoc power analysis was performed for comparisons yielding non-significant results (e.g., mineralized and un-mineralized bone formation), using G*Power software version 3.1.0.

III. Results
For H&E, under ×10 magnification in T-PRF+AMX Group there was presence of inflammatory area at the surgical site overlying there was a healing fibrovascular connective tissue. In case of T-PRF+MET Group there was relatively lesser inflammatory area and greater presence of woven and trabecular bone reported. In case of T-PRF+NE Group there was presence of greater width of un-mineralized collagen matrix with osteocytes were reported. In case of T-PRF plain there was presence of osteoblastic and osteoclastic rimming, woven and mature bone adjacent to surgical site.(Fig. 1) In a similar fashion at ×10 magnification, on Masson trichome staining there was more mineralized bone (represented in red colour) along with un-mineralized woven bone areas (blue colour) was reported in T-PRF+AMX, T-PRF+MET and T-PRF plain. Whereas T-PRF+NE Group showed un-mineralized bone which was represented in blue colour indicating an immature bone or mature collagen fibrils and presence of osteocytes within mature bone was reported.(Fig. 2)
At ×40 magnification also similar results were reported for H&E indicating moderate to severe inflammatory state along with woven to mature bone formation (mature collagen orientation) for T-PRF+Amoxclav/MET/NE. Whereas Masson trichome staining showing red colour in T-PRF+AMX, T-PRF+MET and T-PRF plain along with osteoblastic rimming and osteocytes presence. In case of T-PRF+NE though there was regeneration of bone, but the amount of mineralization was not complete depicting in blue colour.(Fig. 3, 4)
When examined under light microscope after H&E staining as well as Masson trichome staining of slides, following inferences were drawn. In the present study, greater inflammatory response (severe) was reported in T-PRF+MET Group followed by T-PRF+AMX Group and no inflammatory response was recorded for T-PRF plain. Mild to moderate inflammatory response was noted in T-PRF+NE group. There was a statistical significance reported inclining towards T-PRF+ MET Group. While coming to nature of inflammatory cells lymphoplasmacytic cells were reported in all the test groups and lymphocytes were reported only in T-PRF+NE Group. T-PRF plain (Fig. 5) doesn’t have any sought of inflammatory cells. There was a statistical significance noted regarding the nature of inflammatory cells.(Table 1)
Regarding mineralized bone formation >70% bone formation was reported in all the samples of T-PRF plain Group and 66.7% of T-PRF+MET Group. Whereas 2 samples of T-PRF+NE Group reported 25%-49% mineralized bone and 1 sample of T-PRF+NE reported 0%-24% mineralization. In case of un-mineralized bone, least un-mineralized bone was reported in T-PRF plain Group (0%-24%). Higher percentages were reported in T-PRF+NE Group ranging from 50%-70% while 2 samples each of T-PRF+AMX and T-PRF+MET showed 0%-24% un-mineralized bone and 1 sample each of AMX and MET Groups reported 25%-50% un-mineralized bone. Though outcomes of mineralized and un-mineralized bone formation appears to be varied but when statistically compared there was no significant difference (P=0.133).(Table 2)
For osteoblast rimming there was total absence of rimming noted for T-PRF plain Group whereas 100% rimming was reported for T-PRF+AMX and T-PRF+NE Groups. In T-PRF+MET two (66.7%) samples showed osteoblastic rimming and 1 sample didn’t show any rimming (33.3%) and the comparisons among the groups was statistically significant (P=0.029). In case of osteocyte viability all the groups of current study showed viable osteocytes (100%).(Table 3)

1. Micro-CT analysis
Regarding mean comparisons of BD there was no significant difference among all the groups (P=0.545) recorded in HU.(Table 4) When comparison was performed between test and non-treated contra lateral sides regarding BD there was no statistical significant difference reported for all the groups (T-PRF+AMX [P=0.094], T-PRF+MET [P=0.172], and T-PRF plain [P=0.208]) except for T-PRF+NE Group where there was significance (P=0.033) noted and favored the untreated site with greater BD.(Supplementary Table 1) Red arrow in the Fig. 6 depicts the surgical site in all the groups where BD was calculated.

2. Gene expression for ALP and BMP-2
Regarding gene expression there was significant highest ALP and BMP-2 expressions for T-PRF+NE (P<0.001) followed by T-PRF+MET and T-PRF+AMX. T-PRF plain showed the least ALP and BMP-2 expression. Forward and reverse primers along with GAPDH housekeeping gene sequence used in the current study were also depicted.(Supplementary Table 2) Pairwise comparisons revealed that ALP levels differed significantly between all groups. T-PRF NE showed significantly higher ALP compared to T-PRF plain, AMX, and MET (P<0.001). Similarly, T-PRF+AMX and T-PRF+MET were significantly higher than T-PRF plain. All pairwise group comparisons showed statistically significant differences in BMP-2 levels. T-PRF NE exhibited the highest values, significantly greater than all other groups (P<0.001). T-PRF+MET also showed higher BMP-2 levels compared to T-PRF plain and T-PRF+AMX.(Supplementary Table 3)

IV. Discussion
Current study results showed that showed bone formation was seen in all the groups with higher in T-PRF plain followed by T-PRF+MET, T-PRF+AMX whereas in T-PRF+NE had showed mature collagen and un-mineralized bone indicating all the treatment protocols can be safely used. Incorporation of antibiotics or herbal extracts systemically result in many side effects hence; present study wants to assesses whether adding antibiotics (AMX/MET) or herbal extracts (NE) into T-PRF in gel form to check the bone healing and mineralization in vivo. Hence, this animal model procedure was performed. Null hypothesis has been rejected as T-PRF helped in new bone formation.
Bone regeneration achievement is always a tough task and it is greatly modulated by osteoblastic cell lineages, macrophages, monocytes and osteoblast/clast cells. This inflammatory process and bone regenerative changes varied among humans. It was mainly due to the habitual differences such as alcohol intake, smoking, diet, systemic diseases etc. Hence, animal models are very much essential for evaluating the new treatment strategies and assess the effect on bone healing.
To the authors knowledge this is the first study of its kind. Previous studies that were performed on rats had assessed the parameters of different entity. Hence, comparison of the present study results will be performed with the available data. All the Wistar rats that underwent treatment survived through entire duration of study. No complications or adverse events were reported for the animals. Previous study done by Du et al. incorporated aspirin into PRF and compared it with PRF alone. From their study outcomes they concluded that both the groups helped in bone regeneration. They also stated that PRF+aspirin combination formed 2 times more bone than PRF alone; aspirin helps in inhibiting the inflammation and increase the mesenchymal cells’ function.
Study done by Omar et al. utilized L-PRF loaded with MET liquid (prepared by mixing tablet into saline and 0.5 mL was mixed in blood) placed in periodontal pockets and assessed for the levels of Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg). They concluded that MET loaded L-PRF and L-PRF alone showed good improvement in decreased probing pocket depth, gain in clinical attachment level and reduced Pg levels with no significant difference. Sabah and Al-Ghaban, stated that amoxicillin reduces the thickness of enamel and dentin by interfering with amelogenesis and dentinogenesis. They also concluded that caution should be taken in pregnant females and during the first year of the child to prevent the problems that might be encountered. T-PRF plain Group in the present study, had shown complete mineralized bone formation (red color staining) with no significant difference among the groups. There was a significant non inflammatory state and absence of lymphocytes or lymphoplasmacytic cells indicating complete healing was reported when compared to test groups. This is due to the inherent property of thicker fibrin mesh work and membrane area, greater with hold of growth factors’ and longer resorption time might help in stimulation, proliferation of osteoblast cells. Absence of inflammation is mainly due to the reduced expression of pro-inflammatory mediators like interlukin-1 beta (IL-1β) and IL-6 which have helped for excellent hard tissue healing. Present study results were in accordance with to that of study done by Yaşar et al. where they concluded that both T- and L-PRF aided in bone formation but L-PRF helped in bone defect healing because of its stimulation of bone parameters performance in rapid healing. In the present study there was a usage of AMX in the gel form which formed greater mineralized bone (red color staining) with moderate to severe inflammatory state. This newer bone formation was due to the body response of healing for a defect site. Moreover, inflammation that was created was within the regenerative range which might have helped for better outcomes. There was a presence of lymphoplasmacytic cells in all the test groups depict the tissue response and immune modulation from the animal due to the addition of antibiotics. These cells indirectly alter the environment of osteoblasts and trigger the bone formation. In the current study, MET incorporated T-PRF clots, there was a greater mineralized bone formation along with lesser un-mineralized areas with severe inflammatory response. This indicates the addition of MET in T-PRF helped in triggering of bone cells to form more mature bone. This is in accordance with study done by Duggal et al. in regarding with MET Group, where they stated that MET exhibited osteogenic effects and helped in enhancing the bone regeneration in open fractures. This is due to the stimulation of osteogenic mechanism through wnt path way in osteoblasts. Current results were also in accordance with Alpan et al. where they stated that giving MET was given topically or systemically after creating bone defects and filling them with bone graft mixed with saliva of periodontitis patients. Authors of that study concluded that local MET application helped in new bone formation by triggering β-catenin and BMP-2/Runx2 signaling, with decreased inflammation. This positivity was due to the activation of wnt pathway that triggered the new mineralized osteoid tissue. While coming to NE there was more of un-mineralized bone depicted with intense inflammation. This is mainly due to the components of NE gel which might have influenced the delay of mineralization. The concentration of gel also had influenced the BD, bone remodeling and delay the new bone formation. Present study results were not in accordance with previous study done by Cui et al. where they have assessed the antiarthritic activity of nimbolide in Wistar rats. They concluded that nimbolide helped in reducing the inflammation by decreasing the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines and enhance the health. In the present study total prepared NE gel extract was used and this difference might have influenced the study results. Recent in vitro study by Gummaluri et al. stated that adding herbal extract didn’t alter the release of IGF-1 indicating the improved confidence of injecting antibiotics or herbal extracts into T-PRF and make it as SDDS. Apart from this, T-PRF injecting with antibiotics or herbal extract didn’t compromise growth factor release with superior antimicrobial activity and confirms T-PRF usage as SDDS. Thus, in the present study according to H&E and Masson trichome staining, all the groups showed bone regeneration by the order of T-PRF plain>T-PRF+AMX>T-PRF+MET>T-PRF+NE gel Groups.
While coming to osteoblastic rimming presence, all the test groups except for T-PRF plain showed the presence of rimming which indicates the presence of active bone formation. In case of osteocyte viability, all the groups showed viable osteocytes which indicate that bone cells were live and its structural integrity was well maintained. T-PRF plain, T-PRF+AMX and T-PRF+MET Groups of current showed good bone formation with viable osteocytes. Whereas in T-PRF+NE Group, though osteocyte viability was reported mineralized bone percentage was less. This is due to the concentration of NE used or ingredients of NE have reduced the mineralization content of bone. Regarding µ-CT analysis, there was no significant difference between the groups for BD and had a range of 500 to 580 HU which indicate a successful healing and new bone formation has a greater trend towards the healthy cortical bone state. These results were in accordance with recent study done by Yaşar et al. where they concluded that both T- and L-PRF’s help in bone formation and healing. But they finalized that L-PRF was superior to T-PRF from their results of histology and µ-CT analysis. In the current study there was usage of antibiotics and herbal extract injected into T-PRF clots. Where no significant difference overall and numerically T-PRF+MET>T-PRF+AMX>T-PRF+NE>T-PRF plain was reported. In T-PRF+NE Group had relatively lesser BD when compared with opposite non treated site of the same mandible. This variation was mainly due to the inhibitory effect of NE contents and slowed down the mineralization process which led to lower HU when exposed to µ-CT analysis.
Current study results of hard tissue regeneration were confirmed by the ALP and BMP-2 levels. Least levels of gene expression were recorded in T-PRF Plain and it was followed by T-PRF+AMX and T-PRF+MET Groups. This is due to the complete mature bone formation generally don’t express the higher levels of ALP and BMP-2. T-PRF+NE Group showed the significant highest levels of ALP and BMP-2. These high levels in current T-PRF+NE Group state that bone was still under active remodeling phase with less mineralized bone in the surgical site specimens. Moreover, histopathology showed mature fibrin architecture or less mineralized bone indicating there may be still ongoing mineralization process which reported higher levels of ALP and BMP-2. In addition to this whenever bone formation completes these levels will reduce. This may also be due to delay in maturation of bone by the interaction of the NE extract components.
Current study bone healing can be related to a recent study done by Gummaluri et al. on osteoblastic cell lines (MG-63 osteosarcoma cells) where they used the herbal extracts such as mangosteen rind and triphala indica extracts incorporated into T-PRF and concluded that there was greater osteogenic differentiation along with increased secretions of ALP, BMP-2 and osteopontin. Thus, T-PRF property was not altered with the addition of these herbal extracts.
Limitations of the present study was: It was a pilot study, smaller sample size where there were non-significant results observed in regards to mineralized and un-mineralized bone formation, larger sample size might have shown significant results and shorter duration of study is another limitation. Moreover, due to the ethical concerns from the ethics committee regarding T-PRF preparations and animals sacrifice there was usage of only 12 rats in the current study. This was even discussed with statistician and came to an agreement. There was no gathering of trabecular separation, bone surface area to bone volume ratio, connectivity density, trabecular number and trabecular thickness etc., were not calculated and addition of these parameters might alter the results and depict the best treatment strategy. Quantification of cells through H&E and inter examiner variability calculation if performed would enhance the results and hence this can also be considered a limitation. Long term human randomized clinical trials will help in better establishment of this treatment protocol and data.

V. Conclusion
Within limitations all the test groups helped in new bone formation when examined through light microscopy, µ-CT analysis and gene expression. T-PRF plain without addition of antibiotics or herbal extract stimulated new bone formation indicating its superiority in hard tissue healing. Addition of antibiotics like AMX or MET in T-PRF didn’t inhibit the hard tissue healing and helped in mineralized bone formation. NE incorporation in to T-PRF has also reported new bone formation but it is less mineralized than T-PRF plain, T-PRF+AMX and T-PRF+MET. It can also be concluded that T-PRF has not lost its healing function with the incorporation of antibiotics or herbal extract. Hence, T-PRF can be used as a SDDS vehicle to deliver antibiotics locally at the periodontal disease sites which can control the bacterial load as well as stimulate the body cells for a good hard and soft tissue healing.

Supplementary Materials
Supplementary data is available at https://www.jkaoms.org.
Authors’ Contributions
S.S.G. and K.G. participated in data collection and writing the manuscript. T.K.D., A.B., N.V.K.G., and R.B. participated in the study design and performed the statistical analysis. S.S.G., V.C.R., and K.G. participated in the study design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
No funding to declare.
Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
This study was approved by the Institutional Animal Ethical Committee and Review Board of Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences (No. SU/CLAR/RD/01/2024).
Conflict of Interest
No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.

References
Periodontitis: consensus report of workgroup 2 of the 2017 World Workshop on the Classification of Periodontal and Peri-Implant Diseases and Conditions
The association between oral hygiene and periodontitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Analysis of periodontal attachment loss in relation to root form abnormalities
Patients' view on non-surgical and surgical periodontal therapy in relation to oral health: a narrative review
Systemic antibiotic therapy in periodontics
Local delivery and controlled release drugs systems: a new approach for the clinical treatment of periodontitis therapy
Biomimetic natural biomaterials for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine: new biosynthesis methods, recent advances, and emerging applications
Une opportunité en paro-implantologie: le PRF
Endodontic regeneration therapy: current strategies and tissue engineering solutions
Platelet-rich fibrin for root coverage: a plausible approach in periodontal plastic and esthetic surgery
Extraction socket augmentation with autologous platelet-rich fibrin (PRF): the rationale for socket augmentation
Incorporating antibiotics into platelet-rich fibrin: a novel antibiotics slow-release biological device
Can platelet-rich fibrin act as a natural carrier for antibiotics delivery? A proof-of-concept study for oral surgical procedures
Platelet-rich fibrin (PRF): a second-generation platelet concentrate. Part IV: clinical effects on tissue healing
Safety issues associated with platelet-rich fibrin method
In vivo evaluation of titanium-prepared platelet-rich fibrin (T-PRF): a new platelet concentrate
A novel platelet concentrate: titanium-prepared platelet-rich fibrin
Titanium platelet-rich fibrin (T-PRF) as high-capacity doxycycline delivery system
Comparative evaluation of titanium-prepared platelet-rich fibrin with and without herbal extract: a histological study
Comparative assessment of T-PRF alone and T-PRF injected with antibiotic gels, herbal product separately: a histological study
Comparative analysis of local application of titanium-platelet rich fibrin (T-PRF) and leukocyte-platelet rich fibrin (L-PRF) in bone defect healing: a micro-CT and histopathological study in rabbit models
Stability of platelet-rich fibrin treated with tranexamic acid in vivo: a histological study in rats
Microbiological and clinical evaluation of neem gel and chlorhexidine gel on dental plaque and gingivitis in 20-30 years old adults: a randomized parallel-armed, double-blinded controlled trial
Healing capacity of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells versus platelet-rich fibrin in tibial bone defects of albino rats: an in vivo study
Comparative histological evaluation of L-PRF with T-PRF: a scanning electron microscopic study
Histological and histomorphometrical evaluation of porous phosphate glass as a bone graft substitute: a pilot study
Histological study to evaluate the effect of local application of Myrtus communis oil on alveolar bone healing in rats
Analyzing real-time PCR data by the comparative C(T) method
Aging, inflammation, stem cells, and bone healing
A novel classification of bone graft materials
Platelet-rich fibrin/aspirin complex promotes alveolar bone regeneration in periodontal defect in rats
Evaluation of leukocyte-platelet rich fibrin as an antibiotic slow-release biological device in the treatment of moderate periodontitis: a randomized controlled clinical trial
Evaluation of the effects of amoxicillin on tooth development in rats by histological and histomorphometric study
Anti-microbial drug metronidazole promotes fracture healing: enhancement in the bone regenerative efficacy of the drug by a biodegradable sustained-release in situ gel formulation
The effects of local and systemic metronidazole on bone healing in mandibular defects: a rat model
Evaluation of antiarthritic activity of nimbolide against Freund's adjuvant induced arthritis in rats
Comparative evaluation of azadirachtin, vitamin C and insulin like growth factor 1 release in titanium platelet rich fibrin infused with neem and Triphala indica gel extracts: an invitro study
Evaluating the antimicrobial efficacy, growth factor release drug kinetics of titanium platelet-rich fibrin loaded with amoxiclav, metronidazole and neem gel: an in vitro study
Comparative evaluation of titanium platelet rich fibrin infused with Triphala indica and mangosteen gels for osteogenic cell viability and gene expression on osteosarcoma cells (MG-63): an ex-vivo study
Depict the step wise surgical procedure such as initial induction of periodontitis using ligature for lower anterior teeth (A), surgical creation of defect and checking the depth of the defect using UNC 15 probe (B, C). Depict the titanium test tubes used (D); (E) depict the T-PRF plain and (F-H) depict the method of injecting AMX gel, MET gel and NE gel into T-PRF clots; (I) depict the placement of the clots in the created bone defect and (J) depict the suturing of the flap after the surgery. (H&E: haematoxylin & eosin, UNC: University of North Carolina, CT: computed tomography, T-PRF: titanium platelet-rich fibrin, AMX: amoxicillin+clavulanate, MET: metronidazole, NE: neem)
Depict the histological images (H&E staining) at ×10 magnification of T-PRF+AMX (A), T-PRF+MET (B), T-PRF+ NE (C), and T-PRF plain (D) Groups showing surgical site (red arrow), green arrow depicts mineralized lamellar bone and yellow arrow indicate woven bone that might be less mineralized, white arrow in (B) and (D) depicts the muscle tissue. Blue arrow indicates the osteoblastic cells. (T-PRF: titanium platelet-rich fibrin, AMX: amoxicillin+clavulanate, MET: metronidazole, NE: neem)
Depict the histological images (Masson trichome staining) at ×10 magnification of T-PRF+AMX (A), T-PRF+MET (B), T-PRF+NE (C), and T-PRF plain (D) Groups showing highly mineralized bone areas in red colour depicted by green arrow, less mineralized with mature collagen content depicted in yellow colour. Black arrow depicts the osteocytes presence. Red arrow in (A) depict the surgical site and in (D) it depicts the osteoblastic rimming. Blue arrow depicts osteoblastic rimming. (T-PRF: titanium platelet-rich fibrin, AMX: amoxicillin+clavulanate, MET: metronidazole, NE: neem)
Depict the histological images (H&E and Masson trichome staining) at ×40 magnification where (A, B) belongs to T-PRF+AMX, (C, D) belongs to T-PRF+MET, (E, F) belongs to T-PRF+NE Groups where much mineralized bone was shown in T-PRF+AMX and T-PRF+MET Groups (green arrows), yellow arrows show woven bone (less mineralized), white arrow depict the osteocytes and blue arrows show the inflammatory state. Red arrow show the osteoblastic cells. (T-PRF: titanium platelet-rich fibrin, AMX: amoxicillin+clavulanate, MET: metronidazole, NE: neem)
Depict the histological images (H&E and Masson trichome staining) at ×40 magnification of titanium platelet-rich fibrin plain where green arrow depicts the mature mineralized bone, blue arrow depicts the osteocytes, red arrow indicates the inflammatory state, yellow arrow show the blue region which meant for less mineralized bone. White arrow indicate the surgical wound site with osteoblastic cells presence.
Depict the images of micro computed tomography images of T-PRF+ AMX (A), T-PRF+MET (B), T-PRF+NE (C) and T-PRF plain (D). Red arrow indicates the surgical site where defect was prepared and Hounsfield values were calculated to report the bone density. (T-PRF: titanium platelet-rich fibrin, AMX: amoxicillin+clavulanate, MET: metronidazole, NE: neem)
Depict the distribution of inflammatory response and type of inflammatory cells in all the groups
Group	Inflammatory response	P-value	 		 	Severe	Mild	Moderate	Nil	Total	 	T-PRF plain	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	3 (100.0)	3	0.0081	 	T-PRF+ amoxiclav	2 (66.7)	0 (0)	1 (33.3)	0 (0)	3		 	T-PRF+MET	3 (100.0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	3		 	T-PRF+NE	0 (0)	2 (66.7)	1 (33.3)	0 (0)	3		 	Total	5 (41.7)	2 (16.7)	2 (16.7)	3 (25.0)	12		 	Group	Nature of inflammatory cells	P-value	 		 	Lymphocytes	Lymphoplasmacytic	None	 	T-PRF plain	0 (0)	0 (0)	3 (100.0)	0.0201	 	T-PRF+AMX	0 (0)	3 (100.0)	0 (0)		 	T-PRF+MET	0 (0)	3 (100.0)	0 (0)		 	T-PRF+NE	1 (33.3)	2 (66.7)	0 (0)		 	Total	1 (8.3)	8 (66.7)	3 (25.0)
(T-PRF: titanium platelet-rich fibrin, AMX: amoxicillin+clavulanate, MET: metronidazole, NE: neem)
Values are presented as number (%).
1Indicates significance, P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Depict the mineralized and un-mineralized bone formation in all the groups
Group	0%-24%	25%-49%	50%-69%	>70%	Total	P-value	 	Mineralized bone formation							 	T-PRF plain	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	3 (100.0)	3	0.1331	 	T-PRF+AMX	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (33.3)	2 (66.7)	3		 	T-PRF+MET	0 (0)	0 (0)	1 (33.3)	2 (66.7)	3		 	T-PRF+NE	1 (33.3)	2 (66.7)	0 (0)	0 (0)	3		 	Total	1 (8.3%)	2 (16.7)	2 (16.7)	7 (58.3)	12		 	Un-mineralized bone formation		 	T-PRF plain	3 (100.0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	0 (0)	3	0.1331	 	T-PRF+AMX	2 (66.7)	1 (33.3)	0 (0)	0 (0)	3		 	T-PRF+MET	2 (66.7)	1 (33.3)	0 (0)	0 (0)	3		 	T-PRF+NE	0 (0)	0 (0)	2 (66.7)	1 (33.3)	3		 	Total	7 (58.3)	2 (16.7)	2 (16.7)	1 (8.3)	12
(T-PRF: titanium platelet-rich fibrin, AMX: amoxicillin+clavulanate, MET: metronidazole, NE: neem)
Values are presented as number (%).
1Indicates non-significant, P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Depict the osteoblastic rimming presence and frequency distribution of osteocyte viability in all the groups of the present study
Group	Osteoblastic rimming presence	P-value	 		 	No	Yes	Total	 	T-PRF plain	3 (100.0%)	0 (0%)	3	0.0291	 	T-PRF+AMX	0 (0%)	3 (100.0%)	3		 	T-PRF+MET	1 (33.3%)	2 (66.7%)	3		 	T-PRF+NE	0 (0%)	3 (100.0%)	3		 	Total	4 (33.3%)	8 (66.7%)	12		 	Group	Viability of osteocytes	-	 		 	Viable cell	%		 	T-PRF plain	3	100%			 	T-PRF+AMX	3	100%			 	T-PRF+MET	3	100%			 	T-PRF+NE	3	100%			 	Total	12	100%
(T-PRF: titanium platelet-rich fibrin, AMX: amoxicillin+clavulanate, MET: metronidazole, NE: neem)
1Indicates significance, P<0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Depict the comparison of means of bone density in Hounsfield units among all T-PRF Groups
Group	Number	Mean	Standard deviation	F-value	P-value	 	T-PRF+AMX	3	551.00	18.68	0.765	0.5451	 	T-PRF+MET	3	578.00	18.25			 	T-PRF+NE	3	569.00	24.58			 	T-PRF Plain	3	507.67	118.50
(T-PRF: titanium platelet-rich fibrin, AMX: amoxicillin+clavulanate, MET: metronidazole, NE: neem)
1Indicates not significant.