A Research Strategy to Discover the Environmental Causes of Autism and Neurodevelopmental Disabilities
Autism, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), mental retardation, dyslexia, and other biologically based disorders of brain development affect between 400,000 and 600,000 of the 4 million children born in the United States each year. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has reported that autism spectrum disorder (ASD) now affects 1.13% (1 of 88) of American children and ADHD affects 14%. Treatment of these disorders is difficult; the disabilities they cause can last lifelong, and they are devastating to families. In addition, these disorders place enormous economic burdens on society.
Although discovery research to identify the potentially preventable causes of neuro-develop-mental disorders (NDDs) has increased in recent years, more research is urgently needed. This research encompasses both genetic and environ-mental studies.
Genetic research has received particular investment and attention (Autism Genome Project Consortium et al. 2007) and has demonstrated that ASD and certain other NDDs have a strong hereditary component. Linkage studies have identified candidate autism susceptibility genes at multiple loci, most consistently on chromosomes 7q, 15q, and 16p (Autism Genome Project Consortium et al. 2007). Exome sequencing in sporadic cases of autism has detected new mutations, and copy number variant studies have identified several hundred copy number variants putatively linked to autism. The candidate genes most strongly implicated in NDD causation encode for proteins involved in synaptic architecture, neuro-transmitter synthesis (e.g., ©-amino-butyric acid serotonin), oxytocin receptors, and cation trafficking. No single anomaly predominates. Instead, autism appears to be a family of diseases with common pheno-types linked to a series of genetic anomalies, each of which is responsible for no more than 2–3% of cases. The total fraction of ASD attributable to genetic inheri-tance may be about 30–40%.
Exploration of the environmental causes of autism and other NDDs has been catalyzed by growing recognition of the exquisite sensitivity of the developing human brain to toxic chemicals. This susceptibility is greatest during unique “windows of vulnerability” that open only in embryonic and fetal life and have no later counter-part. “Proof of the principle” that early exposures can cause autism comes from studies linking ASD to medications taken in the first trimester of pregnancy—thalidomide, misoprostol, and valproic acid—and to first-trimester rubella infection.
This “proof-of-principle” evidence for environmental causation is supported further by findings from prospective birth cohort epidemio-logical studies, many of them supported by the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS). These studies enroll women during pregnancy, measure prenatal exposures in real time as they occur, and then follow children longitudinally with periodic direct examinations to assess growth, development, and the presence of disease. Prospective studies are powerful engines for the discovery of etiologic associations between prenatal exposures and NDDs. They have linked autistic behaviors with prenatal exposures to the organophosphate insecticide chlorpyrifos and also with prenatal exposures to phthalates. Additional prospective studies have linked loss of cognition (IQ), dyslexia, and ADHD to lead, methyl-mercury, organophosphate insecticides, organo-chlorine insecticides, polychlorinated biphenyls, arsenic, manganese, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, bisphenol A, brominated flame retardants, and perfluorinated compounds.
Toxic chemicals likely cause injury to the developing human brain either through direct toxicity or inter-actions with the genome. An expert committee convened by the U.S. National Academy of Sciences (NAS) estimated that 3% of neuro-behavioral disorders are caused directly by toxic environ-mental exposures and that another 25% are caused by inter-actions between environmental factors, defined broadly, and inherited susceptibilities. Epigenetic modification of gene expression by toxic chemicals that results in DNA methyla-tion, histone modification, or changes in activity levels of non-protein-coding RNA (ncRNAs) may be a mechanism of such gene–environment interaction. Epigenetic “marks” have been shown to be able to influence gene expression and alter high-order DNA structure.
A major unanswered question is whether there are still undiscovered environ-mental causes of autism or other NDDs among the thousands of chemicals currently in wide use in the United States. In the past 50 years, > 80,000 new synthetic chemicals have been developed. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has identified 3,000 “high production volume” (HPV) chemicals that are in widest use and thus pose greatest potential for human exposure. These HPV chemicals are used today in millions of consumer products. Children and pregnant women are exposed extensively to them, and CDC surveys detect quantifiable levels of nearly 200 HPV chemicals in the bodies of virtually all Americans, including pregnant women.
The significance of early chemical exposures for children’s health is not yet fully understood. A great concern is that a large number of the chemicals in widest use have not undergone even minimal assessment of potential toxicity, and only about 20% have been screened for potential toxicity during early development. Unless studies specifically examine develop-mental consequences of early exposures to untested chemicals, sub-clinical dysfunction caused by these exposures can go unrecognized for years. One example is the “silent epidemic” of childhood lead poisoning: From the 1940s to the 1980s, millions of American children were exposed to excessive levels of lead from paint and gasoline, resulting in reduced average intelligence by 2–5 IQ points. The late David Rall, former director of NIEHS, once observed that “If thalidomide had caused a 10-point loss of IQ instead of birth defects of the limbs, it would likely still be on the market”.
To begin formulation of a systematic strategy for discovery of potentially preventable environmental causes of autism and other NDDs, the Mount Sinai Children’s Environmental Health Center, with the support of the NIEHS and Autism Speaks, convened a workshop on “Exploring the Environmental Causes of Autism and Learning Disabilities.” This workshop produced a series of papers by leading researchers, some of which are published in this issue of Environmental Health Perspectives. It also generated a list of 10 chemi-cals and mixtures widely distributed in the environment that are already suspected of causing develop-mental neuro-toxicity:
Lead
Methylmercury
Polychlorinated biphenyls
Organophosphate pesticides
Organochlorine pesticides
Endocrine disruptors
Automotive exhaust
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
Brominated flame retardants
Perfluorinated compounds.
This list is not exhaustive and will almost certainly expand in the years ahead as new science emerges. It is intended to focus research in environmental causation of NDDs on a short list of chemicals where concentrated study has high potential to generate actionable findings in the near future. Its ultimate purpose is to catalyze new evidence-based programs for prevention of disease in America’s children.
The authors declare they have no actual or potential competing -financial interests.

References
Epigenetic transgenerational actions of endocrine disruptors.
The teratology of autism.
Mapping autism risk loci using genetic linkage and chromosomal rearrangements.
Impact of early-life bisphenol A exposure on behavior and executive function in children.
The emerging neuroscience of autism spectrum disorders
Mental health in the United States. Prevalence of diagnosis and medication treatment for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder–United States, 2003.
Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders—autism and developmental disabilities monitoring network, 14 sites, United States, 2008.
Autism and the environment
Organophosphate pesticide exposure and neurodevelopment in young Mexican-American children.
Pesticide toxicity and the developing brain.
Rare copy number variants in tourette syndrome disrupt genes in histaminergic pathways and overlap with autism.
Chemicals and children’s environment: what we don’t know about risks.
Autism spectrum disorders and epigenetics.
Developmental neurotoxicity of industrial chemicals: a silent pandemic.
Economic gains resulting from the reduction in children’s exposure to lead in the United States.
Prenatal exposure to PBDEs and neurodevelopment.
Blood lead concentrations < 10 µg/dL and child intelligence at 6 years of age.
Manganese exposure from drinking water and children’s classroom behavior in Bangladesh.
Children’s vulnerability to toxic chemicals: a challenge and opportunity to strengthen health and environmental policy.
Neurobehavioral and neurodevelopmental effects of pesticide exposures.
Environmental neurotoxicants and developing brain.
Endocrine disruptors and childhood social impairment.
Scientific Frontiers in Developmental Toxicology and Risk Assessment.
Maternal fish intake during pregnancy, blood mercury levels, and child cognition at age 3 years in a US cohort.
Exome sequencing in sporadic autism spectrum disorders identifies severe de novo mutations.
Diagnosed attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and learning disability: United States, 2004–2006.
Prenatal airborne polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon exposure and child IQ at age 5 years.
Genomic architecture of autism spectrum disorders.
Serum perfluorinated compound concentration and attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder in children 5–18 years of age.
Reducing the staggering costs of environmental disease in children, estimated at $76.6 billion in 2008.
Residential proximity to freeways and autism in the CHARGE Study.
Water arsenic exposure and intellectual function in 6-year-old children in Araihazar, Bangladesh.
Early nutrition, epigenetic changes at transposons and imprinted genes, and enhanced susceptibility to adult chronic diseases.
Food additives and environmental chemicals as sources of childhood behavior disorders.
Developmental aspects of environmental neurotoxicology: lessons from lead and polychlorinated biphenyls.
Environmental chemicals in pregnant women in the United States: NHANES 2003–2004.