Heterogeneity in Histological Evaluation of Microscopic Colitis in Randomized Clinical Trials: An Umbrella Review
Abstract
Background
The diagnosis of microscopic colitis (MC) is based on endoscopic biopsy with histological assessment. Histological outcomes (remission, response or improvement) are important treatment targets in clinical trials. Although a substantial body of research on MC has been published in recent years, no standardized criteria currently exist for its histological outcomes. We sought to review and summarize the histological evaluation of MC in published systematic reviews (SRs) assessing the efficacy of interventions and to examine the heterogeneity in histological evaluation among the randomized controlled trials (RCTs) included in those SRs.
Methods
We conducted an umbrella review (ie, an overview of systematic reviews) of published SRs. A literature search of the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, MEDLINE, and Embase was performed up to May 2025. Definitions of histological evaluation and monitoring following interventions were extracted and summarized from the published SRs and the RCTs included within them.
Results
Fourteen SRs with meta-analyses that focused on interventions were included. Nineteen RCTs were included in these SRs. Of them, 12 fully published RCTs reported histological outcome data and met our inclusion criteria. The definitions for histological outcomes varied between RCTs but were generally based on reduction in lamina propria cellularity, intraepithelial lymphocytes, or collagen band thickness.
Conclusions
This umbrella review highlights the heterogeneity in the definitions of histological outcomes in MC RCTs. The summarized evidence will support ongoing efforts to develop consensus definitions for histological outcomes in order to facilitate clinical trials of medical therapies for MC.
What is already known?
Microscopic colitis is an inflammatory bowel disease characterized by persistent watery diarrhea. Diagnosis relies on endoscopic biopsy with histological assessment, but standardized histological criteria are lacking.
What is new here?
This is the first systematic review on the topic, and the evidence shows that definitions of histological outcomes (remission, response, or improvement) in microscopic colitis across randomized controlled trials are highly heterogeneous.
How can this study help patient care?
The summarized evidence will support ongoing efforts to develop consensus definitions for histological outcomes, thereby facilitating future clinical trials of medical therapies for microscopic colitis.

Introduction
Microscopic colitis (MC) is an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and a relatively common cause of chronic, watery, nonbloody diarrhea, comprising 2 major histological subtypes: lymphocytic colitis (LC) and collagenous colitis (CC). It is characterized by a normal or near-normal endoscopic appearance of the colon, along with distinct histological abnormalities. Incomplete forms may also occur (incomplete MC). Its incidence and prevalence have been increasing in recent years and in routine procurement of biopsies in which there are symptoms that may be suggestive of MC. A systematic review reported a pooled incidence rate of 4.85 per 100 000 person-years for LC and 4.14 per 100 000 person-years for CC. According to the recent United European Gastroenterology and European Microscopic Colitis Group (EMCG) guidelines on MC, the pooled overall prevalence of MC is estimated at 119 per 100 000 persons, with prevalence estimates of 50.1 per 100 000 for CC and 61.7 per 100 000 for LC, respectively.
There is a significant overlap of symptoms between MC and disorders of the brain-gut axis (DBGAs). It is reported that the pooled prevalence of DBGAs in patients who present diagnostic criteria of MC was 39.1%, while the prevalence of MC in patients exhibiting diarrhea-dominant irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) was 9.8%. Several risk factors have been associated with the development of MC, including older age, female sex, and the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. The diagnosis of MC and the classification of its 2 subtypes rely on histologic examination of colonic mucosal biopsy specimens, as macroscopic findings on colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy are typically absent.
In addition to clinical outcomes, histological outcomes, such as remission and response, are important treatment targets in clinical trials. However, the definition of MC remains heterogeneous. In particular, there is no standardized histological measurement tool for assessing treatment response in clinical trials. Although pharmaceutical interventions have been studied in this patient population, clinical trials have reported varying histological evaluation criteria and components. This is in part influenced by the clinical management of MC, where repeat endoscopy with biopsy is not routinely performed once clinical remission has been achieved.
Several systematic reviews (SRs), with or without meta-analyses, have evaluated the efficacy of interventions in patients with MC, with some considering histological outcomes. No histological scoring system for MC has been validated to date. In this umbrella review, we aimed to summarize the assessment of histological outcomes reported in published SRs and in the randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that they included. Information from this review will help to inform consensus definitions for histological outcomes that can be used in future clinical trials evaluating interventions for MC.

Methods
For the overview of SRs, we followed the Cochrane Collaboration guidelines of overviews of reviews, the JBI manual for umbrella reviews, and the recommendations outlined in the Preferred Reporting Items for Overviews of Reviews. We also followed a standardized methodology and reported findings according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses. Our methods involved presenting definitions of histological assessment exactly as reported in the included SRs and RCTs of interventions for MC; no data analyses or reanalyses were planned. An in-house protocol was developed before developing the search strategies and the data extraction form for the umbrella review.

Search strategy
The literature search was conducted in MEDLINE (from 1946), Embase (from 1974), and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (from inception) on May 23, 2025, to identify SRs (with or without meta-analysis) focused on interventions for MC. The search strategy was initially developed in MEDLINE and then translated for use in Embase and Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. Both controlled vocabulary and free-text terms related to MC—including “collagenous colitis” and “lymphocytic colitis”—were used. Non–English language records and conference abstracts were excluded (Supplemental Appendix 1).

Selection criteria
We predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria in the study protocol. First, we included SRs that evaluated interventions in patients with MC, regardless of the primary study design. We excluded SRs that did not evaluate interventions (eg, those focused on incidence, prevalence, risk factors, pathogenesis, associations with other diseases, or complications, etc.). We also excluded general narrative reviews, guidelines, position papers, and studies that did not meet the criteria for an SR due to unsystematic methodology.
Second, we reviewed the studies included in those SRs and selected RCTs that investigated the treatment effects of pharmaceutical interventions for MC. Nonpublished (including conference proceedings), non-English and non-RCTs included in the published SRs were excluded.
Third, we further reviewed the selected RCTs to identify those that evaluated histological outcomes in response to treatment. We excluded studies that did not report histological diagnostic criteria or histological outcomes.
All references retrieved through the search strategy were imported into Covidence (https://www.covidence.org/) for screening. Two reviewers independently conducted title and abstract screening, followed by full-text review. Any discrepancies were resolved through discussion; if consensus could not be reached, a third reviewer acted as an adjudicator.

Data extraction
Data extraction was performed independently and in duplicate by 2 reviewers. A study-specific extraction form was piloted prior to use. For each SR, we extracted the following data: author and year of publication, type of review (with or without meta-analysis), date of search, databases searched, number of included studies, number of included RCTs, study eligibility criteria, and key conclusions related to histological outcome evaluation. For each RCT that reported histological evaluation data, we extracted the author and year of publication, the SR(s) in which the RCT was included, diagnostic criteria of MC, subtypes of MC, measurement time points, and definitions of histological outcomes, including the definition and components of the histological evaluation.

Outcomes
Our outcome of interest was the histological definitions and components used in the diagnostic criteria for MC, as well as those used in histological outcome assessment after interventions.

Risk-of-bias assessment
Because our focus was on the definitions of histological response reported in primary studies, rather than the efficacy or adverse outcomes of the interventions, the quality of the included SRs and the risk of bias in the primary RCTs were not considered relevant to our outcome of interest. Therefore, no quality assessment of SRs and no risk-of-bias assessment of RCTs were performed.

Data analysis
We did not intend to reanalyze the data beyond the original assessments presented in the included SRs, nor update the SRs. Instead, we extracted the histological definitions and components used in the interventional RCTs for MC as reported and then synthesized and summarized the findings narratively.

Results

Study selection and characteristics
The literature search identified 249 records, of which 30 full texts were further excluded with reasons (Table S1). Finally, 14 systematic reviews (all but one with meta-analyses) that focused on interventions for MC were included in this umbrella review (Figure S1). They were published between 2004 to 2024. The previously published versions of 2 Cochrane reviews, one with 5 and the other with 3, were not considered separate SRs in our summary.

Summary of SRs
The two latest SRs and the earliest SR did not report any histological outcomes. Histological outcomes included histological response/improvement or histological remission, as defined by included studies (Table 1). The most comprehensive SR that reported histological outcomes was by Hamilton et al, which included 12 placebo-controlled RCTs. Although the authors reported “endpoint definitions” for each study, this information was missing for histological outcomes for some studies. They concluded, “No consistent definition of histologic response was used across all studies but was generally based on reduction in lamina propria cellularity, intraepithelial lymphocytes, or collagen band thickness,” with a pooled placebo histologic response rate from 7 RCTs, as 19.9% (95% confidence interval, 5.3%-39.0%).
Characteristics of included SRs (n = 14).
Study (all SR with or without meta-analysis)	Title	Inclusion criteria	Searched databases and dates	Number of included studies (publication year)	Key conclusions related to histological outcome evaluation and definition	 	Tome 2024 (SRMA)	Effectiveness of Bile Acid Sequestrants (BAS) in Microscopic Colitis and Utility of Bile Acid Testing: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.	Clinical outcomes with BAS therapy and/or BAM testing in adults with MC (biopsy-proven MC)	MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane, and Scopus; January 22, 2024	23 studies (1 RCT, 22 observational studies)	No histological outcomes	 	Tome 2024 (SRMA)	Effectiveness and Safety Profile of Budesonide Maintenance in Microscopic Colitis: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.	Budesonide in adults with MC for induction and/or maintenance evaluated clinical outcomes and safety (biopsy proven)	MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane, and Scopus; October 31, 2022	35 studies (11 RCTs, 24 observational studies)	No histological outcomes	 	Malik 2024 (SRMA)	Budesonide Versus Mesalamine in Microscopic Colitis. A Comparative Meta-analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.	Patients with MC, compared with budesonide or mesalamine vs placebo; outcomes: clinical remission or safety	Cochrane Library, Scopus, Web of Science, and PubMed; October 2020	19 studies, 12 RCTs: although claimed to include “19 RCTs” (8 of them not included in other published SRs (7 were not RCTs, 1 did not report histological outcomes), 5 were assessed as high risk of bias of randomization (4 of them were open-label phase)	Listed the outcome of all included studies, 3 of which mentioned histological outcomes (improvement or remission). No meta-analysis on histological outcomes.	 	El Hage Chehade 2023 (SRMA)	Efficacy and Safety of Vedolizumab and Tumor Necrosis Factor Inhibitors in the Treatment of Steroid-refractory Microscopic Colitis: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis	Steroid-refractory MC who received vedolizumab, adalimumab, or infliximab in induction or maintenance trials	MEDLINE/PubMed,EMBASE, and Cochrane databases, conferences, 2022	14 studies (3 retrospective studies and 11 case series) (2011-2022); zero RCTs	Histological remission defined by “histologic normalization of mucosa with disappearance of intraepithelial lymphocytes or thickening of the subepithelial collagen band.” Reported pooled rates after each drug in each phase.	 	Hamilton 2023 (SRMA)	Meta-analysis: Placebo rates in microscopic colitis randomised trials and applications for future drug development using a historical control arm	Placebo-controlled RCTs in adult patients with MC, evaluating a medical treatment for MC; aimed to estimate clinical and histologic placebo response rates and associated factors; induction endpoint only	Embase, MEDLINE, and CENTRAL, January 7, 2022	12 RCTs (1999-2018); 7 of them were included for the “histologic induction response rate” meta-analysis	Although reported “endpoint definitions,” some information is missing for histological endpoints in some studies. Concluded “No consistent definition of histologic response was used across all studies, but was generally based on reduction in lamina propria cellularity, intraepithelial lymphocytes, or collagen band thickness.”Pooled placebo histologic response rate = 19.9% (95% CI, 5.3%-39.0%).	 	Kumar 2023 (SR-NMA)	Efficacy and safety of medical therapies in microscopic colitis: a systematic review and network meta-analysis	RCTs examining the efficacy of medical therapies vs placebo or another therapy.	MEDLINE, Embase and Embase Classis, CENTRAL, conferences; May 2021	15 RCTs (2002-2018); 7 of them were included for “induction, histological remission,” 3 for “maintenance, histological remission”	“Histological remission was defined using several parameters: reduction in the mean thickness of collagen band of less than 10 µm, reduction if infiltrate in lamina propria (the number of IELs ≤20 IEL/100 epithelial cells), and the absence of degeneration of the surface epithelium.”	 	Rehde 2023 (SR only)	 	 	Effectiveness of Non-Budesonide Therapies in Management of Microscopic Colitis: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.	Effectiveness of nonbudesonide therapies (thiopurines, BSS, BASs, loperamide, and biologics), “clinical, endoscopic, and histological response,” etc.	MEDLINE, Embase and CENTRAL, April 18, 2023	25 studies (17 published and 8 abstracts): 1 RCT, case series with >5 cases, and cohort studies	Reported data of “histologic response” (“histologic remission” and “histological improvement”) by primary studies; no definition. Histologic response rate 45% (95% CI, 17-76); in 34 participants in 3 studies only. Histologic remission rate 36% (95% CI, 22-50); in 52 participants in 5 studies. The single RCT did not provide histological data.	 	Taneja 2022 (SRMA)	Efficacy and safety of biologic therapy in microscopic colitis: Systematic review and meta-analysis.	Biologic (infliximab, adalimumab, certolizumab, golimumab, vedolizumab, ustekinumab, and tofacitinib) for induction and maintenance of remission in MC; efficacy and safety	MEDLINE, Embase, Web of Science, and CENTRAL; May 30, 2021	13 articles (including 4 abstracts): zero RCTs, 3 retrospective observational studies, 8 case series, and 2 case reports	Reported 4 studies reported histological remission and response data. No definitions. No meta-analysis.	 	Sebastian 2019 (SRMA)	Budesonide treatment for microscopic colitis: Systematic review and meta-analysis	RCTs, using budesonide for the treatment of MC	MEDLINE, Embase and CENTRAL, September 2018	10 RCTs (only listed 9 RCTs in its Table 1)	“Histological response” at induction (7 RCTs) and “maintenance of histological remission (2 RCTs) included in the meta-analysis. Did not provide definitions.	 	Kafil 2017 (Cochrane SR, updated the previous 5 versions from 2003 to 2008)	Interventions for treating collagenous colitis	RCTs compared any medical treatments with an active control or placebo	CENTRAL, the Cochrane IBD Group Specialized Register, MEDLINE and EMBASE, November 2016	12 RCTs	Histological response was one of the secondary outcomes. Reported definitions of histological diagnosis or histological response outcome histological response as defined by the included studies.Only 7 RCTs were included in 5 meta-analyses related to histological response, 3 of which only included 1 RCT.	 	Chande 2017 (Cochrane SR, updated the previous 3 versions from 2006 to 2008)	Interventions for treating lymphocytic colitis	RCTs compared any medical treatments with an active control or placebo	MEDLINE, PubMed and Embase, August, 2016	5 RCTs	Histological response was one of the secondary outcomes. Reported definitions of histological diagnosis or histological response outcome histological response as defined by the included studies.Four RCTs were included in 3 meta-analyses.“There are no established definitions for clinical or histological remission in lymphocytic colitis.”	 	Stewart 2011-(SRMA)	Prednisolone and budesonide for short- and long-term treatment of microscopic colitis: systematic review and meta-analysis	RCTs compared conventional corticosteroid or budesonide with placebo	MEDLINE, Embase, CENTRAL, conference proceedings, and reference lists; trial registry, November 2010	9 RCTs in SR, 8 in meta-analysis	Histologic response was a secondary outcome as defined by the authors. “Histologic improvement was assessed by evaluating the degree of inflammation, the thickness of the collagen layer (in CC), and the number of intraepithelial lymphocytes (in LC)” (n = 6 RCTs).	 	Chande 2009 (co-publication of Cochrane SRs)	Interventions for treating microscopic colitis: A Cochrane inflammatory bowel disease and functional bowel disorders review group systematic review of randomized trials	RCTs assessing therapy for CC or LC	MEDLINE, PubMed, and Cochrane Collaboration databases, reference lists, and major conferences; August 2008	11 RCTs (9 for induction, 2 for maintenance)	Histological response was a secondary outcome. “The definitions for histological response varied between trials. Therefore, the data were not combined for analysis.”	 	Feyen 2004 (SRMA)	Meta-analysis: Budesonide treatment for collagenous colitis.	RCTs of budesonide use in CC	MEDLINE and Embase, search date not reported	3 RCTs	No histological outcomes
Abbreviations: AJG, •••; BAS, bile acid sequestrant; BSS, bismuth subsalicylate; CC, collagenous colitis; CI, confidence interval; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IEL, intraepithelial lymphocyte; LC, lymphocytic colitis; SR, systematic review; SRMA, systematic review with meta-analysis; SR-NMA, systematic review with network meta-analysis.
The second most comprehensive SR that reported histological outcome was a network meta-analysis by Kumar et al, which included 15 RCTs. Among them, 7 were included for induction of histological remission (2 were zero-outcome studies) and 3 were included for “maintenance of histological remission” (1 was a zero-event study). The authors defined histological remission as “Histological remission was defined using several parameters: reduction in the mean thickness of collagen band of less than 10 µm, reduction if infiltrate in lamina propria (the number of intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) ≤20 IEL/100 epithelial cells.” The review authors did not provide a further outcome definition of histological remission of individual RCTs.
Two Cochrane reviews in 2017 reported histological response data for CC (n = 12) and LC (n = 5), respectively, with a limited number of studies included in meta-analyses. The Chande 2017 Cochrane SR of LC concluded that “There are no established definitions for clinical or histological remission in lymphocytic colitis… If standardized definitions of clinical and histological remission can be established, the outcomes of these trials would be more applicable to clinical practice.” In an earlier version of the Cochrane SR, the authors stated that “The definitions for histological response varied between trials. Therefore, the data were not combined for analysis.” Except for the two Cochrane reviews and the earliest SR focused on CC or LC, other SRs included both CC and LC studies. Detailed information of all 14 SRs are summarized in Table 1.

Summary of RCTs included in SRs
Zero to 15 RCTs were included in published SRs. After removing the 2 SRs that included zero RCTs, 19 RCTs were included in the 12 SRs. Figure 1 presents the inclusion of RCTs in published SRs. Of these, 3 were conference abstracts, and 4 published RCTs did not report histological outcome data.
Mapping of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) included in the published systematic reviews with meta-analysis (SRMAs). Blue cells indicate a conference abstract; gray cells indicate no histological outcome data; green cells indicate a fully published RCT, with histological outcome data; orange cells indicate RCTs included in this umbrella review. AJG, American Journal of Gastroenterology; CC, collagenous colitis; IBD, Inflammatory Bowel Diseases; LC, lymphocytic colitis; MC, microscopic colitis.

General results of 12 eligible, fully published RCTs
After removing the above 7 RCTs, in total, 12 full-published RCTs that provided histological outcomes were further reviewed for their definitions of histological outcomes (Table 2). Their publication year ranged from 2002 to 2018. Two of the 12 RCTs studied both CC and LC, 2 only included LC, and the remaining 8 studied MC. Two RCTs evaluated the long-term therapy for the maintenance of clinical remission of CC and reported histological response.
Study characteristics and histological outcome definitions in 12 included RCTs.
CC only (n = 8)	 	Study ID	Country, center	Interventions, sample size	Time to follow-up	Histological diagnosis	Histological remission	Histological response/improvement	Inflammation of the lamina propria	Thickness of the collagen band	Degeneration of the surface epithelium	 	Baert 2002; CC	Belgium, multicenter	Budesonide (n = 14) vs placebo (n = 14)	8 wk	The subepithelial collagen band on a well-oriented section of the mucosa had the typical feathery appearance of the inferior border and exceeded 10 μm. In addition, an increased mixed inflammatory cell inﬁltrate in the predominantly mononuclear lamina propria should be present. Other ﬁndings may include (but not required) regenerative epithelial changes with mucin depletion, surface epithelial damage and sloughing, rare inﬁltration of neutrophils and eosinophils both in the epithelium and the lamina propria. Cases with overlapping histologic features with LC (increased number of intraepithelial lymphocytes) were classiﬁed according to the most predominant ﬁndings. Overlap syndromes were allowed if the collagen band was a predominant ﬁnding.		Significant reduction of infiltrate in lamina propria and/or significant reduction in mean thickness of collagen band	Infiltrate in lamina propria, scored semiquantitatively as normal, slightly increased, or dense.	Significant reduction in the mean thickness of the collagen band		 	Miehlke 2002; CC	Germany, multicenter	Budesonide (n = 26) vs placebo (n = 25)	6 wk	“Histologically confirmed CC”		Histologic improvement: improvement of at least 2 of 3 histologic parameters: thickness of collagen band, inflammation of lamina propria (semiquantitative), degeneration of surface epithelium (present/absent)	Inflammation of the lamina propria (semiquantitative score, 0-3)	A collagen band thickness of ≤10 μm posttreatment or a reduction of at least 50% vs baseline	Degeneration of the surface epithelium (present or absent)	 	Bonderup 2003; CC	Denmark, single center	Budesonide (n = 10) vs placebo (n = 10)	8 wk	Histological ﬁndings of a collagen layer more than 10 µm located beneath the surface epithelium in colonic mucosa		A reduction of the histological inflammation grade in the sigmoid mucosa and the thickness of the collagen layer	Grade of inflammation in the lamina propria semiquantitatively on a scale from 0 to 3: 0 = no inflammation; 1 = mild, with inflammatory inﬁltrate conﬁned to the upper part of the lamina propria; 2 = moderate, with inflammatory inﬁltrate extending beyond the base of the crypts; 3 = severe, with heavy inflammatory inﬁltrate occupying the lamina propria and inﬁltrating the lamina muscularis mucosa	The thickness of the collagen layer at 10 points. The average grade of inflammation and the average thickness of the collagen layer were calculated for the sigmoid colon (biopsies 1-4), rectum (biopsies 5 and 6), and all biopsies (1-6).		 	Wildt 2006; CC	Denmark, multicenter	AB-Cap-10 (Lactobacillus acidophilus LA-5 and Biﬁdobacterium animalis subsp. lactis BB-12) (n = 21) vs placebo (n = 8)	12 wk	A subepithelial collagenous layer exceeding 10 μm in a well-oriented section of the mucosa and inflammation of the lamina propria with inﬁltration of predominantly lymphocytes and plasma cells.		Only reported “histopathological changes between groups or within groups” for the 3 parameters (only reported “no differences”)	Degree of inflammation in the lamina propria was recorded semiquantitatively (0-3)	The collagen layer was measured at 3 to 5 points at each biopsy location, and the average thickness was calculated	Degree of degeneration/detachment of surface epithelium recorded semiquantitatively (0-2)	 	Madisch 2007; CC	Germany, multicenter	Boswellia serrata extract (n = 16) vs placebo (n = 15)	6 wk	Three parameters were assessed: thickness of the collagen band (μm) (typical feature being diffuse thickening of the subepithelial collagen layer ≥10 µm), inflammation of the lamina propria (semiquantitative score 0-3), and degeneration of surface epithelium (present/absent).Diagnosis of CC when the subepithelial collagen layer on at least 1 well-oriented section of mucosa exceeded 10 μm.		“Histologic effects.” Only reported: “small reduction of collagen band thickness and inflammation score without statistical significance compared with baseline or between the groups”	Inflammation of the lamina propria (semiquantitative score 0-3)	Thickness of the collagen band (μm)	Degeneration of surface epithelium (present/absent)	 	Miehlke 2008; CC/maintenance	Germany, multicenter	Budesonide (n = 23) vs placebo (n = 23)	6 mo	“Histologically proven collagenous colitis” (for maintenance of clinical remission; subepithelial collagen band ≥10 μm; inflammatory infiltrate in the lamina propria, and degeneration of the surface epithelium [finding: mucosal erythema (usually patchy) in 11 of 48 at baseline])		Assessed “changes in histologic variables after 6 months’ maintenance therapy”; Reported post-treatment “histological improvement” and “no pathologic macroscopic ﬁndings.” Also reported individual histologic variables: mean thickness of the collagen band, inflammation of the lamina propria, at baseline and follow-up and change from baseline to follow-up	Inflammation of the lamina propria (inﬁltration with lymphocytes and plasma cells; absent, mild, moderate, or severe)	Mean thickness of the collagen band, at baseline and follow-up up and change from baseline to follow-up, thickness of the collagen band (>10 or <10 μm)	Degeneration of the surface epithelium (absent or present)	 	Bonderup 2009; CC/maintenance	Denmark, multicenter	Budesonide (n = 17) vs placebo (n = 17)	6 mo	Histologically confirmed collagenous colitis (ie, diffuse lymphocytic inflammation and evidence of a collagenous band >10 μm, at least focally upon colorectal mucosal biopsy [for maintenance of clinical remission])		Reported: change in histological appearance (based on the degree of inflammation and the thickness of the collagen layer); analyze between-group differences in histological variables (collagen layer thickness and grade of inflammation)	The degree of inflammation assessed on a 4-point scale (0 was absent and 3 was severe).	The average thickness of the collagen layer was then calculated		 	Miehlke 2014; CC	Europe, multinational (Germany, Denmark, Lithuania, Spain, and the United Kingdom)	Budesonide (n = 30) vs mesalamine (n = 25) vs placebo (n = 37)	8 wk	Histologically confirmed CC (thickness of collagen band >10 μm, degeneration of surface epithelium)	Histologic remission: collagen band thickness ≤10 μm and no inflammation of the lamina propria with neutrophilic and eosinophilic granulocytes		Inflammation of the lamina propria (semiquantitative score 0-3) (remission required no inflammation with neutrophilic and eosinophilic granulocytes)	Collagen band thickness ≤10 μm
LC only (n = 2)	 	Study ID	Country	Interventions, sample size	Time to follow-up	Histological diagnosis	Histological remission	Histological response/improvement	IELs and inflammation of the lamina propria	Thickness of the collagen band	Degeneration of the surface epithelium	 	Miehlke 2009; LC	Germany, multicenter	Budesonide (n = 21) vs placebo (n = 21)	6 wk	Histologically confirmed LC (>20 IEL per 100 epithelial cells)	Histological remission (reduction in the number of IEL ≤ 20 IEL/100 epithelial cells plus a reduction in lamina propria inflammation)	Histological response (>20 IEL/100 epithelial cells but reduction of ≥50% compared with baseline or reduction in lamina propria inflammation or both)	Reduction in the number of IEL/100 epithelial cells plus a reduction in lamina propria inflammation			 	Miehlke 2018; LC	Europe, multinational	budesonide (n = 19) vs mesalamine (n = 19) vs placebo (n = 19)	8 wk	Histologically conﬁrmed LC: >20 IELs per 100 surface epithelium cells; signs of inflammation of the lamina propria; and normal (ie, <10 μm) subepithelial collagen layer on well-oriented sections.	Histologic remission: ≤20 IELs per 100 surface epithelium cells		Assessed: (1) the total number of IELs per 100 surface epithelium cells(3) inflammation of the lamina propria with lymphocytes and plasma cells (semiquantitative score, 0-3);(4) inflammation of the lamina propria with neutrophilic and eosinophilic granulocytes (semiquantitative score, 0-3)	(2) The thickness of the collagen band (μm)	(5) Degeneration of the surface epithelium (present/absent)
CC and LC (n = 2)	 	Study ID	Country	Interventions, sample size	Time to follow-up	Histological diagnosis	Histological remission	Histological response/improvement	IELs and inflammation of the lamina propria	Thickness of the collagen band	Damage of surface epithelium	 	Calabrese 2007; MC (CC or LC)	Italy, single center	Mesalazine (11 CC, 20 LC) vs mesalazine+ cholestyramine (12 CC, 21 LC)	6 mo	Histological criteria included increased chronic inflammatory inﬁltrate (plasma cells, lymphocytes and eosinophils) in the lamina propria, increased number of IELs (normal, higher than 7 per 100 epithelial cells), and damage of surface epithelium, with flattening of epithelial cells and/or epithelial loss and detachment and minimal crypt architecture distortionDiagnosis of CC: the additional presence of an abnormal surface subepithelial collagen layer with a thickness >10 µm, which entraps superﬁcial capillaries, with an irregular lacy appearance at the lower edge of the basement membraneDiagnosis of LC: a number of IELs higher than 20 lymphocytes per 100 epithelial cells in the absence of a thickened subepithelial collagen layer (<10 µm)	Histological remission (no clear definition) after 6 mo, and relapse after 24 mo confirmed at histology		Chronic inflammatory inﬁltrate (plasma cells, lymphocytes, and eosinophils) in the lamina propriaMeasurements of the subepithelial collagen layer and counts of IELs; the number of surface IELs was estimated by counting the lymphocytes per 100 intercryptal epithelial cells	The thickness of the subepithelial collagen band	Damage of surface epithelium, with flattening of epithelial cells and/or epithelial loss and detachment and minimal crypt architecture distortion	 	Rohatgi 201537; MC (CC or LC or NOS)	India, single center	VSL#3 (n = 15) vs mesalamine (n = 15)	8 wk	Histologically provenCC (subepithelial collagen layer ≥10 µm with chronic mononuclear inﬁltrates in lamina propria)LC (increased intraepithelial lymphocytes ≥20 per 100 surface epithelial cells with surface epithelium damage, lymphocytic and plasma cells in ﬁltration in the lamina propria and normal collagen layer)MC-NOS (chronic inflammatory cell inﬁltrates, subepithelial collagen layer <10 µm, and/or intraepithelial lymphocytosis of 10-20 per 100 surface epithelial cells)		Histopathological response (reduction of histopathological score by ≥50%). Scoring pattern: surface epithelium microulceration, cell flattening and mucin depletion, crypts, lamina propria, number of intraepithelial lymphocytes in surface and crypt epithelium assessed separately, and thickness of subepithelial collagen layer. For each of these 5 parameters, the arithmetic means of the scores from 4 separate colonic biopsies. The sum of these 5 means were compared within and between groups.	Lamina propria (0: normal; 1: focal increase in neutrophils and/or mononuclear in ﬁltrates; 2: diffuse increase in neutrophils and/or mononuclear in ﬁltrates); number of intraepithelial lymphocytes in surface and crypt epithelium assessed separately (0: normal; 1: moderately increased; 2: signiﬁcantly increased)	Thickness of subepithelial collagen layer (0: normal; 1: focal thickening; 2: diffuse thickening)	Surface epithelium microulceration, cell flattening, and mucin depletion (0: normal; 1: moderate; 2: severe); crypts (0: normal; 1: distorted architecture and/or cryptitis with neutrophils; 2: crypt abscesses)
Abbreviations: CC, collagenous colitis; IEL, intraepithelial lymphocyte; LC, lymphocytic colitis; MC, microscopic colitis; NOS, not otherwise specified.
Apart from one study performed in India, all studies were conducted in Europe. Five of the 12 RCTs were first authored by Miehlke and colleagues from Germany. Three were single-center studies and the remainder were multicenter studies, 1 being a multinational study. The sample size was small in most studies, despite most being multicenter trials, ranging from 20 to 92. Except for 2 MC studies that compared mesalazine vs mesalazine + cholestyramine or probiotics VSL#3 vs mesalamine, all were placebo-controlled RCTs. The most frequently studied intervention was budesonide (n = 8), and other studied drugs included mesalamine (n = 2) (both were 3-arm trials that also compared with budesonide), probiotics (n = 1), and Boswellia serrata extract (n = 1). Treatment duration and measurement time points ranged from 6 weeks to 6 months.
Histological outcomes included histological remission (n = 3), histological response (n = 8), or both (n = 1). Definitions of histological outcomes varied. The definitions of histological diagnostic criteria, outcome definitions, and details of the outcome assessment components are summarized in Table 2.

CC only (n = 8)
Among the 8 RCTs of CC, only 1 reported histological remission, and others reported histological improvement (Table 2). Two RCTs aimed to assess maintenance of clinical remission. Half of these studies assessed all 3 major histological parameters (inflammation of the lamina propria), thickness of the collagen band, and degeneration of the surface epithelium, while the other 4 RCTs only assessed the first two parameters.
All 7 RCTs used the semiquantitative 4-point scale score 0 of 3 to assess the inflammation of the lamina propria (absent, mild, moderate, or severe); except the earliest study scored infiltrate in lamina propria semiquantitatively as normal, slightly increased, or dense.
All studies mentioned 10 μm as the cutoff when they assessed the thickness of the collagen band, either in the diagnostic criteria or in the post-treatment assessment, with slight differences in defining the histological response outcomes, such as “thickness of ≤10 μm post-treatment or a reduction of at least 50% vs baseline,” was also eligible, or reported the post-treatment mean thickness of the collagen band, compared within or between groups, or required a significant reduction in the mean thickness of the collagen band.
Among the 4 studies that assessed degeneration of the surface epithelium, 3 used “present or absent” as an endpoint, except 1 study used a 3-point scale to record “degree of degeneration/detachment of surface epithelium” semiquantitatively as “0 to 2.”
“Eosinophilic granulocytes” is only mentioned in the only study that reported “histological remission” as the histological outcome, which was defined as “collagen band thickness ≤10 μm and no inflammation of the lamina propria with neutrophilic and eosinophilic granulocytes.” The earliest study, by Baert et al, mentioned “eosinophils” among the “other findings” that may be observed in the histological assessment of MC, but clearly stated that such findings are not required for diagnosis. Specifically, the authors noted, “regenerative epithelial changes with mucin depletion, surface epithelial damage and sloughing, rare infiltration of neutrophils and eosinophils both in the epithelium and the lamina propria.”

LC only (n = 2)
For the 2 RCTs that only included patients with LC, one reported both histological remission and histological response and the other reported only histological remission. The standard cutoff for number of IELs was applied (20 IELs per 100 surface epithelium cells), but one study only assessed post-treatment reduction in the number of IELs per 100 epithelial cells plus a reduction in lamina propria inflammation; the other study also assessed the thickness of the collagen band as well as the degeneration of the surface epithelium. In this study, the assessment of lamina propria inflammation included lymphocytes, plasma cells, and both neutrophilic and eosinophilic granulocytes (Table 2).

CC and LC (n = 2)
For the 2 RCTs that included both CC and LC, one reported histological remission and the other reported histological response. They have different descriptions of definitions for CC, LC, or not otherwise specified MC. Although they both assessed the number of surface IELs, inflammatory inﬁltrates in the lamina propria, thickness of the subepithelial collagen band, and damage of surface epithelium, their scales used for treatment endpoints differed.
The earlier study by Calabrese et al did not provide a clear definition of histological remission at 6 months or relapse at 24 months (which was “confirmed at histology”). The assessment of chronic inflammatory infiltrates in the lamina propria included plasma cells, lymphocytes, and eosinophils.
In the Rohatgi et al study from India, histopathological response was defined as a reduction of histopathological score by ≥50%. Scoring pattern included 5 components: (1) surface epithelium microulceration, cell flattening, and mucin depletion; (2) crypts; (3) lamina propria; (4) number of IELs in surface and crypt epithelium assessed separately; and (5) thickness of subepithelial collagen layer. For each of these 5 parameters, the arithmetic means of the scores from 4 separate colonic biopsies; then, the sum of these 5 means was compared within and between groups (Table 2).

Discussions
According to the European EMCG guidelines, MC is defined as a “clinical pathological entity characterized by chronic watery (nonbloody) diarrhea, a normal or almost normal endoscopic appearance of the colon, and a distinct histologic pattern of collagenous colitis or lymphocytic colitis.” The diagnosis relies on the combination of classical symptoms—primarily urgency and watery diarrhea—together with histological confirmation. Histological assessment is therefore essential for both the diagnosis of MC and for monitoring treatment outcomes.
In this umbrella review, we examined 14 systematic reviews with meta-analyses published from 2004 to 2024 that focused on therapeutic interventions. We screened all 19 RCTs included in these reviews and further assessed the definitions, components, and scoring systems of histological outcomes in the 12 fully published RCTs (published from 2002 to 2018) that reported histological data. Histological remission was assessed as an outcome in only 4 RCTs. Definitions of histological response were poorly reported in SRs and varied across RCTs; they were generally based on the assessment of lamina propria inflammation, IEL counts, or collagen band thickness. While all RCTs assessed inflammation of the lamina propria, degeneration of the surface epithelium was not consistently evaluated. The pooled overall incidence rate of MC is estimated to be 11.4 cases per 100 000 person‐years in the recent United European Gastroenterology–EMCG guidelines. While the majority of patients respond to budesonide, it is estimated that 50% have a refractory course, which results in steroid dependency and off-label use of advanced therapies such as vedolizumab and anti-tumor necrosis factor agents. More recently, preliminary evidence supports the effectiveness of JAK inhibitors as a valid therapeutic option for patients with refractory MC. Results from a real‑life retrospective multicenter cohort of 99 patients suggested that almost all advanced therapies are used in budesonide‑refractory or budesonide‑dependent MC. Anti-tumor necrosis factor agents, most often used as first‑line drugs, are frequently discontinued due to lack or loss of efficacy. The alternatives, vedolizumab and ustekinumab, also show substantial discontinuation rates, whereas the small number of patients treated with JAK inhibitors (n = 14) achieved the highest remission rate.
The increasing prevalence of MC is paralleled by a growing interest in conducting clinical trials in this field, especially with the repurposing of advanced therapies approved for use in IBD. However, essential to the design of clinical trials for MC is the need for standardized definitions for histological endpoints which are valid, reliable and responsive to intervention. Although recent guidelines provide guidance on the medical management of MC and mention histological remission or histological response as one of the outcomes, no guideline has defined “histological response.”
Clinical remission was well defined, but the correlation between histology and clinical symptoms is weak. The recent European guidelines on MC did provide the histopathologic diagnostic criteria of CC (the histopathologic criteria of CC are a thickened subepithelial collagenous band ≥10 μm combined with an increased inflammatory infiltrate in lamina propria), LC (an increased number of IELs ≥20 per 100 surface epithelial cells combined with an increased inflammatory infiltrate in lamina propria and a not significantly thickened collagenous band [<10 μm]), and incomplete MC. While these diagnostic criteria are useful for confirming histological remission, which was defined as “Identified by the presence of fewer than 20 intraepithelial lymphocytes per 100 epithelial cells (for LC), a collagen band thickness of 10 μm or less (for CC), and the absence of inflammation in the lamina propria,” it remains unclear how they can be translated into outcome assessment tools for evaluating histological response, particularly whether a standardized scoring scale should be applied to each histological component.
MC shares certain clinical manifestations with DBGAs. DBGAs are observed in 39% of patients with MC, and MC is present in 7% of patients with DBGAs. Notably, diarrhea-predominant IBS occurs in approximately 33% of patients with MC. Constipation-dominant IBS is uncommon (1.3%), but it is not impossible in patients with MC. These overlapping prevalences highlight the diagnostic complexity of MC and underscore the importance of clearly defining appropriate parameters and methods for histological assessment in clinical trials. Colonoscopies with random mucosal biopsies may be considered for a larger proportion of patients with DBGAs, particularly those with the IBS with diarrhea subtype in the absence of alarm signs, to rule out or confirm a diagnosis of MC.
MC typically presents with normal or near-normal macroscopic appearances on endoscopy. Therefore, biopsies from multiple colonic segments are essential for both diagnosis and treatment monitoring. The optimum number of colonic biopsies from the ascending and descending colon is also critical to ensure a high level of certainty in diagnosing and monitoring MC. A recent SR of 3 retrospective cohort studies concluded that, to ensure a high level of diagnostic certainty for MC, a total of 6 biopsies should be obtained—3 from the ascending colon and 3 from the descending colon. Among the included studies, one examined biopsy samples from 101 consecutive patients with MC taken from various colonic segments. Based on their findings, the authors proposed a Western protocol recommending 2 biopsies each from the ascending and descending colon. They concluded that this approach is sufficient to confidently diagnose MC while minimizing oversampling, procedural time, and histological workload. Future international consensus statements should provide standardized recommendations on biopsy requirements—including the number and locations of biopsies—and address the differentiation of MC from other forms of colitis or causes of chronic diarrhea. These recommendations should be considered alongside standardized histological assessment components, scoring scales, and outcome definitions.
Our overview of systematic reviews has several limitations inherent to the nature of this research. Our summary was based on published SRs of interventions and the RCTs included in those SRs. Most of the included RCTs had small sample sizes and were published before 2018. We did not plan to conduct an updated search for more recent RCTs. Previous work has suggested that detailed and comparative studies are needed to support stronger diagnostic recommendations for MC. We believe the same applies to the design of RCTs in MC, particularly regarding the selection of appropriate assessment endpoints. More data are needed to validate any newly proposed consensus histological assessment scales. Once standardized histological assessment tools are established for all subtypes of MC, future clinical trials could include all MC patients and stratify them by subtype to facilitate recruitment and enable more comprehensive analysis.

Future Considerations
Histologic remission of MC is a normal state. Hence, researchers can quantify IELs and lamina propria lymphocytes from normal biopsies to establish what “normal” is. With the aid of artificial intelligence to standardize and automate the measurement and interpretation of histologic features, such as lymphocyte counts and collagen thickness across centers, variability in assessment could be reduced and reproducibility improved. Researchers should decide what percentage of change should be accepted to define clinical response for lymphocyte number reduction and collagen basement membrane thickness reduction. Even now, researchers can prospectively follow patients with MC who undergo therapy and document the percentage reduction of histologic findings in patients who achieve clinical remission.
The advent of high‑definition colonoscopy has likely improved the diagnostic yield of targeted mucosal biopsies. Enhanced visualization of subtle mucosal changes enables more precise biopsy sampling. The integration of optical biopsy technologies and advanced endoscopic techniques provides a strong rationale for performing targeted biopsies, thereby increasing the yield and accuracy of histological assessment in patients with suspected MC. This approach has the potential to enhance diagnostic precision and reduce the sampling variability associated with random biopsies.

Conclusions
The diagnosis and outcome assessment of MC rely on histological examination of colonic biopsies and require collaboration among dedicated gastroenterologists, endoscopists, and histopathologists. The findings of this review will help inform future research gaps, including reliability assessments for histological scoring systems and a global consensus on appropriate outcome measures for MC clinical trials.

Supplementary Material

Supplementary Data
Supplementary data is available at Inflammatory Bowel ­Diseases online.

Conflicts of Interest
C.M. has received consulting fees from AbbVie, Alimentiv, Amgen, Anaptys Bio, AVIR Pharma, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celltrion, Domain Therapeutics, Eupraxia, Eli Lilly, Ferring, Forte Biosciences, Fresenius Kabi, Gilead, Janssen, McKesson, Mirador Therapeutics, Pendopharm, Pfizer, Prometheus Biosciences, Roche, Sanofi, Takeda, and Tillotts Pharma; speaker fees from AbbVie, Amgen, AVIR Pharma, Alimentiv, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Ferring, Fresenius Kabi, Janssen, Merck, Organon, Pendopharm, Pfizer, Sanofi, Takeda, and Tillotts Pharma; and royalties from Springer Publishing; research support from AbbVie, Eli Lilly, Ferring, and Pfizer. B.V. has received research support from AbbVie, Biora Therapeutics, Celltrion, Landos, Pfizer, Sanofi, Sossei Heptares/Nxera, and Takeda; speaker fees from AbbVie, Agomab, Alfasigma, Biogen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celltrion, Eli Lily, Falk, Ferring, Galapagos, Johnson and Johnson, Pfizer, Sandoz, Takeda, Tillotts Pharma, Truvion, and Viatris; has received consultancy fees from AbbVie, Alfasigma, Alimentiv, Anaptys Bio, Applied Strategic, AstraZeneca, Atheneum, BenevolentAI, Biora Therapeutics, Boxer Capital, Bristol Myers Squibb, Domain Therapeutics, Eli Lily, Galapagos, Guidepont, Landos, Merck, Mirador Therapeutics, Mylan, Nxera, Inotrem, Ipsos, Johnson and Johnson, Pfizer, Sandoz, Sanofi, Santa Ana Bio, Sapphire Therapeutics, Sosei Heptares, Takeda, Tillotts Pharma, and Viatris; and owns stock options Vagustim and Thethis Pharma. O.M.N. has received advisory board fees from Eli Lilly, Nestlé, and Janssen; and speaker fees from AbbVie, Janssen, Eli Lilly, Ferring, Alfa Sigma, Recordati, Noòs, and Pfizer. C.B. has been supported by the Bingham Chair in Gastroenterology; has served on advisory boards for AbbVie Canada, Amgen Canada, Bristol Myers Squibb Canada, Celltrion, Eli Lilly Canada, Ferring Canada, Fresenius Kabi Canada, Janssen Canada, Pendopharm Canada, Sandoz Canada, Takeda Canada, and Pfizer Canada; received educational grants from AbbVie Canada, Boston Scientific, Bristol Myers Squibb Canada, Eli Lilly, Ferring Canada, Pfizer Canada, Takeda Canada, Janssen Canada, Organon Canada, Eli Lilly Canada, and Amgen Canada; served as a speaker for AbbVie Canada, Fresenius Kabi Canada, Janssen Canada, Pfizer Canada, and Takeda Canada; and received research funding from AbbVie Canada, Amgen Canada, Sandoz Canada, Takeda Canada, and Pfizer Canada. A.M. has received consulting/advisory board fees from Tillotts, Dr. Falk Pharma, Eli Lilly, Ferring, and Sanofi. V.J. has received consulting/advisory board fees from AbbVie, Alimentiv, Anaptyis Bio, Arena Pharmaceuticals, Asahi Kasei Pharma, Asieris, AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celltrion, Eli Lilly, Endpoint Health, Enthera, Ensho, Ferring, Flagship Pioneering, Fresenius Kabi, Galapagos, GlaxoSmithKline, Genentech, Gilead, Innomar, JAMP, Janssen, Merck, Metacrine, Mylan, MRM Health, Pandion, Pendopharm, Pfizer, Protagonist, Prometheus Biosciences, Reistone Biopharma, Roche, Roivant, Sandoz, Second Genome, Sorriso, Spyre, Synedgen, Takeda, Teva, Ventyx, Vividion; and speaker fees from AbbVie, Ferring, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, Fresenius Kabi, Janssen, Pfizer, Shire, Takeda, and Tillotts. The other authors disclose no conflicts.

Data availability
The data underlying this article are available in the article and in its online supplementary material.

References
Systematic review: are lymphocytic colitis and collagenous colitis two subtypes of the same disease—microscopic colitis?
Diagnosis and management of microscopic colitis
European guidelines on microscopic colitis: United European Gastroenterology and European Microscopic Colitis Group statements and recommendations
Endoscopic findings and colonic perforation in microscopic colitis: a systematic review
Incidence, prevalence, and temporal trends of microscopic colitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Systematic review with meta-analysis: diagnostic overlap of microscopic colitis and functional bowel disorders
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug exposure and the risk of microscopic colitis
Reporting guideline for overviews of reviews of healthcare interventions: development of the PRIOR statement
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Effectiveness and safety profile of budesonide maintenance in microscopic colitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Effectiveness of bile acid sequestrants in microscopic colitis and utility of bile acid testing: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Budesonide versus mesalamine in microscopic colitis: a comparative meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Efficacy and safety of vedolizumab and tumor necrosis factor inhibitors in the treatment of steroid-refractory microscopic colitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Effectiveness of non-budesonide therapies in management of microscopic colitis: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Efficacy and safety of medical therapies in microscopic colitis: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
Meta-analysis: placebo rates in microscopic colitis randomised trials and applications for future drug development using a historical control arm
Efficacy and safety of biologic therapy in microscopic colitis: systematic review and meta-analysis
Budesonide treatment for microscopic colitis: systematic review and meta-analysis
Interventions for treating collagenous colitis
Interventions for treating lymphocytic colitis
Prednisolone and budesonide for short- and long-term treatment of microscopic colitis: systematic review and meta-analysis
Interventions for treating microscopic colitis: a Cochrane Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Functional Bowel Disorders Review Group systematic review of randomized trials
Meta-analysis: budesonide treatment for collagenous colitis
Interventions for treating collagenous colitis: a Cochrane Inflammatory Bowel Disease Group systematic review of randomized trials
Randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of bismuth subsalicylate for microscopic colitis
OC.07.2 Beclometasone dipropionate and mesalazine are equally effective in the treatment of lymphocytic colitis
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of budesonide for the treatment of active lymphocytic colitis
Oral budesonide therapy improves quality of life in patients with collagenous colitis
Long-term follow-up of collagenous colitis after induction of clinical remission with budesonide
Low-dose budesonide for maintenance of clinical remission in collagenous colitis: a randomised, placebo-controlled, 12-month trial
Incomplete remission with short-term prednisolone treatment in collagenous colitis: a randomized study
Budesonide in collagenous colitis: a double-blind placebo-controlled trial with histologic follow-up
Efficacy and safety of budesonide, vs mesalazine or placebo, as induction therapy for lymphocytic colitis
Mesalazine with or without cholestyramine in the treatment of microscopic colitis: randomized controlled trial
VSL#3 induces and maintains short-term clinical response in patients with active microscopic colitis: a two-phase randomised clinical trial
Budesonide is effective in treating lymphocytic colitis: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled study
Budesonide treatment for collagenous colitis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial
Budesonide treatment of collagenous colitis: a randomised, double blind, placebo controlled trial with morphometric analysis
Probiotic treatment of collagenous colitis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with Lactobacillus acidophilus and Bifidobacterium animalis subsp. Lactis
Boswellia serrata extract for the treatment of collagenous colitis. A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, multicenter trial
Oral budesonide for maintenance treatment of collagenous colitis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
Long-term budesonide treatment of collagenous colitis: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial
Budesonide is more effective than mesalamine or placebo in short-term treatment of collagenous colitis
Biologic therapy for budesonide-refractory, -dependent or -intolerant microscopic colitis: a multicentre cohort study from the GETAID
JAK inhibitor, a new player for treatment-refractory microscopic colitis
1178 Promising efficacy of small molecules and biologicals for microscopic colitis: results from a large real-life multicenter cohort
American gastroenterological association institute guideline on the medical management of microscopic colitis
Current concepts on microscopic colitis: evidence-based statements and recommendations of the Spanish Microscopic Colitis Group
Defining clinical criteria for clinical remission and disease activity in collagenous colitis
Diagnosis and treatment of microscopic colitis: position paper on behalf of the Brazilian Federation of Gastroenterology
Estimating the optimum number of colon biopsies for diagnosing microscopic colitis: a systematic review
Biopsies from ascending and descending colon are sufficient for diagnosis of microscopic colitis
Vedolizumab in refractory microscopic colitis: an international case series