The mediating effect of resilience between physical activity and mental health: a meta-analytic structural equation modeling approach
Background
While the correlation between physical activity (PA) and mental health is well known, the mediating mechanism of resilience between the two variables remains unclear.
Objectives
To systematically evaluate the relationship between PA and mental health, and explore the mediating role of resilience between them.
Methods
A systematic search of electronic databases (PubMed, Web of Science, ProQuest, Ebsco, China Knowledge, and China Biomedical Database) was conducted to identify relevant studies, and meta-analytic procedures were used to assess the strength of the relationships between PA and mental health. Furthermore, a meta-analytic structural equation model (MASEM) was used to assess the mediating effects of resilience, ensuring the reliability of our findings.
Results
The findings of 15 studies (17,043 subjects) were subjected to meta-analysis and route analysis. The findings of the meta-analysis revealed a statistically significant positive correlation of 0.288 (95% CI, 0.166–0.402) between PA and positive indicators of mental health, as well as a statistically significant negative correlation (95% CI, −0.342 to −0.171) with negative indicators of mental health. Furthermore, the results of MASEM path analysis indicated that PA may indirectly impact both positive and negative indicators of mental health through the mediating factor of resilience. The indirect effect values were 0.108 (95% CI, 0.080–0.141) and −0.074 (95% CI, −0.100 to −0.051), respectively, accounting for 40.15% of the total effect value and 28.91%.
Conclusion
Physical activity is positively correlated with positive indicators of mental health and negatively correlated with negative indicators of mental health. Moreover, PA can positively influence mental health through the mediating role of resilience.

Introduction
With the advancement of civilization and the accelerated pace of individuals’ lives, mental health has gradually received societal focus and emerged as a prominent area of research in various fields, including psychology, preventive medicine, and epidemiology. Researchers have proposed a two-factor model of mental health influenced by the principles of positive psychology. This model suggests that mental health is not simply the absence of mental illness but a condition that encompasses the presence of positive indicators, such as life satisfaction, and the absence of negative indicators, such as depression. Measures of positive indicators of mental health primarily used the Positive Mental Health Scale (PMH-scale), the WHO Happiness Index, the Psychological General Well-Being Index (PGWBI), and the Life Satisfaction Scale. Negative indicators were measured using the Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D), the Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS-21), the GAD-7 Anxiety Disorder Scale, and the SAS-2 Anxiety Questionnaire. While there may be variations in the aforementioned measures, the scales themselves encompass the positive and negative signs of mental health, respectively. Therefore, the proposal and application of the two-factor model of mental health lay a solid foundation for a more comprehensive and accurate assessment of an individual’s mental health.

The relationship between PA and mental health
Among the various determinants influencing mental health, physical activity (PA) has become a well-known factor. Intervention studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of PA in treating depression and anxiety. Furthermore, observational studies have provided evidence that PA is negatively correlated with negative indicators of mental health such as depression, anxiety, and stress symptoms. Engaging in PA that involves self-entertainment for psychological gratification may help alleviate adverse emotions and influence human health or subjective well-being. Epidemiologic studies indicate that PA is associated with certain indicators of subjective well-being and that engaging in moderate-intensity physical activity positively affects mood. Therefore, most studies have shown that PA can directly influence mental health by enhancing individuals’ mental state and reducing negative emotions. However, Hearon et al. found a positive correlation between anxiety sensitivity and PA in adult individuals (r = 0.43). Established meta-analyses have mostly explored the impact of PA on mental health with pooled intervention studies. Conversely, correlational meta-analyses only considered the relationship between PA and single indicators of mental health. The validity and practicality of applying the two-factor model in meta-analysis studies of mental health were verified in the study conducted by Hu et al.. Therefore, a meta-analysis of the correlation between PA and mental health using the two-factor model of mental health would allow for more comprehensive results.

Mediating effects of resilience
With the advancement of comprehensive research, current researchers are increasingly focusing on the mediating processes through which PA influences mental health. These mechanisms encompass various variables, including resilience, social support, self-efficacy, and psychological capital. An examination of existing literature indicates that most studies have concentrated on investigating the influence of resilience on mental health. Resilience refers to an individual’s ability or trait to cope with stress, frustration, and trauma. It is a crucial positive psychological quality with an intricate and multidimensional relationship with PA and mental health. Researchers found a positive correlation between PA and resilience. Individuals’ psychological resilience improves with regular PA, while the fulfillment of individual psychological needs further improves resilience during exercise. Numerous empirical studies have found that resilience is positively correlated with positive indicators of mental health and negatively correlated with negative indicators of mental health. Moreover, resilience can be projected to predict mental health indicators, such as life satisfaction, depression, and anxiety. Empirical studies have confirmed the mediating effect played by resilience between PA and mental health; however, the findings are divergent. Some studies have suggested that resilience plays a partial mediating role in the effect of PA on mental health; others have suggested that there is no significant correlation between indicators of PA and mental health after controlling for the variable of resilience. Yet, researchers have not used the method of meta-analysis to elucidate the mediating role of resilience and uncover the mechanism by which PA affects mental health. Hence, this gap in the literature emphasizes the need to address this important research void.

Objectives and hypotheses
Considering the lack of consistency in the current research on the relationship between PA and mental health and the possible mediating role of resilience between the two, it is necessary to summarize and analyze the existing findings. Therefore, the primary aim of this study was to assess the strength of the relationship between PA, resilience, and mental health by conducting a meta-analysis of the relevant literature. This analysis would involve constructing a joint correlation matrix among the three variables based on the results of the meta-analysis. Finally, this study aimed to confirm the mediating role of resilience using Structural Equation Modeling. Reviewing the current research, we anticipated a substantial positive correlation between PA and positive indicators of mental health, as well as a significant negative correlation with negative indicators of mental health. We also expected that PA could have a positive impact on positive indicators of mental health and a negative impact on negative indicators of mental health mediated by resilience.

Materials and methods

Literature retrieval
The systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted in strict adherence to PRISMA guidelines. We searched for the terms sport*/physical activi*/exercis*; resilience/resilient; “life satisfaction”/“positive emotion”/well-being/“positive mood”/mental health/depression/anxiety/“negative emotion”/“negative mood” in databases such as PubMed, Web of Science, ProQuest, Ebsco, China Knowledge, and China Biomedical Database. To identify literature published from its establishment to November 2023. Initially, the following criteria were met: the source of the literature was journal articles, the research content was the relationship between PA and mental health (positive and negative indicators), and the language of the literature was written in Chinese/English. Finally, 3,493 papers were retrieved.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The selection of literature was based on the following criteria: (a) the required studies must be empirical and published (mainly cross-sectional studies, longitudinal studies use baseline data); (b) these studies must cover predictor, mediator, and outcome variables, i.e., PA, resilience, and mental health (which can be measured through any of life satisfaction, subjective well-being, positive affect, depression, anxiety, and negative affect); (c) the sample size and correlation coefficient, or other indicators of transformable data, must be reported; (d) for literature that repeatedly used the same set of data, the earliest one was selected. Figure 1 depicts the literature screening process.
Flow chart of literature screening.

Study coding
The literature data was encoded to incorporate the first author and year, sample size, effect size, and name of the mental health indicator. If the study included multiple samples, the effect sizes were calculated separately for each independent sample. Two researchers finally retrieved the material and conducted the coding separately. In cases of conflicts or inconsistencies, a third researcher was consulted to review and debate the differences and collaboratively resolve the issues. Table 1 depicts a total of 15 papers that were finally included in the present study.
Basic information on the included meta-analysis studies.
Author, year	Sample size	Mental health indicators	r1	r2	r3	Subjects	 	Cocozza et al., 2020 	1,182	SWB	0.150	0.240	0.46	Adult	 	Cui and Zhang, 2022 	1,048	Negative indicator	0.301	−0.357	−0.366	Undergraduate	 	Ho et al., 2015 	775	Positive indicator	0.250	0.660	0.440	Middle school student	 	Li et al., 2022 	1,009	Life satisfaction	0.234	0.218	0.618	Elementary school students	 	Li et al., 2021 	1,214	Negative indicator	0.470	−0.250	−0.330	Undergraduate	 	Liu, 2020 	1,408	Negative indicator	0.253	−0.357	−0.355	Undergraduate	 	Wu et al., 2023 	1,248	Positive indicator	0.290	0.210	0.590	Adult	 	Wu et al., 2022 	402	Positive indicator	0.386	0.180	0.570	Adult	 	Xin et al., 2023 	451	Anxiety	0.269	−0.301	−0.237	Older adult	 	Xu et al., 2018a 	2,282	Life satisfaction	0.297	0.123	0.254	Middle school student	 	Xu et al., 2018b 	2,282	Negative indicator	0.297	−0.137	−0.258	Middle school student	 	Yang et al., 2021 	557	SWB	0.36	0.382	0.353	Older people	 	Zhang et al., 2023 	3,143	SWB	0.249	0.247	0.467	Adolescent	 	Zhang, 2018 	485	Depression	0.219	−0.315	−0.393	Older adult	 	Zhang et al., 2022 	1,117	Negative indicator	0.098	−0.087	−0.304	Undergraduate	 	Zhou and Zhou, 2022 	722	SWB	0.19	0.187	0.341	Undergraduate
r1 is the correlation coefficient between PA and resilience; r2 is the correlation coefficient between PA and mental health indicators; r3 is the correlation coefficient between resilience and mental health indicators; SWB is subjective well-being.

Statistical methods
The effect size for the meta-analysis was determined to be the correlation coefficient r. Using Fisher’s Z transformation, weighted average effect values were obtained for each group of relationships. The interconversion formula is shown below:
A statistical analysis of effect value merging, heterogeneity test, and publication bias was performed using CMA 3.7. The effect sizes were combined using a random-effects model, and the heterogeneity of the total effect sizes was evaluated using Q-values and I2. Correlation coefficients and confidence intervals of 95% are provided in the study. Publication bias assessments were performed utilizing three methodologies: (a) Fail-safe numbers (Fail-safe N) were calculated to determine the number of insignificant studies that would need to be included to render the total effect value statistically insignificant. (b) A funnel plot was created to evaluate the existence of publication bias by visually analyzing the symmetry of the plot. If the effect values are predominantly clustered in the top middle of the funnel and exhibit symmetry, it suggests the absence of publication bias, as depicted in Figure 2. (c) If both the approaches above confirmed the presence of publication bias, the funnel plot was rectified using the trim-and-fill method to derive an adjusted effect size.
Funnel diagram.
Based on meta-analytic structural equation modeling (MASEM) theory, the path analysis and the mediating effects of resilience were validated by the great likelihood method using the WebMASEM application1.

Results
Fifteen articles containing 17,043 subjects were included in this study. Among them, 10 articles were studied in the adolescent and college student population; three were adults, and two were older adults.

Heterogeneity test
As depicted in Table 2, it was found that after testing, the I2 values of all groups exceeded 70%, a high degree of heterogeneity in the included studies (p < 0.01), so it was more accurate to use a random effects model to combine the effect sizes.
Results of meta-analysis.
Variable relationship	k	r	95% Confidence interval	z	p	Q	df	p	I2	Fail-safe N	 	Lower limit	Up limit	 	PA-PI	8	0.288	0.166	0.402	4.496	0.000	283.162	7	0.000	97.53%	1,149	 	Re-PI	8	0.463	0.362	0.552	8.082	0.000	249.462	7	0.000	97.19%	4,517	 	PA-NI	7	−0.259	−0.342	−0.171	−21.621	0.000	99.465	6	0.000	93.97%	875	 	Re-NI	7	−0.321	−0.360	−0.280	−29.069	0.000	22.667	6	0.001	73.53%	1,480
PA is PA; Re is resilience; PI is positive indicators of mental health; NI is negative indicators of mental health; k is the number of studies; r is the effect size.

Publication bias test
A visual evaluation using a funnel plot indicated that most of the effect values for each set of associations were clustered in the central top region of the funnel and were evenly distributed on both sides of the overall effect size. The fail-safe N measure was calculated (Table 2), which yielded a critical value greater than 5k + 10 for each item. Furthermore, no other studies were identified for inclusion during the trim-and-fill process. Therefore, there was no publication bias in the current meta-analysis.

Main effects test
The mean weighted correlation coefficients between PA and positive indicators of mental health were 0.288 (95% CI, 0.166–0.402). Similarly, the average weighted correlation coefficients between resilience and positive indicators of mental health were 0.463 (95% CI, 0.362–0.552). Conversely, the average weighted correlation coefficients between PA and negative indicators of mental health were −0.259 (95% CI, −0.342 to −0.171), and between resilience and negative indicators of mental health were −0.321 (95% CI, −0.360 to −0.280). The results of the z-value and p-value indicated that these effect sizes were statistically significant. Based on Cohen’s criteria, a value of ∣r∣ ≤ 0.10 is considered a small effect, ∣r∣ = 0.30 is considered a medium effect, and ∣r∣ ≥ 0.50 is considered a large effect. This suggests that there is a medium to high positive correlation between PA and resilience with positive indicators of mental health and a medium to high negative correlation with negative indicators of mental health.

Mediation effect test
The mediation effects of resilience were tested using the MASEM theory. Table 3 presents the joint correlation matrix, which was calculated using the Web MASEM application to obtain the results.
Physical activity, resilience, and mental health correlation matrix.
Variable	PA1	Re1	PA2	Re2	 	Re1	0.263	1			 	PI	0.27	0.453			 	Re2			0.273	1	 	NI			−0.256	−0.319
PA1 is a PA that impacts positive indicators of mental health; Re1 is resilience that impacts positive indicators of mental health; PA2 is a PA that impacts negative indicators of mental health; Re2 is resilience that impacts negative indicators of mental health; PI is positive indicators of mental health; NI is negative indicators of mental health.
Second, the lavaan syntax2 was composed. Path analyses and mediation effects tests were performed using the WebMASEM program. The fit indices of SEM showed that the model was saturated (χ2 < 0.001, df = 0, CFI = 1.00, TLI = 1.00, RMSEA = 0), indicating that the model fits well with the data.
Table 4 depicts the results of the test. Both PA and resilience can directly predict positive mental health indicators, with path coefficients of 0.161 (95% CI: 0.040–0.283) and 0.411 (95% CI: 0.316–0.506), respectively. PA can indirectly impact positive indicators of mental health by influencing resilience. The indirect effect value is 0.108 (95% CI: 0.080–0.141), allowing for 40.15% of the total effect value. PA and resilience had a direct negative impact on mental health, with path coefficients of −0.182 (95% CI: −0.0275 to −0.089) and −0.270 (95% CI: −0.319 to −0.221), respectively. Furthermore, PA indirectly affected negative indicators of mental health through the mediating effect of resilience, with an indirect effect value of −0.074 (95% CI: −0.100 to −0.051), accounting for 28.91% of the total effect value. The 95% confidence intervals for all effect sizes did not contain 0. Thus, the mediating role of resilience in the relationship between PA and mental health was established.
Path analysis of the mediating effect of resilience.
Mediating variable	k	a	CIa	b	CIb	ab	CIab	c	CIc	d	 	PA-Re-PI	8	0.263	0.216, 0.313	0.411	0.316, 0.506	0.108	0.080, 0.141	0.161	0.040, 0.283	0.269	 	PA-Re-NI	7	0.273	0.183, 0.361	−0.270	−0.319, −0.221	−0.074	−0.100, −0.051	−0.182	−0.275, −0.089	−0.256
k is the number of studies; PA is PA; Re is resilience; PI is positive indicators of mental health; NI is negative indicators of mental health; a is the effect of the predictor variable (PA) on the mediator variable (Re); b is the effect of the mediator variable (Re) on the outcome variables (PI, NI); ab: the indirect effect of the predictor variable on the outcome variable through the mediator variable; c: the direct effect of the predictor variable on the outcome variable; d: the total effect of the predictor variable on the outcome variable.

Discussion
PA has an important place in people’s lives. Overall, engaging in PA can alleviate stress, regulate negative emotions, enhance life satisfaction, and foster mental well-being. From a physiological perspective, engaging in PA leads to increased production and release of endorphins, decreased adrenaline levels, and stimulated logical thinking and reasoning abilities. Consequently, the most immediate outcome of PA is the experience of pleasure and a sense of well-being. This is also indicated by our findings that PA is correlated with positive indicators of mental health and that PA can positively influence positive indicators of mental health. Increasing happy emotions during exercise can alleviate the impact of negative emotions and mitigate depression, anxiety, and work-related stress. Moreover, PA can play a crucial role in treating anxiety and depression by improving various physiological factors, as illustrated by the results of the present study, where PA showed a negative correlation with negative indicators of mental health. Nevertheless, researchers have already emphasized that the relationship between PA and mental health differs considerably across different life domains; moreover, certain specific groups, such as older adults and smokers, may experience negative emotions due to the physical discomfort or risks associated with exercise. Hence, it is imperative to establish a scientific exercise prescription to implement exercise interventions for mental health issues. The advent of an information-driven and sophisticated society has resulted in a decline in the level of PA among people, which inevitably leads to mental health issues. It has been suggested that physical inactivity is the leading cause of death globally, which has a huge impact on the prevalence of non-communicable diseases such as mental health issues. Therefore, the impact of physical inactivity on mental health remains a concern for the future.
Resilience, an inherent quality or skill to deal with challenges, is closely linked to mental well-being. Individuals with a high level of resilience tend to have a more positive outlook on cognitive matters. The results of our study indicated a significant positive association between resilience and favorable mental health indicators. Moreover, resilience has a significant negative correlation with negative indicators. Researchers presented a comprehensive meta-analysis that thoroughly clarifies the connection between resilience and mental health. Those who possess resilience are more capable of confronting challenges, positively dealing with them, seeking support, and effectively solving problems. This resilience acts as a protective shield, safeguarding individuals from the negative emotional effects of unfavorable occurrences. The findings of the present study indicate that the correlation between resilience and mental health is notably stronger than that of physical exercise. This could be attributed to the fact that resilience has a more immediate impact on mental health than PA. Furthermore, resilience, as a characteristic of one’s personality, exhibits greater stability and a more robust association with an individual’s mental well-being than physical exercise, which is an external protective factor. This trait of resilience suggests that it may mediate other distal variables affecting mental health. Therefore, this needs to be focused on in studying mental health issues.
Physical activity was a significant predictor of resilience, consistent with previous reports. Individual resilience is not static and can be influenced by both positive and negative factors. PA as a protective factor, PA can enhance the development of individual resilience. Research has shown that regular participation in PA can effectively reduce physiological stress levels, foster emotional balance, strengthen self-control, and boost mental well-being, thereby leading to increased levels of resilience. Moreover, resilience can be influenced by various factors, such as the type and intensity of activity and personal beliefs and habits. There are many intricate relationships between PA and resilience and mental health. This study is the first to investigate how resilience mediates PA and mental health using a meta-analytic structural equation model (MASEM). The results showed that PA not only directly affects mental health but also positively predicts positive indicators of mental health and negatively predicts negative indicators of mental health through the mediating role of resilience. Even after the introduction of resilience, the direct effect of PA and mental health was still significant, indicating that resilience plays a partially mediating role, with the mediating effects accounting for 40 and 29%, respectively. Our study revealed that resilience had a stronger mediating influence on positive mental health measures than negative ones. This implies that positive mental health outcomes may favor a person’s trait resilience and can further increase the weight of resilience in the system of PA-mental health relationships. Resilience shields individuals from the consequences of difficult circumstances by following four primary potential routes: diminishing the likelihood of being affected, mitigating adverse ripple effects, bolstering psychosocial abilities like self-esteem and self-efficacy, and providing chances for adaptive responses. Therefore, consistently engaging in PA can indirectly improve mental health by bolstering psychological resilience and boosting an individual’s self-esteem and self-efficacy.

Limitations and future directions
In order to validate the mediating effect of resilience, it was necessary to include three variable indicators: PA, mental health, and resilience. Nevertheless, this reduced the sample size, which may have affected the accuracy of the effect values associated with PA and mental health.
The included studies had significant variation and were restricted in number. This study did not examine the moderating effects of characteristics such as subject age, gender, and type of measurement instrument. Therefore, further research is required in the future.
From the perspective of the research subjects included in the study, there are very few relevant studies on older adults. As China, a densely populated nation, experiences an aging population, it becomes imperative to allocate more focus and study toward the mental well-being of the older adults.
China has been the fastest-growing country in the world in the past two decades. The lack of physical activity of people caused by informatization and intelligence has become a major cause of non-communicable diseases, including mental health problems. Hence, there is an urgent need to focus on studies related to physical inactivity in the future.

Conclusion
This study was the first to explore the relationship between PA, resilience, and mental health using the MASEM approach. Our findings suggested that PA is positively correlated with positive indicators of mental health and negatively correlated with negative indicators of mental health. Moreover, PA can positively influence mental health through the mediating role of resilience.
1 https://sjak.shinyapps.io/webMASEM/
2Using the positive indicators of mental health as an example: the direct effects are # Regression coefficients; Re ~ b21*PA; PI ~ b31*PA + b32*Re; # Variances; PA ~~ 1*PA; Re ~~ p22*Re; PI ~~ p33*PI; and the indirect effects are # Regression coefficients; Re ~ beta1*PA; PI ~ beta2*Re + PA; # Variances; PA ~~ 1*PA; Re ~~ Re; PI ~~ PI.

Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.

Author contributions
HL: Data curation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. YZ: Data curation, Writing – original draft. QL: Supervision, Writing – review & editing. SL: Data curation, Methodology, Writing – original draft.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

Supplementary material
The Supplementary material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpubh.2024.1434624/full#supplementary-material

References
Toward an integration of subjective well-being and psychopathology
Looking beyond psychopathology: the dual-factor model of mental health in youth
The mental health continuum: from languishing to flourishing in life
Psychometric properties of the positive mental health scale (pmh-scale)
The who-5 well-being index: a systematic review of the literature
Adolescent students’ life satisfaction: its construct and scale development
The ces-d scale: a self-report depression scale for research in the general population
The structure of negative emotional states: comparison of the depression anxiety stress scales (dass) with the beck depression and anxiety inventories
A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety disorder: the gad-7
Measurement of multidimensional sport performance anxiety in children and adults: the sport anxiety scale-2
Exercise as a treatment for depression: a meta-analysis adjusting for publication bias
The relationship between physical activity and clinically defined depression
The effects of physical exercise on anxiety symptoms of college students: a meta-analysis
The effect of physical activity on anxiety in children and young people: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Mental health problems among Chinese adolescents during the COVID-19: the importance of nutrition and physical activity
Physically isolated but socially connected: psychological adjustment and stress among adolescents during the initial COVID-19 crisis
Bmi status and associations between affect, physical activity and anxiety among us children during COVID-19
Exercise as treatment for anxiety: systematic review and analysis
Physical activity and mental health in children and youth during COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Interrogation and response: eight basic problems in the study of the relationship between physical activity and happiness
Physical activity and mental health in the unitedstates and Canada: evidence from four population surveys
Emotion, mood and physical activity
The role of anxiety sensitivity in daily physical activity and eating behavior
Effects of mind–body therapies on depression among adolescents: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
Anxiety sensitivity and physical activity are inversely related: a meta-analytic review
Domain-specific physical activity and mental health: a meta-analysis
A meta-analysis of the trait resilience and mental health
Resilience and mental health
Does physical activity influence health behavior, mental health, and psychological resilience under the moderating role of quality of life?
Testes de resistência mental e aptidão física de atletas de boxe associados aos cinco grandes fatores de personalidade
Benefits of physical activity and its associations with resilience, emotional intelligence, and psychological distress in university students from southern Spain
Repercussions of pandemic and preventive measures on general well-being, psychological health, physical fitness, and health behavior: mediating role of coping behavior
Physical activity and interpersonal adaptation in Chinese adolescents after COVID-19: the mediating roles of self-esteem and psychological resilience
Resilience and perceived stress: predictors of life satisfaction in the students of success and failure
Psychometric assessment of the Wagnild and Young’s resilience scale in Kano, Nigeria
The Connor–Davidson resilience scale (cd-risc): testing the invariance of a uni-dimensional resilience measure that is independent of positive and negative affect
The role of dispositional resilience in regaining life satisfaction after the loss of a spouse
Traumatic severity and trait resilience as predictors of posttraumatic stress disorder and depressive symptoms among adolescent survivors of the Wenchuan earthquake
Life satisfaction, anxiety, depression and resilience across the life span of men
Effects of physical exercise on negative emotion for university students——the mediating and moderating effects of self-efficacy and mental resilience
Effect of physical exercise on subjective well-being of college students: chain mediation effect of cognitive reappraisal and resilience
Effect of extracurricular physical exercise on life satisfaction of upper elementary students: the chain mediating role of self-confidence and resilience
Dichotomization of continuous variables: the implications for meta-analysis
A fail-safe n for effect size in meta-analysis
Trim and fill: a simple funnel-plot–based method of testing and adjusting for publication bias in meta-analysis
Meta-analytic structural equation modeling with moderating effects on sem parameters
A power primer
The health benefits of physical activity and cardiorespiratory fitness
The physiological impact of physical activity on psychological stress
Towards a functional neuroanatomy of pleasure and happiness
Neural correlates of the happy life: the amplitude of spontaneous low frequency fluctuations predicts subjective well-being
Coping resources, coping processes, and mental health
Cardiovascular risks associated with gender and aging
Effects of physical activity on exercise tests and respiratory function
Physical inactivity, non-communicable diseases and national fitness plan of China for physical activity
Systematic review of universal resilience-focused interventions targeting child and adolescent mental health in the school setting
Optimism, mindfulness, and resilience as potential protective factors for the mental health consequences of fear of the coronavirus
The role of physical activity in psychological resilience
Relationship among social anxiety, emotional maltreatment and resilience in rural college students with left-behind experience
The influence of physical exercise on the spiritual well-being of the elderly: the mediator role of psychological resilience
Exercise improves executive function and achievement and alters brain activation in overweight children: a randomized, controlled trial
Physical activity in pregnancy: women's perceptions, practices, and influencing factors
Resilience in the face of adversity: protective factors and resistance to psychiatric disorder
Participation to leisure activities and well-being in a group of residents of Naples-Italy: the role of resilience
The influence of physical exercise on college students' negative emotions: the mediating and regulating role of psychological resilience
Physical activity improves mental health through resilience in Hong Kong Chinese adolescents
The mediating role of resilience in the effects of physical exercise on college students' negative emotions during the COVID-19 epidemic
The direct effect of exercise on the mental health of scientific and technological professionals and the mediating effects of stress, resilience, and social support
Effects of physical activity on regulatory emotional self-efficacy, resilience, and emotional intelligence of nurses during the COVID-19 pandemic
Mechanisms of physical exercise effects on anxiety in older adults during the COVID-19 lockdown: an analysis of the mediating role of psychological resilience and the moderating role of media exposure
Physical exercise impact on the life satisfaction among rural adolescents in Zizhong county
The association between physical activity and subjective well-being among adolescents in Southwest China by parental absence: a moderated mediation model
Mediating effect of resilience on relationship between exercise and depression in elderly
The roles of exercise tolerance and resilience in the effect of physical activity on emotional states among college students