Hospital information systems evaluation criteria: a scoping review
Introduction
Hospital information systems (HISs) play a vital role in optimizing healthcare delivery, managing clinical data, and supporting decision-making. While numerous frameworks have been developed to evaluate HIS performance, many remain limited in scope and do not fully capture the wide range of needs in modern healthcare environments. This review aimed to identify, categorize, and present a comprehensive set of criteria for evaluating HIS performance.
Methods
A scoping review was conducted following Arksey and O’Malley’s methodological framework and reported in line with the PRISMA-ScR guidelines. A systematic search was carried out in the Cochrane Library, PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar for English-language studies that addressed HIS evaluation criteria.
Results
The initial search yielded 561 records, 52 of which met the inclusion criteria. A comprehensive list of evaluation indicators was synthesized and grouped into six main domains: human, technological, informational, organizational, legal, and patient safety. These domains were further divided into 14 categories. To provide further clarity, the indicators were also classified according to Donabedian’s framework of structure, process, and outcome. The majority of studies emphasized structural aspects—such as technological infrastructure and organizational capacity—followed by process-related factors such as user training and system usability, whereas outcome measures were less frequently addressed. Across the domains, “user satisfaction” was the most commonly reported criterion.
Conclusion
This review provides a structured, multidimensional framework for the comprehensive evaluation of HISs. Moving beyond partial assessments focused solely on technical or usability aspects highlights the importance of incorporating human, organizational, legal, and patient safety perspectives. The proposed framework has practical value for policymakers, hospital administrators, and IT developers and can serve as a foundation for developing standardized and adaptable evaluation tools.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12913-025-13972-3.

Introduction
In recent years, healthcare systems worldwide have undergone profound digital transformation, often described as the era of digital health. Within this era, health information systems (HISs) have become increasingly recognized as key foundational infrastructures that enable digital health to function in practice. HIS aims to optimize healthcare performance by managing and storing patient data and integrate a wide array of functionalities, such as electronic health records (EHRs), clinical decision support systems (CDSSs), laboratory information systems (LISs), radiology information systems (RISs), and telemedicine platforms. After successful implementation of these functions, HISs improve the quality of patient care, operational efficiency, and clinical and administrative outcomes.
The numerous modules of HIS platforms demand substantial technical expertise, financial investment, and organizational resources. However, their implementation and operation face several challenges, including system complexity, data security risks, and persistent interoperability issues. These challenges often result in fragmented patient health records, redundant data entry, and potential clinical errors. Poorly designed user interfaces may further hinder healthcare providers’ ability to use the system effectively. In addition, the growing reliance on interconnected networks and cloud-based solutions exposes sensitive health data to cybersecurity threats, requiring robust monitoring and system maintenance. Finally, the rapid pace of technology change complicates both the evaluation and management of HISs.
Given these multifaceted challenges, HISs, as a critical discipline, should be evaluated not only by traditional criteria such as system uptime or basic user satisfaction but also by broader criteria that encompass usability, interoperability, data security, and overall organizational impact. It is essential to assess usability in high-stakes clinical environments, along with interoperability and data security, due to growing cybersecurity concerns. A one-size-fits-all evaluation approach, however, is ineffective because healthcare institutions have widely divergent needs. While some academic medical centers may prioritize advanced data analytics and research capabilities, smaller rural clinics are more likely to focus on cost-effectiveness, reliability, and ease of use. This diversity underscores the need for adaptable evaluation frameworks.
The evaluation of HISs needs to focus on a standardized and comprehensive assessment framework. However, many studies have examined only specific aspects, such as usability or technical performance, in isolation without adequately considering the broader organizational, clinical, and legal contexts. This fragmented approach underestimates the overall impact of HISs on healthcare delivery and patient outcomes. The present study aimed to identify and synthesize evaluation criteria to develop a multidimensional and context-aware framework for HIS performance evaluation.

Methods

Study design and framework
The current scoping review was conducted to systematically investigate the criteria of the HIS. The methodological framework, developed by Arksey and O’Malley, was applied to guide the review process, including finding relevant studies, screening the studies, organizing and extracting the data, and finally presenting the findings. The reporting of this review aligns with the 2015 PRISMA-ScR (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews for Scoping Reviews) guidelines. The completed PRISMA-ScR checklist for this review is provided as a supplementary file to ensure full transparency and adherence to reporting standards (Supplementary File 1).

Research question
The question of the current scoping review is “What are the key criteria for the evaluation of HIS?”

Information sources and search strategy
A comprehensive search of the literature was conducted for published articles until 30 December 2024 across the PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google. The Google Scholar search was conducted to ensure no relevant studies that were not included in the primary databases had been overlooked. Due to the large number of search results from Google Scholar, abstract screening occurred for only the first 200 records ordered by relevance. The titles of the identified studies were screened and 112 records that met our criteria were reviewed in full text and after excluding duplicates and non-eligible sources, finally 26 unique studies from Google Scholar are included. All potentially eligible Google Scholar records were hand searched in PubMed, Scopus and Web of Science to ensure they came from peer-reviewed journals and for de-duplication. Only peer-review journal articles were considered, while non–peer-reviewed sources (conference abstracts with no full papers, websites and blogs) were excluded. To ensure that no similar reviews were already in existence, an initial search was performed in the Cochrane Library. The search strategy was formulated via a combination of keywords and MeSH terms related to hospital information systems, evaluation, and criteria. Boolean operators (“AND,” “OR”) were used to combine search terms. The search was limited to the title and abstract fields to enhance specificity. The initial draft of the search strategy, developed by the research team, was subsequently peer-reviewed by an independent expert to ensure completeness and accuracy before being finalized and executed across the database. The detailed search strategy is presented in Table 1. No supplementary search methods (e.g., reference list screening or citation tracking) were conducted, as the primary database search yielded sufficient coverage for the scope and purpose of this review.
Database search strategy
Database	Search Fields	Search String	 	PubMed	MeSH, Title/Abstract	((“Hospital Information Systems“[Mesh] OR “Ambulatory Care Information Systems“[Mesh] OR “Operating Room Information Systems“[Mesh] OR “Point-of-Care Systems“[Mesh]) OR (“Hospital Information Systems“[Title/Abstract] OR “Ambulatory Care Information Systems“[Title/Abstract] OR “Operating Room Information Systems“[Title/Abstract] OR “Point-of-Care Systems“[Title/Abstract])) AND (“evaluation“[Title/Abstract] OR “assessment“[Title/Abstract] OR “measurement“[Title/Abstract] OR “appraisal“[Title/Abstract] OR “estimation“[Title/Abstract] OR evaluat*[Title/Abstract] OR assess*[Title/Abstract] OR measur*[Title/Abstract] OR estimat*[Title/Abstract] OR apprais*[Title/Abstract]) AND (“criteria“[Title/Abstract] OR factor*[Title/Abstract] OR “standards“[Title/Abstract] OR “touchstone“[Title/Abstract] OR “measure“[Title/Abstract] OR “module“[Title/Abstract])	 	Scopus	Title, Abstract, Keywords	(TITLE-ABS-KEY (“hospital information system" )) AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY ( evaluation )) AND (TITLE-ABS-KEY ( criteria ))	 	Web of Science	Topic (TS = Title, Abstract, Author Keywords, Keywords Plus)	” Hospital information system” _ (Topic) AND Evaluation (Topic) AND Criteria (Topic)	 	Google Scholar	Title, Keywords	allintitle: evaluation “hospital information systems” criteria OR evaluation OR assessment OR “hospital information systems” “hospital information systems”

Eligibility criteria
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) the evaluation of health information systems or hospital information systems; (2) the identification of specific evaluation criteria, factors, or standards; (3) original research studies or a form of review (systematic, scoping, or narrative); and (4) English-language published articles.
Studies were excluded if their focus was solely on specific HIS subsystems (e.g., Nursing Information Systems, Laboratory Information Systems, or Radiology Information Systems) without addressing the broader hospital-level system. This decision was made to maintain the study’s focus on evaluating Hospital Information Systems as integrated, organization-wide platforms. However, it is acknowledged that this criterion may have also excluded relevant subsystem studies containing valuable insights on generic evaluation criteria within their specific contexts.

Selection of sources of evidence
The titles and abstracts of the included studies were screened, and the full texts of potentially relevant articles were thoroughly examined for final inclusion by two independent reviewers (H. KH and M. S). Any disagreements between the two reviewers at any stage were resolved through discussion or, if necessary, consultation with a third author (M.D.) to reach a consensus. The entire screening process was managed via EndNote v.8 software. The primary aim of a scoping review is to map the scope, breadth, and characteristics of existing evidence rather than to critically appraise studies in order to reach a definitive conclusion. Accordingly, no formal methodological quality assessment of the included studies was conducted in this review. This approach is fully aligned with the PRISMA-ScR guidelines and the JBI Manual, both of which emphasize that quality appraisal in scoping reviews is optional and may be omitted when appropriately justified. Given the objectives of this review include a broad scope of study designs, it was neither methodologically appropriate nor practical to utilize one specific tool for evaluating the quality of each individual study. Additionally, the use of multiple tools for quality assessment would not provide useful or meaningful evaluations that can be compared or combined. Moreover, excluding studies based solely on their methodological quality would conflict with the inclusive, open, and exploratory nature of scoping reviews. Despite the above-mentioned reasons for the lack of a single tool being used for quality assessment in the included articles, the Discussion section provides a narrative overview of the strengths, limitations, and differences in methodology of the included literature to help clarify the overall evidence landscape presented through this scoping review.

Data extraction and charting
A total of 52 studies were included in the review. For each study, the following data items were extracted: author(s), year of publication, country, study purpose, evaluation method, specific evaluation criteria, and key findings. The data extraction and qualitative synthesis process followed a rigorous multi-stage procedure aligned with PRISMA-ScR item 17 and JBI methodological guidance. A hybrid deductive–inductive coding approach was used. Initial deductive sensitizing concepts were derived from broad domains frequently referenced within the HIS evaluation literature, whereas additional inductive codes emerged from iterative engagement with the included studies during full-text review. Two authors (H.KH. and S.A.) independently extracted data using a standardized form and collaboratively developed the preliminary codebook based on a purposive sample of studies. Through multiple rounds of pilot testing, the team refined code definitions, inclusion/exclusion rules, and illustrative examples to achieve conceptual clarity. To ensure analytic rigor, two reviewers independently applied the preliminary codebook to approximately 15% of the included studies, achieving 85% percent agreement. Coding discrepancies were examined in consensus meetings and resolved through discussion, leading to further refinement of the codebook and coding logic. All coding was conducted manually; qualitative data analysis software (e.g., NVivo, MAXQDA) was not used due to resource constraints and the manageable size of the dataset. This decision has been explicitly stated for transparency. Following the finalization of the codebook, one researcher completed coding of the remaining studies with ongoing team consultation throughout the process. The six-dimensional framework presented in this review was not imposed a priori; rather, it emerged through iterative thematic aggregation of higher-order categories derived from the coded data. This inductive formation of the framework reflects the underlying structure of the synthesized evidence and supports the conceptual robustness of the final classification (Fig. 2).

Unit of analysis and data presentation
The charted data were synthesized and are presented in two distinct formats. In the comprehensive list (Table 2), frequencies correspond to the number of studies mentioning each specific indicator, yielding a total of n = 146. Subsequently, for analysis through the Donabedian model, these indicators were grouped into thematic categories. The frequencies in Table 3 represent the count of unique themes within each domain (Structure, Process, Outcome), resulting in a total of n = 81 distinct groups. This difference in totals is a direct consequence of the shift from counting occurrences to counting thematic categories.
A detailed workflow diagram illustrating all methodological steps of the scoping review is provided in Supplementary File 2.

Results

Study selection
In the current scoping review, a total of 473 records were identified. After 10 duplicates were removed, 463 were screened, leading to the exclusion of 221 records. The abstracts of the remaining 242 articles were then assessed for eligibility, which led to the further exclusion of 190 articles that did not meet the inclusion criteria. Finally, the full texts of the remaining 52 articles were retrieved, all of which met the inclusion criteria and were included in the final analysis. The study selection process is illustrated in the PRISMA flow diagram (Fig. 1).
PRISMA flow diagram for the scoping review process

Characteristics of the included studies
Figure 2 shows that the publication trend from 1972 to 2024 has generally been increasing, despite some fluctuations. The highest number of articles was observed in 2014 and 2019, with seven studies published each year. Although there has been some variation and a slight decline in publications since 2020, the overall volume of research in the past decade has increased compared with that in earlier periods.
Distribution of Included Studies by Publication Year
An analysis of the geographical distribution of studies revealed that the majority originated from Iran, accounting for a notable 42% of all publications. Malaysia (9%) and Indonesia (7%) were the next most prominent contributors. Other countries, including the United States and France (each 6%), as well as various European and Asian nations, had a limited and scattered presence. This pattern highlights a significant concentration of scientific output in this field originating from the Middle East and Southeast Asia (Fig. 3).
Distribution of included studies by country
Details of the included studies are provided in Supplementary File 2.

Identified evaluation criteria
Following a detailed analysis, the identified criteria were organized into six primary classes: information, human, technology, organization, legal and patient safety. These classes were further subclassified into 15 main categories, each encompassing a set of specific evaluation criteria.
Across the reviewed literature, the most frequently applied criteria were user satisfaction (reported in 19 studies), user behavioral factors (10 studies), system infrastructure (9 studies), and system properties and attributes (9 studies). In contrast, criteria related to organizational culture, legal and ethical aspects, patient safety, and system development attributes were less frequently reported, each appearing in only one or two studies. Table 2 presents the complete classification of the dimensions, categories, and criteria, along with their corresponding frequencies. (Note: frequencies indicate the number of studies that reported each specific indicator)
Dimensions, Categories, and criteria for hospital information system evaluation
Main Criteria	Sub-Criteria	Details	Frequency	 (Refs)	 	Information	Information Quality	Accessibility	5		 	Objectivity	1		 	Information Format	Representation	2		 	Information Use	Recall, Interpretation, Integration, Awareness	2		 	Information Functionality	Information Features	1		 	Human	User Satisfaction	Usage Expectation	19	– 	 	User Items	Motivation	2		 	Training	6		 	User Behavioral Items	Acceptance, Trust, Engagement, etc.	10	, – 	 	Functional	User Requirements	3		 	Social & Cultural	Cultural Requirements	3		 	Technology	Functional Criteria	System Features and Capabilities	7		 	System Performance	6	, – 	 	Communication Services	2		 	Privacy and Security	7		 	System Infrastructure	9		 	Non-Functional Criteria	System Properties and Attributes	9		 	System Development Attributes	1		 	Impact on Process Quality	8	– 	 	Impact on Process Efficiency	5		 	Organization	Management	Cost	2		 	Support (External and Internal)	4		 	Management Style	3		 	Resources and Funding	3		 	Organizational	Collaboration (Physician Participation/Champion)	5		 	Structure and Strategy	4		 	Culture	2		 	Security	3		 	Legal	Legal and Ethical	Legal and Ethical Issues	2		 	Politics	Political Factors	3		 	Patient Safety	Outcome	Safety Outcomes	2
To support a structured analysis, the extracted criteria were classified via Donabedian’s model, which encompasses three dimensions: structure, process, and outcome. This framework aligns HIS evaluation with established healthcare quality principles. As shown in Table 3, the structure dimension accounted for the largest number of indicators (47 in total), covering technological infrastructure, user items, support resources, organizational leadership and support, and legal and ethical frameworks. The process dimension included 21 indicators, primarily related to user satisfaction and data entry, reflecting the operational aspects of system use. The outcome dimension comprises 13 indicators, emphasizing operational efficiency as well as cost-effectiveness and institutional benefits. (Note: Frequencies represent the count of unique indicator themes aggregated under each domain. The sum (n = 81) is the total number of distinct thematic groups)
Classification of evaluation criteria by the Donabedian model (structure, process, and outcome)
Dimension (Donabedian)	Category	Frequency	References	Criteria	 	Structure(Freq = 47)	Technological infrastructure	19		- System Features and Capabilities- System Performance- Privacy and Security- System Infrastructure- System Properties and Attributes	 	User Items	14	, –– 	- Training- Motivation- User behavioral Items	 	Support resources	6		- Support (External and Internal)- Resources and Funding	 	Organizational leadership and support	5		- Management Style- Cost	 	Legal and ethical frameworks	3		- Legal and Ethical politics	 	Process(Freq = 21)	User satisfaction	16		- Usage Expectation- User Requirements- Impact on Process Quality- Impact on Process Efficiency- Communication tools and interoperability- Workflow integration	 	Data entry	5	– 	- Information Format- Information Quality- Information use	 	Outcome (Freq = 13)	Operational efficiency	3		- Communication Services- Patient safety and quality of care	 	Cost-effectiveness and institutional benefit	10	– 	- Collaboration (Physician Participation/Champion)- Structure and Strategy- Security- Legal and Ethical Issues
Figure 4 illustrates the interaction of the Six-Domain HIS Evaluation Model with Donabedian’s framework (Structure, Process, and Outcome). It clearly depicts the six core domains of HIS evaluation, including human, technological, informational, organizational, legal, and patient safety, and their interrelationships within a cohesive structure. This visual synthesis enhances the understanding of complex relationships, making it more accessible and applicable for hospital managers, policymakers, and IT designers.
Six-Domain HIS Evaluation Model Aligned with Donabedian’s Framework

Discussion
Regular evaluation based on a comprehensive framework is essential for the effective use of hospital information systems. These evaluations help improve efficiency, enhance the quality of care, and support management decisions by identifying the strengths and weaknesses of the system. Moreover, developing such a framework requires gathering and integrating the various dimensions mentioned in existing evaluation studies. Although technological, human, and organizational measures of HISs have been addressed in previous studies, a comprehensive review that also considers informational, legal, outcomes, and patient safety measures is still lacking. This review addresses this gap by providing a structured synthesis of measures. This multidimensional approach offers a more holistic understanding of HIS performance evaluation.
The results revealed that the evaluation criteria for hospital information systems can be grouped into six main dimensions: information, technology, human, organizational, legal, and clinical patient care. Specifically, the information dimension refers to the quality of the data used and issues related to their accessibility; the technological dimension encompasses the infrastructure and technical capabilities of the system; and the human dimension focuses on the interaction and needs of users. The organizational, legal, and clinical dimensions also address management policies, legal requirements, and the direct and indirect impact of using these systems on patient care, respectively. This categorization provides a comprehensive view of HIS evaluation and supports the development of accurate tools to measure system performance.
The findings of this review, which is based on 52 included studies, indicate that the focus of evaluating hospital information systems has gradually shifted from technical aspects toward organizational and human dimensions and their implications for patient care. As shown in Table 2, most criteria were concentrated in the human (n = 19 studies), technological (n = 18 studies), and informational (n = 15 studies) dimensions, whereas the organizational (n = 12), legal (n = 6), and patient care and safety (n = 5) dimensions were less frequently addressed. This distribution shows how evaluation priorities have evolved from purely objective, technical issues toward more subjective and perceptual components. This development also highlights the need for greater familiarity with qualitative assessment approaches and methods. In line with this, several studies have reported that the implementation of hospital information systems can lead to changes in organizational culture, policies, and work group interactions. Together, this shift underlines the importance of incorporating both technical and socio-organizational criteria into HIS evaluation frameworks while pointing to the need for further research on how these dimensions influence patient care.
However, these key dimensions have not been adequately addressed in most standard evaluation models, which may explain their limited ability to account for system failures in clinical practice. For example, many studies have relied on the DeLone and McLean model, which, despite acknowledging the role of senior management support and user participation, does not structurally incorporate these variables. Likewise, organizational culture and contextual characteristics are overlooked, even though cultural and organizational barriers are frequently reported as major challenges to successful HIS implementation. Other studies have relied mainly on questionnaires or narrower models, such as the technology acceptance model, which emphasize user acceptance but fail to provide comprehensive evaluation criteria. Frameworks such as the technology–organization–environment framework (TOE) and the human–organization–technology fit framework (HOT-FIT) have also been applied; however, they remain limited in capturing the full range of organizational, technical, human, and contextual factors required for robust HIS evaluation. Several studies have emphasized organizational and managerial factors such as the commitment of system managers, management motivation to advance the project, technical knowledge, and organizational influence as key elements for the successful implementation of HISs. Among these factors, the human dimension, particularly user satisfaction, stands out as one of the most widely applied measures of success. The evidence consistently shows that user satisfaction is a reliable criterion for assessing the effectiveness of hospital information systems. In addition to satisfaction, other human-related aspects have also been highlighted, including user expectations, motivation, acceptance, training, and participation in system use.
Other findings of this study highlight the importance of considering legal and political requirements as well as the impact of HISs on clinical patient care. To ensure more effective evaluation, compliance with ethical standards in management, respect for privacy and confidentiality, adherence to legal requirements, and awareness of legal limitations and opportunities are necessary. Only a few studies have addressed these dimensions, possibly because most evaluations rely on standard parameters. Nevertheless, the existing work in this area provides a useful starting point for future research. In addition, several studies have emphasized the importance of the organizational dimension, which includes elements such as costs, organizational policies and strategies, management style, and cross-sector collaboration. One important issue in this dimension is that the efficiency of investments in IT projects may be influenced by hidden and indirect costs, which are often difficult to calculate. Moreover, assessing the benefits and effects of organizational factors on system success is usually intangible, complex, and time-consuming. In addition to the organizational, technological, and human dimensions, the findings of this study highlight the key role of the information dimension in HIS evaluation. Several studies have shown that deficiencies in information quality, limited access to sufficient and timely data, and a lack of comprehensiveness can lead to inefficiency, errors, and reduced user trust.
To provide a more coherent framework and offer a broader perspective on the identified evaluation dimensions, the set of criteria was recategorized according to Donabedian’s three-part model. This model, which was originally developed to assess healthcare quality, classifies indicators into structure, process, and outcome. Similar methodological applications can be found in the literature. For example, a systematic review of hospital quality indicators classified 248 indicators into structure, process, and outcome domains, revealing a predominance of structure and process indicators over outcome indicators. Hebert also evaluated patient care information systems via Donabedian’s framework to examine how organizational and technical structures translate (or fail to translate) into process changes and ultimately patient outcomes. In the context of the present study, structural indicators encompassed dimensions such as technology, information, and organizational criteria; process-related indicators included the human dimension, particularly user satisfaction, training, and acceptance; and outcome indicators covered clinical patient care, safety, and legal-ethical aspects. Organizing the extracted criteria under this well-established framework provides both conceptual clarity and comparability with previous quality assessment approaches while also demonstrating the applicability of Donabedian’s model in the evaluation of hospital information systems.
This review provides a broad and structured overview of hospital information system evaluation criteria, extending beyond the frequently studied technological and human aspects to include informational, organizational, legal, and patient safety dimensions. Mapping these findings onto Donabedian’s model adds conceptual clarity and makes the results comparable with established healthcare quality frameworks, whereas the inclusion of studies from diverse contexts increases the relevance and transferability of the findings. In interpreting these findings, several contextual considerations should be noted. Restricting the search to English-language articles and having limited access to some databases may have led to the omission of relevant evidence. These constraints could have affected the completeness of the results, although the systematic approach applied here helps mitigate this risk. The literature exhibits a significant geographical focus on Asian countries, with Iranian studies representing 42% of the included sample. This pattern reflects the existing distribution of empirical research in this field rather than any methodological limitation or selection bias within our review, as the search was conducted systematically and without regional restrictions. Nevertheless, this geographic concentration may have influenced the relative prominence of certain criteria. for example, dimensions such as organizational culture, leadership, or political and managerial factors appear more frequently in studies from Iran and neighboring countries, reflecting contextual characteristics of regional health systems. While the core themes identified were consistent across settings, suggesting broader applicability of the proposed framework, the relative emphasis of specific dimensions may vary in other geographical or institutional contexts. Therefore, considerations of transferability and regional representativeness remain essential when interpreting the findings.

Suggestion for future studies
The findings of this study also highlight several clear gaps in the existing literature on Hospital Information System (HIS) evaluation. Criteria related to the legal and ethical dimensions, patient safety outcomes, organizational culture, information functionality, and system development attributes have been reported in only one or two studies, indicating insufficient exploration in these areas. On a broader level, the existing literature is heavily focused on structural indicators, while outcome-level measures aligned with the Donabedian model are sparse and inconsistently reported. Furthermore, only a few studies have used standardized or validated evaluation tools, and longitudinal or real-world assessments of HIS performance are largely absent. These gaps emphasize the need for more rigorous, outcome-oriented, and evidence-based evaluations in future research. Additionally, future studies should prioritize and assess the relative importance of the identified criteria to determine the significance of each dimension. The development and psychometric validation of structured questionnaires based on the proposed framework could assist in systematically collecting data and ensuring the reliability and validity of evaluation tools. A practical examination of this framework in real hospital settings can empirically test its effectiveness and efficiency under operational and local conditions. The use of mixed methods and field data can further support the refinement, validation, and applicability of the proposed framework.

Limitations
The diverse study designs included in this scoping review (e.g., qualitative, quantitative, mixed-methods, and review articles) combined with the absence of formal methodological quality appraisal limit the interpretability of the frequency-based findings. The reported frequencies (such as the number of studies identifying a specific evaluation criterion) represent only the occurrence of the criterion across the literature and should not be interpreted as indicators of methodological rigor, evidentiary strength, or the relative importance of the findings.
Focused solely on specific HIS subsystems, which created a tension as many evaluation criteria are applicable to both subsystem and enterprise-level implementations. This exclusion may have led to selection bias and restricted the evidence base, limiting the framework’s transferability to evaluations of modular or interoperable HIS architectures. Consequently, the emphasis on integrated systems may overlook the importance of subsystem performance.

Conclusion
This scoping review offers a novel and structured framework for the evaluation of hospital information systems, grounded in a systematic analysis of the criteria most frequently cited in the literature from the past decade. By categorizing a wide array of evaluation indicators across six main domains: human, technology, information, organizational, legal and outcome. This study highlights the necessity of an integrated approach that moves beyond isolated technical or outcome metrics. The inclusion of often overlooked dimensions such as legal frameworks and cultural context adds distinct value to the existing body of knowledge. The framework presented here has significant practical utility, providing a clear roadmap for policymakers, hospital administrators, and IT developers to design and implement more effective and user-cantered HIS evaluation strategies. It can also serve as a foundation for developing standardized and context-adaptable evaluation tools. Overall, this study contributes not only to academic knowledge but also to the operational enhancement of HISs in diverse settings that require a balanced, cost-effective, and holistic approach to digital transformation. Future work should focus on validating these criteria in different healthcare contexts to further enhance their applicability.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
HKH wrote the first draft, analyzed and interpreted the data. SA, AF and SDcontributed to extracting the data and provided intellectual thinking on datacharting. MS and MD supervised and conceptualized the study. All authors readand approved the final manuscript.

Funding
None.

Data availability
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Abbreviations
CDSS
Clinical Decision Support Systems
CHIS
Computerized Hospital Information System
EHRs
Electronic Health Records
HIS
Hospital Information Systems
HOT-FIT
Human-Organization-Technology fit framework
LIS
Laboratory Information Systems
MeSH
Medical Subject Headings
PRISMA-ScR
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews for Scoping Reviews
PRISE
Process-Based Evaluation of Hospital Information Systems
RIS
Radiology Information Systems
TOE
Technology-Organization-Environment framework
TS
Topic

References
Digital health is a cultural transformation of traditional healthcare
Abernethy A, Adams L, Barrett M, Bechtel C, Brennan P, Butte A, et al. The promise of digital health: then, now, and the future. NAM Perspect. 2022.
Förstel S, Förstel M, Gallistl M, Zanca D, Eskofier BM, Rothgang EM. Data quality in hospital information systems: lessons learned from analyzing 30 years of patient data in a regional German hospital. Int J Med Inform [Internet]. 2024;192:105636. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1386505624002995.
Zheng F, Wang K, Wang Q, Yu T, Wang L, Zhang X, et al. Factors influencing clinicians’ use of hospital information systems for infection prevention and control: cross-sectional study based on the extended DeLone and McLean model. J Med Internet Res [Internet]. 2023;25. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1438887123004648.
Danso G, Lasim OU. The impact of health information technology on patient safety. medRxiv. 2024;2011–24.
Security and privacy of electronic health records: concerns and challenges
Applying the Non-Adoption, Abandonment, Scale-up, Spread, and sustainability framework across implementation stages to identify key strategies to facilitate clinical decision support system integration within a large metropolitan health service: interview
Applying an evaluation framework for health information system design, development, and implementation
Yu P. A multi-method approach to evaluate health information systems. MEDINFO 2010. IOS; 2010;1231–5.
Motevali Haghighi S, Torabi SA. A novel mixed sustainability-resilience framework for evaluating hospital information systems. Int J Med Inform [Internet]. 2018;118(February):16–28. Available from: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2018.07.003.
Benefits, challenges, and contributors to success for National eHealth systems implementation: a scoping review
Dixon BE. Introduction to health information exchange. Health information exchange. Elsevier; 2023;3–20.
Schulman J, Kuperman GJ, Kharbanda A, Kaushal R. Discovering how to think about a hospital patient information system by struggling to evaluate it: a committee’s journal. J Am Med Informatics Assoc [Internet]. 2007;14(5):537–41. Available from: 10.1197/jamia.M2436
Canova-Barrios C, Machuca-Contreras F. Interoperability standards in health information systems: systematic review. In: Seminars in Medical Writing and Education. 2022;7.
Usability problems do not heal by themselves: National survey on physicians’ experiences with EHRs in Finland
Beyond adoption: a new framework for theorizing and evaluating nonadoption, abandonment, and challenges to the scale-up, spread, and sustainability of health and care technologies
Westbrook JI, Braithwaite J, Georgiou A, Ampt A, Creswick N, Coiera E, et al. Multimethod evaluation of information and communication technologies in health in the context of wicked problems and sociotechnical theory. J Am Med Informatics Assoc [Internet]. 2007;14(6):746–55. Available from: 10.1197/jamia.M2462
Chatzoglou PD, Fragidis LL, Doumpa T, Aggelidis P. Hospital information system evaluation. In: 10th International conference on ICT in health. International Conference on Information Communication Technologies in Health. 2012;240–57.
Usability and evaluation of a health information system in the emergency department: mixed methods study
Santos BJ, Tabacow RP, Barboza M, Leão TF, Bock EGP. Cyber security in health: standard protocols for IoT and supervisory control systems. Research anthology on Securing medical systems and records. IGI Global; 2022;238–54.
Innovative health information technology training: exploring blended learning
Implementation to optimization: a tailored, data-driven approach to improve provider efficiency and confidence in use of the electronic medical record
Jeyakumar T, McClure S, Lowe M, Hodges B, Fur K, Javier-Brozo M, et al. An education framework for effective implementation of a health information system: scoping review. J Med Internet Res [Internet]. 2021;23(2):e24691. Available from: https://www.jmir.org/2021/2/e24691
Bowman S. Impact of electronic health record systems on information integrity: quality and safety implications. Perspect Heal Inf Manag. 2013;10(Fall).
User’s guide to correlation coefficients
Data quality and data use in primary health care: A case study from Iran
Technical requirements framework of hospital information systems: design and evaluation
Questionnaire based usability evaluation of hospital information systems
Evaluation of hospital information systems in iran: A case study in the Kerman Province
Evaluation of hospital information systems of the teaching hospitals affiliated to Shiraz university of medical Sciences, based on the American college of physicians criteria
Performance evaluation of public hospital information systems by the information system success model
Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework
Peters M, Godfrey C, McInerney P, Soares CB, Khalil H, Parker D. Methodology for JBI scoping reviews. The Joanna Briggs Institute reviewers manual 2015. Joanna Briggs Institute. 2015;3–24.
Scoping studies: advancing the methodology
Determinants of success of inpatient clinical information systems: a literature review
HIS-Monitor: an approach to assess the quality of information processing in hospitals
An assessment and comparison of information quality of hospital information systems in medical-teaching hospitals of the City of Isfahan based on Delone and mclean’s modified model
An importance-performance analysis of hospital information system attributes: A nurses’ perspective
Stavrothanasopoulou K, Papoutsidakis M, Papachristos D. Evaluation of health information systems: A case study of Greek Metaxas hospital. Evaluation. 2019;6(12).
Evaluation of hospital information systems data quality in educational hospitals of Zahedan university of medical sciences form users’ perspective
Success criteria for electronic medical record implementations in low-resource settings: a systematic review
Evaluation of failure causes in employing hospital information systems
Gürsel G. Expectation based evaluation framework for hospital information systems measurement model. 2012.
Evaluation of hospital information systems using technology acceptance model
Ranking the critical success factors for hospital information systems using a fuzzy analytical hierarchy process
Sadoughi F, Kimiafar K, Ahmadi M, Shakeri MT. Determining of factors influencing the success and failure of hospital information system and their evaluation methods: a systematic review. Iran Red Crescent Med J. 2013;15(12).
DANP-based method for determining the adoption of hospital information system
An evaluation of the risk factors associated with implementing projects of health information technology by fuzzy combined ANP-DEMATEL
An evaluation model for the implementation of hospital information system in public hospitals using multi-criteria-decision-making (MCDM) approaches
Ranking evaluation factors in hospital information systems
Methods for evaluating hospital information systems: a literature review
Hanmer LA, Isaacs S, Roode JD. A Conceptual Model of Computerised Hospital Information System (CHIS) use in South Africa. Kuhn KA, Warren JR, Leong TY, editors. Vol. 129, MEDINFO 2007: Proceedings of the 12th world congress on health (medical) informatics, pts 1 and 2: building sustainable health systems. 2007. p. 63-+.
A survey on the users’ satisfaction with the hospital information systems (HISs) based on DeLone and mclean’s model in the medical-teaching hospitals in Isfahan City
Evaluation of hospital information system (HIS) in general hospitals: user perspectives
Factors influencing nurses’ attitudes towards healthcare information technology
Chin HL, McClure P. Evaluating a comprehensive outpatient clinical information system: a case study and model for system evaluation. In: Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer Application in Medical Care. American Medical Informatics Association; 1995;717.
Salleh MIM, Zakaria N, Abdullah R. The influence of system quality characteristics on health care providers’ performance: Empirical evidence from Malaysia. J Infect Public Health. 2016;9(1st International Saudi Health Informatics Conference (ISHIC)):698–707.
Usability evaluation of three admission and medical records subsystems integrated into nationwide hospital information systems: heuristic evaluation
Identification and classification of indicators for evaluating health information systems
Which health information systems for the evaluation of health actions?
Brigl B, Hübner-Bloder G, Wendt T, Haux R, Winter A. Architectural quality criteria for hospital information systems. In: AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings. American Medical Informatics Association; 2005;81.
Evaluation of hospital information systems in selected hospitals of Iran
Organizational decision to adopt hospital information system: an empirical investigation in the case of Malaysian public hospitals
Wielki J, Jurczyk-Bunkowska M, Madera D. IT Application Evaluation at the University Clinical Hospital in Opole: Criteria Selection and Classification. Tome E, Cesario F, Soares RR, editors. PROCEEDINGS OF THE 20TH EUROPEAN CONFERENCE ON KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT (ECKM 2019), VOLS 1 AND 2. 2019;1105–13.
Wielki J, Jurczyk-Bunkowska M, Madera D. Application of TOPSIS Method for Evaluation of IT Application in the Hospital. Tome E, Cesario F, Soares RR, editors. Proceedings of the 20th european conference on knowledge management (ECKM 2019), VOLS 1 AND 2. 2019;1096–104.
A taxonomy: hospital information systems evaluation methodologies
Evaluation of hospital information systems (HIS) in terms of their suitability for tasks
Safe use of hospital information systems: an evaluation model based on a sociotechnical perspective
Learman I. Cost benefits analysis in the design and evaluation of information systems. In: Proceedings of the November 16–18, 1971, fall joint computer conference. 1972;469–76.
Evaluation of hospital information systems security
Visions and strategies to improve evaluation of health information systems: reflections and lessons based on the HIS-EVAL workshop in Innsbruck
Evaluation–the Cinderella science of ICT in health
Sadoughi F, Aminpour F. A review on the evaluation methods of health information systems. Iran J Med Educ. 2011;10(5).
Criteria for the evaluation of a Cloud-Based hospital information system outsourcing provider
A framework of a patient safety information system for Iranian hospitals: lessons learned from Australia, England and the US
Ozkan S, Baykal N, Sincan M. Process-Based evaluation of hospital information systems: application of an information system success model (PRISE) in the healthcare domain. Health information systems: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and applications. IGI Global Scientific Publishing; 2010;339–55.
Evaluation of hospital information systems in hospitals affiliated to Tehran universities of medical sciences
A new approach in the evaluation of hospital information systems
Usability evaluation of hospital information systems based on isometric 9241
Evaluation of hospital information systems from the users’ viewpoints in Tehran
Sibuea GHC, Napitupulu TA, Condrobimo AR. An evaluation of information system using HOT-FIT model: a case study of a hospital information system. In: 2017 International Conference on Information Management and Technology (ICIMTech). IEEE; 2017;106–11.
Evaluating the quality of medical care
Hospital quality indicators: a systematic review
Hebert M. Professional and organizational impact of using patient care information systems. MEDINFO’98. IOS; 1998;849–53.