Methods for the evaluation of corneal nerve fibres in diabetes mellitus by in vivo confocal microscopy: a scoping review
Abstract
Aim
To map, summarise and analyse the methodologies of corneal nerve fibre imaging in studies using in vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM) in diabetes and assess the potential for standardising methods and reporting.
Methods
A scoping review was conducted using five databases, MEDLINE, Embase, Cochrane, Web of Science and Scopus, with search terms related to IVCM, diabetes and corneal nerves. Two researchers independently screened the studies for eligibility. Relevant data were extracted and systematically analysed.
Results
Out of 1533 screened articles, 195 met the inclusion criteria. Spanning from 2000 to 2024, the studies showed high variability in image acquisition, image processing, image analysis and reporting detail. Most studies used laser scanning confocal microscopy, examining the central cornea in both eyes in patients with type 2 diabetes, manually selecting 3–6 images from each eye, and using ACCMetrics and CCMetrics for quantifying corneal nerve fibre length in mm/mm2. Many studies lacked sufficient methodological details for reproducibility.
Conclusion
IVCM studies of corneal nerve fibres in diabetes show substantial methodological heterogeneity and inconsistent reporting, limiting reproducibility. We propose a guideline to support standardisation and improve the reliability of future research.

STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THIS STUDY
Use of the the updated Joanna Briggs Institute guidelines for scoping review and Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews guidelines.
Collaboration with an academic librarian for the search.
Restricted to five databases.
Restricted to papers written in English, German and Scandinavian languages.
Restricted to papers of subjects with diabetes and relevant control groups, and not including methodology of other relevant samples.

Background
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a growing global health concern, and the most common complication is diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN), found in about half of patients with DM. The cornea provides a window for assessing thin nerve fibres in the living eye, which are part of the peripheral nervous system. By using the technique of in vivo confocal microscopy (IVCM), the morphology and nerves of the cornea can be non-invasively imaged with high resolution and precision, and the thin corneal nerve fibres can be further quantified.
Several studies have explored the association between corneal nerve fibres and DPN. A meta-analysis including 38 studies and approximately 4000 participants demonstrated a significant reduction in the corneal nerve fibre density (CNFD), corneal nerve branch density (CNBD), corneal nerve fibre length (CNFL) and inferior whorl length (IWL) in subjects with DM with/without DPN versus controls, and in subjects with DM with/without DPN. Another meta-analysis included 13 studies and 1680 participants, reporting that CNFL, CNFD and CNBD were significantly reduced in patients with DPN compared with healthy controls; however, the authors concluded that comparison across studies is challenging due to the diversity of image acquisition and analysis methods used.
IVCM has the potential for enabling early diagnosis of DPN, and IVCM measures have been shown to correlate with the onset and severity of DPN. However, translation of IVCM into clinical practice requires evidence-based knowledge about corneal nerves in healthy and diabetic eyes, as well as standardised methods. Although published protocols and methodological studies are available, there is no accepted gold standard for IVCM image acquisition, image selection or quantitative image analysis of corneal nerve fibres. Therefore, this scoping review aims to map, summarise and analyse the methodology of corneal nerve fibre imaging in studies using IVCM in DM subjects and relevant control groups, with an aim to determine the potential for developing standardised methods and reporting guidelines.

Methods

Design
This study was conducted in accordance with the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) methodology for scoping reviews and follows the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR). The population, concept and context approach was used, and a protocol was developed and published a priori.
This scoping review addresses the following research questions:
In what types of DM have corneal nerve fibres been assessed by IVCM?
Which instruments and techniques are used for IVCM image acquisition of corneal nerves in DM?
What data selection methods are used to obtain the raw image dataset for further analysis?
What data extraction and image processing methods are applied to the images before defining the nerve parameters?
How are the extracted images analysed?
What outcome measures are reported for the corneal nerves?
How can the reporting methodology of IVCM image acquisition, image processing, image selection and image analysis be standardised?
The inclusion criteria have been outlined in the published protocol. The eligibility criteria were subjects with DM and healthy controls and use of IVCM for quantitative analysis of corneal nerve fibres in the subbasal nerve plexus. Data sources included empirical and research articles published in peer-review journals, written in English, German or Scandinavian languages. The scoping review includes randomised controlled trials, controlled trials, intervention studies, experimental studies, quasi-experimental studies, observational studies with a control group, within-subject/repeated measures studies and case–control studies, study protocols and observational studies without a control group. Studies on animals, qualitative studies, literature reviews, commentaries, letters, editorials, conference papers or proceedings, opinion or discussion papers, dissertations/thesis, abstracts/presentations, grey literature and brief reports were excluded.

Search strategy
The search strategy was developed in collaboration with an academic librarian who performed the search in the following databases: MEDLINE, Embase, Web of Science, Scopus and Cochrane. The search was conducted from inception to 13 September 2024. The search strategy and the full search are available in onlinesupplemental files 1  2. The search was conducted with keywords from Thesaurus/Medical subject headings and text words (keywords) for “in vivo confocal microscopy” AND “cornea” AND “diabetes mellitus”.
The search results were imported to Endnote for removal of duplicates and exported to Rayyan for screening of titles, keywords and abstracts. The screening and selection of studies were completed in two steps (figure 1). First, two independent reviewers screened the title and abstracts (VS and SAS) to identify eligible studies. In cases of disagreement about inclusion, the reviewers discussed and reached consensus. Second, the full texts of the potentially eligible studies were divided and screened by pairs of independent reviewers (SAS and TLM, SAS and EL, and SAS and JL). Disagreement about inclusion was resolved by a third reviewer (VS).
PRISMA flow diagram illustrating the search strategy.

Data extraction
The data extraction followed a deductive approach. A template was developed in Microsoft Excel for Microsoft 365 MSO (V.2311) for extraction of key findings about the methods used for image acquisition, image processing, image selection and image analysis of the corneal nerve fibres in subbasal nerve plexus. The data extraction tool was piloted by two reviewers (VS and SAS), who extracted information from two included articles to ensure consistency and accuracy. Further, minor adjustments were made during the extraction process (SAS in consultation with VS).
Data about methods were extracted by pairs of two independent researchers (SAS and TLM), and consensus was reached. Details about the publication (author, year, journal and title), study sample, study methods and outcome variables were recorded (online supplemental file 3).

Data analysis and presentations
The extracted data were descriptively analysed and presented graphically and in frequency tables to provide an overview and understanding of published studies. Attention was given to the methods of IVCM image acquisition, image selection, image processing and image analysis to identify potential limitations and/or areas for improvements in reporting IVCM-based measures of the corneal subbasal nerves.
In the current review, the different nerve analysis tools are categorised into manually, semi-automated and fully automated, based on degree of human involvement. Manual analysis represents human tracing of the nerve fibres, semi-automated refers to human tracing assisted by a computer algorithm, and automated corresponds to fully automated tracing and quantification of the nerve fibres without human involvement in identifying nerves.
The country of the study was determined by identifying locations of the study or their ethical approval in the methods section. Combining country and author information enabled identification of collaborating research groups. This analysis made it possible to identify the authors or research groups with the most publications in this specific field of research.

Statistical methods
Frequencies and summary statistics were performed in Excel for Windows, V.2411 (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, Washington, USA).

Deviations from the protocol
The protocol published previously included the use of risk-of-bias tools (AXIS, ROBBIN and ROB2). However, risk-of-bias tools was excluded from this scoping review as these belong to the systematic review format. The same applies to the evaluation of statistical power of the included articles. Uncertainties regarding the content in the included papers were treated as missing information, and the authors were not contacted for clarifications.

Patient and public involvement
Patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, conduct, reporting or dissemination plans of this research.

Results
In total 2997 articles were identified. The search in five databases (23 December 2022) yielded 2518 articles. Two additional searches were conducted on 23 December 2023 and 13 September 2024 to include the most recent published papers. After removing duplicates, 1533 articles were uploaded to Rayyan for title and abstract screening. After exclusion of ineligible articles, because of wrong population, intervention, publication type, study design, outcome measurement methods or language, the full text of 229 articles was sought for retrieval. In total, 215 articles were retrieved and eligible for full text screening, of which 195 met the inclusion criteria (figure 1).
The included studies were published from 2000 to 2024 (online supplemental file 4). Study samples included subjects with type 1 diabetes (T1DM) (n=3895), type 2 diabetes (T2DM) (n=6697), both T1DM and T2DM (n=6245) and healthy controls (n=5577). Two studies did not provide information about type of DM included in the sample (n=40). Among the 52 studies investigating both T1DM and T2DM, 15 reported their results stratified by type of DM. An overview of all included studies is provided in onlinesupplemental files 56.
All regions of the world are represented in the included studies (online supplemental file 7). However, most studies were conducted in the UK (n=39 (20%)) and Australia (n=26 (13%)) (online supplemental file 7). The five authors with the most publications were Rayaz A. Malik (n=76 (39%)), Nathan Efron (n=38 (19%)), Andrew Marshall (n=33 (17%)), Andrew J. M. Boulton (n=28 (14%)), and Mitra Tavakoli (n=27 (14%)), all affiliated with the research originating in Manchester.

In vivo corneal confocal microscopy image acquisition method
The most frequently used image acquisition method was laser scanning confocal microscopy using Heidelberg Retina Tomograph with Rostock Cornea Module (n=173, 89% of the studies), followed by slit scanning confocal microscopy (n=19, 10% of the studies). One study used both laser and slit scanning confocal microscopy, one study used Tandem scanning confocal microscopy and one study did not report the type of instrument used.
In total, 116 (59%) of the 195 included studies referred to an image acquisition protocol or referred to another publication for details about the image acquisition methods. 57 (29%) of the studies did not provide information about the number of eyes imaged, and figure 2a shows an overview of the distribution of image acquisition of one or two eyes where 79 (41%) studies collected images from both eyes.
Overview of studies with different imaging and selection criteria, % of studies. (a) Overview of studies imaging one, two or both eyes. (b) Corneal region for image acquisition (%). (c) Categorised image selection criteria, numbers not mutually exclusive (% of studies) representing different categories of selection criteria. (d) Number of images selected per eye for further analysis (% of studies). NA, not applicable; NI, no information; RF, refer further to other articles.
Among the studies taking images from one eye, 10 of the 58 (17%) used randomisation for eye selection criteria.
The corneal region imaged, or region of interest, was not reported in 50 (26%) of the studies. Among the studies reporting region of interest, the central cornea was the most frequently imaged (n=101 (52%)) (figure 2b), followed by the central cornea in combination with the inferior whorl (n=27 (14%)). The number of raw images acquired was reported in 50 (26%) studies, ranging from 3 to 1400.
Information about the number of imaging operators and their experience level was not reported for 139 (71%) and 146 (75%) studies, respectively. For the 56 studies reporting the number of imaging operators, the number ranged from 1 to 4 operators, and 30 (54%) of them had only one imaging operator.

Selection and processing of in vivo corneal confocal images
Image selection criteria were reported in 160 (82%) of the included studies. Forty-four (27%) provided a detailed description of the image selection criteria or applied an image selection protocol. Masking of the image selector or a randomised image selection was reported in 39 (20%)
and 11 (6%) studies, respectively.
The image selection criteria are defined by three main principles (figure 2c); (1) area of image selection: depth, focal position, subbasal nerve layer/plexus, images not overlapping more than 20% or images not overlapping at all; (2) image quality: contrast, best or good image quality, distinct and focused nerves, highest technical quality, clearest image, image quality>80%, best resolution and images without stromal cells, scars, pressure lines and artefacts; and (3) nerve fibre density: from lowest to highest nerve fibre density, variability, the largest number of nerve fibres and image with the highest number of nerve bundles. Ten (5%) of the studies reported all three main principles. Twenty-six (13%) studies did not describe selection based on the three main selection criteria.
The number of images selected for analysis from the central cornea and the inferior whorl ranged from 1 to 12 and 1 to 6 images, respectively. Twelve (6%) merged multiple images to a mosaic for analysis (figure 2d), covering an area from 2 mm2 (55) to 6 mm2 .

Analysis of in vivo corneal confocal images
In total, 175 (90%) studies provided information about image analysis method and 143 (73%) referred to an analysis protocol. The most frequently used analysis tool was ACCMetrics (n=50 (26%) (figure 3)). Masking and randomisation of the images for analysis were reported in 66 (34%) and 10 (5%) of the studies, respectively. In 118 (60%) of the studies, 3–6 images were used for analysis (figure 2d).
Overview of the analysis tools for quantification of the subbasal nerves. % of studies.
For 62 of the 195 (32%) studies, it was unclear whether the number of images reported for quantitative analysis was derived from one eye or both. In nine (11%) of the studies examining both eyes, the authors did not report whether equal numbers of images from right and left eyes were used for analysis (online supplemental files 5-6).

Measures of the corneal nerves reported for in vivo corneal confocal microscopy
The reported corneal nerve fibre outcomes vary across the studies (onlinesupplemental files 56). The five most frequently reported outcome parameters were CNFL, corneal CNFD, CNBD, nerve tortuosity and IWL, reported in 184 (94%), 160 (82%), 151 (77%), 47 (27%) and 29 (15%) of the included studies, respectively. Other reported variables were the total number of nerve fibres, the number of nerve fibre interconnections, the number of nerve fibre connecting points, the number of beadings, the number of Langerhans cells, the number of immune cells and keratocyte density. An overview of all reported outcome variables, including definitions and their variability, can be found in online supplemental file 8.

Discussion
This scoping review provides a detailed and systematic overview of the methods of imaging acquisition, image selection and quantitative analysis of corneal nerves using IVCM among subjects with DM and relevant control groups.
The most striking feature was the high variability, lack of rigour and inconsistency in applied methods and reporting. The absence of rigorous methodology may affect the reported quantitative parameter values and lead to uncertainty when comparing studies and their reported results and conclusions. Therefore, methodological details must be considered when interpreting and comparing findings across studies.

Image quality
Accurate visualisation and quantification of nerve fibres are dependent on image quality. Laser scanning confocal microscopy was the most frequently used image acquisition method. In accordance with prior evidence indicating superiority of this imaging method compared with slit scanning confocal microscopy or tandem scanning confocal microscopy, laser scanning confocal microscopy provides higher image contrast and resolution enabling enhanced nerve fibre detection.
Only one in four studies reported information about the number of microscope operators and/or provided details about the operator’s experience level. Previous studies have highlighted operator experience as a critical factor influencing image quality and the sensitivity and specificity of assessment; hence, specification of the operator’s experience has been recommended. It is important to consider the reliability of the data collection when interpreting the value and meaning of the study results. With multiple operators, which is comparable to a clinical setting, variability between operators exists. Agreement between operators is termed inter-rater reliability, and, according to McHugh, with multiple data collectors, inter-rater reliability should be reported. Within a single observer, it is also of interest to know the intra-rater reliability, which is whether the operator consistently achieves the same result. Failure to report the instrument used and to provide information about the image operator limits critical assessment of the image acquisition method, which in turn impacts the reliability of the findings.

Corneal region of image acquisition
One in four studies did not provide information about the corneal region imaged. This information is highly important for the quantitative outcome and to be able to replicate the study. One IVCM image represents less than 1% of the total subbasal nerve plexus. Multiple images are therefore necessary for quantitative analysis to differentiate healthy from pathologic nerves, as shown by Badian and colleagues. They did not find a clinically significant difference in CNFL between subjects with DM compared with healthy controls when analysing a repeatable region of interest with dimensions 650×1000 µm, whereas a difference was noted across a larger area of the same subbasal nerve plexus. The corneal nerve parameters are thus highly sensitive to the region of image acquisition. Previous studies have shown that the CNFD across the corneal surface is inhomogeneous, even in the central cornea. The nerve density is the highest in the inferior whorl, followed by the central cornea, and lowest in the periphery. Only 14% of the studies included images of the inferior whorl. The inferior whorl has a unique appearance and is used as an anatomic landmark and as a reference point for consistent image acquisition. Without the inclusion of a specific landmark, it is difficult to ensure the same region of interest is examined across different subjects. Kim et al demonstrated this by employing an Amsler chart fixation target to enhance the standardisation of image acquisition procedures. Although aiming for repeatable fixation by using a white fixation light overlapping the red laser light, they reported poor reliability for corneal nerve measurements using a single image. The method did not apply corneal structural landmarks as reference points for image acquisition, which may have improved repeatability; however, the study authors suggested calculating the mean value of a given parameter across all sampled locations to improve reproducibility and achieve more clinically meaningful results.
Using multiple images and referencing these to a specific landmark may increase the repeatability and reliability of corneal image acquisition. Conversely, lack of information about the imaged corneal region limits both the ability to interpret the results and compare results to other studies.

Image selection
As many as 18% of the studies did not provide details concerning the image selection process, potentially leading to selection bias. Among studies providing such information, the number of raw images acquired for further selection ranged from 3 to 1400. Further, image selection criteria were applied to a varying extent. Few studies randomised the image selection. The impact of different selection criteria or area covered has been explored by multiple studies
First, studies apply varying criteria for nerve fibre density to guide image selection, this may impact the reliability of results. Studies using the same analysis software but different selection criteria and varying numbers of images for analysis also demonstrate varying inter-observer reliability.
Kalteniece et al applied a detailed image selection protocol selecting 3–6 high-quality images from each eye with subjectively high, medium and low nerve fibre density. The nerve fibres were vertically oriented within the central cornea, and the authors used the orientation of the nerve fibres both to facilitate repeatable image acquisition and image selection. The study included four different observers selecting images and found an interclass correlation (ICC) (95% CI) of 0.95 (0.95 to 0.98), 0.93 (0.93 to 0.97) and 0.96 (0.95 to 0.98) for CNFL, CNFD and CNBD, respectively. By contrast, Ostrowski et al selected a single image, the image with the highest density and technical quality, and found lower ICC (95% CI) of 0.75 (0.58 to 0.86), 0.68 (0.48 to 0.81) and 0.40 (0.13 to 0.61) for CNFL, CNFD and CNBD, respectively. The two studies highlight that despite using the same analysis tool, the image selection criteria and extent can have a large impact on the reliability of the study.
Schaldemose et al explored the difference between a randomised selection of 8 images, 4 images with vertical nerve fibres and 2 images from diagonal left and right nerve orientation compared with a non-randomised selection of 3–6 images with low, medium and high nerve fibre density. The authors found a statistically significant difference in CNFL between methods. We propose that the reported difference may be explained by the different number of images and the location for sampling. The non-randomised selection of 3–6 images had vertical orientation, indicating sampling of central corneal nerves, whereas the randomised selection of 8 images, including obliquely oriented nerve fibres, suggests sampling of both central and more peripheral corneal nerves, supporting Schaldemose’s emphasis on the importance of providing clear guidelines for image selection.
Second, the total number of images selected from one eye for analysis varied between 1–12 and 1–6 for the central cornea and inferior whorl regions, respectively. The number of images selected has an impact on the quantitative outcome of the study. As a single image represents only 0.4 mm × 0.4 mm (0.16 mm2) of the cornea, selecting multiple images covering a larger area is required to reduce the variability of the nerve fibre density. Parissi and colleagues explored the difference for maximum error in CNFL between the mean CNFL of all preselected images (mean 4.3 images) compared with randomly selecting 1–4 images of the preselected images, with preselection based on strict image quality criteria. The authors found a decrease in maximum error from 4.7% to 1.2% by increasing the number of randomly selected images for analysis from 1 to 4 images, concluding that the number of images influences the impact of the inhomogeneous nerve fibre density and single image size on the outcome measurement. The optimal number of images for analysis has been previously explored, and Vagenas and colleagues suggested that five randomly selected images from the central cornea, not overlapping more than 20%, compared with a reference standard represented by 16 central images, gives an average CNFL within 13% of the true mean 80% of the time. Whereas Kheirkhah and colleagues concluded that CNFL (mm/mm2) measured based on three single images compared with a wide field mosaic covering an area of 1.29±0.64 mm2 did not differ significantly. In contrast, Allgeier and colleagues suggest that collecting images covering at least 1.5 mm2 of the central cornea is required to achieve reliable measurements of CNFL. Lagali and colleagues compared analysing 1–20 single non-overlapping images (0.16–3.2 mm2) with full mosaics. They found a large difference in CNFL even when up to 10 single images (1.6 mm2) were randomly selected for analysis compared with the full mosaic analysis. Hence, these studies reflect two factors affecting reliable measurements, the inhomogeneous nerve fibre structure and the area and size of image acquisition. There are mixed findings regarding the optimal total area for analysis and the advantages of creating mosaic images. The preferred method remains an open question. Mosaic imaging allows for the analysis of a larger corneal area, which can enhance diagnostic accuracy, whereas single images are more practical for clinical use due to their simplicity. Although the time required to acquire mosaic images has traditionally been a limitation, advancements in extended HRT software now make it feasible to obtain mosaics within a clinically acceptable timeframe. This remains an active area of research. Determining the most suitable method and the ideal area for analysis warrants further investigation.
In summary, the image selection process has great importance for both repeatability and reliability of the study. Considering the existing research that highlights the variability resulting from the different methods applied, it is essential to account for selection criteria when critically assessing and comparing conclusions related to normal findings. We suggest that selection bias exists in most studies, and a detailed description of image selection methods should be reported, to enable reproducibility and risk-of-bias assessment.

Analysis of images
Three-quarters of studies referred to an analysis protocol, and 1 in 10 studies did not provide any information about the analysis tool. The analysis tool may introduce analysis bias to the results. Several comparative studies have investigated the differences and intercorrelation between analysis tools. Automated ACCMetrics has been shown to underestimate the quantitative nerve fibre parameters compared with manual (CCMetrics) and semi-automated methods (NeuronJ) because of the inability of ACCMetrics to detect the low contrast, fainter nerve fibres against the background. Still, the correlation between automated and manual ACCMetrics and CCMetrics has been reported to be high. CNFL is the quantitative outcome variable with the best correlation across the different tools (r>0.8). CNFL is also considered to be the most reliable parameter for beginners using manual CCMetrics, providing the ability to differentiate between groups and preserve the relationship to neuropathy status.

Quantitative corneal subbasal nerve outcome variables
CNFL was the most frequently reported outcome variable in papers assessed within the current review. The outcome variable itself is potentially biased due to the abovementioned differences in methodology related to image acquisition, image selection and quantitative analysis. This raises the need for careful interpretation of the value itself.
CNFL has shown the best repeatability in multiple studies using different analysis tools and selection criteria and has the most consistent definition across studies. CNFL has been defined as the cumulative length of all nerve fibres within the total area of analysis in mm/mm2. In contrast to CNFL, CNBD and CNFD are based on a discrimination between ‘main’ nerve fibres and ‘branches’ which gives a lower degree of correlation, r=0.609 and r=0.471, respectively, compared with CNFL (r>0.8). Consequently, studies publishing normative values and cut-off points need to be seen together with the methods used, as they may vary. Based on the methods illustrated by the studies by Parissi and Tavakoli, Parissi reported mean CNFL (SD) varies from 17.2 (5.4) to 19.8 (4.7) mm/mm2 across different age groups. Tavakoli reported median CNFL varies from 19.97 to 26.43 mm/mm2, 0.05 quantile 12.48 to 19.19 mm/mm2, respectively, for healthy subjects aged <16 to 61+. Hence, for clinical use, normative values need to be based on valid studies using the same methodology.
Nerve fibre tortuosity is the outcome parameter with the most varied definitions and interpretations. Some authors defined this parameter qualitatively using a grading scale and others mathematically. Lagali et al recommend a definition specifying the tortuosity based on short-range and long-range tortuosity assessing the most tortuous nerve in an image, for increased repeatability. From a biological perspective, nerve tortuosity is suggested to be an indicator of nerve degeneration and regeneration. Further, a strong correlation between progression of DM and the grade of tortuosity has been demonstrated. Without a consistent or standardised definition or reliable assessment, however, tortuosity suffers from both poor repeatability and reliability.

One or two eyes for analysis
The current review revealed that almost half of the studies collected images from both eyes. However, almost a third did not provide information about the number of eyes used for analysis and there was uncertainty in how many images were selected for analysis from each eye. The number of eyes used for analysis is important for interpretation, repeatability and reliability of the study. The correlation between both eyes of the same subject needs to be considered if both eyes are eligible and contribute to the statistical analysis, and appropriate statistical correction must be used. If the inter-eye correlation is not taken into consideration, p values and CIs will be artificially reduced. Averaging information collected from both eyes is a statistically valid method; however, it reduces the power of the study and results in less precise estimates, and the poorer the correlation between the eyes the more information is lost. To achieve a higher power, as well as a more efficient study, both eyes can be used for analysis, handling the eyes as a ‘within subjects’ factor and using an appropriate statistical test for the relationship based on the aim of the study.
The inter-eye correlation of subbasal nerves has been explored by several studies finding a high correlation between the two eyes for the same subject. However, the correlation differs between studies and study samples. It is recommended to provide a rationale for choosing one or both eyes, and if one eye is used for analysis an explanation for the selection criteria is needed.
In summary, the method of image analysis strongly impacts the quantitative outcome parameters and consequently, the study results. Therefore, comparison across studies requires critical review of the methodology and assessment of the risk of bias. Insufficient information about methods limits replication, risk of bias assessment and study validity. We propose CNFL as the outcome variable most robust to bias, but methodological details can still impact CNFL significantly. Further, for assessing CNFD and CNBD, a clear and reproducible description of differentiation between main nerve fibres and nerve branches is required.

Publishing landscape
This scoping review has shown that most research in the field of diabetes and corneal nerves has been conducted in Europe and Australia by a small number of authors and research groups. Although the use of IVCM remains limited in many countries, its adoption is steadily increasing. However, there is currently no consensus or gold standard protocol for image acquisition, processing, selection or analysis. Furthermore, substantial methodological heterogeneity and inconsistent reporting hinder reproducibility. Existing protocols may serve as a checklist, but dedicated reporting guidelines are needed to enhance reproducibility, support the assessment of clinical validity and facilitate comparisons across studies

Summary of findings
There was a high methodological variability, and lack of information across all aspects of IVCM methodology. This included image acquisition (image quality), image selection and image analysis methods, all of which affect the repeatability and reliability of the measurement and screening efficacy. Without sufficient details and description, studies suffer from a lack of reproducibility. Due to the differences between the various studies, to have a protocol and consistent image acquisition, image selection and image analysis is recommended and beneficial for better agreement and replicability.

Proposed recommendation of reporting details in the methodology in research studies evaluating the subbasal nerve plexus by IVCM and future research
To ensure transparency and reproducibility of future research quantifying corneal subbasal nerve parameters in DM, authors should report detailed information/protocols for image acquisition, image selection and image analysis in within the methods or supplementary methods sections of publications. We propose a reporting guideline in table 1 as a recommendation to improve the quality, consistency and reproducibility of future studies.
Guidelines for reporting and methodology to achieve reproducible studies without lack of relevant information
Required reporting items	Recommended	 	Image acquisition	Instrument	Type of instrument, model and supplier.	 	Number of imaging operators	Define the operators as novel, trained or experienced with explicit definitions of experience.	 	Experience level of the imaging operator	 	Number of eyes for image acquisition	One or two, with motivation and statistical correction where appropriate.	 	Corneal region for imaging	Describe the region of interest imaged, including how the region was defined/referenced.	 	Number of images	Total number of raw images obtained per eye (mean and range).	 	Image selection	Number of people selecting images	Report the number of selectors and the detailed criteria for image selection. Report experience of selectors in in vivo confocal microscopy assessment. Tests of reproducibility of image selection are encouraged.	 	Masking of selectors	Report if and how image selectors were masked to the identity of the subjects.	 	Images from one or both eyes	Depending on the aim of the study:If both eyes were eligible for the study, and one eye is selected: motivate why only one eye is considered and use randomised selection.	 	If both eyes are selected, report the inter-eye correlation.	 	Number of images	Report the number of non-overlapping images with image quality thresholds.	 	Image area	Report selection criteria: nerve density, the corneal layer/depth, total area/region imaged and any image overlap.	 	Image quality	Report selection criteria: contrast, resolution and artefacts.	 	Image analysis	Outcome variables	Report outcome variables with detailed definitions.	 	Analysis tool used	Report type of analysis tool, model and supplier.If manual software is used, report number of analysers and intra-rater and inter-rater reliability.

Strengths and limitations of this study
Strengths of this scoping review include the use of the updated JBI guidelines for scoping review, and PRISMA-ScR guidelines, collaboration with an academic librarian and the transparent approach in inclusion and data extraction based on a previously published protocol. Nevertheless, some limitations need to be addressed. The aim of this scoping review was limited to methods used in IVCM evaluation of corneal nerve fibres in subjects with DM and relevant control groups. Findings of inconsistent methodologies might not be representative for the use of IVCM in other study populations. The search strategy for this scoping review was restricted to five databases and articles written in English, German and the Scandinavian languages. Finally, a scoping review is not as extensive as a meta-analysis, and risk-of-bias assessment is not provided in this review.

Conclusion
Mapping and summarising methods over two decades of studies using IVCM evaluating corneal nerve fibres in subjects with DM and relevant control groups revealed a high variability and diversity of methods. Detailed reporting of methods in imaging, image selection and image analysis is lacking. These deficiencies increase the likelihood of bias and impact the reproducibility of studies. IVCM examination protocols, image selection and analyses require better standardisation and detailed reporting of methods. We provide a guideline for reporting and methodology, aiming to improve the reproducibility of methods and reliability of results in future studies.

Supplementary material
Funding: The authors have not declared a specific grant for this research from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.
Prepublication history and additional supplemental material for this paper are available online. To view these files, please visit the journal online (https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2024-098294).
Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
Patient consent for publication: Not applicable.
Ethics approval: Not applicable.
Map disclaimer: The depiction of boundaries on this map does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of BMJ (or any member of its group) concerning the legal status of any country, territory, jurisdiction or area or of its authorities. This map is provided without any warranty of any kind, either express or implied.
Patient and public involvement: Patients and/or the public were not involved in the design, or conduct, or reporting, or dissemination plans of this research.

References
Global estimates of the prevalence of diabetes for 2010 and 2030
Peripheral neuropathy in prediabetes and the metabolic syndrome
Relationship between corneal confocal microscopy and markers of peripheral nerve structure and function in Type 2 diabetes
In vivo confocal microscopy of corneal nerves in health and disease
In vivo confocal microscopy of human corneal nerves in health, in ocular and systemic disease, and following corneal surgery: a review
Corneal confocal microscopy for the diagnosis of diabetic peripheral neuropathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Corneal confocal microscopy for assessment of diabetic peripheral neuropathy: a meta-analysis
New ophthalmologic imaging techniques for detection and monitoring of neurodegenerative changes in diabetes: a systematic review
Corneal nerves in diabetes-The role of the in vivo corneal confocal microscopy of the subbasal nerve plexus in the assessment of peripheral small fiber neuropathy
Corneal confocal microscopy: a biomarker for diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Morphology of corneal nerves using confocal microscopy
Mosaicking the subbasal nerve plexus by guided eye movements
A novel approach to analyze the progression of measured corneal sub-basal nerve fiber length in continuously expanding mosaic images
Image reconstruction of the subbasal nerve plexus with in vivo confocal microscopy
Corneal confocal microscopy: a novel non-invasive technique to quantify small fibre pathology in peripheral neuropathies
The inferior whorl for detecting diabetic peripheral neuropathy using corneal confocal microscopy
Imaging of the corneal subbasal whorl-like nerve plexus: more accurate depiction of the extent of corneal nerve damage in patients with diabetes
Wide-field corneal subbasal nerve plexus mosaics in age-controlled healthy and type 2 diabetes populations
Updated methodological guidance for the conduct of scoping reviews
Methods for evaluation of corneal nerve fibres in diabetes mellitus by in vivo confocal microscopy: a scoping review protocol
Intelligent systematic review [internet]
An unbiased stereological method for corneal confocal microscopy in patients with diabetic polyneuropathy
Small nerve fiber quantification in the diagnosis of diabetic sensorimotor polyneuropathy: comparing corneal confocal microscopy with intraepidermal nerve fiber density
Corneal and retinal neuronal degeneration in early stages of diabetic retinopathy
Association between alterations of corneal sub-basal nerve plexus analyzed with in vivo confocal microscopy and long-term glycemic variability
In vivo confocal microscopy study of corneal nerve alterations in children and youths with Type 1 diabetes
Baseline omega-3 level is associated with nerve regeneration following 12-months of omega-3 nutrition therapy in patients with type 1 diabetes
Effect of omega-3 supplementation on neuropathy in type 1 diabetes: a 12-month pilot trial
Using in vivo corneal confocal microscopy to identify diabetic sensorimotor polyneuropathy risk profiles in patients with type 1 diabetes
The utility of corneal nerve fractal dimension analysis in peripheral neuropathies of different etiology
Corneal nerve fractal dimension: a novel corneal nerve metric for the diagnosis of diabetic sensorimotor polyneuropathy
Associations between acute glucose control and peripheral nerve structure and function in type 1 diabetes
Association of corneal nerve loss with markers of axonal ion channel dysfunction in type 1 diabetes
Early nerve fibre regeneration in individuals with type 1 diabetes after simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation
Longitudinal changes in corneal cell and nerve fiber morphology in young patients with type 1 diabetes with and without diabetic retinopathy: a 2-year follow-up study
Ophthalmic and clinical factors that predict four-year development and worsening of diabetic retinopathy in type 1 diabetes
No relation between the severity of corneal nerve, epithelial, and keratocyte cell morphology with measures of dry eye disease in type 1 diabetes
Small-fibre neuropathy in men with type 1 diabetes and erectile dysfunction: a cross-sectional study
Early corneal cellular and nerve fiber pathology in young patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus identified using corneal confocal microscopy
Utility of assessing nerve morphology in central cornea versus whorl area for diagnosing diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Natural history of corneal nerve morphology in mild neuropathy associated with type 1 diabetes: development of a potential measure of diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Longitudinal assessment of neuropathy in type 1 diabetes using novel ophthalmic markers (LANDMark): study design and baseline characteristics
Structure-function relationship between corneal nerves and conventional small-fiber tests in type 1 diabetes
Greater small nerve fibre damage in the skin and cornea of type 1 diabetic patients with painful compared to painless diabetic neuropathy
Early corneal nerve fibre damage and increased Langerhans cell density in children with type 1 diabetes mellitus
Protection from neuropathy in extreme duration type 1 diabetes
Corneal nerve loss in children with type 1 diabetes mellitus without retinopathy or microalbuminuria
Hypertension contributes to neuropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes
In vivo corneal confocal microscopy and prediction of future-incident neuropathy in type 1 diabetes: a preliminary longitudinal analysis
Corneal confocal microscopy detects neuropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes without retinopathy or microalbuminuria
Detection of diabetic sensorimotor polyneuropathy by corneal confocal microscopy in type 1 diabetes: a concurrent validity study
Reproducibility of in vivo corneal confocal microscopy as a novel screening test for early diabetic sensorimotor polyneuropathy
Corneal confocal microscopy in type 1 diabetes mellitus: a six-year longitudinal study
Corneal nerve fiber pathology in Japanese type 1 diabetic patients and its correlation with antecedent glycemic control and blood pressure
In vivo corneal confocal microscopy as a novel non-invasive tool to investigate cardiac autonomic neuropathy in Type 1 diabetes
The corneal subbasal nerve plexus and thickness of the retinal layers in pediatric type 1 diabetes and matched controls
Vitamin D deficiency is associated with painful diabetic neuropathy
Early alterations of corneal subbasal plexus in uncomplicated type 1 diabetes patients
Effect of diabetes mellitus type 1 diagnosis on the corneal cell densities and nerve fibers
Higher total insulin dose has positive effect on corneal nerve fibers in DM1 patients
Diagnostic utility of corneal confocal microscopy and intra-epidermal nerve fibre density in diabetic neuropathy
Risk factors associated with corneal nerve alteration in type 1 diabetes in the absence of neuropathy: a longitudinal in vivo corneal confocal microscopy study
Corneal confocal microscopy predicts 4-year incident peripheral neuropathy in type 1 diabetes
In vivo confocal microscopy of corneal nerves: an ocular biomarker for peripheral and cardiac autonomic neuropathy in type 1 diabetes mellitus
Does the prevailing hypothesis that small-fiber dysfunction precedes large-fiber dysfunction apply to type 1 diabetic patients?
Corneal confocal microscopy detects early nerve regeneration in diabetic neuropathy after simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation
Corneal confocal microscopy detects early nerve regeneration after pancreas transplantation in patients with type 1 diabetes
Corneal structure and sensitivity in type 1 diabetes mellitus
A novel algorithm for the evaluation of corneal nerve beadings by in vivo confocal microscopy in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus
Corneal confocal microscopy identifies people with type 1 diabetes with more rapid corneal nerve fibre loss and progression of neuropathy
Neurodegeneration of the cornea and retina in patients with type 1 diabetes without clinical evidence of diabetic retinopathy
Corneal confocal microscopy identifies a reduction in corneal keratocyte density and sub-basal nerves in children with type 1 diabetes mellitus
Renal hemodynamic dysfunction and neuropathy in longstanding type 1 diabetes: results from the Canadian study of longevity in type 1 diabetes
Corneal nerve and nerve conduction abnormalities in children with type 1 diabetes
Early marker of ocular neurodegeneration in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes: the contributing role of polymorphisms in mir146a and mir128a genes
The reliability and reproducibility of corneal confocal microscopy in children
Corneal confocal microscopy abnormalities in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes
Corneal confocal microscopy predicts cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events and demonstrates greater peripheral neuropathy in patients with type 1 diabetes and foot ulcers. Diagn basel Switz [internet]
Cranial nerve affection in adolescents with type 1 diabetes assessed by corneal confocal microscopy, smell and taste tests
Optimizing examination time and diagnostic performance of the histamine-induced axon-reflex flare response in diabetes
Diagnostic accuracy of perception threshold tracking in the detection of small fiber damage in type 1 diabetes
Diabetesinduzierte Veränderungen des Auges bei Jugendlichen und jungen Erwachsenen mit einem Diabetes mellitus Typ 1
Tear neuropeptide Y as a non-invasive marker of peripheral microvascular complications in type 1 diabetes
Corneal confocal microscopy: a useful tool for diagnosis of small fiber neuropathy in type 2 diabetes
Diagnostic utility of corneal confocal microscopy in type 2 diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Correlation between corneal and retinal neurodegenerative changes and their association with microvascular perfusion in type ii diabetes
Small fibre neuropathy is associated with impaired vascular endothelial function in patients with type 2 diabetes
Corneal confocal microscopy as a tool for detecting diabetic polyneuropathy in a cohort with screen-detected type 2 diabetes: ADDITION-Denmark
In vivo corneal confocal microscopy and optical coherence tomography on eyes of participants with type 2 diabetes mellitus and obese participants without diabetes
Impact of the metabolic syndrome on peripheral nerve structure and function in type 2 diabetes
Retinal and corneal neurodegeneration and their association with systemic signs of peripheral neuropathy in type 2 diabetes
Corneal nerve fiber loss in diabetes with chronic kidney disease
Nerve growth factor and expression of its receptors in patients with diabetic neuropathy
Quantitative analysis of corneal nerve fibers in type 2 diabetics with and without diabetic peripheral neuropathy: comparison of manual and automated assessments
Latent autoimmune diabetes of adulthood (LADA) is associated with small fibre neuropathy
In vivo corneal confocal microscopy detects improvement of corneal nerve parameters following glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes
Corneal nerve fibre damage precedes diabetic retinopathy in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
The effect of the duration of diabetes on dry eye and corneal nerves
Correlation of the retinopathy degree with the change of ocular surface and corneal nerve in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Painful diabetic neuropathy is associated with increased nerve regeneration in patients with type 2 diabetes undergoing intensive glycemic control
Insulin resistance limits corneal nerve regeneration in patients with type 2 diabetes undergoing intensive glycemic control
Improvements in diabetic neuropathy and nephropathy after bariatric surgery: a prospective cohort study
Effect of treatment with exenatide and pioglitazone or basal-bolus insulin on diabetic neuropathy: a substudy of the Qatar Study
Small fibre pathology is associated with erectile dysfunction in men with type 2 diabetes
Corneal confocal microscopy detects severe small fiber neuropathy in diabetic patients with Charcot neuroarthropathy
Improvement in neuropathy outcomes with normalizing HbA1c in patients with type 2 diabetes
The relationship between corneal nerve density and hemoglobin A1c in patients with prediabetes and type 2 diabetes
Imaging and quantification of subbasal nerve plexus in healthy volunteers and diabetic patients with or without retinopathy
Using corneal confocal microscopy to compare Mecobalamin intramuscular injections vs oral tablets in treating diabetic peripheral neuropathy: a RCT
Epithelial changes with corneal punctate epitheliopathy in type 2 diabetes mellitus and their correlation with time to healing
Confocal microscopy of corneal nerve plexus as an early marker of eye involvement in patients with type 2 diabetes
Impact of normoglycemia in reducing microvascular complications in patients with type 2 diabetes: a follow-up study
Corneal confocal microscopy as a non-invasive test to assess diabetic peripheral neuropathy
The preferential impairment of pupil constriction stimulated by blue light in patients with type 2 diabetes without autonomic neuropathy
Early central and peripheral corneal microstructural changes in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients identified using in vivo confocal microscopy
Tear levels of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 correlate with subbasal nerve plexus changes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Morphometric features of corneal epithelial basal cells, and their relationship with corneal nerve pathology and clinical factors in patients with type 2 diabetes
Correlation between sudomotor function, sweat gland duct size and corneal nerve fiber pathology in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Morphological changes of the peripheral nerves evaluated by high-resolution ultrasonography are associated with the severity of diabetic neuropathy, but not corneal nerve fiber pathology in patients with type 2 diabetes
Corneal microstructural changes in nerve fiber, endothelial and epithelial density after cataract surgery in patients with diabetes mellitus
The expanded bead size of corneal c-nerve fibers visualized by corneal confocal microscopy is associated with slow conduction velocity of the peripheral nerves in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
Early detection of nerve fiber loss by corneal confocal microscopy and skin biopsy in recently diagnosed type 2 diabetes
Reduced corneal nerve fibre length in prediabetes and type 2 diabetes: the maastricht study
Region of interest and directional analysis of subbasal nerves in wide-area corneal nerve plexus mosaics in type 2 diabetes mellitus
The association of fasting c-peptide with corneal neuropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes
Explanations for less small fibre neuropathy in South Asian versus European subjects with type 2 diabetes in the UK
Reduced corneal nerve fiber density in type 2 diabetes by wide-area mosaic analysis
Ocular surface changes in type II diabetic patients with proliferative diabetic retinopathy
Diabetic foot syndrome and corneal subbasal nerve plexus changes in congolese patients with type 2 diabetes
ARA 290, a nonerythropoietic peptide engineered from erythropoietin, improves metabolic control and neuropathic symptoms in patients with type 2 diabetes
Correlation of diabetic retinopathy and corneal neuropathy using confocal microscopy
Morphologic alterations of both the stromal and subbasal nerves in the corneas of patients with diabetes
Spatial analysis improves the detection of early corneal nerve fiber loss in patients with recently diagnosed type 2 diabetes
Corneal subbasal nerves changes in patients with diabetic retinopathy: an in vivo confocal study
Changes in corneal nerve morphology and function in patients with dry eyes having type 2 diabetes
Altered circulating micrornas in patients with diabetic neuropathy and corneal nerve loss: a pilot study
Multimodal testing reveals subclinical neurovascular dysfunction in prediabetes, challenging the diagnostic threshold of diabetes
Mosaic vs. single image analysis with confocal microscopy of the corneal nerve plexus for diagnosis of early diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Progressive loss of corneal nerve fibers is associated with physical inactivity and glucose lowering medication associated with weight gain in type 2 diabetes
Corneal confocal microscopy in patients with distal symmetric polyneuropathy compared to controls
Oral Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor-Alpha (PPAR)-α agonist enhances corneal nerve regeneration in patients with type ii diabetes mellitus
Relationship between time in range and corneal nerve fiber loss in asymptomatic patients with type 2 diabetes
Repeatability of measuring corneal subbasal nerve fiber length in individuals with type 2 diabetes
Assessing corneal confocal microscopy and other small fiber measures in diabetic polyneuropathy
Chronic kidney disease has no impact on tear film substance P concentration in type 2 diabetes
Circulating netrin-1 levels are reduced and related to corneal nerve fiber loss in patients with diabetic neuropathy
Comparison of novel wide-field in vivo corneal confocal microscopy With skin biopsy for assessing peripheral neuropathy in type 2 diabetes
Comprehensive assessment of ocular parameters for identifying diagnostic indicators of diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Corneal characteristics of Mongolian population with type 2 diabetic peripheral neuropathy in inner Mongolia, China: an assessment using corneal confocal microscopy
Correlation between corneal whorl-like nerve and retinal neurodegenerative changes and their association with microvessel perfusion in diabetes
Diabetic corneal neuropathy and its relation to the severity of retinopathy in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: an in vivo confocal microscopy study
Evaluation of limbal stem cells in patients with type 2 diabetes: an in vivo confocal microscopy study
High-frequency spinal cord stimulation (10 kHz) alters sensory function and nerve fiber density in painful diabetic neuropathy: a pilot prospective open-label study
Impact of chronic kidney disease on corneal neuroimmune features in type 2 diabetes
Impact of peripheral and corneal neuropathy on markers of ocular surface discomfort in diabetic chronic kidney disease
Impact of SGLT2 inhibitors on corneal nerve morphology and dendritic cell density in type 2 diabetes
In vivo corneal confocal microscopy as a non-invasive test to assess obesity induced small fibre nerve damage and inflammation
(Pre)diabetes and a higher level of glycaemic measures are continuously associated with corneal neurodegeneration assessed by corneal confocal microscopy: the Maastricht Study
Remission of corneal and peripheral neuropathy after bariatric surgery in people with diabetes
The severity of diabetic retinopathy corresponds with corneal nerve alterations and ocular discomfort of the patient
Sustained corneal nerve loss predicts the development of diabetic neuropathy in type 2 diabetes
Tear fluid progranulin as a noninvasive biomarker for the monitoring of corneal innervation changes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
A comparative study on the diagnostic utility of corneal confocal microscopy and tear neuromediator levels in diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Tear film substance P: a potential biomarker for diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Corneal nerve morphology and tear film substance P in diabetes
Agreement between automated and manual quantification of corneal nerve fiber length: implications for diabetic neuropathy research
Rapid automated diagnosis of diabetic peripheral neuropathy with in vivo corneal confocal microscopy
Topical citicoline and vitamin B12 versus placebo in the treatment of diabetes-related corneal nerve damage: a randomized double-blind controlled trial
Corneal confocal microscopy detects small nerve fibre damage in patients with painful diabetic neuropathy
Small nerve fiber damage and langerhans cells in type 1 and Type 2 diabetes and LADA measured by corneal confocal microscopy
Diagnosis of neuropathy and risk factors for corneal nerve loss in type 1 and type 2 diabetes: a corneal confocal microscopy study
Diabetic neuropathy is characterized by progressive corneal nerve fiber loss in the central and inferior whorl regions
Greater corneal nerve loss at the inferior whorl is related to the presence of diabetic neuropathy and painful diabetic neuropathy
Corneal confocal microscopy compared with quantitative sensory testing and nerve conduction for diagnosing and stratifying the severity of diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Corneal nerve loss detected with corneal confocal microscopy is symmetrical and related to the severity of diabetic polyneuropathy
Utility of corneal confocal microscopy for assessing mild diabetic neuropathy: baseline findings of the LANDMark study
Increased Langerhan cell density and corneal nerve damage in diabetic patients: role of immune mechanisms in human diabetic neuropathy
Differential reduction in corneal nerve fiber length in patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus
Ocular surface disease in patients with diabetic peripheral neuropathy
Corneal confocal microscopy for identification of diabetic sensorimotor polyneuropathy: a pooled multinational consortium study
Corneal confocal microscopy predicts the development of diabetic neuropathy: a longitudinal diagnostic multinational consortium study
Corneal confocal microscopy identifies small fibre damage and progression of diabetic neuropathy
Augmented corneal nerve fiber branching in painful compared with painless diabetic neuropathy
Rapid corneal nerve fiber loss: a marker of diabetic neuropathy onset and progression
Corneal subbasal nerve plexus changes in severe diabetic charcot foot deformity: a pilot study in search for a DNOAP biomarker
Keratocyte density is reduced and related to corneal nerve damage in diabetic neuropathy
Abnormal anterior corneal morphology in diabetes observed using in vivo laser-scanning confocal microscopy
Corneal confocal microscopy for the diagnosis of diabetic autonomic neuropathy
Corneal confocal microscopy detects improvement in corneal nerve morphology with an improvement in risk factors for diabetic neuropathy
In vivo confocal microscopy of corneal small fiber damage in diabetes mellitus
Corneal nerve loss is related to the severity of painful diabetic neuropathy
Effect of panretinal photocoagulation on corneal sensation and the corneal subbasal nerve plexus in diabetes mellitus
Corneal confocal microscopy: a novel noninvasive test to diagnose and stratify the severity of human diabetic neuropathy
Surrogate markers of small fiber damage in human diabetic neuropathy
Corneal diabetic neuropathy: a confocal microscopy study
Corneal nerve tortuosity in diabetic patients with neuropathy
Corneal confocal microscopy: a non-invasive surrogate of nerve fibre damage and repair in diabetic patients
Association between systemic omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid levels, and corneal nerve structure and function
Implementation of corneal confocal microscopy for screening and early detection of diabetic neuropathy in primary care alongside retinopathy screening: Results from a feasibility study
Continuous glucose monitoring reveals a novel association between duration and severity of hypoglycemia, and small nerve fiber injury in patients with diabetes
Automated analysis of corneal nerve tortuosity in diabetes: implications for neuropathy detection
Spinal inhibitory dysfunction in patients with painful or painless diabetic neuropathy
Quantitative analyse des subbasalen Nervenplexus der Kornea mittels in vivo konfokaler laser-scanning-Mikroskopie
Corneal nerve fiber and sensitivity loss after repeated intravitreal anti-VEGF injections: an in vivo confocal microscopy study
Corneal nerve fibre loss as a marker to identify the impact of diabetes on Parkinson’s disease
Diabetic neuropathy in hands: an endemic complication waiting to unfold?
Differences in corneal nerve fiber density and fiber length in patients with painful chronic idiopathic axonal polyneuropathy and diabetic polyneuropathy
Evaluation of microvascular complications in kidney recipients with posttransplant diabetes mellitus
Investigation of small fiber neuropathy in patients with diabetes mellitus by corneal confocal microscopy
Occurrence of corneal sub-epithelial microneuromas and axonal swelling in people with diabetes with and without (painful) diabetic neuropathy
Pre-ophthalmoscopic quantitative biomarkers in diabetes mellitus
Relationship between ocular surface pain and corneal nerve loss in dry eye diabetics: a cross-sectional study in Shenyang, China
Sub-basal corneal nerve plexus analysis using a new software technology
Contemporary in vivo confocal microscopy of the living human cornea using white light and laser scanning techniques: a major review
Comparison of in vivo confocal microscopy, pcr and culture of corneal scrapes in the diagnosis of acanthamoeba keratitis
The use of in vivo confocal microscopy in fungal keratitis - Progress and challenges
Interrater reliability: the kappa statistic
Mapping of the normal human corneal sub-Basal nerve plexus by in vivo laser scanning confocal microscopy
Anatomy of the human corneal innervation
Architecture and distribution of human corneal nerves
Mapping the entire human corneal nerve architecture
Assessing the reproducibility of quantitative in vivo confocal microscopy of corneal nerves in different corneal locations
Selection bias and information bias in clinical research
Improved sampling and analysis of images in corneal confocal microscopy
Standardized baseline human corneal subbasal nerve density for clinical investigations with laser-scanning in vivo confocal microscopy
Comparison of standard versus wide-field composite images of the corneal subbasal layer by in vivo confocal microscopy
Optimal image sample size for corneal nerve morphometry
Local variability of parameters for characterization of the corneal subbasal nerve plexus
Reproducibility of in vivo corneal confocal microscopy using an automated analysis program for detection of diabetic sensorimotor polyneuropathy
Corneal confocal microscopy is a rapid reproducible ophthalmic technique for quantifying corneal nerve abnormalities
Comparing the results of manual and automated quantitative corneal neuroanalysing modules for beginners
Fully automated, semiautomated, and manual morphometric analysis of corneal subbasal nerve plexus in individuals with and without diabetes
Semiautomated and automated quantitative analysis of corneal sub-basal nerves in patients with DED with ocular pain using IVCM
Normative values for corneal nerve morphology assessed using corneal confocal microscopy: a multinational normative data set
Focused tortuosity definitions based on expert clinical assessment of corneal subbasal nerves
Standardizing corneal nerve fibre length for nerve tortuosity increases its association with measures of diabetic neuropathy
Automatic evaluation of corneal nerve tortuosity in images from in vivo confocal microscopy
Repeatability of in vivo corneal confocal microscopy to quantify corneal nerve morphology
Statistical guidelines for the analysis of data obtained from one or both eyes
Choice of analytic approach for eye-specific outcomes: one eye or two?
EyeGuidance – a computer controlled system to guide eye movements
Validation of a novel confocal microscopy imaging protocol with assessment of reproducibility and comparison of nerve metrics in dry eye disease compared with controls

Data availability statement
The research data associated with this study are not currently available due to ongoing further analysis. We are committed to ensuring the data’s integrity and will make it accessible once our analysis is complete.

Review Process File
2025