A comprehensive value evaluation index system for provincial medical insurance access to traditional Chinese medicine preparations in medical institutions
Background
This study established a comprehensive value evaluation index system for provincial medical insurance access to traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) preparations in medical institutions from the insurance viewpoint. The system aims to provide a reference for insurance access applications and decision-making.
Methods
The index system was first established through systematic evaluation and expert consultation. The Delphi method and analytic hierarchy process were employed to reveal the index system and calculate each indicator’s weight. The indicator selection thresholds were based on the importance score thresholds and the coefficient of variation thresholds. Indicators with importance scores higher than the threshold and coefficient of variation less than the threshold were included in the index system.
Results
The researchers retrieved 6201 articles in total, 68 of which were retained following a review of the titles and full text. The initially established index system had six dimensions (i.e., basic information and TCM theory of the preparation, safety, effectiveness, economy, innovation, and fairness), 25 primary indicators, and 55 secondary indicators. Two expert consultation rounds were employed to collect the opinions of 13 and 11 experts. The final index system considered the index system’s aforementioned six dimensions, including safety (30.44 %), effectiveness (43.18 %), economy (14.72 %), innovation (6.48 %), and fairness (5.17 %), along with 22 primary indicators, and 26 secondary indicators. Moreover, the top three weight indicators were the prescription source (secondary indicator), effectiveness evaluation based on real-world evidence (primary indicator), and direct costs (secondary indicator).
Conclusion
The proposed index system elucidates the scope of evidence and basic research design for TCM preparations from the insurance viewpoint. It also integrates cost evaluation and value evaluation indicators and improves the definition of reference drugs, thus providing a reference for achieving rational clinical drug usage and a pricing policy for TCM preparations.

Introduction
Medical institution preparations, also known as in-hospital preparations, are fixed-prescription preparations developed internally to meet clinical needs and are not commercially available. Among these preparations, traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) preparations (hereafter referred to as “TCM preparations”) are widely employed in clinical practice and have significant economic value and potential for inheritance (the prescription basis and dosage form characteristics) and innovation. By the end of 2022, 13 278 TCM preparations were available across 31 provincial-level administrative units, and 22 provinces had issued provincial reimbursement lists for TCM preparations as a vital supplement for commercial drugs.
The National Healthcare Security Administration, in its 2023 policy, underscored the need to “standardize and strengthen medical insurance access management for ethnic medicines, in-hospital preparations, and decoction-ready traditional Chinese medicines, and dynamically adjust the reimbursement drug lists.” Currently, provincial health-care security administrations are authorized to modify insurance coverage for TCM preparations, but the related decision‑making process faces significant challenges. For instance, the effectiveness and safety of TCM preparations are often supported by weak evidence, and this lack of efficacy parameters hinders their economic assessment. To address these issues, the Center for Drug Evaluation of National Medical Products Administration suggested establishing a TCM-specific “three-in-one” evidence system—a system that integrates TCM theory, human experience, and clinical trials—emphasizing the application of evidence-based medicine and real-world evidence on drug review. However, there remains a lack of such a system for TCM preparations to effectively transform evidence into decision to support value assessment.
Comprehensive value evaluation involves collection and analysis of multisource data and assessment of the value of various stakeholders. It achieves a health benefit-oriented transformation from data collection to multilevel evidence-based decision-making while minimizing uncertainty. Therefore, from the insurance viewpoint and using comprehensive value evaluation methods, this study established an index system for insurance access to TCM preparations, based on TCM theory, human experience, and real-world study.

Methods

Index system framework construction

Systematic literature search

Sources of literature
Articles were collected from electronic databases and also through manual retrieval. Electronic databases included MEDLINE, EMBASE, CNKI, Wanfang Database, SinoMed, and VIP Database. The researchers manually retrieved policy documents on market access as well as guidelines related to TCM theory, human experience, and real-world research issued by medical product administrations in China, the United Kingdom, and the European Union.

Search strategy
The search period spanned from database inception to April 2024. Taking CNKI as an example, the researchers established the search strategy as follows: (SU % = ‘comprehensive value evaluation’ OR SU % = ‘comprehensive value assessment’ OR SU % = ‘comprehensive clinical assessment’ OR SU % = ‘post-marketing reassessment’ OR SU % = ‘health technology evaluation’ OR SU % = ‘medical insurance access’ OR SU % = ‘selection’) AND (FT = ‘Chinese Materia Medica’ OR FT = ‘Chinese patent medicine’ OR FT = ‘traditional Chinese medicine preparation’ OR FT = ‘compound traditional Chinese medicine formula’ OR FT = ‘single medicinal material’ OR FT = ‘Chinese herbal medicine’ OR FT = ‘traditional Chinese medicine’). The search strategies for other databases were presented in Supplement 1.

Selection criteria

Inclusion criteria
The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) guidelines and methodological literature on the comprehensive value evaluation system of TCM, drug selection, and insurance access; or principles, expert consensus, or guidelines of TCM theory, human experience, and real-world research; (2) an issuing or publishing institution that was a national authority, governmental organization, or academic group; (3) the latest officially published version available in full text; and (4) publications in Chinese or English.

Exclusion criteria
The exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) interpretations of guidelines, expert consensus, or policy documents; and (2) duplicate publications.

Data extraction and qualitative synthesis
Two researchers independently performed the data extraction and cross-checked the results and then resolved disagreements through discussion. The following information was extracted: year of publication, issuing or publishing organization, items of each dimension, item descriptions, evaluation targets, and number of citations.
Qualitative synthesis was employed to integrate the data. An item pool was established, and the items were initially classified to determine the aforementioned six dimensions in the comprehensive value evaluation. Subcategories included TCM theory, human experience, and real-world study. This process was used to create a draft of the proposed index system for provincial insurance access to TCM preparations.

Internal expert validation
Internal expert penal consisted of 13 experts in TCM, evidence-based medicine, pharmacy, pharmacoeconomics, and health policy. The internal expert validation was achieved through offline meetings. Three internal expert validation rounds had been conducted until a consensus was reached to ensure the scientific validity and feasibility of the provincial insurance access index system for TCM preparations before expert consultation.

Modified delphi method and analytic hierarchy process

Modified delphi method

Design of consultation form
The consultation form had three components: instructions for completion, a scoring table for the proposed index system, and an expert authority evaluation form. The index system covered the aforementioned six dimensions. Key issues addressed by the consultation form were the index system for provincial insurance access to TCM preparations based on the “three-in-one” theory, economic evaluation based on cost and value assessment, and basic research design for provincial insurance access. The expert consultation form included mandatory and optional questions and specified the evaluation criteria for the importance, operability, and sensitivity of each indicator, as well as related recommendations for modification, deletion, or addition.

Expert team
Comments and recommendations were collected from 10 to 15 experts, all senior professionals with more than 10 years of work experience in TCM, integrated traditional Chinese and Western medicine, pharmacy, evidence-based medicine, health economics, and health policy.

Expert consultation
Two expert consultation rounds were performed using offline paper forms. Based on the first expert consultation’s results, items were chosen using predetermined thresholds and valid feedback. The index system was updated according to expert comments and recommendations and subjected to the second expert consultation. Consensus items in the second consultation were identified to establish the “Comprehensive Value Evaluation Index System for Provincial Medical Insurance Access of TCM Preparations in Medical Institutions.”

Statistical analysis
Two researchers independently entered and verified the consultation results and then resolved discrepancies through discussion. SPSS 28.0 was employed to perform a reliability analysis and an indicator selection based on the consultation results. The item weights were calculated using the basic version of YAAHP software, based on the analytic hierarchy process method.

Scoring criteria
The importance, operability, and sensitivity of each item were scored as “very good,” “good,” “average,” “poor,” and “very poor,” corresponding to 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1 point, respectively. Additionally, experts rated their familiarity (Cs) as “very familiar,” “relatively familiar,” “generally familiar,” “not very familiar,” and “unfamiliar,” with scores of 1.0, 0.8, 0.5, 0.2, and 0.0, respectively. The basis for judgment (Ca) was divided into theoretical analysis, practical experience, domestic and international literature, and expert intuition, each with the three levels of large, medium, and small. The level scores were 0.3, 0.2, 0.1; 0.5, 0.4, 0.3; 0.1, 0.1, 0.1; and 0.1, 0.1, 0.1, respectively.

Expert enthusiasm
The enthusiasm and attention of experts to the study were quantified using the expert enthusiasm coefficient (Cj), calculated as follows:

Expert authority
The expert authority coefficient (Cr) is positively correlated with decision-making accuracy and was self-assessed by the experts. A Cr greater than 0.7 indicates a high level of expert authority. Cr was calculated using the primary indicators Ca and Cs:

Concordance of expert opinions
The concordance of expert opinions is the consistency of experts’ judgments for each item. It was measured using Kendall’s W coefficient, which was calculated based on the importance scores of secondary indicators and ranges from 0 to 1. A high Kendall’s W coefficient indicates high concordance, and P < 0.05 denotes statistical significance.

Indicator selection thresholds
The indicator selection thresholds were the importance score thresholds and the coefficient of variation thresholds. The importance score threshold = arithmetic mean of importance scores − standard deviation of importance scores; the coefficient of variation threshold = mean of coefficient of variation of importance scores + standard deviation of coefficient of variation of importance scores. Indicators with importance scores higher than the threshold and coefficient of variation less than the threshold were included in the index system.

Index system weights
Based on qualitative analysis, the primary and secondary indicator weights were quantitatively determined in the aforementioned six dimensions. The judgment matrix was created using Saaty’s 1–9 scale method and the importance difference comparison method. Then, a single-level ranking and a consistency test were performed, and the consistency ratio was assessed. A consistency ratio <0.1 denotes satisfactory matrix consistency. Finally, the total hierarchical ranking was performed to determine each item’s weight in the index system.

Results

Index system framework construction

Literature search and qualitative synthesis
In total, 6,201 articles were retrieved from MEDLINE (n = 125), EMBASE (n = 156), CNKI (n = 2,705), Wanfang Database (n = 2,037), SinoMed (n = 377), and VIP Database (n = 736). An additional 65 articles were obtained from national or regional organizational websites. After reviewing titles and full texts, the researchers retained 68 articles. Based on qualitative synthesis, a draft of the “Comprehensive Value Evaluation Index System for Provincial Medical Insurance Access of TCM Preparations in Medical Institutions” was prepared. The index system included the aforementioned six dimensions, 23 primary indicators, and 59 secondary indicators.

Internal expert validation
Based on the results of expert validation, the “Expert Validation Form for the Comprehensive Value Evaluation Index System for Provincial Medical Insurance Access of TCM Preparations in Medical Institutions” was created. The form included the aforementioned six dimensions, 25 primary indicators, and 55 secondary indicators.
In the basic information dimension, three primary indicators related to TCM theory were added, including 1) the preparation’s main functions and indications, 2) the preparation’s usage, dosage, and course, and 3) the prescription’s basis. In the effectiveness dimension, the primary indicator “effectiveness evaluation based on TCM theory” and the secondary indicators “source of the preparation prescription” and “adjustment and improvement of the preparation prescription” were deleted. In the innovation dimension, the primary indicator “inheritance and innovation” was deleted. In the fairness dimension, the primary indicator “patient value” was added to encourage the application of patient values in the aforementioned six dimensions.

Modified delphi method and analytic hierarchy process

Experts’ basic information
The experts’ basic information is listed in Supplement 2.

Expert enthusiasm, authority, and opinion concordance
In the first consultation, 15 questionnaires were distributed, 15 were returned, and 13 were deemed valid. In the second consultation, 15 questionnaires were distributed, and 10 were returned (mostly due to schedule conflict and time constraints), all of which were deemed valid. To ensure the experts covered all necessary expertise, one additional expert in evidence-based medicine was invited, resulting in 11 valid questionnaires. The Cj values were 86.7 % and 100 %, respectively.
In the first consultation, the Cr values for the dimensions of basic information of preparation and TCM theory, safety, effectiveness, economy, innovation, and fairness were 0.89, 0.92, 0.93, 0.83, 0.88, and 0.83, respectively. In the second consultation, the Cr values were 0.89, 0.92, 0.95, 0.84, 0.91, and 0.85, respectively.
The Kendall’s W and P values for the first consultation were 0.212 and <0.001, respectively. The second consultation values were 0.348 and <0.001, respectively.

Thresholds for indicator selection
In the first consultation, the importance score threshold and coefficient of variation threshold for the tertiary indicators were 3.76 and 0.29, respectively. In the second round, these thresholds were 3.71 and 0.33, respectively.

Expert consultation
In the first consultation, based on expert opinions, the primary indicator “innovation” was renamed to “inheritance and innovation,” and the primary indicator “basic information of preparation and TCM theory” was revised to “basic information of the preparation.” The indicator “prescription basis” in the basic information of preparation dimension was changed to the “inheritance and innovation” dimension. In the safety dimension, the secondary indicator “toxic medicinal materials listed in standards” was modified to differentiate oral from topical medicinal materials. In the effectiveness dimension, considering existing reporting checklists and quality assessment tools, indicators related to real-world research were deleted; and a secondary indicator, “time of formulation,” was added. In the inheritance and innovation dimension, the indicator “clinical trial approval from the National Medical Products Administration” was deleted; and the secondary indicator “dosage form and specifications of the preparation” was changed to “dosage form characteristics related to clinical application.”
Based on the indicator selection thresholds, in the safety dimension, the secondary indicator “new, severe adverse reactions” (importance score = 3.55, coefficient of variation = 0.39) was deleted. In the effectiveness dimension, the secondary indicators “clinical positioning” (importance score = 3.69, coefficient of variation = 0.33), “adjustment and improvement of the preparation prescription” (importance score = 3.69, coefficient of variation = 0.33), and “clinical value of the preparation” (importance score = 3.75, coefficient of variation = 0.18) were deleted. In the economy dimension, the secondary indicators “target population” (importance score = 3.43, coefficient of variation = 0.25), “intervention and control measures” (importance score = 3.64, coefficient of variation = 0.22), “research perspective” (importance score = 3.73, coefficient of variation = 0.26), and “research time frame” (importance score = 3.73, coefficient of variation = 0.26) were deleted. In the inheritance and innovation dimension, the secondary indicators “administration method” (importance score = 3.38, coefficient of variation = 0.43), “innovation of preparation process” (importance score = 2.75, coefficient of variation = 0.45), and “innovation of treatment regimen” (importance score = 3.47, coefficient of variation = 0.26) were deleted. In the fairness dimension, the secondary indicator “patient value” (importance score = 3.70, coefficient of variation = 0.19) was deleted.
In the second consultation, no recommendations for modification, deletion, or addition of primary indicators were made. Based on the indicator selection thresholds, in the safety dimension, the secondary indicator “tests for heavy metals and toxic elements, pesticide residue tests, microbial limit tests, acute/chronic toxicity tests and self-inspection or quality control indicators” (importance score = 3.50, coefficient of variation = 0.46) was deleted. In the economy dimension, the secondary indicators “medical cost evaluation of prescriptions with similar medicinal materials and efficacy” (importance score = 3.33, coefficient of variation = 0.41), “cost–benefit” (importance score = 3.40, coefficient of variation = 0.36), and “cost–utility” (importance score = 3.40, coefficient of variation = 0.32) were deleted.
Proposed index system for insurance access to TCM preparations.
Table 1
Dimension	Primary indicator	Secondary indicator	Indicator description	 	Basic information on the preparation	1. Preparation name*	-	1. Follows the Technical Guidelines for Naming of Generic Names of Chinese Patent Medicines;2. Basic preparation information must be consistent with the registration or filing information with the National Medical Products Administration;3. Preparation information may may be reported with reference to Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China, national drug standards, drug registration standards, provincial or autonomous‑region/municipal standards for medicinal materials/decoction-ready medicines or specifications for processing of medicines, Technical Guidelines for Specification Description of Chinese Patent Medicines, Good Manufacturing Practice for Pharmaceutical Packaging Materials.	 	2. Approval number or filing number*	-	 	3. Medical insurance code for the preparation*	-	 	4. Dosage form of the preparation*	-	 	5. Names, origins, and parts of plants used as medicinal materials, and processing methods of all medicinal materials*	-	 	6. Prescription composition and dosage*	-	 	7. Main functions and indications*	-	 	8. Usage, dosage, and treatment course*	-	 	9. Specification of the preparation*	-	 	10. Packaging material of the preparation*	-	 	Safety	1. Safety evaluation based on TCM theory	1.1 Incompatible medicinal material combinations specified in “eighteen incompatibilities” and “nineteen incompatibilities”*	1. If the prescription includes toxic medicinal materials listed in standards or medicinal materials whose dosages exceed standard limits, documentation from the research and development process must be provided;2. Safety evaluations from preclinical and clinical studies within the last five years must be provided;3. Incidence of adverse reactions or events may be reported with reference to WHO-UMC criteria or Administrative Measures for the Reporting and Monitoring of Adverse Drug Reactions;4. Safety information may be reported with reference to Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China; national drug standards; drug registration standards; provincial, autonomous‑region, or municipal standards for medicinal materials, decoction-ready medicines, or specifications for processing of medicines; and package inserts or labels of preparation products.	 	1.2 Toxic medicinal materials (oral) noted in standards*	 	1.3 Toxic medicinal materials (topical) noted in standards*	 	1.4 Dosages of decoction-ready medicines exceeding standard limits*	 	1.5 Use restrictions or contraindications based on TCM syndromes or constitutions	 	1.6 Contraindications in special conditions (e.g., pregnancy, lactation)*	 	1.7 Cautions for concurrent drug usage*	 	2. Safety evaluation based on preclinical and clinical research	2.1 Incidence of adverse reactions or events	 	2.2 Causal relationship between the preparation and adverse events	 	Effectiveness	1. Effectiveness evaluation based on human experience	1.1 Study design	1. Effectiveness evaluation based on human use refers to clinical studies performed prior to submission;2. Common study designs and evidence levels are shown in Supplement 3; the basic access design is IVb or above;3. If multiple studies exist, a systematic review may be employed to explain target population, efficacy features, and clinical benefits;4. Diagnostic criteria for the target population may be reported with reference to Classification and Codes of Diseases and Patterns of Traditional Chinese medicine, or ICD-10/11;5. Clinical benefits include the following: recognized outcome indicators as primary endpoints or surrogate endpoints correlated with the primary ones (e.g., biomarkers, imaging, functional tests); patient-reported outcomes such as Chinese medicine quality of life-11 dimensions (CQ-11D); traditional Chinese medicine-specific indicators such as syndrome scales with demonstrated reliability and validity, or other indicators that reveal the preparation’s specific therapeutic effects;6. Usage information includes the following: medical institutions, start year or month, departments, total use in the past 1–5 years, main population, number of person-treatments or course (reasons for interruptions in clinical use, if applicable, should be stated);7. Prescription sources may include ancient classical formulas as specified in the Catalogue of Ancient Classical Formulas released by the National Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, and experience from National Traditional Chinese Medicine Masters/Academicians/Qihuang Scholars/nationally renowned traditional Chinese medicine practitioners;8. Effectiveness information may be reported with reference to domestic or international standards; data governance or statistical analysis may be reported with reference to Guiding Principles for Real-World Data to Generate Real-World Evidence and Guiding Principles for the Design and Protocol Framework of Real-World Drug Studies;9. A study protocol and statistical analysis plan should be submitted prior to the study’s commencement; it may include follow-up studies based on original human experience studies.	 	1.2 Target population	 	1.3 Clinical benefits	 	1.4 Bias assessment	 	1.5 Usage in medical institutions*	 	1.6 Prescription sources*	 	1.7 Time of formulation*	 	2. Effectiveness evaluation based on real-world research	-	 	Economy	1. Cost assessment	1.1 Direct costs*	1. Direct costs include raw materials, excipients, packaging materials, labor, water, electricity, gas, equipment depreciation, and manufacturing costs;2. Indirect costs may include saved labor time and productivity due to the use of preparations produced by the medicinal institutions;3. Patient burden reduction refers to cost savings due to the use of preparations compared with conventional therapy (e.g., costs of drugs, preoperative tests, hospitalization, subsequent treatments);4. A reference drug is one that is either listed on the National Reimbursement Drug List or on the market, possesses the same functions/indications, and shares at least 50 % of the same medicinal materials.	 	1.2 Indirect costs	 	2. Bonus items	2.1 Reduction in patient burden	 	2.2 Cost-effectiveness evaluation methods	 	Inheritance and innovation	1. Inheritance of traditional Chinese medicine theory	1.1 Prescription basis of the preparation*	1. The prescription must be grounded in the theories and formulation rationales of TCM or ethnic medicine for similar indications. The theories include disease etiology, development, and outcome, as well as the syndrome characteristics and therapeutic principles that correspond to the etiological factors and pathogenesis of the indications. The formulation rationales should be guided by TCM or ethnic medicine theories, explain formulation principles, and they should reflect the correspondence between patterns and formula;2. Filling gaps in reimbursement drug lists means treating diseases that lack effective interventions and severely affect quality of life, or offering clinical advantages over current therapies (e.g., improved efficacy, reduced severe adverse effects, enhanced compliance), or targeting rare diseases, pediatrics, and Class A/B infectious diseases;3. Others include reducing or replacing rare medicinal materials;4. Patents refer to those with clearly defined, independently held intellectual‑property rights;5. Scientific achievements refer to city-level third prize or higher awards.	 	1.2 Dosage form characteristics related to clinical application	 	2. Innovation in clinical value	2.1 Filling gaps in reimbursement drug lists	 	2.2 Others	 	3. Scientific achievements and patents	3.1 Patents	 	3.2 Scientific achievements	 	Fairness	1. Population coverage*	-	1. Impact on insurance funds is assessed from the payer’s viewpoint, comparing the effects of including the preparation in the insurance reimbursement list on the funds, such as through budget impact analysis, which can be performed with reference to the China Guidelines for Pharmacoeconomics Evaluations 2020 (Chinese-English Edition), Technical Manual for Pharmacoeconomic Evaluation of Chinese Patent Medicines.	 	2. Impact on insurance funds*	-	 	3. Rights to dispense and use	-
Abbreviations: TCM, Traditional Chinese Medicine; WHO-UMC, World Health Organization - Uppsala Monitoring Centre; ICD, International Classification of Diseases.
indicates mandatory items.
Based on the results of two consultation rounds, the final comprehensive value evaluation indicators for provincial insurance access to TCM preparations included the aforementioned six dimensions, 22 primary indicators, and 26 secondary indicators (Table 1). The index system had effectiveness and safety indicators based on the “three-in-one” theory for provincial insurance access to TCM preparations, cost evaluation (represented by direct costs), and value evaluation (represented by cost-effectiveness in the economy dimension). In addition, indicator connotations were clarified, including a basic research design for insurance access—based on the level of IVb evidence, defined as a case series of 100 patients over five consecutive years (Supplement 3)—and a reference drug definition, specified as one that is either listed on the National Reimbursement Drug List or on the market, possesses the same functions/indications, and shares at least 50 % of the same medicinal materials.

Analytic hierarchy process
Proposed index system and weights for provincial insurance access to TCM preparations.
Table 2
Dimension	Weight	Primary indicator	Secondary indicator	Combined weight	 	Safety	30.44 %	1. Safety evaluation based on traditional Chinese medicine theory	1.1 Incompatible medicinal material combinations specified in “eighteen incompatibilities” and “nineteen incompatibilities”*	2.05 %	 	1.2 Toxic medicinal materials (oral) noted in standards*	5.38 %	 	1.3 Toxic medicinal materials (topical) noted in standards*	4.57 %	 	1.4 Dosages of decoction-ready medicines exceeding standard limits*	1.18 %	 	1.5 Use restrictions/contraindications based on traditional Chinese medicine syndromes or constitutions	2.3 %	 	1.6 Contraindications in special populations (e.g., pregnancy, lactation)*	6.84 %	 	1.7 Cautions for concurrent drug usage*	2.52 %	 	2. Safety evaluation based on preclinical and clinical research	2.1 Incidence of adverse reactions or events	2.62 %	 	2.2 Causal relationship between the preparation and adverse events	2.98 %	 	Effectiveness	43.18 %	1. Effectiveness evaluation based on human experience	1.1 Study design	6.28 %	 	1.2 Target population	6.41 %	 	1.3 Clinical benefits	4.55 %	 	1.4 Bias assessment	3 %	 	1.5 Usage in medical institutions*	1.69 %	 	1.6 Prescription sources*	9.63 %	 	1.7 Time of formulation*	3.08 %	 	2. Effectiveness evaluation based on real-world research	-	8.55 %	 	Economy	14.72 %	1. Cost assessment	1.1 Direct costs*	8.09 %	 	1.2 Indirect costs	2.95 %	 	2. Bonus items	2.1 Reduction in patient burden	1.97 %	 	2.2 Cost-effective evaluation methods	1.72 %	 	Inheritance and innovation	6.48 %	1. Inheritance of TCM theory	1.1 Prescription basis of the preparation*	1.48 %	 	1.2 Dosage form characteristics related to clinical application	0.59 %	 	2. Innovation in clinical value	2.1 Filling gaps in reimbursement drug lists	2.63 %	 	2.2 Others	0.53 %	 	3. Scientific achievements and patents	3.1 Patents	0.96 %	 	3.2 Scientific achievements	0.29 %	 	Fairness	5.17 %	1. Population coverage*	-	2.87 %	 	2. Impact on insurance funds*	-	1.65 %	 	3. Rights to dispense and use	-	0.65 %
Abbreviations: TCM, Traditional Chinese Medicine.
Based on two expert consultation rounds, the weights of indicators at each level were calculated using the analytic hierarchy process methodology (Table 2). The consistency ratios of all judgment matrices were less than 0.1, indicating satisfactory consistency.

Discussion

Summary of key findings
This study established an index system, indicator connotations, and indicator weights for insurance access to TCM preparations. This index system offers a reference for medical institutions in the application for provincial insurance access to TCM preparations and offers recommendations for decision-making in health-care security administrations on the inclusion of TCM preparations in insurance. From the insurance viewpoint, the index system clearly defines the scope of evidence for TCM preparations and the basic research design for insurance access based on human experience and real-world studies. Moreover, based on expert opinions, the index system retains cost evaluation in the economy dimension, incorporates value evaluation represented by cost-effectiveness, and refines the definition of reference drugs, thus providing a methodological basis for value-based purchasing by insurance funds.

Comparison with previous studies
The findings align with and extend existing frameworks for the comprehensive clinical evaluation of Chinese patent medicines, wherein the indicator system, guidelines, technical specifications, and reporting standards have been established. Unlike prior work that primarily focused on Chinese patent medicines, this study addresses the particular challenges of TCM preparations, which lack uniform quality standards in production and evidence-based support for their effectiveness, safety and economic evaluation. Internationally, health insurance decision-making increasingly values the application of real-world evidence. For example, the United States’ Food and Drug Administration encourages the use of real-world evidence in drug regulatory decisions, and such evidence plays a large role in post-marketing surveillance and insurance payment decisions. Similarly, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence in the United Kingdom has long incorporated real-world data into Health Technology Assessment for drug pricing and reimbursement decisions, even developing a well-established methodological framework and technical guidelines.
In the traditional medicine field, Korean medicine plays a critical role in South Korea’s health-care system. Since 1984, the health insurance system has covered Korean medicine technology and drug expenses. The Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service, relying on the resource-based relative value scale, has performed continual effectiveness evaluations and insurance payment decision analysis for Korean medicine drugs and technologies. These international experiences offer specific references for TCM insurance, including the establishment of evidence-based evaluation mechanisms, and real-world data utilization for coverage and pricing decisions.
Collectively, these international practices highlight the global shift toward value-based, evidence-informed decision-making. The index system is consistent with these trends but is uniquely designed to accommodate the multi-component formulations, syndrome differentiation, and holistic outcomes of TCM preparations—features rarely addressed in conventional HTA frameworks. These comparisons underscore the importance of localized adaptation and the need to translate international best practices into context-specific tools that can support more transparent and equitable insurance decision-making for TCM preparations.

Clinical and scientific implications
Building on international best practices and localized adaptation needs, the proposed index system provides a structured, evidence-based tool for guiding provincial insurance decisions on TCM preparations. By defining clear evidence scope and incorporating cost-effectiveness evaluation, it promotes methodological transparency and supports rational, value-based allocation of healthcare resources.
Clinically, the system encourages medical institutions to generate high-quality real-world evidence, including patient-reported outcomes, which can enhance the credibility of TCM preparation applications. From a policy-maker viewpoint, its adoption could strengthen the linkage between clinical value and healthcare insurance decision-making, aligning with China’s ongoing Diagnosis Related Groups (DRG)/ Diagnosis Intervention Packet (DIP) payment reforms. This integration has the potential to improve budget impact control, promote equitable access to effective TCM therapies, and foster a shift toward outcomes-driven reimbursement decisions.

Strengths and limitations
The proposed index system for insurance access to TCM preparations established through literature research and consultation demonstrated substantial scientific validity and feasibility in this study, but several limitations apply. First, when applying the current index system to different diseases, researchers may need to adjust the weights to reflect disease-specific characteristics. These variations may affect the relative importance of indicators such as safety, effectiveness, or economic assessment, which in turn could influence the comparability of results across diseases and the consistency of reimbursement decisions. For example, economic indicators may carry greater weight in chronic disease management. Therefore, when adapting the index system to specific disease areas, methodological transparency should be ensured, and future empirical studies should be performed based on selected diseases, optimally managed by TCM, to further corroborate the index system’s scientific validity and feasibility. Second, the current system only considers the index structure, content, and weights, which can help medical institutions prepare application materials or conduct real-world studies and provide a reference for insurance review. However, future improvements should consider TCM preparations’ data foundation and refine the indicators’ evaluation criteria based on the index system. Given that most TCM preparations have been formulated based on clinical experience and have low certainty or insufficient evidence for disease management, their economic evaluations often lack reliable efficacy parameters. In this context, considering that TCM preparations are generally inexpensive, this study focus primarily on cost assessment and cost-effectiveness analysis, rather than cost-utility analysis. Moreover, the practical implementation of the index system should address regional differences. Variations in disease spectrum, availability of healthcare resources, and patient access across provinces may affect both feasibility and equity. Therefore, future refinement should adapt the system to local contexts to ensure the effective use of insurance funds and equitable medical service access.

Conclusions and suggestions for future research
This study established an index system for insurance access to TCM preparations, based on TCM theory, human experience, and real-world studies. It elucidates the scope of evidence and basic research design for TCM preparations from the insurance viewpoint, integrates cost evaluation and value evaluation indicators, and refines the definition of reference drugs, thus offering a reference for medical institutions applying for provincial insurance access to TCM preparations and offering recommendations for healthcare security administrations regarding the inclusion of TCM preparations in insurance coverage. Although this index system has been approved by the Hainan Provincial Healthcare Security Administration, further improvements tailored to specific diseases and regional contexts are necessary to enhance its scientific rigor and practical applicability.

Funding
This study was supported by National Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine (2024QNDY0017) and Hainan Provincial Healthcare Security Administration.

Ethical statement
Not applicable.

Data availability
The data that support the findings of this study are publicly available.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Xinyan Jin: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal analysis, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Changgeng Su: Investigation. Jiale Zhang: Investigation. Yujuan Liu: Writing – review & editing. Xiaoying Chen: Validation. Rui Zhao: Methodology, Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Supervision, Funding acquisition.

Declaration of competing interest
Xinyan Jin is an editorial board member but the editorial board membership had no bearing on the review process or editorial decision. There are no other conflict of interest.

References
Announcement of the general administration of food and drug administration on the implementation of record management for medical institutions applying traditional techniques to prepare Chinese medicinal preparations
Traditional Chinese medicine preparations in medical institutions: current situation and inspirations on research and development of new traditional Chinese medicine preparations
Notification to do well in the basic medical insurance for urban and rural residents in 2023
Opinions of the General Office of the State Council on the implementation of comprehensively strengthening the capacity building of drug supervision
Study on establishing a methodology of comprehensive clinical evaluation for Chinese patent medicine based on health technology assessment
Research on evaluation index system of mental health service accessibility based on Delphi method
The application of Delphi in the percormance evaluation system for key medical discipline
Research on the analysis of hierarchical analysis weight calculation method and its application
Recommendation for clinical evidence grading on traditional Chinese medicine based on evidence body
Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine: Levels of Evidence (March 2009)
GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations
Design of retrospective treatment outcome research and its application in traditional Chinese medicine
Construction of total quality management system of clinical comprehensive evaluation of drugs in China
Clinical comprehensive evaluation indicator system and path of Chinese patent medicine
Construction and interpretation of clinical comprehensive evaluation index system for Chinese patent medicine based on EVIDEM framework
Guideline for clinical comprehensive evaluation of Chinese patent medicine (2022 version)
Preferred reporting items for comprehensive evaluation of Chinese patent medicine (PRICE-CPM)
Technical specification for clinical comprehensive evaluation of Chinese patent medicine
Real-World evidence
Real-world evidence for coverage decisions: opportunities and challenges
NICE strategy 2021 to 2026: Dynamic, Collaborative, Excellent
Korean medicine coverage in the National Health Insurance in Korea: present situation and critical issues
Economic impact of integrated care models for patients with chronic diseases: a systematic review

Supplementary materials
Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi:10.1016/j.imr.2025.101258.