Evaluating Animal Models of Arteriovenous Malformation and Intracerebral Aneurysm: A Mechanistic Approach
Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) and intracranial aneurysms contribute to a high degree of morbidity and mortality due to the risk of intracranial hemorrhage observed in each of these cerebrovascular disorders. Due to the morbidity present in each condition, preclinical modeling of AVMs and intracerebral aneurysms is essential for advancing treatment options. A multitude of techniques and animal models have been described to model both AVM and intracranial aneurysm. In the present study, we sought to provide a comprehensive overview of the different models used to recapitulate AVM and intracranial aneurysm, highlighting advantages and disadvantages of each model. We conducted a comprehensive literature search for all preclinical animal models of AVM and intracerebral aneurysm. The studies included in the literature review were obtained from PubMed and included original studies, reviews, and systematic reviews. In this review, we highlight various animal models of AVM and intracranial aneurysm through the use of genetic models as well as surgical models. An overview of each model is thoroughly described and advantages and disadvantages of each model are outlined. Through the evaluation of current literature, the best models for AVM and aneurysm depend on the goal of the underlying study. Overall, we recommend using rodents and swine for modeling AVM and aneurysm as these animal species provide versatility, reliability, and accessibility for vascular research. Additionally, these species best recapitulate human AVM and aneurysm.
Cerebral vascular alterations and abnormalities such as aneurysm and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs) contribute to high levels of morbidity often through intracranial hemorrhage. AVMs are classified as abnormalities in the connection between intracranial arteries and veins without a capillary bed between the vessels. This vascular anomaly can lead to changes in oxygen delivery to areas of the brain, the potential for intracranial hemorrhage, and the so‐called “steal phenomenon” if left untreated. As outlined by the Spetzler–Martin grading system, brain AVMs can be classified based on size, location near an eloquent area (such as the primary motor cortex or language area of the brain), and venous drainage attachment. An intracranial aneurysm is characterized as a bulging of a blood vessel that leads to arterial wall thinning. Many underlying etiologies contribute to the formation of aneurysms including genetic factors, chronic hypertension, a history of smoking, increased age, and connective tissue disorders among other contributory factors. Many intracranial aneurysms are asymptomatic; however, some aneurysms are at risk of rupture, which can lead to a subarachnoid hemorrhage resulting in neurological deficit through direct damage to brain tissue, increased intracranial pressure, aneurysmal rerupture, and arterial vasospasm. Treatment for intracranial aneurysms depends on a variety of factors that are outlined by the population, hypertension, age, size, earlier subarachnoid hemorrhage, site (PHASES) score. The PHASES score includes factors such as demographics, history of hypertension, age, aneurysm size, history of subarachnoid hemorrhage, and the vessel site of the aneurysm. Patients who receive a PHASES score of >4 typically require intervention as the scoring system can help guide physicians in clinical decision‐making to determine which patients are best suited for intervention. Although scales such as Spetzler–Martin and PHASES can provide guidance when evaluating patients with brain arteriovenous malformation (bAVMs) and intracranial aneurysms, the decision to treat is often multifaceted and individualized. Imaging and physical exam findings in addition to supplemental scoring systems guide clinical decision‐making on a case by case with surgeons and interventionalist weighing all elements of the patient presentation.
Intracranial aneurysms and AVMs are treated through both endovascular and open‐vascular approaches. Open vascular approaches for the treatment of aneurysms include microvascular clipping, whereas the most ideal treatment option for AVMs is via the resection of the focal nidus of the AVM using an open vascular surgical approach. bAVMs are typically treated via conservative management, open resection, endovascular embolization, microsurgery, and radiosurgery. Medical decision‐making is based on the Spetzler–Martin score, institutional factors, and surgeon experience. Endovascular therapy for AVM and intracranial aneurysm differ in practice; however, the overall goal of embolization in both etiologies is to reduce the risk of rupture and intracranial hemorrhage. Endovascular embolization of saccular aneurysms includes coil embolization, stent‐assisted coiling, intrasaccular devices, balloon‐assisted coiling, and flow diversion devices.
Although AVMs and aneurysms have distinct vascular pathologies, some reports suggest that the incidence of intracranial aneurysms associated with comorbid AVM is as high as 60% with variability in reporting due to many factors including genetic predisposition, environmental factors, and sampling bias. Given that intracranial aneurysms and AVMs both pose a risk for intracranial hemorrhage, albeit via different mechanisms, the study of each of these neurological abnormalities is key to the development of novel endovascular and open vascular treatment techniques. These advancements will lead to reduced morbidity and mortality in patients who suffer from both AVMs and intracranial aneurysms. Current literature states that AVMs and aneurysms rarely occur naturally in animals, resulting in induction of aneurysms and AVMs in animal models to further study pathology. To evaluate the strengths and limitations of current AVM and aneurysm models, we conducted a comprehensive literature search highlighting key advantages and disadvantages of each model.

Nonstandard Abbreviations and Acronyms
bAVM
brain arteriovenous malformation
CCA
common carotid artery
EJV
external jugular vein
ENG
endoglin
HHT
hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
RM
rete mirabile

CLINICAL PERSPECTIVE
This review provides a comprehensive assessment evaluating both brain arteriovenous malformations and intracerebral aneurysms. Through a complete review and analysis of the literature, we compared genetic, surgical, and hemodynamic approaches to each of these cerebrovascular pathologies, highlighting advantages and disadvantages of each model. Additionally, we provide comprehensive illustrations outlining key techniques and procedures utilized in the study of brain arteriovenous malformations and intracerebral aneurysms
What Is New?
The selection of an appropriate animal model to study brain arteriovenous malformations and intracerebral aneurysm is necessary for the advancement in treatment and clinical guidance for cerebrovascular pathologies. Overall, we recommend the use of rodent and swine models for the study of brain arteriovenous malformation and intracerebral aneurysm due to their respective accessibility and reliability when studying vascular pathologies. With improved preclinical models and studies, advancements in treatment at the bedside will follow ultimately reducing the morbidity and mortality of patients with intracerebral vascular pathologies
What Are the Clinical Implications?
A literature search was conducted using PubMed. Key search terms included (“intracranial aneurysm” OR “cerebral aneurysm” OR “brain aneurysm”) AND (“animal model” OR “animal study” OR “animal experimentation” OR “preclinical model”) AND (zebrafish OR rodent OR feline OR swine OR ovine OR canine OR “non‐human primate” OR rabbit). (“intracranial arteriovenous malformation” OR “cerebral arteriovenous malformation” OR “brain arteriovenous malformation”) AND (“animal model” OR “animal study” OR “animal experimentation” OR “preclinical model”) AND (zebrafish OR rodent OR feline OR swine OR ovine OR canine OR “non‐human primate” OR rabbit). Additional search terms including “surgical models of AVM,” “rete mirabile models of AVM,” “genetic simulation of AVM,” “elastase model of aneurysm,” “surgical models of aneurysm,” “venous pouch model of aneurysm,” and “genetic simulation of aneurysm.” Resultant articles were screened for relevance.

MODELING CEREBRAL ARTERIOVENOUS MALFORMATIONS
The direct connection and entanglement of vessels in AVM present unique pathophysiological and hemodynamic bounds in animal modeling. An effective model seeks to replicate the high‐flow, low‐resistance arteriovenous shunting system that forms with the absence of capillaries, as well as its inherent structural intricacy. Given the complexity, several modes of simulating AVM in large and small animals exist such as surgical simulation, genetic modifications, and xenografting.

Surgical Simulation of AVM
A common way to model AVM is through anastomosis performed in both large and small animals. The first end‐to‐end anastomosis model, published by Spetzler et al in 1978, was completed in felines through a connection of the common carotid artery (CCA) and external jugular vein (EJV). Since the creation of the first carotid‐jugular fistula model, numerous models that differ in anastomosis type, target vessel combination, and choice of animal have been developed. The diversity in surgical simulation of AVM is a product of the various areas of study – for example, side‐to‐end anastomosis between the CCA and EJV was specifically chosen by Storer et al to investigate radiosurgical intervention of AVMs.

Carotid‐Jugular Fistula Models
Carotid‐jugular fistula models of AVM are typically used to evaluate the hemodynamics of the AVM pathophysiology. Studies on the carotid‐jugular fistula model began in the late 1970s and have since been performed in various animal models including felines, rodents, and nonhuman primates (NHPs). Ultimately, these models have the greatest use in understanding the underlying hemodynamic alterations that occur in AVMs.
Spetzler's normal perfusion pressure breakthrough theory serves as the hemodynamic basis of the first AVM fistula models. This theory details the loss of vascular autoregulation by ischemic brain following the resection of a high‐flow AVM. Whereas the Spetzler model creates an arteriovenous shunt by connecting the rostral CCA and caudal EJV (Figure 1A), Scott et al developed an internal jugular vein and CCA around the same time, establishing another option for mimicking the draining component of a shunt (Figure 1B). Although normal perfusion pressure breakthrough theory remains contested in hemodynamic theory, it gave rise to many other carotid‐jugular fistula models developed to study surgical complications and additional changes in tissue surrounding AVM.
Timeline of relevant carotid‐jugular fistula models with anastomosis and occlusion sites shown in yellow and green
,
respectively. A, Spetzler model in felines, (B) Scott model in nonhuman primates, (C) Morgan, (D) Bederson, and (E) Hai models in rodents.
Later models have experimented with other vessels' involvement to mimic the complex nature of AVM (Figure 1). For example, strategic ligation and occlusion can be used to simulate the hemodynamic landscape more effectively. A model created in rats by Morgan et al in 1989 features end‐to‐end anastomosis between the internal carotid artery and the EJV with accompanying ipsilateral external carotid artery ligation (Figure 1C). This effectively involved intracranial arterial and extracranial venous components. The rat model developed by Bederson et al in 1991 achieves a fistula through an extracranial end‐to‐end anastomosis between the EJV and proximal CCA (Figure 1D). This model uniquely features contralateral EJV occlusion, which allows for the investigation of AVM‐induced blockage of venous drainage that can contribute to hypoperfusion and ischemia of surrounding tissues. A model shared in 2002 by Hai et al similarly creates a fistula with the EJV and CCA but does so through an end‐to‐side anastomosis (Figure 1E). Another distinguishing component of this model is its contralateral transverse sinus occlusion and bilateral external carotid artery ligation, thus combining elements from the Morgan and Bederson models.
The host of small animal models developed after the first carotid‐jugular fistula model demonstrably built upon one another. These foundational studies allowed for pathophysiological analysis of hemodynamic principles of AVM and the effects upon contiguous parenchyma. Although undeniably valuable, effective simulation of structural complexity and translatability to human brain anatomy AVM remain of significant consideration.
Rodents are practical for surgical AVM studies, with rats and mice commonly used in carotid‐jugular fistula models. However, the small size of the rodent presents several points of consideration. First, there are inherent technical difficulties when operating on mice. Completing an anastomosis, for example, is much easier in large animal models such as sheep or swine. Second, the small vessel size means that there is less blood flow through an anastomosis alone. So, to replicate AVM hemodynamics, blood flow must be rerouted through strategic ligation and occlusion, as seen in previous models (Figure 1). Additional vessel modifications require more surgical skill, time, and increases the experiment cost as more instruments are introduced.
Despite phylogenetic similarity to humans, few studies have used NHPs apart from the carotid‐jugular fistula model completed by Scott et al. Given that NHPs present significant logistical barriers in comparison to rodents, as they require highly specialized vivarium facilities and have substantial monetary and ethical costs, animal models of AVM are rarely completed in NHPs.
Overall, carotid‐fistula models of AVM hold value in the ability to monitor and study the underlying hemodynamics of AVMs. Given the ethical and logistical barriers surrounding the use of feline and NHP models of AVM, we recommend rodents when conducting a carotid‐fistula study of AVM. Regardless of the technical surgical challenges of creating a carotid‐fistula model in rodents, rodents display the greatest versatility to study the underlying hemodynamics of the carotid‐fistula model. Additionally, rodents are more readily available than large animal models and are logistically easier to house.

Rete Mirabile Models and Endovascular Surgical Technique Exploration
A rete mirabile (RM) is a vascular network that provides countercurrent circulation. Although the RM is highly uncommon in humans and is more appropriately categorized as an abnormality during embryonic vessel development, it occurs naturally in birds, fish, and several large mammals. Both sheep and swine make attractive candidates for RM modeling, which has been used to study various methods of AVM intervention since 1989, including embolization and radiosurgery.
The presence of an intracranial, bilateral RM system in swine has been popularly used in brain AVM investigation as it mimics the structure of the nidus, both grossly and angiographically. The RM, at the base of the skull, is purely an arterial system between the internal carotid artery and pharyngeal artery. Thus, a significant consideration of these models is the fact that they lack the venous component that is highly critical in AVM hemodynamics. One of the first landmark RM models, published by Chaloupka et al in 1994, addressed this by creating a shunt between the RM and the cavernous sinus through orbital access. In spite of their ability to replicate the high‐flow AVM environment, this model was highly limited by its short‐term nature predicated by complications following orbital puncture and spontaneous occlusion of the shunt itself. In response to this, Massoud et al shared a related model around this time that used a carotid‐jugular fistula through side‐to‐side CCA and EJV anastomosis and simultaneous occlusion of surrounding arteries (external carotid artery, ophthalmic artery, and ascending pharyngeal artery) to introduce increased blood flow across the RM (Figure 2). Due to its cost and technical complexity, subsequent models in the early 2000s have sought to simplify the Massoud model through fusion of surgical and endovascular components and elimination of the additional vessel occlusion. Of note, these models were able to limit spontaneous occlusion and more closely simulate pressure drops observed in human AVM. More recent models have worked to transmute longstanding RM models from short‐term study to investigation of chronic AVM.
Massoud swine rete mirabile model with anastomosis and occlusion sites shown in yellow and green, respectively.
Sheep RM differs greatly from swine, as it comprises 2 distinct units connected by vessels, rather than 1 interconnected complex site. Following the publication of swine models in the later 90s, feasibility studies were conducted by Qian et al in 1999. This model used an EJV and CCA anastomosis and accompanying ligations to eliminate the various additional endovascular occlusions used by Massoud. Despite this finding, swine models are a mainstay in RM modeling.
Swine are an attractive candidate for AVM structure modeling as they have a RM and mimic human coagulation, hemodynamics, and previous immunohistochemical findings. Moreover, the ability to simulate the nidus of an AVM angiographically allows for testing of endovascular approaches and embolic therapeutics. The large vessel size provides relative technical ease and increased blood flow. Further, several models were able to limit spontaneous occlusion. Yet, as previously mentioned, the RM itself is extracranial, and its connections are arterial to arterial. Thus, they do not truly recapitulate intracranial AVM and lack the essential venous component. Additionally, previous RM models, such as Massoud et al's can be extraordinarily complex and expensive when integrating endovascular approaches. Swine may be used more in comparison to other similar large animals, such as sheep, because of convenience as they are far more readily available. Swine are able to breed inexpensively in high volume and offspring grow quickly. More swine are available from large‐scale distributors, and pigs are considered domestic pets and can be transported with lighter regulations.
Several surgical models have been conducted with dogs. For example, canines were used to create intracranial arteriovenous fistula for investigation of training with microcatheters and local cerebral hypoperfusion. Because canines exhibit similar vascular anatomy and hemodynamics to humans, they are a relatively reasonable model for cerebrovascular pathologies. Despite this, canines tend to be less ethically acceptable animal models and adequate simulation of the structure of AVMs remains a significant consideration, as they do not have an RM. It is also worth noting that high vessel tortuosity in the brain may signal difficulty in surgical models. A study by Pietilä et al used a muscle graft to create an arteriovenous shunt for AVM lesion induction. This model was able to recapitulate several key parts of AVM presentation – both ischemia and hemorrhage to surrounding parenchyma, angiogenesis, and tissue changes to the existing draining venous components. Although promising, this model demonstrates much more technical complexity to mimic anatomy already present and commonly used with swine and sheep RM.
Like swine, sheep are a reasonable candidate in surgical modeling as they have a RM. Qian et al demonstrated feasibility in the ovine model by creating a simple and cost‐effective surgery. However, no studies have been reported since Qian et al. This is likely due to the similarity to swine, which hold more logistical advantages over sheep as previously mentioned.
Animals that contain an RM vascular network are ideal for the study and practice of use for endovascular surgical techniques such as embolization and microcatheter procedures. Swine are the best animal model to use when investigating novel endovascular surgical techniques as the RM in swine closely resembles the AVM nidus that is present in human bAVM. Additionally, the vasculature of swine is large compared with ovine and canine models and has similar hemodynamic properties to that of human vasculature. Although canine models more closely resemble human hemodynamics and coagulation characteristics, they lack an RM, which makes them less effective models when compared with swine in the study of endovascular techniques in animal models.

Genetic Simulation of AVM
Investigation of AVM‐causing pathologies such as hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) has been central in identifying genetic targets in animal modeling. Three primary loss‐of‐function mutations have been identified since the mid‐1990s and early 2000s – activin receptor‐like kinase (ALK‐1), endoglin (ENG), and less commonly, SMAD4. Each of these genes are involved in bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling, specifically with BMP9 and BMP10. Although genetic involvement in HHT is well known, specific roles in AVM have not yet been clearly defined. Yet, these genes remain logical targets for study due to the association between HHT and AVM and have been studied independently and in combination with each other.
In addition to surgical methods, genetic approaches such as angiogenic stimulation via vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) overexpression offer a complementary strategy for modeling AVMs. Thus, angiogenic induction is a way to mirror the structural complexity and progression of brain AVM and has been paired with foundational surgical models such as Chaloupka et al and Massoud et al in more recent studies.

Genetic Components of AVM
HHT is an autosomal dominant disorder in which there are intracerebral vascular abnormalities that can lead to the formation of bAVMs. The genetic pathways of HHT have been studied at length and generally focus on variations in 2 genes, ENG and ALK‐1. Each of these genes plays a role in the transforming growth factor‐β pathway that is expressed within the vascular endothelium and plays a pivotal role in angiogenesis. Given that ENG and ALK‐1 have been identified in the pathogenesis of human AVMs, each gene has been the subject of targeted research in the induction of AVMs in animal models to gain insight into the pathogenesis of bAVMs.
Bourdeau et al first created a HHT 1 murine model of AVM in 1999 through the use of a transgenic mouse approach. In this study, the ENG gene was knocked out and the angiogenesis of intracranial vasculature was tracked. In spite of the knockout of ENG, endothelial cells were expressive of the ENG gene until embryonic day 9 suggesting that the it is not necessary for the generation of primitive vessels but rather the proliferation and migration of endothelial cells. Additional components of the transforming growth factor‐β pathway also appear to be involved in the aberrant angiogenesis observed in HHT. These genes include angiopoeitin‐1 and its endothelial receptor, TIE‐2/TEK (Angiopoietin 1 Tyrosine Kinase Receptor). The model established by Bourdeau et al demonstrated that HHT could be generated in a rodent model suggesting that in vivo AVMs could plausibly be studied using transgenic mice to better understand the pathophysiology of HHT and AVM progression. Despite this finding, several studies including Bourdeau et al and Li et al noted that homozygous ENG knockout mice die in utero during midgestation due to abnormalities of blood vessel formation and heart defects. Given the high rate of mortality among homozygous experimental animals, the ENG complete knockout approach to model HHT has significant drawbacks that limit the use of the model in practice. However, further studies into the transforming growth factor‐β pathway have discovered that mice with a heterozygous knockout of the ENG gene can mature to adulthood and display features of HHT.
Further evidence that a heterozygous knockout of the ENG gene could create a viable HHT model was suggested by the analysis carried out by Satomi et al. Scanning electron microscopy was used to investigate whether vascular abnormalities were apparent in mice that were heterozygous for the ENG gene. It was reported that 30% of heterozygous mice for the ENG gene had developed AVM‐like structures, reinforcing the notion that a heterozygous knockout model of ENG could be used to model the pathophysiology of AVM. The genetic pathway observed in HHT heavily involves the ENG gene, which leads to angiogenesis and vascular proliferation. Additional genetic pathways such as those observed with adherent VEGF signaling also work through the ENG gene pathway and have been investigated in their role to stimulate angiogenesis when modeling AVMs.
VEGF is an endothelial mitogen and morphogen that is known to play a role in the angiogenesis of the cerebral vascular system as well as induce angiogenesis in a variety of tissues in vivo. Given that there is evidence that VEGF can stimulate angiogenesis in organs such as skeletal muscle and the myocardium, Yang et al sought to establish whether the administration of VEGF via an adenoviral modality would result in angiogenesis within the cerebral vascular system. Through the use of western blot analyses and immunohistochemistry, Yang et al determined that the delivery of VEGF cDNA via a viral vector induced microvascular proliferation without systemic changes in physiology. This model provided a novel approach to induce intracerebral angiogenesis without causing cerebral ischemia or the use of vasculature from tumors. Regardless of these advantages, the VEGF model is effective for short periods, typically <4 weeks, due to the short half‐life and limited bioavailability of VEGF. Given the time limitation of the model, this signifies a potential drawback in the use of an isolated VEGF model of angiogenesis. To combat this shortfall, the same group investigated the combined use of VEGF administration in addition to an ENG knockout.
Additional models of AVM that take advantage of the ENG pathway include 1 model that used a heterozygous ENG knockout scaffold with concurrent administration of VEGF via an adenoviral vector. Through analysis via immunostaining and confocal microscopy, Xu et al confirmed that their model of a heterozygous ENG knockout with the administration of VEGF led to increased vascular density at 4 weeks post procedure. Xu et al also noted that the microvasculature within the brain was grossly abnormal. The concomitant use of a heterozygous knockout mouse and the administration of VEGF via a viral vector appears to be a reasonable model to simulate the pathogenesis of AVM development and pathophysiology with a high degree of reproducibility.
ALK‐1 (or ACVRL1) is responsible for encoding an endothelial transmembrane receptor within the tissue growth factor β family. Although the direct AVM‐causing ligands and full mechanism remain largely unknown, various small animal models since the early 2000s have sought to establish a stronger link to AVM. ALK‐1 deletion mouse models have been used in a host of studies and can be differentiated by several variables such as age and type of deletion. For example, mouse studies by Oh et al have revealed that ALK‐1 deletion demonstrates lethality in embryonic development, solidifying the role ALK‐1 has in development of healthy arteriovenous connections. On the other hand, ALK‐1 deletion in adult mice that have been wounded resulted in de novo AVM formation, suggesting that ALK‐1 may play a role in Neurogenic locus notch homolog (Notch)‐mediated recognition between arteries and veins. Of note, these studies introduced an additional level of intricacy – location specificity – as de novo AVM formation was observed in abdominal tissue only, prompting the creation of similar brain‐specific AVM models.
Controlling the type of deletion, either global or cell‐specific, in ALK‐1 knockout animals is another variable by which to categorize genetic studies. Global knockouts in adult mice demonstrate AVM formation whereas lethal AVM formation was observed in global or endothelial cell‐specific neonates. Other studies have displayed that global and cell‐specific deletion outcomes may also match each other. For example, endothelial cell‐specific knockout mice generated by Chen et al formed de novo AVMs throughout the body and after wounding, closely replicating the results of a global deletion study completed by Park et al 5 years earlier.
The NOTCH4 receptor family is a key mediator of endothelial cell migration and maturation with gain of function mutations leading to embryonic vascular defects that result in fetal death. Given the key role of NOTCH4 in the proper development of intracerebral vasculature, Krebs et al was the first study to investigate the effects of loss‐of‐function mutations in in the NOTCH4 pathway. On analysis of the NOTCH4 knockout mice, Krebs et al noted an avascular yolk sac suggesting that the NOTCH4 pathway is essential to normal vascular development and endothelial cell maturation and migration. After confirming the role of the NOTCH4 pathway in the proper migration of the endothelial cell precursors, further vascular analysis was done in the NOTCH4 knockout embryos to evaluate for the potential formation of AVMs. Previous studies conducted in zebrafish demonstrated that NOTCH4 knockouts could result in the formation of AVMs and abnormal vasculature. Histological analysis of the NOTCH4 knockout embryos revealed abnormalities in vascular formation that resemble AVMs, suggesting a key role of the NOTCH4 pathway that is required for proper formation of arterial and venous vascular beds.
In recent studies, a signaling pathway involving the MAPK pathway was newly associated with the formation of sporadic bAVMs. Notably, the involved pathway was found to be significantly associated with vascular malformations. Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS) mutations were associated with the occurrence of bAVM formation, which suggests a potential role for KRAS in the underlying etiology of bAVM pathogenesis. Of note, recent studies have shown a large amount of variability in the role of KRAS in bAVMs as KRAS mutations have occurred in different cells across human samples and in varying amounts of cells. This could suggest variable underlying genetic changes or environmental factors that affect the role of KRAS in bAVM formation. Hyperactivation of oncogenic KRAS mutations has also been shown to induce bAVMs in a rodent model. Park et al highlights that the induction of an endothelial KRAS mutation led to the formation of bAVMs in rodents. This model recapitulated the tangled AVM nidus that is commonly observed in human pathology creating an anatomically accurate depiction of bAVMs for modeling. Although AVMs are notable in cancerous tissue as highlighted by Park et al there is additional evidence suggesting that KRAS gain of function mutations in the vascular endothelium can stimulate the production of AVMs. Fish et al created an in vivo study through a mutation in endothelial KRAS that led to AVM formation complete with the characteristic entanglement of arteries of veins that are observed in human bAVMs. This study highlights the key role that KRAS plays in the pathogenesis of AVMs as it relates to mutations in the endothelial lining outlining the key role that KRAS plays in the formation of AVMs. A study conducted by Fraissenon et al added to the growing evidence that KRAS mutations play a role in the development of AVMs. In this study, the investigators administered sotorasib, a KRAS G12C inhibitor, to mice with a KRAS mutation as well as human patients with known AVMs refractory to surgical intervention. They found that mice administered sotorasib had increased survival and decreased AVM volume compared with those that received vehicle treatment. Additionally, the 2 patients who received sotorasib for AVMs showed marked symptomatic improvement for AVMs that had previously been refractory to surgical intervention. Further studies should focus on the role of KRAS mutations in AVM development as KRAS has been shown to recapitulate the underlying pathophysiology of AVM in animal models.
Because the genetic basis of AVM is not yet fully understood, some studies have used zebrafish to investigate target genes. Zebrafish have also been used to investigate the Notch pathway to better understand the arterial and venous maturation process. One study identified that the loss of Notch signaling led to alterations in the normal development of arterial and venous development making Notch signaling a plausible molecular target for the study of AVM. Although zebrafish are easy to house and have a high degree of embryo production, there are several drawbacks that may limit their use. Some drawbacks include an underdeveloped central nervous system compared with humans as well as abnormal and inconsistent drug administration. In spite of these limitations, zebrafish still hold value in the ability to evaluate genetic changes in disease pathophysiology.
Rodents are a mainstay in genetics as they allow for high editing specificity for a relatively low cost and control over generations through convenience in breeding with their shorter gestation and pup maturation timelines. Given the complex nature of the underlying genetic variations observed in AVMs, mouse models provide the most suitable means to study the genetic changes in AVM. Although the NOTCH receptor family has been studied in zebrafish, mice are readily available, genetically modifiable and can be used to evaluate many genetic changes in AVM from VEGF‐induced angiogenesis to the maturation of endothelial cells in developing brain. For these reasons, mice are the best preclinical animal model for evaluating the genetic changes in AVM.

Xenografts in AVM Modeling
Most approaches to the modeling of AVM use either surgical models to create arterial and venous connections or induce AVM genesis via genetic manipulation. One study was published that resected human AVMs and injected the specimen subcutaneously in nude mice. Human AVMs generally progress slowly and elicit an effect on the surrounding parenchyma via vascular steal in which increased blood supply is driven through the AVM rather normal brain parenchyma. The study conducted by Hou et al was the first of its kind to demonstrate the survival of resected human aneurysms grafted into mice. This study demonstrated that the human graft underwent a short period of growth within mice followed by a gradual period of shrinkage over the 120 days post graft. One advantage of this model of AVM is that the structural characteristics of human AVMs were maintained in the mice, which has been difficult to model via other methods. Although a xenograft model of AVM maintains many features of human AVMs that surgical and genetic models cannot account for, there are several drawbacks to this model. These drawbacks include the gradual decline of the human AVM after it is grafted and the inability to identify whether the resected AVM is of the nidus or surrounding vessels. Additionally, AVMs are typically slowly progressive. However, harvesting an AVM graft occurs at a specific time point, often in a mature AVM, which does not recapitulate the disease process. Through the xenograft of a human AVM into a mouse, Hou et al has established a novel method to model AVM. Despite the drawbacks of this model, it provides an accurate portrayal of the human AVM structure, making it a useful tool in the study of AVM.
Another xenograft model of AVM in the preclinical setting used human bAVM samples and injected the specimen into the cornea of rats. The study conducted by Konya et al evaluated the angiogenesis of implanted bAVMs, cavernous malformations and venous angiomas injected into the rat cornea to determine whether these modalities could be used to model vascular malformations. Overall, the Konya et al study demonstrated that AVM samples harvested from human patients had the highest degree of angiogenesis following implantation into the rat cornea whereas cavernous malformations and venous angiomas had angiogenesis similar to that or normal of brain tissue. Following this study, the cornea model of AVM was used to determine whether the use of radiation treatment in AVMs affected angiogenesis. Radiation treatment was also compared to an embolization procedure in the evaluation of angiogenesis. Ultimately, the study conducted by Akakin et al highlighted gamma knife radiosurgery decreased angiogenesis whereas intravascular embolization increased angiogenesis. These studies highlight the use of implanted bAVMs in the cornea of a rat in the evaluation of advancing interventional techniques.
Xenografting creates an accurate representation of bAVMs immediately after implantation, which can be helpful in the study of therapeutic interventions such as radiosurgery as well as angiogenesis following implantation. However, a significant drawback with xenografts is that the disease progression is not mimicked, as harvested AVMs are usually mature in nature and regress after implantation. Overall, further studies must be conducted to determine the viability of AVM xenografts in rodents as previous studies have shown promise; however, concerns exist when it comes to modeling the underlying disease pathology.

MODELING CEREBRAL ANEURYSMS
Intracerebral aneurysms are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in the United States, affecting an estimated 6.7 million people. Ruptured intracerebral aneurysms are fatal in roughly 43% of occurrences from the initial insult with a 57% mortality rate at 6 months post rupture. Often times, survivors of ruptured intracerebral aneurysms suffer from long‐term health consequences with as many as two thirds of survivors suffering from permanent neurological deficits. Given the significant impact and incidence of intracerebral aneurysms, it is essential to model these vascular pathologies to advance treatment and gain a better understanding of the underlying pathology that results in intracerebral aneurysms and their subsequent rupture. Several models for intracerebral aneurysms are used across a variety of animal species. The following sections outline each aneurysm model highlighting the key points in each case.

Surgical Simulation of Aneurysm

Elastase Model
The use of an elastase induction model of intracerebral aneurysm has been demonstrated in both small and large animals. In general, elastase models of aneurysm formation incubate elastase within a vessel leading to bulging (Figure 3). Nuki et al showed an elastase/angiotensin II method of intracerebral aneurysm induction in mice by a combined approach of hypertension induction with concomitant elastic lamina weakening. Hypertension was induced by the administration of angiotensin II while the elastic lamina was weakened through the administration of elastase into the cerebral spinal fluid. Elastic lamina weakening has also been employed to induce intracerebral aneurysms in swine and rabbit models. Atles et al first demonstrated the induction of an aneurysm using the elastase model in rabbits in 1999. This procedure was done via an endovascular approach in which porcine elastase was injected and incubated in the CCA. The same induction protocol was used by Goericke et al in 2009 on a swine model. Goericke et al demonstrated comparable results in the swine elastase model as the rabbit elastase model expanding upon the species used to model intracerebral aneurysm.
Example of an endovascular elastase model, highlighting the placement of elastase within the vessel and resulting saccular aneurysm.
In mice, elastase is stereotactically injected into the basal cistern of the rodent brain, effectively entering intracerebral circulation. After the elastase injection, angiotensin II is administered for 2 weeks. This model of elastase injection produced intracranial aneurysms around the circle of Willis. Nuki et al also noted structural changes within the vasculature of the circle of Willis, which included the infiltration of immune cells within the aneurysm. One of the benefits of the procedure described by Nuki et al is the relatively short, 2‐week period of aneurysm formation. This model allows for a reproducible model of aneurysm that is feasible in terms of time.
Aneurysms commonly form at the bifurcation of arteries in humans making it imperative for the creation of aneurysms at bifurcations in animal models to provide an applicable preclinical platform for aneurysm. In contrast to venous graft models, an elastase model has been used to induce bifurcation aneurysms in rabbits. In this model, a balloon occlusion was created in the carotid artery and elastase was incubated to induce the formation of an aneurysm. Upon further analysis, the aneurysm created using a balloon occlusion and elastase incubation created a bifurcation aneurysm that was hemodynamically similar to those observed in humans while maintaining endothelial integrity. A similar model of balloon occlusion and elastase incubation has been used in swine.
Since the initial advent of the rabbit model of aneurysms, there have been several iterations and refinements. One of the newest iterations of the elastase model was more recently developed by Miskolczi et al in which elastase was applied directly to the outside of the CCA rather than via an endovascular approach. Miskolczi et al reports the successful creation of saccular aneurysms by using this method providing a less invasive elastase method of aneurysm creation. In addition to the traditional elastase model of aneurysm induction in rabbits, another model uses an anastomotic arterial pouch to model aneurysm. In this model both the left and right common carotid arteries are ligated and sutured together. Elastase is applied at the connection point of the left and right CCA. This model effectively creates an arterial pouch model of aneurysm by using both hemodynamic alterations and an elastase component.
Although rabbit models are frequently used to model aneurysm via an elastase model, they have several drawbacks. Most notable, the small size of the vasculature does not allow for the use of endovascular techniques within the rabbit model. This prompted Goericke et al to create a model of cerebral aneurysm in which endovascular techniques could be practiced. This was done by adapting the elastase model of aneurysm formation from rabbits and using the same procedural strategy in swine. Ultimately, a carotid aneurysm was induced in swine by exposing the carotid artery to elastase. Although the Goericke model demonstrated that an aneurysm can be induced in swine by using an elastase model similar to rabbit, further studies must be conducted to investigate the structural changes of the vasculature in swine after the induction of an aneurysm by using the elastase model as porcine elastase is known to interfere with the elastic network of the vasculature potentially leading to instability and rupture.
Elastase models of aneurysms are readily reproducible across both small and large animal models making it a reasonable choice when evaluating aneurysmal characteristics from hemodynamics, vascular changes, and endovascular techniques. Our recommendations vary depending on the goal of the research study when using the fusiform model. When looking to investigate the molecular changes observed in intracranial aneurysm, we suggest the use of a murine model of aneurysm due to the short incubation period as well as ease of molecular studies on the tissue when compared with large animal models. For hemodynamic changes in elastase models, we recommend the use of the carotid anastomosis elastase model in rabbits. Previous studies have demonstrated that this model of aneurysm closely resembles the hemodynamics of aneurysms observed in humans. Finally, when the desire of a study is to study the use of endovascular techniques, swine is the superior model given the large vessel size. Overall, elastase models of aneurysm are reliably reproduced and have a wide range of uses.

Fusiform Elastase Model
In the refinement of the use of rabbits in aneurysm modeling, a modified elastase technique was developed and validated by Avery et al in which the CCA was isolated and elastase was applied to the outside of the vessel, creating a fusiform aneurysm in the CCA. This was the first study to create a fusiform aneurysm in a rabbit model as the previous studies had largely focused on saccular aneurysms.

Hemodynamic Aneurysm Induction
Hemodynamic alterations can induce hypertension, alter the flow of blood, and affect the vascular integrity of the intracerebral arterial systems leading to the formation of intracerebral aneurysms. Hashimoto et al first demonstrated this model in rats and Morimoto et al adapted the same technique in mice. As outlined by Morimoto et al, genetically altered mice underwent ligation of the left common carotid and posterior branches of the right renal arteries. Following the first operation, the left renal arteries were also ligated. This model of cerebral aneurysm was the first of its kind to induce aneurysms in the basal cerebral arteries without the direct manipulation of the intracerebral vasculature. By changing the flow of blood systemically, each of these small animal models provided a novel technique of aneurysm induction without the use of elastase. Additionally, by changing the systemic hemodynamics of the experimental animals, this method of aneurysm creation may better reflect the changes seen in patients with aneurysm because aneurysm formation in humans is often secondary to disorders such as hypertension.
In small animal models of cerebral aneurysm, the induction of hypertension can lead to changes in both the hemodynamics and structure of the blood vessel walls, which can cause the formation of aneurysms both intracranially and extracranially. Hashimoto et al were the first to describe a hemodynamic, hypertension induced aneurysm model in rats in 1978 that was later refined by Morimoto et al in mice. In the hemodynamic model conducted by Morimoto et al, the left CCA and posterior branches of the right renal artery were ligated. In a second procedure, the left renal arteries were ligated. These alterations to the vasculature led to significant increases in the blood pressure of the mice compared with control and produced intracranial aneurysms within the circle of Willis on light microscopy. A limitation of this hemodynamic model is that it is induced by hypertension and alterations to blood flow that cause an increase in pressure within the vessels. Although cerebral aneurysms are often associated with hypertension, some aneurysms are idiopathic or have a potential genetic predisposition.
Outside of the elastase models of aneurysm that we previously outlined in rabbits, hemodynamic differences and the induction of pathological hemodynamics can also create intracranial aneurysms in rabbits. Hemodynamic alterations were originally done by Hassler in 1962. The Hassler model ligated the carotid artery on 1 side of the neck. The induction of this defect led to the formation of arterial wall bulging and saccular aneurysm formation on the basilar and posterior cerebral arteries. A similar procedure was reproduced in 2009 by Gao et al in which the CCA was ligated which subsequently increased basilar artery blood flow effectively creating basilar artery aneurysms.
The majority of studies involving alterations to hemodynamics in the creation of intracranial aneurysms have been conducted in rodents. When using a hemodynamic model of intracranial aneurysm, we suggest the use of rodents due to ease of availability and molecular tests that can be conducted. The hemodynamic model of aneurysm formation may be of particular use when investigating hypertensive changes that lead to aneurysm formation granting this model unique value for the study of aneurysms secondary to hypertension.

Surgically Induced Saccular Aneurysms
Given the size of the vasculature in small animal models such as mice and rats, intracranial aneurysms are rarely induced via a surgical suturing method. Despite this limitation, surgical models of aneurysm have been demonstrated in the abdominal aorta of mice and rats to study cellular and pathological changes of aneurysm. Frosen et al displayed the induction of a saccular aneurysm in the abdominal aorta of a murine model. The descending aorta of a donor mouse was dissected and sutured end to side to the abdominal aorta of the experimental animals. The distal end of the donor aorta was subsequently ligated to create a saccular aneurysm in the anastomosed artery demonstrating visible pulsation. Although the surgical induction of saccular aneurysms is commonly used to model aneurysms of the abdominal aorta, these studies are frequently used to examine the cellular changes that occur in aneurysms. Marbacher et al expands upon the original studies of the surgically induced aneurysm model by evaluating cellular changes and the rate of recurrence in aneurysm based on cellular changes, highlighting the utility of extracranial aneurysms in a murine model.

Venous Pouch
A venous pouch model of CCA aneurysm was first introduced by German and Black in canines in 1954. This model of aneurysm is done by isolating the CCA and jugular veins (Figure 4). A portion of the jugular vein is harvested and clamped on 1 end of the dissected jugular vein. The open end of the harvested jugular vein is then sutured onto an arterial defect of the CCA creating a pulsatile berry aneurysm of the CCA. Although the German model was the first to successfully produce a patent, pulsatile berry aneurysm in canines, the model failed to definitively recapitulate the hemodynamic alterations observed in human aneurysms. Over time various iterations of the German model have been modified in canines to better model aneurysms.
Examples of venous pouch aneurysms. Venous pouch aneurysms can be created in several ways such as a (A) singular CCA sidewall aneurysm or through (B,C) anastomosis with the contralateral CCA.
In a comparable manner to German and Black, Raymond et al adapted and used a venous pouch model of aneurysm formation in swine to create a novel aneurysm model in a large animal species. Raymond et al created several distinct types of aneurysms including small aneurysms with small necks and giant aneurysms with giant necks. The study further investigated the hemodynamic profile of the model using angiography. One disadvantage of the swine venous pouch model is that several of the animals from the Raymond study lacked endothelial lining in the ligated portion of the jugular vein that was attached to the CCA to create the aneurysm. This lack of endothelial lining could limit the types of experiments and analyses conducted in the swine model of aneurysm. One final advantage of the Raymond model is the ability to evaluate aneurysm rupture with ease due to the size of the swine vasculature.
The venous pouch method of creating an aneurysm in large animal species holds value mainly in the realm of testing and using endovascular surgical techniques. Given that the aneurysm is created with a vein rather than an artery limits the molecular analysis that can be conducted in experiments. Additionally, venous pouch models generally produce aneurysms that are in the CCA rather than in an intracranial location. If one were to use a venous pouch model of aneurysm, we recommend the use of swine over canine. Although canines tend to have a more similar intracranial vasculature to humans, swine species are more accessible, easier to house, and have fewer ethical considerations than canine models.

Jugular Vein Graft Aneurysm
Large animal models are more frequently used to study intracerebral aneurysms than small animal models. Forrest and O'Reilly were the first to execute a venous graft aneurysm model in rabbits. The procedure creates a surgically constructed bifurcation aneurysm by connecting the left and right common carotid arteries. Once the bifurcation is created, a ligated portion of the jugular vein is sutured at the bifurcation point creating a saccular aneurysm. Although this model of cerebral aneurysm is in an extracranial location (within the CCA), a saccular aneurysm positioned at an arterial bifurcation point is pathologically relevant to study the hemodynamic alterations observed in bifurcation aneurysms. Additionally, many human intracerebral aneurysms occur at arterial bifurcation points in the circle of Willis highlighting an advantage of the venous graft model in large animals. Several drawbacks of the venous graft model exist including the potential rupture of the aneurysm and the formation of thromboses in both the pouch itself and the carotid artery proximal to the attachment point of the pouch.
In a similar fashion as the German model, Guo et al created a fusiform aneurysm in the CCA of canines by harvesting the jugular vein and attaching the resected jugular vein to the CCA. This effectively created a fusiform aneurysmal defect in the CCA that was confirmed under angiography. Additionally, Guo et al evaluated the hemodynamic changes observed in the fusiform aneurysm. This was compared to the hemodynamics of human fusiform aneurysms, and no differences were found suggesting that the Guo model of fusiform aneurysms have a clinically applicable model of the pathophysiological changes in the formation of aneurysms. Additional modifications of the German model have been instituted to create bifurcation aneurysms and giant berry aneurysms in other large animal models of aneurysm such as swine. Canines have several advantages over small animal models and swine such as a closely related intracerebral vascular system with humans and the ability to use a canine model as a practice platform for endovascular techniques.
Given ethical considerations, cost, and accessibility, canines have many barriers to use in aneurysm research. Although they more closely resemble human vasculature, rabbits are a superior option for use in venous graft studies as they are more accessible and provide more flexibility than canine models while still providing the ability to analyze hemodynamics within the aneurysm.

Genetic Simulation of Aneurysm

S OX17 Deficiency
More recently a study has been conducted on a transgenic mouse model of intracranial aneurysm formation. SOX17 is a transcription factor that is found in abundance throughout the endothelium of intracranial arteries. To induce aneurysm formation, angiotensin II was administered toSOX17 knockout mice creating vascular changes that resemble intracranial aneurysms. Upon further molecular analyses, Lee et al evaluated characteristics of the intracranial vasculature and determined that S OX17 knockout mice administered angiotensin II displayed dilation of vessel lumen, vascular wall thinning, and decreased smooth muscle within the vasculature suggesting that SOX17 may be a predisposition for the formation of intracranial aneurysms. Given these findings, SOX17 knockout mice may be further investigated as a surrogate model for the study aneurysm.

Endothelial Alterations in Intracranial Aneurysms
Endothelial cell dysfunction is known to be a contributing factor in the underlying etiology of cerebral aneurysms. Endothelial cell alterations are known to be some of the first changes that lead to intracranial aneurysms. The mechanism by which endothelial dysfunction typically occurs is through hemodynamic stress, nitric oxide synthase activity, oxidative stress, estrogen balance, and endothelial cell‐to‐cell function compromise. These factors are interwoven in the underlying pathophysiology of the induction of intracerebral aneurysms in humans. Less research has been conducted in preclinical models of intracerebral aneurysm that elucidate these factors. However, a recent study evaluated the molecular changes in the endothelium of intracranial aneurysms in a preclinical model.
In recent years, Xiao et al evaluated endothelial cells changes in a model of intracranial aneurysm formation. The study evaluated the endothelial alterations in both white rabbits and rats via the use of hematoxylin and eosin staining. Each of these studies used a CCA ligation model of intracranial aneurysms. Ultimately, the study found that endothelial changes were most commonly found at the basilar termini in rabbits and at the bifurcation anterior cerebral artery‐olfactory artery bifurcation in rats. Specifically, there was a decrease in the marker p120ctn, which contributes to cell‐to‐cell adhesion with E‐cadherins. The molecular changes observed in these studies suggest that there is an overall thinning of the endothelial layer as well as reduced elasticity in the blood vessel itself predisposing to aneurysmal formation. Given that endothelial changes are known to occur in human intracranial aneurysms, further studies using hemodynamic models of intracranial aneurysms should be used to further identify molecular changes at the cell level of intracranial aneurysms.

CONCLUSION
Given the elevated risk of hemorrhage with both intracranial aneurysm and AVM compared with the general population, accurate animal models are necessary to recapitulate the disease process to advance care in patients who suffer from these vascular anomalies. The risk of hemorrhage in both intracranial aneurysms and bAVMs is influenced by numerous factors such as genetics, medical comorbidities and environmental influences with an overall risk of hemorrhage between 1%–5% annually for each vascular etiology. In spite of the relatively low risk of hemorrhage annually, the significant burden that is caused by intracranial hemorrhage necessitates further investigation.
Clinical decision‐making for the treatment of intracranial aneurysm and AVM is guided by the PHASES score and Spetzler–Martin grading scale, respectively. The PHASES score considers aneurysmal factors such as demographics, history of hypertension, patient age, aneurysm size, prior subarachnoid hemorrhage, and location of the aneurysm. The Spetzler–Martin scale accounts for the size, location, and venous drainage of bAVMs. Each of these scoring scales guides the treatment approach that will be taken when caring for patients with intracranial aneurysm and bAVMs.
When modeling AVM there is often a choice that must be made between evaluating AVM architecture and effectively simulating hemodynamics. Many studies have been conducted in small animals such as rats and mice that are focused on the genetic components of AVM as well as the reconstruction of AVMs via genetic knockout such as the ENG and VEGF method of AVM induction. Additionally, several surgical techniques have been used in rodents to recreate AVMs through carotid‐jugular fistula and xenograft models. Rodents are also easily accessible, economically feasible, and easy to house. Given the versatility of mice and rats in their ability to be easily manipulated genetically and surgically, rodents provide an adequate platform for the study of AVM in a small animal model.
The use of large animal species in the modeling of AVM has also been done, mostly in canine and swine models. Although canines have similar intracerebral vasculature to humans, the presence of the RM structure in swine makes swine a more suitable model platform for AVM. In addition to the RM vasculature, swine also have larger vasculature, which increases ease of assessment and are generally readily available for acquisition. Given these factors, we recommend the use of swine as a large animal platform for the study of AVM (Table 1 and 2).
Summary of Advantages and Drawbacks of Animal Models for AVM
Animal	Advantages	Disadvantages	 	Zebrafish	Ease of housing and reproductionSignificant precedence in genetic studies	Underdeveloped CNS compared to small animal modelsDifficulty of drug administration	 	Rodent	Low cost and ethically acceptableAllow for a range of studies to be conducted (genetic, surgical)Easily bred compared with other animalsXenografting allows for AVM structure recapitulation	Small size presents difficulty when operatingSmall size limits blood flow through AV fistula, often requires additional modifications (ie, occlusion of surrounding vessels)Do not have RM, requires more aggressive intervention to mimic AVM nidus	 	Swine	Contain RMLarge vessel size allows for easier operation and increased blood flow across fistulaRelatively ethically acceptance and readily available	RM is arterial to arterial, lack venous component of AVMPrevious models regarded as complex and expensive	 	Ovine	Demonstrated feasibility, less costly than previous swine modelContain RM	Not used as frequently as swineLogistical barriers in distribution and transportationRM is arterial to arterial, lack venous component of AVM	 	Canine	Similar cerebrovascular anatomy and hemodynamic profile to humansRecapitulates ischemia and hemorrhage in AVM	Higher cost and less ethically acceptableRegarded as technically complex modelHigh vessel tortuosity	 	NHP	Cerebrovascular anatomy similar to humans	Significant ethical and monetary costHighly specialized facilities required
AVM indicates arteriovenous malformation; CNS, central nervous system; NHP, nonhuman primate; and RM, rete mirabile.
Summary of Advantages and Drawbacks of Animal Models for Aneurysm
Animal	Advantages	Disadvantages	 	Rodent	Low cost and ethically acceptableRelatively brief time period for aneurysm inductionEasier to evaluate the histological and morphological changes of vasculature in aneurysm formation	Small vasculature impedes the ability to test endovascular treatmentsDifficulty in the creation of intracranial aneurysms due to small size of vasculature and limited intracranial access for manipulation	 	Rabbit	Low cost and ethically acceptableSimilar formation and hemodynamics as in humansLarge amount of aneurysm induction options	Small vasculature impedes the ability to test endovascular treatments	 	Swine	Low cost and ethically acceptablePotential to use endovascular surgical techniques	Models are still in development	 	Canine	Similar cerebrovascular anatomy and hemodynamic profile to humansClinically applicable model of aneurysm confirmed by angiography	Higher cost and less ethically acceptable
Aneurysm modeling has also been done across a variety of species. Small animal models of aneurysm, most notably mice, typically follow a hemodynamic alteration approach to aneurysm modeling. More recently, genetic models of mice have been established that warrant further evaluation in aneurysm modeling. Overall, mice are best used for the evaluation of histological and pathological changes within the vasculature when studying aneurysm due to the ability to easily harvest tissue samples as well as their low cost and ease of housing.
When studying the use of novel endovascular surgical techniques, large animals are more suitable. We evaluated aneurysm models in both canine and swine, each of which display advantages and disadvantages. Given the large vessel size of swine and the ability to use an elastase model of aneurysm induction, swine are a suitable model of the study of aneurysm in large animals, especially when using an animal model to advance endovascular techniques to progress patient care.
Although this review mainly focused on animal models of AVM and aneurysm, there are many in vitro models of both AVM and aneurysm that hold value in evaluating hemodynamics as well as anatomy within these vascular anomalies. Future studies can be conducted to incorporate these models of AVM and aneurysm into the greater scheme of research use for the advancement of clinical understanding in intracranial vascular pathologies.
Overall, the modeling of AVMs and aneurysms depends largely on the study focus and desired outcome. In this review, we evaluated the use of animal models in AVM and aneurysm research as these vascular etiologies are often linked to the clinical setting. The literature supports that rodents and swine are the best model platforms for both AVM and aneurysm as they each provide several advantages over other animal models previously studied in aneurysm and AVM research.

Sources of Funding
This study was not funded.

Disclosures
The authors do not have any disclosures or conflicts of interest.

Data Availability Statement
The authors declare that all data and supporting materials have been provided within the article.

REFERENCES
Aneurysms associated with brain arteriovenous malformations
Brain arteriovenous malformations
A proposed grading system for arteriovenous malformations
Cerebral aneurysms
Development of the PHASES score for prediction of risk of rupture of intracranial aneurysms: a pooled analysis of six prospective cohort studies
Experimental animal models of arteriovenous malformation: a review
Endovascular management of arteriovenous malformations of the brain
Endovascular minimally invasive treatment of the intracranial aneurysms–first 124 cases
Normal perfusion pressure breakthrough theory
Expression of endothelial adhesion molecules after radiosurgery in an animal model of arteriovenous malformation
Vascular dynamics of an experimental cerebral arteriovenous shunt in the primate
Normal perfusion pressure breakthrough theory: a reappraisal after 35 years
A model of the pathophysiology of cerebral arteriovenous malformations by a carotid‐jugular fistula in the rat
Intracranial venous hypertension and the effects of venous outflow obstruction in a rat model of arteriovenous fistula
A new rat model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion associated with arteriovenous malformations
Revised concept of rete‐like collateral formation: rete mirabile does not exist in humans
Rete mirabile of posterior inferior cerebellar artery: a rare cause of subarachnoid hemorrhage
Endovascular embolization of the swine rete mirabile with Eudragit‐E 100 polymer
Use of a new mixture for embolization of intracranial vascular malformations: preliminary experimental experience
Arteriovenous malformation animal model for radiosurgery: the rete mirabile
Evaluation of three embolic agents in pig rete
An in vivo arteriovenous malformation model in swine: preliminary feasibility and natural history study
An experimental arteriovenous malformation model in swine: anatomic basis and construction technique
Modification of a previously described arteriovenous malformation model in the swine: endovascular and combined surgical/endovascular construction and hemodynamics
The two‐in‐one model: a new variation of the arteriovenous malformation model in swine
Is a swine model of arteriovenous malformation suitable for human extracranial arteriovenous malformation? A preliminary study
A simplified arteriovenous malformation model in sheep: feasibility study
Application of genetically engineered pigs in biomedical research
Experimental pseudo arteriovenous malformation. A model for training and research
Experimental model of intracranial arteriovenous shunting in the acute stage
Animal model for cerebral arteriovenous malformation
Hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: pathophysiology, diagnosis and treatment
Defective flow‐migration coupling causes arteriovenous malformations in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Mutations in the activin receptor–like kinase 1 gene in hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia type 2
Endoglin, a TGF‐β binding protein of endothelial cells, is the gene for hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia type 1
A combined syndrome of juvenile polyposis and hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia associated with mutations in MADH4 (SMAD4)
BMP9 and BMP10: two close vascular quiescence partners that stand out
Interaction between alk1 and blood flow in the development of arteriovenous malformations
Mutational and phenotypic characterization of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Potential role of modifier genes influencing transforming growth factor‐beta1 levels in the development of vascular defects in endoglin heterozygous mice with hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Defective angiogenesis in mice lacking endoglin
Cerebral vascular abnormalities in a murine model of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
Induction of focal angiogenesis through adenoviral vector mediated vascular endothelial cell growth factor gene transfer in the mature mouse brain
VEGF gene delivery to muscle: potential role for vasculogenesis in adults
Efficacy and safety of therapeutic angiogenesis from direct myocardial administration of an adeno‐ viral vector expressing vascular endothelial growth factor 165
Vascular endothelial growth factor induces abnormal microvasculature in the endoglin heterozygous mouse brain
Activin receptor‐like kinase 1 modulates transforming growth factor‐β1 signaling in the regulation of angiogenesis
Real‐time imaging of de novo arteriovenous malformation in a mouse model of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
ALK5‐ and TGFBR2‐independent role of ALK1 in the pathogenesis of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia type 2
Brain arteriovenous malformation modeling, pathogenesis, and novel therapeutic targets
Haploinsufficient lethality and formation of arteriovenous malformations in Notch pathway mutants
Vascular patterning defects associated with expression of activated Notch4 in embryonic endothelium
Notch signaling is required for arterial‐venous differentiation during embryonic vascular development
Sonic hedgehog and vascular endothelial growth factor act upstream of the Notch pathway during arterial endothelial differentiation
Gridlock signalling pathway fashions the first embryonic artery
Advances in the study of KRAS in brain arteriovenous malformation
Selective endothelial hyperactivation of oncogenic KRAS induces brain arteriovenous malformations in mice
Somatic gain of KRAS function in the endothelium is sufficient to cause vascular malformations that require MEK but not PI3K signaling
Sotorasib for vascular malformations associated with KRAS G12C mutation
Testing the angiogenic potential of cerebrovascular malformations by use of a rat cornea model: usefulness and novel assessment of changes over time
A xenograft animal model of human arteriovenous malformations
Inhibition of angiogenesis induced by cerebral arteriovenous malformations using Gamma Knife irradiation
Endovascular treatment increases but Gamma Knife radiosurgery decreases angiogenic activity of arteriovenous malformations
Subarachnoid hemorrhage: who dies, and why?
Elastase‐induced intracranial aneurysms in hypertensive mice
1999 ARRS Executive Council Award. Creation of saccular aneurysms in the rabbit: a model suitable for testing endovascular devices. American Roentgen Ray Society
Elastase‐induced aneurysm in swine: proof of feasibility in a first case. A technical note
Endovascular creation of an in vivo bifurcation aneurysm model in rabbits
Production of experimental aneurysms at a surgically created arterial bifurcation
Saccular aneurysm induction by elastase digestion of the arterial wall: a new animal model
A refined experimental model of fusiform aneurysms in a rabbit carotid artery
Experimentally induced cerebral aneurysms in rats
Mouse model of cerebral aneurysm: experimental induction by renal hypertension and local hemodynamic changes
Experimental carotid ligation followed by aneurysmal formation and other morphological changes in the circle of Willis
Nascent aneurysm formation at the basilar terminus induced by hemodynamics
Contribution of mural and bone marrow‐derived neointimal cells to thrombus organization and wall remodeling in a microsurgical murine saccular aneurysm model
Loss of mural cells leads to wall degeneration, aneurysm growth, and eventual rupture in a rat aneurysm model
Intraluminal cell transplantation prevents growth and rupture in a model of rupture‐prone saccular aneurysms
Experimental production of carotid aneurysms
Thrombosis heralding aneurysmal rupture: an exploration of potential mechanisms in a novel giant swine aneurysm model
A comparative CFD analysis of common carotid fusiform aneurysm in canine models and vertebrobasilar fusiform aneurysm in human patients
Deficiency of endothelium‐specific transcription factor Sox17 induces intracranial aneurysm
Endothelial dysfunction in cerebral aneurysms
Role of vascular endothelial‐cadherin and p120‐catenin in the formation of experimental intracranial aneurysm in animals
The natural history of symptomatic arteriovenous malformations of the brain: a 24‐year follow‐up assessment
Lifelong rupture risk of intracranial aneurysms depends on risk factors: a prospective Finnish cohort study