Transcranial magnetic stimulation as a novel approach to effectively treat musical obsession (stuck song syndrome): a case series and a systematic review of case reports
This is the first case series that demonstrates the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) for the treatment of musical obsessions or stuck song syndrome (SSS), following a systematic review that identified existing treatments. SSS can occur independently, but in literature it is commonly reported as an obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) or major depressive disorder (MDD) symptom. Most people are familiar with earworms, experienced by up to 98% of the western population. Earworms can become severe leading to the SSS diagnosis. SSS is a distressing repetition of involuntary tunes persisting in one’s mind. According to literature, SSS has often been treated using antidepressants which are used to treat MDD and OCD. As TMS has shown a positive therapeutic effect for psychiatric disorders particularly MDD and OCD, we hypothesized that TMS could be an effective treatment that reduces symptoms of patients with SSS. We present two cases of TMS treatment contributing to a reduction in symptoms of SSS. We also aim to provide a systematic review of cases where SSS has been described and compare the pharmacological or psychotherapeutic treatments used with our novel TMS interventions for SSS. This report highlights some limitations, including patient’s psychiatric comorbidities and treatment protocol changes, which affect the findings generalizability. Despite these limitations, TMS appears promising as a treatment for SSS due to the observed effectiveness in reducing SSS symptoms and minimal side effects especially in medication-resistant cases.

Introduction
Musical obsessions or stuck song syndrome (SSS) are distressing experiences of repeating tunes that occur involuntarily and persist in one’s mind. Though musical obsessions were not mentioned in the DSM-5, they were often described in literature as symptoms related to obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) or major depressive disorder (MDD). SSS could also occur independently.
Comparison of psychiatric terms related to SSS
Criteria/condition	Earworms	SSS (musical obsessions)	Musical hallucinations	 	Perceptual experience	Internal perception	Internal perception	Auditory hallucination	 	Distress/disruption to daily life	Minimal	Moderate/severe—associated with compulsive behaviors	Variable	 	Requiring/existing treatment	Self-limiting	Cognitive behavioural therapy, antidepressants	Treating the underlying cause
SSS is often confused with earworms, characterized by the repetitive loop of involuntary musical imagery, frequently experienced by individuals in whose lives music is highly involved. When earworms reach a clinical level of severity, they give rise to anxiety, and OCD-like symptoms and are classified as musical obsessions or SSS. SSS also differs from musical hallucinations which are experienced as auditory perceptions of music inside or outside an individual’s head. See Table 1 below for a comparison of all these psychiatric terminologies.
The underlying causes of SSS remain unknown, with theories suggesting that these persistent tunes may stem from emotional triggers, associations, or exposure melodies. Regarding association, some patients experience repetitive tunes because they associate them with certain events, people, or common activities from their life experiences. Mainstream pharmacological treatments for SSS have been antidepressants which are used to treat MDD and OCD, e.g. selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and clomipramine. Nevertheless, SSS remains a difficult-to-treat condition, and being resistant to at least one antidepressant is common.
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) treatment has demonstrated promise as a therapeutic intervention for psychiatric disorders, especially MDD and OCD, both approved by the FDA. TMS is considered to reduce OCD and MDD symptoms by modulating neural circuits associated with these disorders. An example is the prefrontal cortex (PFC) and it’s functional connectivity with other areas of the brain.
Due to the effectiveness of TMS in MDD and OCD, we hypothesized that TMS may hold promise as a safe and effective treatment for SSS. In this case series, we present two patients with SSS comorbid with MDD and OCD who did not respond to antidepressant medications and were subsequently treated with TMS treatment. These are the first reported cases in which TMS treatment contributed to a reduction in SSS symptoms. Moreover, we review past SSS cases, comparing the treatments used, such as pharmacology or psychotherapy, with our new TMS approach.

Methods

Eligibility criteria
The inclusion criteria for this systematic review are as follows: patients diagnosed with stuck song syndrome. The intervention will include any treatments aimed at addressing the SSS condition. A comparison group is optional for inclusion in the review. The primary outcome of interest is the reduction of SSS symptoms. A secondary outcome will be the reduction of psychiatric symptoms associated with SSS. The type of studies that researchers prioritized were original studies, trials, case reports, and case studies focusing on subjects who were diagnosed or had symptoms of stuck song syndrome or musical obsessions.
Exclusion Criteria: (1) Studies were not primary or case reports. (2) Studies described a treatment program but not the SSS condition. (3) Studies did not include SSS. (4) Studies did not provide adequate detail to evaluate (5) No full text available.

Search strategy
This systematic review used the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement.
Studies were identified from PubMed, BASE, and Research Gate. The key search terms were: (“Stuck song syndrome” OR “Musical obsession*”) AND (“Transcranial magnetic stimulation” OR “Psychotherapy” OR “Antidepressant*” OR “treatment*”).

Study selection and data extraction
Critical appraisal of utilized case reports (JBI Critical Appraisal Checklist for case reports). Studies in order as relates to Table 2
Summary of SSS single case reports and respective treatments
References	Age (Sex)	Diagnosis	Duration of SSS (years)	Past treatments	Last treatment	Pre-treatment scales	Post-treatment scales	 	Yoshimura et al. 	34 (F)	SSSMajor depression	NR	Escitalopram (20 mg/day)	Vortioxetine (20 mg/day)	HAM-D = 24Y-BOCS = 10	HAM-D = 2Y-BOCS = 3	 	Orjuela-Rojas et al. 	32 (F)	SSSBulimia nervosa	12	Fluvoxamine (200 mg/day)Eszopiclone (3 mg/day)Paroxetine (50 mg/day)	Fluoxetine (60 mg/day)	Y-BOCS = 33BDI = 8HAM-A = 31	Y-BOCS = 13HAM-A = 16	 	Naskar et al. 	25(M)	SSSOCDMDD	15	Escitalopram (20 mg/day)DesvenlafaxineClomipramineFluvoxamineRisperidone	Escitalopram (40 mg/day)Behavior therapy	HAM-A = 23HAM-D = 20Y-BOCS = 26	HAM-A = 11HAM-D = 8Y-BOCS = 9	 	Marsanic et al. 	17 (F)	SSSAnxiety disorderDepersonalization disorderOCD	NR	Ziprasidone (160 mg/day)Olanzapine (20 mg/day)Fluphenazine (2.5 mg/day)Clozapine (75 mg/day)	Fluvoxamine (300 mg/day)	Y-BOCS = 25	Y-BOCS = 0	 	Liikkanen and Raaska 	36 (F)	SSSSchizophrenia	NR	Risperidone (4 mg/day)Olanzapine (10 mg/day)Fluoxetine (20 mg/day)Fluvoxamine (50 mg/day)Escitalopram (10 mg/day)	Clozapine 75 mg/dayCBT	NR	NR	 	Charron and Ho 	32 (F)	SSSBulimia nervosa	12	Fluvoxamine (200 mg/day)Paroxetine (50 mg/day)	Fluoxetine (60 mg/day)CBT	Y-BOCS = 33HAM-D = 31	Y-BOCS = 13
NR Not reported, HAM-D Hamilton depression rating scale, HAM-A Hamilton anxiety rating scale, Y-BOCS Yale-brown obsessive compulsive scale, BDI Beck depression inventory
The data extraction process was conducted independently, by two investigators. Information obtained from the studies included the sample size, age, sex, diagnosis, SSS duration, SSS symptom severity before and after treatment, and the form of treatment used in each study. One study did not report symptom severity before or after treatment. The quality of the study was evaluated using a JBI Manual for Evidence and Synthesis Case Study Appraisal Checklist. The Critical appraisal checklist includes 8 items that assess each study’s procedural quality and identify the measure to which a study has addressed the possibility of bias in analysis, design, and conduct. All studies subjected to the checklist were included based on evaluation by both researchers with all case studies reporting on SSS or Musical obsession and the treatment modalities utilized (Fig. 1).

Results

Study selection
Flowchart of literature search according to PRISMA
A total of 117 records were identified through searching of electronic databases. (Fig. 2 for the PRISMA flow diagram). 16 duplicate records were removed, and 7 were excluded due to inaccessible full texts. The full texts of 94 studies were examined for eligibility with 6 studies meeting the inclusion criteria for review. Studies were often excluded for not including subjects experiencing musical obsessions/SSS. Details of the included studies are described in Table 2.
Figure 2 demonstrates a PRISMA diagram describing the results of the search strategy and reasons for exclusions. Table 2 summarizes all the eligible publications according to the inclusion criteria in this systematic review.

Study characteristics
All 6 studies were published between 2011 and 2021 in English. All included records were single case reports of varying individuals of age, gender, race, and comorbid illnesses who suffered from SSS. All studies explored SSS symptoms and their response to SSRIs or CBT, all utilized Y-BOCS for symptom severity, except for one study, which did not also report any other scales before or after treatment. Only 2 of 6 studies reported the presence of side effects, which were minimal. Some common medication side effects included increased distress and anxiety during an SSS episode. Three studies did not report the duration of SSS.

Case series
To our knowledge, using neuromodulation treatments for SSS has never been reported. In this case series, we treated one male and one female patient using TMS.

Patient A
Patient A was a 48-year-old male firefighter with a history of MDD and PTSD, both diagnosed at 36 years old. His family history includes a sister who also suffered from PTSD and MDD. Approximately 3 months before his presentation to our clinic, the patient began to experience symptoms of SSS accompanied by OCD, MDD, sleep disturbances, and anxiety. The musical tunes were either catchy jingles or melodies he had recently heard. Concurrently, he also experienced increased intrusive obsessive thoughts related to his PTSD and previous fire incidents. Physical examination did not reveal any neurological abnormalities. Blood tests including complete blood count, kidney, liver, and thyroid function tests were normal. A computerized tomography scan of the brain was also normal.
He was prescribed zopiclone, which improved his sleep; however, he expressed reluctance to continue taking any medications due to concerns about side effects and dependency. Consequently, he chose TMS as an alternative treatment, as it did not carry the same concerns. Before starting the TMS treatment, he rated the severity of the intrusive songs at 9 out of 10 on a visual analogue scale (VAS), with those persisting for 16 h each day. He began a regimen of daily TMS sessions, commencing with the intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS) protocol set at 90% of the motor threshold (total pulse 600, 3 pulses at 50 Hz in bursts, burst frequency 5 Hz, intertrain interval 8 s), targeting the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (L-DLPFC). The targeting was determined by the beam-F3 method. After 10 iTBS treatments, he was still significantly distressed. The total number of pulses per session was increased to 1800/session, with other parameters unchanged, for the 20 remaining treatments. The patient adapted well to the latter protocol, and improvements were observed over time.
Patient A’s psychometric progress over 6 weeks of TMS treatment (BAI Beck Anxiety Inventory, BDI Beck Depression Inventory, PSS PTSD Symptoms Scale, VAS for SSS Visual Analog Scale for Stuck Song Syndrome, Y-BOCS Yale-Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale)
The patient’s scores on all psychometric scales decreased from the start of treatments till the 30th TMS session (see Fig. 3). Specifically, the severity of his SSS symptoms at the end of treatment decreased to 2 out of 10, with their duration reduced to 1–2 h per day. Alongside the reduced intensity and frequency of SSS symptoms, there were also improvements in OCD, MDD, PTSD, and anxiety symptoms.

Patient B
Patient B (They/Them) was a 29-year-old female living with their partner. Since they were young, they showed signs of developmental challenges. At the age of six, they were diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder. MDD was diagnosed during their teenage years. As their life progressed, their depressive episodes became more pronounced, with increasing severity, longer durations, and they had more suicidal ideations. Their family has both a history of bipolar disorder, alcohol and cocaine addiction.
Since their teenage years, they also started to experience SSS. It was usual for them to hear part of a song, and the rest would play in their mind. This could persist for hours, days, or even weeks. In the past, these stuck songs were triggered by hearing music on a radio or someone singing. They felt so distressed and decided to wear noise-cancellation headphones to avoid these, but they could still hear tunes in their head without external triggers.
Patient B was prescribed various medications throughout their 20’s notably sertraline causing binge eating. Fluoxetine heightened anxiety and triggered binge eating, and various other medications that provided no positive results such as venlafaxine and lithium. Patient B presented at our clinic for TMS treatment for anxiety, MDD, and OCD. Before starting the TMS treatment, they rated the severity of the SSS at 7 out of 10. They began a regimen of daily TMS sessions, commencing with the iTBS protocol set at 90% of the motor threshold (total pulse 1800, 3 pulses at 50 Hz in bursts, burst frequency 5 Hz, intertrain interval 8 s), targeting the L-DLPFC.
Patient B’s psychometric progression over 6 weeks of TMS treatment (BAI Beck Anxiety Inventory, BDI Beck Depression Inventory, VAS for SSS Visual Analog Scale for Stuck Song Syndrome, Y-BOCS Yale-Brown Obsessive–Compulsive Scale)
The patient’s scores on all psychometric scales decreased from the start of treatments till the 30th TMS session (see Fig. 4). Specifically, the patient rated the severity of their SSS symptoms at the end of treatment as 3 out of 10. Alongside the reduced intensity and frequency of SSS symptoms, there were further improvements in OCD, MDD, and anxiety symptoms.

Discussion
This review examined SSS cases found in the literature and compared TMS with other available treatment options for SSS. Due to the rarity of SSS, only 6 case reports were identified. All studies reported participants experiencing SSS and receiving some forms of pharmacotherapy. Besides SSS, each subject had at least one comorbid psychiatric condition, some of which were treated at the same time as the SSS.
In previous case reports, several medications were used as forms of treatment to reduce SSS symptoms for patients. They used numerous SSRIs due to patients not responding to medications, or experiencing side effects. Fluvoxamine was the most commonly used antidepressant. Fluvoxamine reduced the frequency of SSS symptoms, though the intensity remained the same. However, it was ineffective in one of the case reports. Intriguingly, clozapine increased the frequency and intensity of SSS. Also, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a form of treatment besides medication that was used in treating SSS in two patients.
This is the first case series to attempt treating SSS with TMS. Previous case studies involving patients who experienced SSS often revealed associations with MDD and/or OCD. Although TMS has been a well-recognized effective treatment for medication-resistant MDD and OCD, there have not been any reports documenting the specific use of TMS in SSS as a treatment modality.
In the present neuromodulation-based case series, two patients were treated with TMS. Both patients showed overall improvement. Patient A’s psychometric scores decreased over the six weeks (Fig. 3). In patient B, all psychometric scales decreased from week 1 to week 3, with depressive and anxiety symptoms decreased more prominently than OC symptoms; however, they all increased slightly in week 6 (Fig. 4). Based on the patient B’s history, the increase in these three scales might be correlated to external stressors at that time. However, the rebound of symptoms could also be the natural progression of the condition. Although the improvement in OC symptoms was quite mild and there was a slight rebound in both mood and OCD symptoms towards the end of the treatment, SSS symptoms continued to decrease. This demonstrated that SSS symptoms do not necessarily correspond to the severity of mood or OCD symptoms, but this needs to be confirmed by a larger study.
While the neurobiology of SSS remains largely unclear, it is frequently comorbid with OCD and may also be associated with conditions such as schizophrenia, brain injury, or hearing loss. Although no specific neurobiological pathology has been identified for SSS, studies on related phenomena like involuntary musical imagery (INMI) provide insights into potential mechanisms. INMI has been linked to regions in the auditory cortex, including Heschl’s Gyrus and the right inferior frontal gyrus, associated with auditory perception, musical imagery, and pitch memory. It also involves areas within the default mode network (DMN), such as the left angular gyrus, which are tied to introspection, mind-wandering, and self-referential processing—functions often overactive in OCD and depression. TMS treatments to the DLPFC may alleviate SSS symptoms by enhancing top-down cognitive control and normalizing DMN connectivity. These mechanisms suggest that TMS may influence brain networks like the DMN and frontoparietal network, potentially restoring disrupted cortico-subcortical and cortico-cortical connections implicated in SSS.
This study has various limitations. First, both patients within the case series had multiple psychiatric comorbidities, which could have affected their SSS in some ways. The case series also only includes two patients, which limits generalizability. Due to patient A’s lack of response in the initial treatment phase, modifications were made to the original treatment protocol, these changes raise concerns about the protocol standardization. These factors could raise a question of the generalizability of the protocol. It was not possible to examine whether SSS symptoms decreased independently, or the amelioration of SSS symptoms promoted the reduction of other symptoms, or that other symptoms improvement influenced the attrition of SSS. In order minimize these limitations in the future, it would crucial to maintain the same protocol throughout the whole treatment to keep the protocols standardized. Given TMS’s minimal side effects and lack of expected dependency, TMS presents as a potential alternative treatment modality for SSS.
The actual prevalence of SSS may be higher than reported due to underdiagnosis, highlighting the need for further research into its epidemiology and neurobiology. The novelty and scale of this exploratory study presents a necessity for larger studies to confirm these findings.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Julie Niyitegeka and Olivia Haysey contributed equally to this work.

Author contributions
JN and OH contributed equally to the study: conducted the systematic review and prepared the manuscript. KA contributed to the manuscript’s conceptualization, revision, and figures preparation. CH contributed to the conceptualization, revision of the manuscript, and supervision. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Musical obsessions: a comprehensive review of neglected clinical phenomena
The stuck song syndrome: a case of musical obsessions
Successful suppression of musical hallucinations with low-frequency rTMS of the left temporo-parietal junction: a case report
Major depression with musical obsession treated with vortioxetine: a case report
A systematic review of scientific studies and case reports on music and obsessive-compulsive disorder
Durability of the antidepressant effect of the high-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) In the absence of maintenance treatment in major depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 16 double-blind, randomized, sham-controlled trials
Real-world efficacy of deep TMS for obsessive-compulsive disorder: post-marketing data collected from twenty-two clinical sites
Efficacy of non-invasive brain stimulation for refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
High-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation accelerates and enhances the clinical response to antidepressants in major depression: a meta-analysis of randomized, double-blind, and sham-controlled trials
Obsessions and musical hallucinations: the neurobiology underlying a differential diagnosis
‘Doctor, I Hear Music’: a brief review about musical hallucinations
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement
Treatment of anxiety from musical obsessions with a cognitive behaviour therapy tool
‘Radio Inside my head’: a curious case of early onset ‘stuck song syndrome’ or obsessive-compulsive disorder with predominant musical obsession
Misdiagnosis and exacerbation of unusual obsessive-compulsive disorder presentation with risperidone and clozapine in an adolescent girl—a case report
Stuck song syndrome: a case of obsessive-compulsive disorder presenting with musical obsessions
Tunes stuck in your brain: the frequency and affective evaluation of involuntary musical imagery correlate with cortical structure
Cerebral substrates of musical imagery
Neuronal correlates of perception, imagery, and memory for familiar tunes
Impaired pitch perception and memory in congenital amusia: the deficit starts in the auditory cortex
Age-related differences in default-mode network connectivity in response to intermittent theta-burst stimulation and its relationships with maintained cognition and brain integrity in healthy aging
An improved neuroanatomical model of the default-mode network reconciles previous neuroimaging and neuropathological findings