Direct-fed Microbials (DFM) and Poultry Genomics: A Synergistic Approach to Sustainable Antibiotic Free Farming
Improper usage of antibiotics in poultry production is a great threat to the ecosystem because their residues can enter into the food chain or leach into soil or water systems and increase antibiotic resistance risks. Hence, direct-fed microbials (DFMs) have gained recognition as a sustainable and viable alternative to antibiotics in poultry production, capitalizing on the relationship between microbial genetics, host genomics, and gut microbiota. This review delves into the genetic and host genomic mechanisms through DFMs effects including the enhancement of nutrient metabolism, modulation of gut microbiota and strengthening of the host immunity. The revolution of multi-omics has participated in the identification of probiotic strains with desirable traits and revealed their impact on host gene expression, particularly in genes related to intestinal health, such as tight junction proteins and mucins. Furthermore, the review summarizes the benefits of using DFMs in poultry production, the factors affecting their efficacy and their challenges and limitations. Future research integrating host and microbial genomics, along with precision microbiome engineering, holds promise for maximizing the potential of DFMs in advancing sustainable poultry farming practices.

Introduction
The historical context of the evolution of DFMs in animal nutrition, focusing on poultry
Beneficial living microorganisms can be supplemented in poultry feeds to improve digestive health which is called Direct-Fed Microbials (DFMs) or probiotics. Now, DFMs have become widespread in poultry production as a sustainable alternative to antibiotics. Their effects are reflected in nutritional consumption, growth rates, egg production, and intestinal health which are the subject of ongoing research. DFMs have numerous roles focusing on gut health, immunological modulation, nutritional utilization, and pathogen control, in addition to decreasing antibiotics usage and minimizing environmental effects. Hence, they provide a sustainable and natural method to enhance animal welfare and productivity. During the past few decades, increasing the demand for sustainability in addition to advances in animal health and microbiology sciences participated in the development of using DFMs in the nutrition of animals, particularly in poultry (Fig. 1). Before the 1950 s, macronutrients and energy sources were the main factors in animal nutrition. Neish stated that not many people agreed that microbes might be involved in digestive health. During the 1950 s and 1960 s, antibiotics were first applied in animal feed to enhance growth and prevent diseases such as penicillin and chlortetracycline which became popular and widespread in poultry and livestock industries. The probiotic term was first coined in 1965 by Lilly and Stillwell, referring to substances synthesized by one microorganism that facilitate the growth of another organism. Early studies in the 1960 s and 1970 s started to explore the potential for beneficial microorganisms (bacteria, yeast) to enhance gut health and reduce intestinal diseases in poultry. Since the late 1980 s, an enormous increase in interest in products depending on yeast and/or filamentous fungi which enhance gut functions as probiotics. During the 1990 s, using of DFMs expanded and the use of DFMs became more common in commercial poultry farming. By the early 2000 s, DFMs were widely accepted in many countries as safe and effective feed additives. The European Union, for example, started to regulate probiotics as a"zootechnical additive"to improve animal performance and health. From the 2010 s till now, the poultry industry has increasingly focused on sustainability. Furthermore, advances in multi-omics technology, including the sequencing of microbial genomes, metagenomics, nutrigenomics, proteomics and metabolomics, enabled more precise identification and enhancement of probiotic strains and studied their pathways. This led to the improvement of more effective and targeted probiotics for poultry. This review proposes the importance of DFMs utilization as alternatives to antibiotics and focuses on their genetic mechanisms and effects on poultry.

Types of Direct-fed Microbials (DFMs) Used in Poultry
The utilization of probiotics in poultry has exhibited a consistent increase yearly, attributable to the growing need for antibiotic-free poultry and the extensive body of research supporting their benefits. In 2023, the poultry probiotics market was valued at about 111.73 million dollars and is expected to elevate to 6.4% at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) between 2024 to 2032. In poultry production, DFMs include numerous living microorganisms, i.e. bacteria, yeasts, and fungi, that preserve a healthy digestive system, herewith enhancing the poultry’s overall health and growth performance. These microorganisms can be categorized into types depending on their genus, species, and functional traits. Probiotics for poultry are most frequently utilized from the following genera: Bifidobacterium, Lactococcus, Lactobacillus, Bacillus, Streptococcus, and yeasts like Candida and Saccharomyces. Each genus has distinct modes of action. For example, Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) produce lactic acid, which inhibits pathogen growth by reducing the gut pH, participating in overall gut health and enhancing the beneficial microbiota growth. As well as Bacillus species are perfect for use in animal feed because of their strong resistance to environmental stressors such as heat and desiccation. Furthermore, yeasts are frequently employed as DFMs by improving nutritional absorption and generating beneficial metabolites, such as B vitamins.
Since Enterococcus strains can withstand gut acidity (pH of 9.6) and preserve a balanced microbiota, they considerably exist in poultry probiotics. Additionally, the enhancement of Bifidobacterium species growth through the gut microbiota of the host that supplies carbon sources, which in turn aid in regulating pathogenic bacteria and sustaining a balanced intenstinal ecosystem. Furthermore, fungi are utilized as DFMs in poultry production by elevating the colonization of beneficial bacteria, decreasing the colonization of enteric bacteria and producing enzymes which enhance feed digestibility and disease resistance.

Mechanisms of Action
The mechanisms of action of DFMs used in poultry
DFMs have a variety of mechanisms of action that are inter-connected as shown in (Fig. 2). DFMs provide comprehensive benefits to poultry. Their ability to positively influence gut health and overall performance makes them a valuable alternative to antibiotics in sustainable poultry production systems.
Beneficial microbes in DFMs outcompete pathogenic microbes for attachment sites and nutrients in the gut. DFMs colonize gut surfaces, forming a protective barrier. They consume nutrients that would otherwise support pathogen growth like Salmonella, Clostridium perfringens, and Escherichia coli. Also, specific probiotic strains can provide metabolites and are characterized to decrease the numbers of E. coli, Pseudomonas spp. and Salmonella spp., through decreasing pH, antibacterial agents’ potentiation, and permeabilization of the cell membrane. Likewise, DFMs supply other antimicrobial compounds, including carbon dioxide, diacetyl, reuterin, bacteriocins, hydrogen peroxide, and acetaldehyde, which have been characterized to mitigate pathogens and have anti-inflammatory properties. DFMs strengthen the gut epithelial lining, preventing pathogen invasion and leakage of toxins. Ban and Guan reported that DFMs help establish and maintain a balanced gut microbiome. Notably, probiotics can increase the microbial enzymes and activate the host enzymes respectively. Amylopectin is hydrolyzed by Lactobacillus species to produce glucose, maltose, and maltotriose. Moreover, Bacillus coagulans NJ0516 increased the amylase activity in the broiler’s duodenum. Cheng et al. and Jha et al. demonstrated that B. licheniformis and L. bulgaricus elevated the proteins, starch, and amino acids digestibility. Similarly, in infected hens with Salmonella Typhimurium, Pediococcus acidilactici conjugated with butyric acid and enhanced amylase activity. Some DFMs synthesize essential nutrients that poultry cannot produce themselves. Consequently, the alternations in microbial populations within the gastrointestinal tract (GIT) induced by probiotics enhance the production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) and facilitate immunomodulation, thereby improving energy metabolism as well. Additionally, there are vitamins produced in the gut through different probiotics, including thiamin, B12, and folate. Some DFMs can bind and neutralize harmful substances, i.e. heavy metals, or mycotoxins in the gut. By decreasing cytokine production and preventing intestinal infections, a DFM may be incorporated during heat stress to decrease the stress response and boost overall performance and survivability.

Benefits of Direct-fed Microbials (DFMs) in Poultry Production
DFMs offer a wide range of benefits in poultry production. Using DFMs has become an increasingly important part of poultry management. A high daily feed intake, and body weight gain (BWG) are often related to improvements in growth performance, meat quality, laying performance, health and disease resistance, stress reduction and antibiotic-free poultry products. Sarsour et al. reported the significance of using DFMs in poultry production, noting that DFMs reduce cloacal temperature and panting behavior during heat stress in hot climates. These effects are linked to improved regulation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, resulting in lower corticosterone levels in the blood, reduced stress responses, and increased ileal energy digestibility.
The incorporation of probiotics with broilers’ feed has been shown to boost production performance by increasing daily feed intake, calcium and nitrogen retention, and reducing the length of the intestine. The hypothesis that probiotics elevate the intestinal fermentation rate and stimulate SCFAs synthesis has been proposed, which serve as essential nutrients for intestinal epithelial cells, subsequently resulting in improved mineral assimilation. Abd El‐Hack et al. conducted a study examining the commercial multi-strain probiotics effects on performance and egg quality. The findings revealed that administration with probiotics led to significant improvements in various parameters associated with egg production, including the weight and size of the egg, albumin and yolk weight, as well as eggshell thickness and strength, in comparison to the control group.
Moreover, increased villus height, reduced crypt depth, and a higher villus height-to-crypt depth (VH:CD) ratio are key indicators of enhanced intestinal morphology, reflecting an expanded surface area that supports improved nutrient absorption. Similarly, the goblet cell numbers present in the intestinal villi and crypts act as another marker of intestine health, due to these cells being involved in mucin production and prevent the adhesion of harmful pathogens to the intestinal epithelium. The supplementation of Lactobacillus salivarius and Lactobacillus reuteri , Pediococcus acidilactici, Lactobacillus acidophilus, Lactobacillus casei, Enterococcus faecium and Bifidobacterium thermophilum mixture, Bacillus subtilis, Bacillus licheniformis, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae mixture, Bacilluscoagulans , and Propionibacterium acidipropionici  were examined in laying hens to record the histomorphological alterations induced by probiotics. These results showed a positive effect on the histomorphological parameters of the small intestinal villi, proved by boosting both villus height and the ratio of villus height to crypt depth, which is related to boosting intestinal nutrient uptake and improving intestinal architecture. Meat quality can be improved by probiotics. Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been demonstrated to have the ability to raise ghrelin, as well as support the metabolism and absorption of fatty acids, maintain glucose uptake, and increase the levels of muscular calcium, all of which improve the softness of the meat. Huang et al., put out a different explanation, arguing that calcium ions in muscles regulate calpain activity and modify the kind of muscle fiber, which impacts meat quality and enhances fat and metabolism. The enhancement of protein deposition and muscle fat affects the flavor, water and cooking loss, and tenderness of meat. Furthermore, using DFMs provides us with antibiotic-free poultry production. Additionally, the reduction of mortality of poultry fed diet containing DFMs and better overall profits on returns from their production, so it is more economical to rear poultry on DFMs diet.

Factors Affecting the Efficacy of Direct-fed Microbials (DFMs)
Although some studies highlighted the beneficial effects of probiotics supplementation on poultry production, others failed to confirm these positive effects. The existence of contradictory results can be attributed to numerous factors such as the certain probiotic strain used, the implemented hygienic measures, the probiotic dosage, and also the age, breed, and poultry species, the inoculation level of threatening pathogens, and other various external factors. Many studies were carried out to identify the optimal probiotic dosage and its potential advantages. However, setting definitive recommendations remains an obstacle due to the differences in dietary practices, and stress levels noticed in various settings. More studies are required to identify the ultimate dosage of single- or multi-strain probiotics and to assess their effects in birds exhibiting intestinal disorders and compromised gut health. Each strain has its own preventive effect so many commercial products have multi-strain probiotics. Multi-species probiotics have synergistic effects by operating on distinct areas and having various action modes. The basic criteria for selecting probiotic strains lie in adherence ability to the gastrointestinal mucosa, gastrointestinal conditions tolerance, and the pathogen's competitive exclusion. Additionally, their capability to withstand the conditions of manufacturing, transportation, storage, and application processes, as well as their overall viability are important selection criteria. Furthermore, the climate is a critical factor that affects poultry performance and alters the gut microbiota. Amplicon metagenome studies have reported that poultry became more susceptible to E. coli infections and enhanced the colonization of the intestine by Salmonella according to climatic conditions. Farm climate depending on geographic location significantly affects the intestinal microbiota. Unfavorable environmental conditions can lead to reduced poultry production, highlighting the significance of climate-related challenges management to maintain poultry health and performance. Although the strain of microorganisms was used, environmental factors such as the intensity and length of heat exposure, relative humidity, size, and the age of the broilers could all affect this reaction, DFM administration may change HS responses.
The immune system and gastrointestinal tract development are impacted by the comparatively high levels of sanitation in poultry production. Due to bacterial exposure from different environmental sources, i.e. transport crates, people handling the chicks, initial feed, and litter inside the poultry house, the high hygiene levels produce a variable intestinal microbiota. This intestinal bacterial community is formed in a rather random manner and exhibits significant heterogeneity. The intestinal morphology of chickens kept in isolators changed, showing shorter villi, more shallow crypts, and less formation of acidic mucus, which could result in a changing composition of the microbiota.
The cage effect in poultry is linked to their coprophagic behavior, where they consume feces, leading to the uncontrolled intake of particles and feathers that can influence the intestinal microbiota. Poultry raised on organic farms show higher levels of Clostridium perfringens in the ileum and cecum compared to those on conventional farms. This discrepancy might result from conventional feed’s usage of salinomycin, an antibiotic coccidiostat that modifies microbial composition. Organic poultry also exhibits lower Enterobacteriaceae levels and higher Lactobacilli in the ileum, while free-range poultry shows a greater abundance of bacteria linked to amino acid and glycan metabolism in the ceca. The flock's collective microbiota significantly impacts individual poultry performance and gut bacterial communities.

The Genetic Basis of Host-Microbe Interactions
Among all birds, chickens constitute the major important economic value all over the world through a global production of eggs by around 87 million metric tons in 2022. As well as, by 2024, global meat production is predicted to grow to around 104.2 million metric tons. So, it is necessary to study its genetic makeup and variations of its mutant phenotypes that led to different characteristics including performance, egg weight, mortality, carcass weight and growth rate.
In 2003, the chicken genome started at Washington University which consisted of ∼1.2 billion-bp. In 2004, the deposition of the first draft genome sequence was carried out into free public databases. A female red junglefowl G. g. gallus was the selected bird for genome sequencing, the wild ancestor to the domestic chicken G. gallus domesticus and an estimated 20,000–23,000 genes arranged in 39 pairs of chromosomes which are the origin of hereditary divided into 38 pairs of autosomes that show distinctive features of poultry, while only one pair of sex chromosome (Z and W) that determine the gender of offspring either female or male. This draft genome sequence offers valuable insights into vertebrate genome evolution and contributes to the enhancement of mammalian genome annotation, genome architecture and molecular evolution. Moreover, the chicken serves as the main bird model in the lab and is an essential model system for developmental biology research as well as studies pertaining to immunology, virology and oncogenesis. Additionally, the genome sequencing of the chicken will make it easier to map quantitative trait loci related to this important agricultural animal. Hence, large-scale genome research has gained prominence. Consequently, a study conducted as part of the Genome-Wide Association Study (GWAS) identified numerous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP). As well as several regions associated with selection signatures were also detected, indicating that these loci in native chicken breeds may be utilized to pinpoint the causative genes and mutations involved in enhancing the related traits of meat and egg.
It is interesting to know how host genes affect DFMs which are not clearly enough. The relationship of host genetics with the structure of the microbiota community in their gut indicates that specific genes control the existence of different species of microbes such as certain species of Methanobacterium are strongly associated with the two genetic loci (rs15142709 and rs15142674)..The lck/yes-related novel tyrosine kinase (LYN) and pleiomorphic adenoma gene 1 (PLAG1), which are both involved in cell growth and differentiation, contain these loci. Further supporting the diversity in the community structure of the gut microbiota by about 21% is the locus rs16775833, which is found within the double sex and mab-3-related transcription factor (DMRT) gene. These findings have suggested that host genetics influences the gut microbiota's structure in birds, and it is vital to investigate its various functions and effects on poultry.
During the DFMs administration to food-producing animals, the host genetic factors and interactions between the host and environmental factors should be taken into consideration. It was proposed both that environmental and host genetic factors may determine the GIT microbiome individuality. Contemporary results have shown the impact of host genetic factors on individualized rumen microbiomes in cattle. Conversely, the GIT microbial community was shown to be primarily unaffected by host genetics, as evidenced by SNPs in chickens. However, heritable taxa were noted, some of which are linked to SNPs in cattle. Hence, more thorough research is needed to determine how environmental factors (like diet and barn) and genetic factors (like sex and breed) contributed to the variations in the GIT microbiomes of individual hosts and how these variations impact the efficacy of DMF use in food-producing animals.
Exploring the genetic network: lactobacillus species and their gene-level interactions
Species name	Genes involved	Certain function	References	 	L. reuteri	Inu, gtfA, xylA, met	Active metabolism(Carbohydrate and protein metabolism)		 	lr1516, dltA, dps, clpL, clpE, msrB, Lr1265, Lr1584	Stress resistance(Cell envelope, Protection, repair DNA and proteins, Active removal of stressors)		 	luxS	Probiotic actions(Antipathogenic effects)		 	lsp	Adhesion(Cell surface proteins)		 	L. johnsonii	LJ1654-LJ1656, prtP (LJ1840)	Active metabolism(Carbohydrate and protein metabolism)		 	LJ0056, LJ1147, LJ1413	Stress resistance(Active removal of stressors)		 	LJ1680	Probiotic actions(Immunomodulation)		 	LJ1476	Adhesion(Cell surface proteins)		 	L. plantarum	pts14 C	Active metabolism(Carbohydrate metabolism)		 	clpC, copA, bsh1	Stress resistance(Protection, repair DNA and proteins, Active removal of stressors)		 	dltB	Probiotic actions(Immunomodulation)		 	srtA, msa, lp_2940, lp_1403	Adhesion(Cell surface proteins)		 	L. acidophilus	bfrA, msmE, treC	Active metabolism(Carbohydrate metabolism)		 	LBA1272, slpA, cdpA, LBA1524, LBA1430, LBA1431, LBA1432gadC (LBA0057), LBA0867, LBA0995, LBA0996, LBA1427, LBA1428, LBA1429, bshA, bshB	Stress resistance(Cell envelope, 2 CRS regulators, Active removal of stressors)		 	labT	Probiotic actions(Antipathogenic effects)		 	fbpA, mub, slpA, cdpA, LBA1663- LBA1664	Adhesion(Cell surface proteins)		 	L. paracasei	fosE	Active metabolism(Carbohydrate metabolism)		 	L. rhamnosus	dltD, luxS	Stress resistance(Cell envelope, Protection, repair DNA and proteins)		 	dltD	Probiotic actions(Immunomodulation)		 	L. sakei	rrp-1, rrp-48	Stress resistance(2 CRS regulators)		 	L. casei Shirota	cps1 A-J	Probiotic actions(Immunomodulation)		 	L. salivarius	abpT	Probiotic actions(Antipathogenic effects)		 	srtA, lspA, lspB, lspD	Adhesion(Cell surface proteins)
Moreover, Ma and Guan suggested that the structure and the core/individualized microbiomes function and how host genetic factors influence the use of DFMs are still not fully understood. Thus, more studies should be made to examine how, in food-producing animals, the GIT microbiome interacts with administrated DFMs in a host-specific or strain-specific way. Additionally, the genetic makeup of DFMs defines their ability to survive, colonize, and positively impact the poultry gut microbiome. By leveraging genomic insights, researchers can design more effective, targeted DFMs, contributing to sustainable and efficient poultry production systems. As mentioned before, Bacteria are the most frequently used DFMs due to their diverse metabolic and functional capabilities such as LAB and Bacillus species. The Lactobacillus core and pan-genome contain 266 genes and 20,800 genes respectively, while the average genome size and G + C content were 1.96 Mb and 37.2% respectively. On the other hand, Bacillus subtilis genome is composed of 4,214,810 base pairs, especially 4,100 protein-coding genes with an average G + C ratio is 43.5%, however, this varies significantly across the chromosome. Some of the genetic interactions of Lactobacillus species with the host genome focus on certain functions including active metabolism, stress resistance, probiotic actions and adhesion as summarized in Table 1).

Coevolution Between Direct-fed Microbials (DFMs) and Host
Coevolution refers to the reciprocal evolutionary adaptations between interacting species over time. The relationship between Lactobacillus johnsonii and its host, including chickens (Gallus gallus domesticus) and turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo domesticus)) represents a fascinating example of coevolution, where this probiotic bacterium has adapted to thrive in the host's gastrointestinal environment, while the host benefits from the bacterium’s contributions to health and fitness.
However, a growing body of evidence indicates that using host-specific strains could be essential, as their coevolution with the host animal enhances the strains'ability to establish and thrive inside its corresponding host animal species. This idea has been implemented in Lactobacillus johnsonii in commercial poultry farming because of its prior linkage to improved poultry performance. Previous research showed the concept of using host-adapted microorganisms for DFM application in poultry, such as Lactobacillus johnsonii. Particularly, studies demonstrated that an L. johnsonii-based DFM derived from turkeys might improve early turkey poult performance by positively influencing the gut microbiome. Johnson et al., highlighted that host-adapted DFMs could imitate some of the beneficial effects and microbiome-boosting impacts induced by antibiotics used for growth enhancement. Similar research has been conducted utilizing a chicken-adapted L. johnsonii strain in broiler chickens. Previous research indicated that the coevolution happens between Lactobacilli and their hosts, which can have a vital role in their next colonization and accommodation inside various hosts. However, choosing a suitable strain with probiotic potential remains important, even within bacterial species and host animal sources. Differences in the strain level present regarding phenotypic traits such as the ability to inhibit pathogens and withstand the conditions of gastrointestinal transit. Ideally, a DFM candidate aimed at enhancing early poultry performance and supporting gut microbiome establishment should be specifically adapted to the host in addition to possessing and exhibiting some of the positive phenotypes associated with an effective probiotic.
Notably, an examination of the core SNP distances among the various isolate groups provided additional evidence in favor of the theory that L. johnsonii and its host coadapt. This corroborates the concept that the host and L. johnsonii coevolved. The animals’ immune system evolution has been attributed to Lactobacilli, which seems to coevolve with their host while maintaining an association that prevents an overabundance of immunological response. Genetically, Johnson et al. proved that L. johnsonii clusters phylogenetically by host. Even somewhat closely related host species are affected by this. Nevertheless, the combination of compelling in vivo data with robust genomic and in vitro data indicates that L. johnsonii coadapted between poultry host sources and the host-specific strains of the parasite may have a greater and more enduring effect than non-host-specific strains.

Gene Regulation and Expression in Microbiota
DFMs influence gene expression within the poultry gut microbiota through metabolite production, competitive interactions, and immune modulation. By reshaping microbial transcriptional profiles, DFMs contribute to gut health, pathogen resistance, and improved nutrient absorption.
Chichlowski et al. found how the entrance of DFMs could shape the poultry’s GIT and affect its microarchitecture through ileal, jejunum, cecal, and colonic epithelium. The results demonstrate that DFM administration caused a significant increase in intestinal muscle thickness, with an enhancement of up to 33% compared to the control treatment. Additionally, the jejunum's villus height and perimeter were significantly greater in the group treated with DFM. Furthermore, this DFM-treated group exhibited elevated values for muscle thickness and jejunal crypt depth. Similar improvements in muscle thickness were observed in the ileum of birds that received DFM. Conversely, the DFM-treated groups demonstrated reduced densities of bacteria embedded within the mucous blanket and a decrease in mucous thickness across all intestinal segments in contrast to the control.
The influence of a multi-strain Bacillus-based DFMs (B. licheniformis, B. amyloliquefaciens, and B. subtilis) combined with fenugreek seed on the expression of specific immune genes through upregulation and downregulation mechanisms. All studied genes (AvBD (avian ß-defensins), PTGS2 (prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2), IL6 and IL8L2 (pro-inflammatory interleukins), CASP6 (caspase), and IRF7 (interferon regulatory factor 7)) were downregulated except AvBD10 gene was upregulated. These results suppose that both transcription factors (FSs) and DFMs may alleviate inflammation and improve broiler immunity.
Additionally, it has been demonstrated that using Bacillus licheniformis as a DFM greatly increases the gene expression linked to catabolism in the livers of afflicted organisms, particularly carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-α. Furthermore, this intervention altered the gene expression associated with lipid anabolism. These results suggest that the supplementation with B. licheniformis in diet may improve growth and antioxidant capacity while also modulating the gene expression responsible for the synthesis of fatty acid and oxidation in the broiler livers diseased with Necrotic Enteritis (NE).

Genetic Mechanisms of Direct-fed Microbials (DFMs) in Modulating Host Gene Expression

Immune System Modulation
Poultry immune system components can be categorized into innate and adaptive immune responses and considered complex mechanisms which protect them from any infection. Lee et al. stated that DFMs may directly affect the gut microbiota composition, which is critical for the immune system development and maintaining homeostasis. This includes antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), toll-like receptors (TLRs) and cytokines in chickens and mammals.
TLRs are critical pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) in chicken, expressed in the intestine and crucial for microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) identification from bacteria and viruses. Additionally, they initiate innate immunity and activate adaptive responses through initiating signaling pathways that stimulate T cells and cause pro-inflammatory cytokines to be released.
DFMs produce MAMPs that can be recognized by TLRs on dendritic cells in the gastrointestinal lumen. Numerous types of TLRs are distinguished in poultry i.e. TLR2 (paired with TLR1) for detecting peptidoglycans and lipoproteins in gram-positive bacteria, TLR4 for recognizing lipopolysaccharides (LPS) from gram-negative bacteria, TLR5 for identifying bacterial flagellin, TLR15 for detecting bacterial proteases and heat-stable secretory substances, TLR3 and TLR7 for recognizing double-stranded and single-stranded RNA viruses, respectively, and TLR21 for identifying unmethylated CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides from bacteria and viruses. When TLRs are activated, the expression of AMPs, cytokines and innate immunity will be regulated in the intestine of chicken.
Cytokines adjust immune cell stimulation and various physiological processes. They participate in precursor cell development, apoptosis, cell survival, tumor rejection, metastasis, and inflammatory responses. Cytokines are critical for host growth, injury response, homeostasis, and infectious disease management, where they protect from pathogenesis. Cytokines bind high-affinity receptors on target cells to initiate intracellular signaling with high potency. According to their functions and cell interactions, cytokines are categorized into groups like tumor necrosis factors (TNF), chemokines, transforming growth factors (TGF), interleukins (IL), and interferons (IFN) with notable functional overlaps. Infectious agents, endotoxins, inflammatory mediators, injuries, or other cytokines stimulate their production.
Modulatory effects of direct-fed microbials (DFMs) on immune-related gene expression
DFMs	Animal	Inclusion level	Duration	Response	Ref	 	TLRs expression change	 	Multi-strains (Enterococcus feacium,Lactobacillus casei,Lactobacillus acidophilus,Bifidobacterium thermophilum)	broiler breeder hens	2.5 × 107 cfu/gFor each strain respectively	10 weeks	Increase in TLR2 and TLR4 mRNA expression		 	Single strain(Pediococcus acidilactici)	broiler breeder hens	1 × 1010 CFU/g	10 weeks	Increase in TLR2 and TLR4 mRNA expression	 	Lactobacillus acidophilus strain (LA-5)	chickens	1 × 109 CFU/g	14 days	Increase in TLR2,TLR4 and TLR5 mRNA expression		 	Lactobacillus acidophilus strain (LA-5)	chickens	109 CFU/g	21 days	No effect on theTLR2,TLR4 and TLR5 mRNA expression	 	Lactobacillus reuteri (L. reuteri)	Broiler chicks	2 × 109 CFU/g	7 days	Significant increase in the expression of TLR5		 	ClostridiumButyricum (C. butyricum)	Broiler chicks	1.3 × 107 CFU/g	7 days	Significant increase in the expression of TLR2-1TLR5	 	Cytokinins expression change	 	L. reuteri	Broiler chicks	2 × 109 CFU/g	7 days	Increase in the expression levels o−1β, TGFβ3 andTGFβ4		 	C. butyricum	Broiler chicks	1.3 × 107 CFU/g	7 days	Increase in the expression levels of IL-1β, TGFβ2 and TGFβ4	 	B. subtilis strain 1781	broiler chicks	1.5 × 105 CFU/g	14 days	No differences in the expression of IL1β, IL17 F, increase in IL6 and TNFSF15		 	B. subtilis strain 1104 + strain 747	broiler chicks	each strain represents 7.5 × 104 CFU/g	14 days	No differences in the expression of IL1β, IL17 F, increase in IL6, IL8 and TNFSF15	 	B. subtilis strain 1781 + strain 747	broiler chicks	each strain represents 7.5 × 104 CFU/g	14 days	No differences in the expression of IL1β, IL17 F while increase in TNFSF15	 	AMPs expression change	 	L. reuteri	Broiler chicks	2 × 109 CFU/g	7 days	Significant Increase in the expression levels of AvBD4 in the cecum		 	C. butyricum	Broiler chicks	1.3 × 107 CFU/g	7 days	Significant Increase in the expression levels of AvBD1 and CATH3 in the cecum	 	Lactobacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and Enterococcus faecalis	Broiler chicks	1 × 106 CFU/g	5 days	No significant effect on the expression level of AvBD1, AvBD2, AvBD4, AvBD6,and cathelicidin
Small peptides with 15–100 amino acids, known as AMPs, are essential for innate immunity because they prevent pathogen invasion. Poultry performance can be improved by their extensive antimicrobial activities, which include antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral actions. Defensins and cathelicidins, two important AMP kinds, exhibit activity against enveloped viruses, fungi, and bacteria. The innate immunological defense of chickens is greatly aided by the identification of four cathelicidins (CATH1-3, CATH-1B) and fourteen avian β-defensins (AvBD1-14). These peptides fight infections, which enhance poultry productivity and health. Many studies used various types of DFMs to investigate their effect on toll-like receptors, cytokines, and antimicrobial peptides in Lactobacillus spp. and Bacillus spp. as a part of the immune system in poultry as proposed in Table 2).

Gene Expression in Intestinal Integrity
The impact of probiotics administration on intestinal barrier integrity
The intestinal barrier integrity is crucial for optimal health and performance in poultry as provided in (Fig. 3). It protects the gut from pathogens and harmful substances penetration however it allows the absorption of nutrients. It consists of 3 structures: the first barrier is a physical barrier (intestinal epithelial cells, tight junctions (TJs), and mucin), the second is the chemical layer that includes (cytokines, immune cells, digestive secretions, and cytokines), and the third, modulation by gastrointestinal tract microbiota. In the physical barrier, the goblet cells secrete mucin 2 (MUC2) which is the most common type of mucin, that works as the first line of defense against pathogenic bacteria. The intestinal epithelium is an integral component of the gastrointestinal tract and consists of a single layer of column-shaped epithelial cells that act as a physical barrier against intraluminal toxins and invaders. Intercellular junctional components give these epithelial cells their tight seal, allowing cells to adhere to one another and controlling paracellular permeability. Many stressors can disrupt tight junctions, and cause gut leakage. Heat stress, feed limitation for 24 h, high rye addition to broiler chicken diet, and high mycotoxin dose in the diet are some examples of these stressors.
Tight junctions are made up of structural and functional proteins i.e. zonula occludens 1 (ZO-1), Claudin (CLDN), Junctional Adhesion Molecule (JAM), and occluding (OCLN). When the tight junctions and the epithelial barrier are disrupted, a leaky gut will occur and allow pathogens to enter the gut and release toxic substances to the bloodstream, then lead to inflammation and other health issues. Several studies obtained that the promotion of intestinal barrier function will be carried out when the expression levels of intestinal barrier genes upregulate through probiotic administration.
Wu et al. examined the nutritional supplementation effects on chicken broilers under controlled conditions i.e. from 32 °C to 26 °C at a rate of 2 °C per week. This experiment had three groups (the control group and two experimental groups were supplemented with 10⁸ CFU/kg of feed with either Lactobacillus plantarum 16 (Lac16) or Paenibacillus polymyxa 10 (BSC10). In BSC10 group, tight junction protein-related genes were upregulated, such as occludin (OCLN), Zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), and claudin-1 (CLDN1), as well as mucin-2 (MUC2) expression compared to the control group. Moreover, Gadde et al. estimated the effects of different dietary treatments divided into five groups studied on zero-day-old male ross broiler chicks and divided them into five groups to evaluate the effects of different dietary treatments as the following: control group, a group receiving a basal diet with bacitracin methylene disalicylate (BMD) at 50 g/ton, and three groups supplemented with different Bacillus subtilis probiotics—strain 1781 (PB1), a combination of strains 1104 and 747 (PB2), and a combination of strains 1781 and 747 (PB3). Occludin expression was increased in the PB1 and PB2 groups, whereas JAM2 and (ZO1) were considerably upregulated in the PB2 and PB3 groups compared to controls. These findings indicated that probiotics influenced the tight junction proteins gene expressions. On the other hand, MUC2 expression was unaffected by any of the treatments.
Furthermore, all three dosages of Bacillus licheniformis markedly elevated the gene expression of CLDN-1, however, the claudin 2 (CLDN-2) levels were only up-regulated by 0.03% B. licheniformis. Although 0.01 and 0.03% B. licheniformis did not show any evident impacts on OCLIN-1 and ZO-1, 0.06% B. licheniformis significantly increased their expression level. Moreover, MUC2 expressions were markedly upregulated by B. licheniformis at three dosages. Generally, all the tested tight junction transcript levels are increased by B. licheniformis, and this effect is more noticeable at higher dosages of the bacterium. Generally, chickens fed probiotic-supplemented diets showed an increase in TJ proteins, which translates to improving the function of intestinal barriers and optimal gut health.

Gut-brain Axis and Neurotransmitter Regulation
The gut-brain axis and the mechanisms of action of probiotic supplementation in order to alleviate anxiety and depression
A network of bidirectional communication between the central nervous system (CNS) and the gastrointestinal (GI) is known as the gut-brain axis. Via this intricate process, neural, immunological, and hormonal signals visceral messages, which can be produced by the host or gut bacteria, can be transmitted from the gut to the brain thanks to this complex mechanism. The signals from these messages were received by the brain through interaction with the enteric nervous system. Afterwards, the brain transmits signals that impact immune responses and other gastrointestinal processes, such as motor, sensory, and secretory activities. This reciprocal relationship causes local pathological circumstances and shapes gut physiology. Numerous studies explored the mechanisms by which probiotics affect the gut-brain axis. Probiotics directly influence the biochemistry of the central nervous system, affecting neurotransmitter levels such as dopamine, γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), and serotonin, which in turn affects behavior and mental health. Wang et al. and Heidarzadeh Rad reported that the vagus nerve and enteric nerves are connected. Indirectly, DFMs can enhance the central nervous system function through gut microbiota modulation. By raising the diversity of microbiota and the abundance of beneficial bacteria, probiotics can alter metabolites like short-chain fatty acids and tryptophan, which can positively impact brain function. Reducing anxiety and depression is considered a turning point in poultry as growth, plumage condition, egg production, eggshell quality, and the efficiency of food conversion have a negative correlation with high levels of underlying fearfulness. Some bacteria such as (Lactobacillus plantarum, Bifidobacterium lactis, Lactobacillus reuteri, Lactobacillus helveticus, Bifidobacterium bifidum, Bifidobacterium longum) produce SCFAs induce the release of γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), dopamine, Noradrenaline and serotonin (5-HT), while resulting in a reduction of pro-inflammatory mediators like TNF α, IL, IFN γ, and reactive oxygen species (ROS), these pathways can mitigate anxiety and depression as shown in (Fig. 4).
Impact of probiotics in gut-brain axis modulation and laying hen behavior
Noteworthy, probiotic use had a positive impact on indicators such as decreased rates of aggressive behavior, feather plucking, fights, concealed chickens, and cracked eggs in the womb as demonstrated in (Fig. 5). It was reported that layers, GalliPro MS inclusion improved behavior and made the poultry calmer. In parallel with these observations, laying performance also were enhanced in the trials with probiotic supplementation and reduced the dirty eggs numbers. These findings provide a good indicator of gut health. This reflects a decrease in dysbacteriosis, improved control of pathogenic bacteria and a healthier intestinal microbiome overall.

Multi-Omics Contributions in Optimizing Direct-fed Microbials (DFMS) for Poultry
Some genomic studies of some DFM strains and their effects on poultry
Examples of Direct-Fed mcrobes	Genome sequencingplatform	Sample isolation	Effects on the poultry	Reference	 	Lactobacillus Salivarius	Illumina MiSeq platform	Isolation from Chicken gut	↓ shedding of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimuriuml		 	Lactobacillus johnsonii	Illumina HiSeq or illumina MiSeq platform	Isolation from ileal and cecal	↑ body weight due to influence on weight gain gene in commercial turkeys		 	Bacillus Spp	PacBio RSII platform	Isolation from the cecal and the fecal of healthy chickens	↓ pathogen resistance by inhibting Sallamonella		 	Enterococcus Spp	Illumina Nextseq platform	Isolation from meat chickens (cecal samples)	↑ antimicrobial resistance gene presence		 	Bifidobacterim	Next-generation sequencing (NGS) platforms	Isolation from different ecosystems	↑ antimicrobial resistance gene presence shows 411 core bifidobacterial genes
(↑) increase (↓) decrease
The genomics combination with the selection and development of DFMs provides precision in handling and meeting the poultry production systems demand and represents a revolutionary approach. Kogut et al. and Wu et al. have demonstrated the significance of genomics in probiotic interventions optimization for enhancing productivity and host health. Hence, genome sequence analysis of microorganisms facilitates the effective utilization of DFMs in poultry. Also, genomics improves the DFMs effectiveness through genomic selection in chickens. Genome sequencing is performed by genome sequencing technologies. Various investigations have proposed the genomics of some DFM strains which are listed in Table 3).
Genetic markers associated with probiotic efficacy (e.g., stress tolerance or bile salt hydrolase activity) can be identified by genomic tools and these markers are used to accelerate the identification of high-performing strains. As well as in a variety of animal species, GWASs have been used to find the polymorphisms of key genes linked to phenotypic features linked to animal production and disease resistance.
On the other hand, at community levels, metagenomics enables us to identify microbial abundance, diversity and its roles from functional genomics. Metagenomics provides insights into the taxonomic diversity of the co-metabolizing micro-community within the gastrointestinal tract of poultry. This approach not only facilitates the understanding of nutrient metabolism and the presence of DFMs but also enables the examination of gene-level activities associated with the metabolism of polysaccharides, nitrogen, fatty acids and lipids. Such knowledge can be leveraged to enhance poultry health. Metagenomics can determine the beneficial microorganisms from non-beneficial microorganisms to increase the concentration of beneficial and decrease harmful to control DFMs concentrations in poultry.
Moreover, Nutrigenomics allows for outstanding of how nutrients regulate gene and protein expression influencing cellular metabolism. It has been possible to identify specific and reliable biomarkers of the interaction between DFMs and poultry that have implications for poultry growth performance. It has been possible to identify the gene pathways and biological functions that are crucial in regulating the biological effects of DFMs'action on poultry. Additionally, an understanding of the intricacies of the interactions that ultimately determine the outcome of DFMs'effects on poultry as well as the protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks analysis between the poultry and the microbiome can help identify potential flow pathways that could help define the mechanism of action of DFMs on poultry performance and health.

Challenges and Limitations
DFMs utilization in poultry production presents several challenges and limitations. Regulatory frameworks for probiotics in poultry differ across regions, and the approval process can be complex and time-consuming. The need to be on the Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) list to lower the regulatory obstacles faced during commercialization accounts for a large portion of the restrictions when choosing probiotic cultures. The cost of incorporating DFMs into feed can be a barrier, particularly in large-scale operations with tight profit margins. The economic returns are not always immediate or guaranteed, especially if performance improvements are marginal. Studies sometimes show conflicting results regarding their impact on growth performance and disease resistance, leading to uncertainty among producers as mentioned above. Their sensitivity to pelletizing methods for feed production is one of their limitations along with their susceptibility to environmental influences, the acidity of the stomach, and the bile salts presence in the small intestine. Besides, maintaining the viability of live microbial strains during feed processing, storage, and transport can be technically challenging and costly. Moreover, the difficulty in predicting outcomes is due to the complex interactions between poultry genetics, microbiota, and DFMs. Addressing these challenges requires ongoing research to improve strain selection, understand mechanisms, and optimize application methods, ensuring the sustainable and effective use of DFMs in poultry production.

Future Perspectives
Using DFMs in poultry production is promising, broader and more effective with the revolution in sequencing and genetic modification (GM) technologies. DFMs were genetically engineered to customize probiotics which satisfy our demands. These GM DFMs help in problem-solving due to their stability, substances delivery to mucosal surfaces, reduction of delivery costs and extended shelf life. So, they face the obstacles of traditional probiotics. A Lactococcus lactis strain IL1403 was genetically edited to express and manufacture AMPs with a distinguished activity against E. coli and Salmonella strains. These peptides were expressed by the resulting recombinant L. lactis strain, and their effect on the survival and development of Salmonella and E. coli was examined. Both pathogens were significantly suppressed and the L. lactis viability was maintained. As well as GM probiotics increased the stress tolerance of the strain. The GM probiotic strains withstand around 54-fold. It is worth noting that it is necessary to check the GM strains virulence and their pathogenicity, so the safety issues of these stains and their usage are critical concerns. Furthermore, new technologies like synthetic biology and CRISPR-Cas9 may genetically modify probiotics to enhance their functions.
DFMs will also be frequently used with other feed additives i.e. enzymes, phytochemicals, and prebiotics. This combination will make the most of their benefits. Dersjant et al., Nusairat and Wang, and Saliu et al. proposed that these synergistic combinations can improve disease resistance, gastrointestinal health, and nutrient absorption. Future studies on genome editing and host-microbe interactions may be the target of ongoing research on poultry production.

Conclusion of the Effect of Direct-fed Microbials (DFMs) VS Antibiotic Growth Promoters (AGPs) on Poultry Production
key comparative effects of DFMs and AGPs on poultry production outcomes
Parameter	Direct-fed microbials (DFMs)	Antibiotic growth promoters (AGPs)	 	Gut Health	↑ Promotes beneficial microbiota,enhances gut morphology	May impair microbiota balance with prolonged use	 	Disease Resistance	↑ Enhances immune defense and barrier function	Suppresses pathogens but may lead to resistance buildup	 	Mortality Rate	↓ Lower mortality in some studies due to immune support	↓ May reduce mortality short-term, but long-term concerns persist	 	Intestinal Morphology	↑ Increased VH:CD ratio, improved surface area	Neutral or slight improvement, less consistent	 	Nutrient Absorption	↑ Enhanced through better mucosal integrity and enzyme activity	Indirectly improved via pathogen suppression	 	Sustainability and Safety	High, no resistance risk, suitable for long-term use	Low, resistance risk, regulatory bans in many regions	 	Regulatory Status	Widely accepted and encouraged as AGP alternatives	Banned or restricted in many countries	 	Residues in poultry products	No accumulated harmful residues	Potential of drug residues in products, may cause harm to consumers'health
DFMs and AGPs have both been widely used to enhance poultry production, but their modes of action and long-term impacts differ significantly. AGPs have traditionally improved growth rates and feed efficiency by suppressing pathogenic bacteria;however, their use raises serious concerns regrading antimicrobial resistance. DFMs, on the other hand,offer a natural and sustainable alternative by promoting gut health,improving nutrient absorption,and modulating the immune system. As mentioned before in this review, studies have shown that DFMs can match or even surpass AGPs in enhancing BWG,FCR and resistance to intestinal diseases, particularly when tailored strains are used. Table 4 below summarizes key comparative effects of DFMs and AGPs on poultry production outcomes.

Conclusion
DFMs have a positive effect on poultry production. Technology revolution in molecular biology, genome editing, genomics, metagenomics, and bioinformatics facilitate a deep understanding of how DFMs influence poultry health overall and performance. These developments will facilitate and optimize the best microbial and host genotypes for sustainable, safe and high-quality poultry production.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
All authors equally contributed.

Authors’ Contributions
A.S.I.H, A.R.H and A.A.H conceptualized the review, formulated the research questions, and provided overall guidance. A.S.I.H., A.R.H, Y.A.S., K.A.G.,O.M.S., and A.A.H. wrote the main manuscript text. Y.A.S. and A.A.H. prepared Figs. 1–5. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

Funding
Open access funding provided by The Science, Technology & Innovation Funding Authority (STDF) in cooperation with The Egyptian Knowledge Bank (EKB).

Data Availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Ethics Approval
Not applicable.

Consent for Publication
Not applicable.

Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Abbreviations
DFMs
Direct-fed microbials
CAGR
Compound annual growth rate
LAB
Lactic acid bacteria
GIT
Gastrointestinal tract
SCFAs
Short-chain fatty acids
BWG
Body weight gain
GWAS
Genome-Wide Association Study
SNP
Single nucleotide polymorphism
PLAG1
Pleiomorphic adenoma gene 1
DMRT
Double sex and mab-3-related transcription factor
CASP
Caspase
PTGS2
Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2
IRF7
Interferon regulatory factor 7
AvBD
Avian ß-defensins
FSs
Transcription factor
NE
Necrotic Enteritis
AMPs
Antimicrobial peptides
TLRs
Toll-like receptors
PRRs
Pattern recognition receptors
MAMPs
Microbial-associated molecular patterns
LPS
Lipopolysaccharides
TGF
Transforming growth factors
IL
Interleukins
IFN
Interferons
TNF
Tumor necrosis factors
TJs
Tight junctions
CLDN
Claudin
ZO-1
Zonula occludens 1
JAM
Junctional Adhesion Molecule
OCLN
Occluding
BMD
Bacitracin methylene disalicylate
GI
Gastrointestinal
CNS
Central nervous system
GABA
γ-Aminobutyric acid
ROS
Reactive oxygen species
PPI
Protein-protein interaction
GRAS
Generally Recognized as Safe
GM
Genetic modification
FCR
Feed conversion rate
VH
Villus height
CD
Crypt depth
AGPs
Antibiotic growth promoters

References
Probiotics (Direct-Fed Microbials) in poultry nutrition and their effects on nutrient utilization growth and laying performance and gut health: a systematic review
Effects of a direct fed microbial (DFM) on broiler chickens exposed to acute and chronic cyclic heat stress in two consecutive experiments
Immune modulation and cecal microbiome changes in broilers fed with fenugreek seeds and Bacillus-based probiotics
History and Current Use of Antimicrobial Drugs in Veterinary Medicine
Microbes in gastrointestinal health and disease
A history of antimicrobial drugs in animals: Evolution and revolution
Probiotics: growth-promoting factors produced by microorganisms
Probiotics, prebiotics, and synbiotics—approaching a definition
Probiotics in animal production: A review
Feeding beneficial bacteria: A natural solution for increasing efficiency and decreasing pathogens in animal agriculture
Performance of broiler chickens fed diets supplemented with a direct-fed microbial
The marketing and the use of feed additives in the European Union with particular regard to zootechnical feed additives
Overview of differences between microbial feed additives and probiotics for food regarding regulation, growth promotion effects and health properties and consequences for extrapolation of farm animal results to humans
Probiotics in disease management for sustainable poultry production
Probiotics in poultry: a comprehensive review
Papadimitriou K, Zoumpopoulou G, FolignÃ© B, et al (2015) Discovering probiotic microorganisms: in vitro, in vivo, genetic and omics approaches. Front Microbiol 6. 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00058
Multi-Omics characterization of host-derived bacillus spp probiotics for improved growth performance in poultry
Advances in characterization of probiotics and challenges in industrial application
Pulidindi K, Ahuja K (2024) Poultry probiotic ingredients market size by product (Lactobacilli Bifidobacterium Streptococcus Bacillus) by Application (Broilers Layers Turkeys Breeders Chicks & Poults). Reg Outlook Applic Potential Price Trends Compet Mark Share Forecast. 2024–2032
Organic acids production from lactic acid bacteria: A preservation approach
Shehata AA, Basiouni S, Tellez-Isaias G, et al (2024) Probiotics as alternative to antibiotics in poultry: challenges and prospects. in: shehata aa, tellez-isaias g, eisenreich w (eds) alternatives to antibiotics against pathogens in poultry. Springer Nature Switzerland Cham. 59–78
The potential of bacillus species as probiotics in the food industry: a review
Yeast Culture and Direct-Fed Microbes: Modes of Action and Beneficial Applications in Ruminants
The many faces of enterococcus spp.—commensal
Carvajal E, Contreras S, Díaz W, et al (2023) Enterococcus isolated from poultry intestine for potential probiotic use. Vet World 1605–1614. 10.14202/vetworld.2023.1605-1614
Effects of probiotics on gut microbiota: an overview
Effects of direct-fed microbials on productive performance qualitative traits of eggs, blood biochemicals and ileal microflora of laying hens fed wheat-soybean-based diet
Comparative effects of two multi-enzyme combinations and a Bacillus probiotic on growth performance digestibility of energy and nutrients, disappearance of non-starch polysaccharides and gut microflora in broiler chickens
Promising future of probiotics for human health: Current scenario
Intestinal microbiome of poultry and its interaction with host and diet
Lactic acid permeabilizes gram-negative bacteria by disrupting the outer membrane
Production of organic acids by probiotic lactobacilli can be used to reduce pathogen load in poultry
Evaluation of the antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory properties of bacillus-dfm (norum™) in broiler chickens infected with salmonella enteritidis
Lactic acid bacteria as antimicrobial agents: food safety and microbial food spoilage prevention
Role of lactic acid bacteria as a biopreservative agent of Talbina
Implication and challenges of direct-fed microbial supplementation to improve ruminant production and health
Live Probiotic lactobacillus johnsonii bs15 promotes growth performance and lowers fat deposition by improving lipid metabolism intestinal development and gut microflora in broilers
Digestive and bacterial enzyme activities in broilers fed diets supplemented with lactobacillus cultures
Effect of probiotic on growth performance and digestive enzyme activity of arbor acres broilers
Effects of synbiotic supplementation on growth performance carcass characteristics meat quality and muscular antioxidant capacity and mineral contents in broilers
Effects of Pediococcus acidilactici, mannan-oligosaccharide butyric acid and their combination on growth performance and intestinal health in young broiler chickens challenged with Salmonella Typhimurium
Molecules produced by probiotics and intestinal microorganisms with immunomodulatory activity
Intestinal flora and endogenous vitamin synthesis
Surface binding of toxins and heavy metals by probiotics
Solis-Cruz B, Hernandez-Patlan D, M. Hargis B, Tellez G (2019) Control of Aflatoxicosis in Poultry Using Probiotics and Polymers. In: Berka Njobeh P, Stepman F (eds) Mycotoxins - Impact and Management Strategies. IntechOpen
The role of probiotics in improving food safety; detoxification of heavy metals and chemicals
The use of probiotics as eco-friendly alternatives for antibiotics in poultry nutrition
Improving productive performance and mitigating harmful emissions from laying hen excreta via feeding on graded levels of corn DDGS with or without Bacillus subtilis probiotic
Shroyer NF, Kocoshis SA (2011) Anatomy and physiology of the small and large intestines. in: pediatric gastrointestinal and liver disease. Elsevier. 324–336.e2
Lactobacillus salivarius: Bacteriocin and probiotic activity
Microarchitecture and spatial relationship between bacteria and ileal cecal and colonic epithelium in chicks fed a direct-fed microbial primalac and salinomycin
Effects of probiotics as antibiotics substitutes on growth performance serum biochemical parameters intestinal morphology and barrier function of broilers
Effect of dietary Bacillus coagulans supplementation on growth performance and immune responses of broiler chickens challenged by Salmonella enteritidis
Feed supplementation with avian Propionibacterium acidipropionici contributes to mucosa development in early stages of rearing broiler chickens
Ghrelin is a signal to facilitate the utilization of fatty acids and save glucose by the liver skeletal muscle and adipose tissues in chicks
Effects of multi-strain probiotics combined with Gardeniae fructus on intestinal microbiota metabolites and morphology in broilers
Effect of supplementation of fermented yeast culture on hormones and their receptors on exposure to higher temperature and on production performance after exposure in nicobari chickens
Effects of calcium and zinc ions injection on caspase-3 activation and tenderness in post-mortem beef skeletal muscles
Investigating antibiotic free feed additives for growth promotion in poultry: effects on performance and microbiota
Direct-fed microbial on the health status, productive performance and internal egg characteristics of layer chickens under hot humid environmental conditions
Alternative to antibiotic growth promoters: beneficial effects of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and/or Lactobacillus acidophilus supplementation on the growth performance and sustainability of broilers’ production
Selection and design of probiotics
Monostrain multistrain and multispecies probiotics—A comparison of functionality and efficacy
Evaluating two multistrain probiotics on growth performance intestinal morphology, lipid oxidation and ileal microflora in chickens
The Effects of direct-fed microbial supplementation, as an alternative to antibiotics on growth performance, intestinal immune status, and epithelial barrier gene expression in broiler Chickens
Bajagai YS, Klieve AV, Dart PJ, Bryden WL. (2016) Animal production and health div probiotics. animal nutrition: production, impact and regulation. food and agriculture organization of the United Nations: Rome, Italy
Host and Environmental Factors Affecting the Intestinal Microbiota in Chickens
Shahbandeh M. (2024) Global egg production from 1990 to 2022 (in 1,000 metric tons)
Sequence and comparative analysis of the chicken genome provide unique perspectives on vertebrate evolution
Progress from Chicken Genetics to the Chicken Genome
Genome-Wide association study identifies 12 loci associated with body weight at age 8 weeks in korean native chickens
Comparison of selection signatures between korean native and commercial chickens using 600k snp array data
Lee JH (2021) Special Issue: Poultry Genetics Breeding and Biotechnology. Genes. 12 1744. 10.3390/genes12111744
Association of host genetics with intestinal microbial relevant to body weight in a chicken F2 resource population
Individuality in gut microbiota composition is a complex polygenic trait shaped by multiple environmental and host genetic factors
Host genetics influence the rumen microbiota and heritable rumen microbial features associate with feed efficiency in cattle
Bovine host genetic variation influences rumen microbial methane production with best selection criterion for low methane emitting and efficiently feed converting hosts based on metagenomic gene abundance
Host genetics and the rumen microbiome jointly associate with methane emissions in dairy cows
The gut microbiota is largely independent of host genetics in regulating fat deposition in chickens
Comparative metagenomic and metatranscriptomic analyses reveal the breed effect on the rumen microbiome and its associations with feed efficiency in beef cattle
Wallace RJ, Sasson G, Garnsworthy PC, et al (2019) A heritable subset of the core rumen microbiome dictates dairy cow productivity and emissions. Sci Adv 5:eaav8391. 10.1126/sciadv.aav8391
Current Understanding of the Crosstalk Between Direct-Fed Microbials and Indigenous Microbiome in the Gastrointestinal Tract: Applications and Challenges in Food-Producing Animals
Direct-Fed Microbials and Their Impact on the Intestinal Microflora and Immune System of Chickens
Clustering of Pan- and Core-genome of Lactobacillus provides Novel Evolutionary Insights for Differentiation
Subspecies-level genome comparison of Lactobacillus delbrueckii
The complete genome sequence of the Gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis
Impact of luxS and suppressor mutations on the gastrointestinal transit of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG
Identification of Lactobacillus reuteri genes specifically induced in the mouse gastrointestinal tract
A High-Molecular-Mass surface protein (lsp) and methionine sulfoxide reductase b (msrb) contribute to the ecological performance of lactobacillus reuteri in the murine gut
Glucosyltransferase a (gtfa) and inulosucrase (inu) of lactobacillus reuteri tmw1.106 contribute to cell aggregation in vitro biofilm formation and colonization of the mouse gastrointestinal tract
pH-Dependent association of enolase and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase of Lactobacillus Crispatus with the cell wall and lipoteichoic acids
The early response to acid shock in Lactobacillus reuteri Involves the ClpL chaperone and a putative cell wall-altering esterase
d -Alanyl ester depletion of teichoic acids in Lactobacillus reuteri 100–23 results in impaired colonization of the mouse gastrointestinal tract
Genomic and genetic characterization of the bile stress response of probiotic Lactobacillus reuteri ATCC 55730
Repression of the locus of the enterocyte effacement-encoded regulator of gene transcription of Escherichia coli O157:H7 by Lactobacillus reuteri culture supernatants Is luxs and strain dependent
Ecological behavior of Lactobacillus Reuteri 100–23 is affected by mutation of the Luxs gene
Identification of Genes associated with the long-gut-persistence phenotype of the probiotic Lactobacillus johnsonii Strain NCC533 using a combination of genomics and transcriptome analysis
Identification of Lactobacillus plantarum Genes that are induced in the gastrointestinal tract of mice
Dynamics of competitive population abundance of Lactobacillus plantarum ivi gene mutants in faecal samples after passage through the gastrointestinal tract of mice: Population dynamics of L. plantarum mutants
Cre- lox -Based system for multiple gene deletions and selectable-marker removal in Lactobacillus plantarum
The d -alanine content of lipoteichoic acid is crucial for Lactobacillus plantarum- mediated protection from visceral pain perception in a rat colorectal distension model
Enhanced antiinflammatory capacity of a Lactobacillus plantarum mutant synthesizing modified teichoic acids
Biodiversity-Based Identification and functional characterization of the mannose-specific adhesin of Lactobacillus plantarum
Functional and comparative genomic analyses of an operon involved in fructooligosaccharide utilization by Lactobacillus acidophilus
Characterization of the tre Locus and Analysis of trehalose cryoprotection in Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM
Identification and Inactivation of Genetic Loci Involved with Lactobacillus acidophilus Acid Tolerance
Microarray analysis of a two-component regulatory system involved in acid resistance and proteolytic activity in Lactobacillus acidophilus
Identification and phenotypic characterization of the cell-division protein CdpA
genetic analysis of two bile salt hydrolase activities in Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM
Genomic features of lactic acid bacteria effecting bioprocessing and health
Characterization of a novel bile-inducible operon encoding a two-component regulatory system in Lactobacillus acidophilus
Identification of an operon and inducing peptide involved in the production of lactacin B by Lactobacillus acidophilus: Inducing peptide of the lactacin B operon
Functional analysis of putative adhesion factors in Lactobacillus acidophilus NCFM
Identification of a putative operon involved in fructooligosaccharide utilization by Lactobacillus paracasei
Functional analysis of d -alanylation of lipoteichoic acid in the probiotic strain Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG
Two-component signal-transducing systems involved in stress responses and vancomycin susceptibility in Lactobacillus sakei
Suppressive effect on activation of macrophages by Lactobacillus Casei strain shirota genes determining the synthesis of cell wall-associated polysaccharides
Bacteriocin production as a mechanism for the antiinfective activity of Lactobacillus salivarius UCC118
Comparative and functional analysis of sortase-dependent proteins in the predicted secretome of Lactobacillus salivarius UCC118
Coevolution and Macroevolution
Evidence of host specificity in Lactobacillus johnsonii genomes and its influence on probiotic potential in poultry
Ward TL, Weber BP, Mendoza KM, et al (2019) Antibiotics and host-tailored probiotics similarly modulate effects on the developing avian microbiome mycobiome and host gene expression. mBio 10:e02171–19. 10.1128/mBio.02171-19
Complete genome sequence of Lactobacillus johnsonii FI9785. a competitive exclusion agent against pathogens in poultry
Indication for Co-evolution of Lactobacillus johnsonii with its hosts
Genome-wide association analysis of milk production somatic cell score and body conformation traits in Holstein cows
Experimental evaluation of host adaptation of lactobacillus reuteri to different vertebrate species
Lactobacillus: Host-Microbe Relationships
Effects of bacillus licheniformis on the growth performance and expression of lipid metabolism-related genes in broiler chickens challenged with clostridium perfringens-induced necrotic enteritis
Immunostimulatory potential of fruits and their extracts in poultry
Effect of <italic>bacillus subtilis</italic>-based direct-fed microbials on immune status in broiler chickens raised on fresh or used litter
Birhan M (2019) Systematic review on avian immune systems. jwpr 9:144–150. 10.36380/scil.2019.jlsb23
Probiotic administration reduces mortality and improves intestinal epithelial homeostasis in experimental sepsis
The role of intestinal microbiota and the immune system
Effects of oral probiotic feeding on toll-like receptor gene expression of the chicken’s cecal tonsil
The central leucine-rich repeat region of chicken tlr16 dictates unique ligand specificity and species-specific interaction with TLR2
avian influenza virus vaccines containing toll-like receptors 2 and 5 ligand adjuvants promote protective immune responses in chickens
Cleavage and activation of a Toll-like receptor by microbial proteases
Avian toll-like receptors
Chicken TLR21 Is an Innate CpG DNA receptor distinct from mammalian TLR9
Effects of toll-like receptor ligands on the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and avian β-defensins in cultured chick intestine
Effects of probiotics lactobacillus reuteri and Clostridium butyricum on the expression of toll-like receptors pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines and antimicrobial peptides in broiler chick intestine
Cytokines and prevention of infectious diseases in poultry: A review
Immunity inflammation and cancer
Pathogenesis and treatment of cytokine storm induced by infectious diseases
Molecular basis of cytokine receptor activation
Interleukins (from IL-1 to IL-38), interferons transforming growth factor β and TNF-α: Receptors functions and roles in diseases
Resistin a novel host defense peptide of innate immunity
Effects of antimicrobial peptide cathelicidin-BF on diarrhea controlling, immune responses intestinal inflammation and intestinal barrier function in piglets with postweaning diarrhea
Antimicrobial peptides with ph-dependent activity and alkaline optima: their origins mechanisms of action and potential applications
Effects of the antimicrobial peptide mastoparan x on the performance permeability and microbiota populations of broiler chickens
Avian host defense peptides
Bioinformatic discovery and initial characterisation of nine novel antimicrobial peptide genes in the chicken
Identification and functional characterization of three chicken cathelicidins with potent antimicrobial activity
Tissue expression and developmental regulation of chicken cathelicidin antimicrobial peptides
Effect of single- and multi-strain probiotics on broiler breeder performance immunity and intestinal toll-like receptors expression
Expression of antimicrobial peptides in cecal tonsils of chickens treated with probiotics and infected with Salmonella enterica Serovar typhimurium
Influence of Stressor-Induced Nervous System Activation on the Intestinal Microbiota and the Importance for Immunomodulation
Current experimental models, assessment and dietary modulations of intestinal permeability in broiler chickens
Effects of probiotics Lactobacillus plantarum 16 and Paenibacillus polymyxa 10 on intestinal barrier function antioxidative capacity apoptosis immune response, and biochemical parameters in broilers
Ohland CL, MacNaughton WK (2010) Probiotic bacteria and intestinal epithelial barrier function. Am J Physiol-Gastrointest Liver Physiol 298:G807–G819. 10.1152/ajpgi.00243.2009
Induction of gut leakage in young broiler chickens fed a diet with low rye inclusion
What to do about the leaky gut
deoxynivalenol impairs hepatic and intestinal gene expression of selected oxidative stress, tight junction and inflammation proteins in broiler chickens but addition of an adsorbing agent shifts the effects to the distal parts of the small intestine
Tellez G, Latorre JD, Kuttappan VA, et al (2014) Utilization of rye as energy source affects bacterial translocation intestinal viscosity, microbiota composition, and bone mineralization in broiler chickens. Front Genet 5. 10.3389/fgene.2014.00339
Quantitative histo-morphometric analysis of heat-stress-related damage in the small intestines of broiler chickens
Effects of a feed additive blend on broilers challenged with heat stress
Optimizing fluorescein isothiocyanate dextran measurement as a biomarker in a 24-h feed restriction model to induce gut permeability in broiler chickens
Dose titration of FITC-D for optimal measurement of enteric inflammation in broiler chicks
Cell biology of tight junction barrier regulation and mucosal disease
Poultry gut health and beyond
Probiotics prebiotics and postbiotics on mitigation of depression symptoms: modulation of the brain–gut–microbiome axis
Gut-Brain axis: role of microbiome metabolomics hormones and stress in mental health disorders
Effect of probiotics on central nervous system functions in animals and humans: a systematic review
Heidarzadeh Rad N (2020) Effects of probiotic and prebiotic supplements on serum bdnf kynurenine tryptophan competing amino acids, and intestinal microbiome in major depressed patients. doctoral dissertation hacettepe university institute of health sciences
Fear and adaptability in poultry: insights implications and imperatives
From genomics to functional markers in the era of next-generation sequencing
Patel VP, Chaudhari MK (2022) Potential of probiotics in improving gut health. in: sayyed rz khan m (eds) microbiome-gut-brain axis. springer nature singapore. Singapore. 411–423
Omics technology draws a comprehensive heavy metal resistance strategy in bacteria
Genomic antimicrobial resistance, and public health insights into Enterococcus spp. from Australian chickens
Investigation of the evolutionary development of the genus bifidobacterium by comparative genomics
Genetic markers, genotyping methods & next generation sequencing in Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Genetic markers associated with milk production traits in dairy cattle
A genome-wide integrated analysis of lncRNA-mRNA in melanocytes from white and brown skin hair boer goats (Capra aegagrus hircus)
Genetic polymorphisms in immune- and inflammation-associated genes and their association with bovine mastitis resistance/susceptibility
Metagenomic analysis of chicken gut microbiota for improving metabolism and health of chickens — a review
Effect of direct-fed microbials on culturable gut microbiotas in broiler chickens: a meta-analysis of controlled trials
Dey S, Kumar Y (2023) Nutrigenomics research: a review. in: thakur m, belwal t (eds) bioactive components. Springer Nature Singapore, Singapore. 359–379
Zduńczyk Z, Pareek Ch (2009) Application of nutrigenomics tools in animalfeeding and nutritional research. J Anim Feed Sci 18:3–16. 10.22358/jafs/66361/2009
Nutrigenomics in the modern era
Toward a better understanding of mechanisms of probiotics and prebiotics action in poultry species
The US food and drug administration and probiotics: regulatory categorization
Regulatory categories of probiotics across the globe: A review representing existing and recommended categorization
Comparing technology and regulatory landscape of probiotics as food dietary supplements and live biotherapeutics
Probiotics and potential applications for alternative poultry production systems
Jael P (2019) Does Marginal Productivity Mean Anything in Real Economic Life ?
Probiotics/direct fed microbials for Salmonella control in poultry
Tellez G, Rodríguez-Fragoso L, Kuttappan V, Kallapura G, Velasco X, and Menconi A. (2013) Probiotics for human and poultry use in the control of gastrointestinal disease: a review of real-world experiences. Altern Integ Med 02: 10.4172/2327-5162.1000118
Technology and potential applications of probiotic encapsulation in fermented milk products
Survival and behavior of encapsulated probiotics ( lactobacillus plantarum ) in calcium-alginate-soy protein isolate-based hydrogel beads in different processing conditions (ph and temperature) and in pasteurized mango juice
Viability of 4 probiotic bacteria microencapsulated with arrowroot starch in the simulated gastrointestinal tract (git) and yoghurt
Probiotic functional foods: Survival of probiotics during processing and storage
Next-generation probiotics: the spectrum from probiotics to live biotherapeutics
the prospects for the therapeutic implications of genetically engineered probiotics
Engineered probiotics
Antimicrobial peptides targeting gram-negative pathogens produced and delivered by lactic acid bacteria
Probiotic engineering: towards development of robust probiotic strains with enhanced functional properties and for targeted control of enteric pathogens
Probiotic lactic acid bacteria in the gastro-intestinal tract: health benefits safety and mode of action
Effect of multi-enzymes in combination with a direct-fed microbial on performance and welfare parameters in broilers under commercial production settings
Xylanase and direct-fed microbials (dfm) potential for improvement of live performance energy digestibility and reduction of environmental microbial load of broilers
The impact of direct-fed microbials and phytogenic feed additives on prevalence and transfer of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase genes in broiler chicken
The silent threat: antimicrobial-resistant pathogens in food-producing animals and their impact on public health
Response of different infection models in broiler chickens against supplemental Organic acid – A review
Antibiotic use in agriculture and its consequential resistance in environmental sources: potential public health implications
How did antibiotic growth promoters increase growth and feed efficiency in poultry?
Comparative analysis of body weight and serum biochemistry in broilers supplemented with some selected probiotics and antibiotic growth promoters