Estimating Causal Effects of Third‐Stage Management on Postpartum Haemorrhage in a Midwifery Context: An Evidence Synthesis Approach for Constructing Directed Acyclic Graphs
ABSTRACT
Background
Estimating the causal effect of third‐stage management approaches on preventing postpartum haemorrhage (PPH) in the context of physiologic birth using observational data requires conditioning on specific variables, with selection relying on assumptions about their roles in the exposure‐outcome pathway that are rarely made explicit.
Objectives
To apply the evidence synthesis for constructing DAGs approach, incorporating findings from a systematic review, to develop a causal directed acyclic graph (DAG) that clarifies these assumptions and identifies the minimum set of variables needed to reduce bias in estimating the causal effects of physiologic third‐stage care versus oxytocin prophylaxis on PPH.
Data Sources
MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, Web of Science, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (to December 15, 2023), ClinicalTrials.gov (to July 8, 2024), and reference lists of eligible studies.
Study Selection and Data Extraction
The systematic review included randomised and non‐randomised studies involving individuals with physiologic birth or minimal obstetric interventions. Two authors independently screened studies. DAG development was based on the subset of non‐randomised studies. For each, one reviewer extracted outcome, exposure, control variables and mediators.
Synthesis
Eligible studies were analysed in three stages: (i) mapping each study's saturated implied graph; (ii) translating each posited connection using causal criteria to create study‐specific DAGs; (iii) synthesising individual DAGs into an integrated DAG. The assumptions underlying this process were specific to the midwifery context in Ontario, Canada and translation was guided by midwifery expertise and existing literature.
Results
Four non‐randomised studies were included. Expert consultation identified 20 factors influencing third‐stage management. The integrated DAG comprised 339 directed edges connecting 35 covariates, yielding four minimal sufficient adjustment sets.
Conclusions
The integrated DAG and minimal sufficient adjustment sets are valuable tools for informing future study design and analysis, helping to minimise bias in estimating the causal effect of physiologic third‐stage care versus oxytocin prophylaxis on PPH in the context of physiologic birth, while also exposing the assumptions about causal relationships between variables to scrutiny.

Background
Postpartum haemorrhage (PPH) is the leading direct cause of maternal deaths globally, emphasising the need for well‐designed studies on prevention. The cornerstone of PPH prevention is the universal use of prophylactic synthetic oxytocin during the third stage of labour—the period between the birth of the baby and the delivery of the placenta—based on evidence from clinical trials. However, questions have been raised about the generalisability of this evidence to individuals who experience a physiologic birth without medical or pharmacological interventions. An alternative to prophylactic oxytocin administration is physiologic third‐stage care, which is central to midwifery training and philosophy in Canada and elsewhere. This practice is generally considered suitable only for individuals who have had a physiological labour and birth. Despite its longstanding use, physiologic third‐stage care has received limited attention in clinical trials. The absence of robust epidemiological evidence on physiologic birth processes in general, combined with policy interest in promoting physiologic birth, presents both a scientific challenge and an opportunity.
Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) are considered the gold standard for obtaining unbiased estimates of treatment effect. However, applying RCT designs to the study of physiologic birth raises ethical and practical challenges. As Tilden and Snowden have noted, large sample sizes are needed because poor outcomes are rare among healthy individuals with physiologic births. Individuals committed to physiologic birth also often have strong preferences for their care and may resist randomisation. In addition, strict adherence to trial protocols, such as the use of placebos, can interrupt natural labour processes, potentially disrupting instinctive adaptations required for birth. These challenges highlight the difficulty in balancing scientific rigour with respect for individual autonomy and the preservation of physiologic processes.
In this context, causal effects must often be estimated from observational data. Although observational studies in health research frequently aim to infer causal relationships, they tend to avoid causal language, instead relying on ambiguous terms like ‘association’ or ‘link’. However, in contrast to associational or predictive analyses, causal analyses require careful a priori consideration of confounding variables—variables related to both the exposure and outcome—to ensure that estimated effects can be causally interpreted. Many observational studies, including those on PPH prevention, condition on variables without explicitly clarifying their roles in the exposure‐outcome relationship, potentially introducing bias and undermining the study's validity. In the perinatal context, there are several examples where conditioning on intermediate variables along the causal pathway between exposure and outcome has led to bias or counterintuitive conclusions.
Directed acyclic graphs (DAG) offer a transparent method for making theories and assumptions about causal relationships between variables more explicit (see Appendix S1). These non‐parametric diagrams depict hypothesised causal relationships between variables, helping to clarify complex causal chains such as those involved in PPH. By visually distinguishing between confounders and mediators (variables on the causal pathway that should not be adjusted for), DAGs guide researchers in identifying the appropriate variables for statistical analyses. In doing so, DAGs support causal inference, reduce bias, and enhance transparency by facilitating external scrutiny of a study's findings.
The objective of this paper was to construct a DAG that represents the causal system underlying the relationship between third‐stage management and PPH in the context of physiologic birth. Specifically, we aimed to develop a causal DAG for the following PICO (population, intervention, comparison, outcome) question: Among individuals with a physiologic birth or a birth with minimal obstetric interventions (P), does physiologic care or expectant management of the third stage of labour (I), compared with oxytocin prophylaxis (C), reduce the risk of PPH (O)?

Methods
The construction of the causal DAG was guided by the evidence synthesis for constructing DAGs protocol proposed by Ferguson et al.. This approach begins with a systematic review of the literature, anchored by a well‐defined causal question. Each study identified through the literature search is then ‘mapped’ and ‘translated’ into a study‐specific DAG. These individual DAGs are synthesised to produce an integrated DAG (I‐DAG) that addresses the research question.

Context
While we follow a structured protocol for building the DAG, the assumptions about causal relationships between variables may vary across settings due to local contexts. Therefore, the assumptions underlying the DAG construction process will be specific to the midwifery context in Ontario, Canada. Since 1994, midwifery has been a regulated and publicly funded profession in Ontario, with approximately 20% of births in the province under midwifery care. Ontario midwives provide low‐risk antepartum, intrapartum, and 6 weeks of postpartum care. Although most midwifery births occur in hospitals, midwives also attend births at home or in birth centres. Transfers of care to a physician occur in high‐risk or emergency situations outside the midwifery scope of practice. Transfers may also happen for certain situations within their scope (e.g., induction or augmentation of labour, epidurals) based on hospital policy. Midwives are the only providers in Ontario trained to offer choice in the management of the third stage of labour.

Systematic Review
The protocol for this review was registered on PROSPERO (CRD42024543100) on May 14, 2024. We included RCTs and non‐randomised studies involving individuals with a physiologic birth or minimal obstetric interventions, comparing physiologic care or expectant management in the third stage of labour with oxytocin prophylaxis (see Appendix S2). We defined physiologic labour and birth as spontaneous onset, progression without pharmacological or medical intervention and spontaneous vaginal birth. We also included births with minimal obstetric interventions, characterised by low regional analgesia use, no intrapartum oxytocin and no instrumental delivery. This approach aligned with the previous review, increased the pool of studies, and allowed us to address the uncertainty around epidural use and PPH.
We conducted searches on MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, Web of Science and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) databases from inception to December 15, 2023, without language or publication date restrictions (Appendix S3). We also searched reference lists of eligible studies and ClinicalTrials.gov (last search on July 8, 2024; Appendix S4) for ongoing, planned, or unpublished trials.

Stage 1: Mapping
For each identified non‐randomised study of interventions, one reviewer (VH) extracted the following variables into a decision log: outcome, exposure, control variables and mediators. Control variables included those used for stratification, adjustment and restriction. Factors excluded by studies, including those incompatible with physiologic birth (e.g., intrapartum oxytocin, instrumental delivery), were identified at this stage. Including nodes that represent these selection procedures in causal DAGs is important, as these variables may be causally related to the exposure and outcome and can introduce selection bias. During the mapping stage, an implied graph was created for each study that created a template for the translation stage. A directed edge was drawn from exposure to outcome, and all control variables were entered. Mediators were mapped based on the study conclusions, if applicable. Finally, directed edges were added between all nodes to create a saturated implied graph. This step was critical, since omitting an arc between two variables requires a stronger statistical assumption than including it and must be justified by theory or evidence.

Stage 2: Translation
In the translation stage, each posited connection in the implied graph was assessed using three causal criteria: temporality (does cause precede effect?), face validity (is the relationship plausible?) and theoretical support (is the relationship backed by existing theory?). After assessing these criteria, we conducted a counterfactual thought experiment (e.g., if all participants had been counterfactually exposed, would we expect the same effect on average as if none had been exposed?). One of the co‐authors (ED) and two expert Ontario midwives specialising in physiologic third‐stage care guided the translation of relationships between third‐stage management and other variables. Each edge was tested in both directions. The translation process resulted in a final DAG for each study, where each directed edge implied by the study was either deleted, retained, or reversed. Each study‐specific DAG was also reviewed to ensure it was acyclic.

Stage 3: Integration, Synthesis and Recombination
At the integration stage, we created an I‐DAG by adding each directed edge and its corresponding nodes from the individual studies. Knowledge of the study authors and expert midwives was incorporated to identify any additional variables not found in the systematic review, which were then subjected to the same mapping and translation steps within the I‐DAG. Nodes were only recombined if they met the following criteria: both nodes were equivalent (i.e., interchangeable or related to a common concept) or they had identical directed edge inputs and outputs.
The DAGitty v3.1 (www.dagitty.net/) online tool was used to draw the I‐DAG and to identify the minimum sufficient adjustment sets. DAGitty is a free software for drawing and analysing DAGs that automates the identification of minimal sufficient adjustment sets, ensuring that biasing paths are blocked (i.e., Exposure ← Confounder → Outcome) while causal paths remain open (i.e., Exposure → Mediator → Outcome) (see Appendix S1). DAGitty can only generate these sets for acyclic models.

Results
The PRISMA flow diagram is presented in Figure 1. We screened 3518 records and included seven studies, 3 RCTs and 4 non‐randomised studies of interventions. The evidence synthesis for constructing DAGs protocol was applied only to the non‐randomised studies. Confounding in these studies was controlled solely through detailed exclusion criteria. Since the edges already assessed did not need to be reassessed, mapping (stage 1) and translation (stage 2) were undertaken for two studies. One study contributed a single new variable (chorioamnionitis), which was added at the integration stage, while the other study did not contribute any new variables. The decision logs for the studies, which include the implied graphs and study‐specific DAGs, are shown in Appendix S5.
PRISMA flow diagram. RCT, randomized controlled trial.
At the integration stage (stage 3), each directed edge from the study‐specific DAGs was added to a blank DAG. While some covariates were common across studies (e.g., anaemia, multiple gestation, previous caesarean birth, polyhydramnios), others were unique to a single study (e.g., BMI, macrosomia and preterm rupture of membranes). As each new node was introduced, new edges became possible, and these were reassessed as in stage 2.
In addition, based on recent reviews of factors affecting PPH and consultations with expert Ontario midwives, several key interpretations and adjustments were made at this stage, which informed the final I‐DAG. First, the variable ‘medical complications’—variously defined across the included studies—was interpreted as medical conditions impacting blood clotting or requiring medications affecting coagulation (e.g., thrombophilias, diabetes, chronic hypertension, cardiac disease, renal disease). ‘Complications in labour’ was interpreted as fetal distress, a factor identified by expert midwives as important in third‐stage management decisions. Fetal distress can lead to rushed birth, maternal–infant separation and increased adrenaline, all of which disrupt the neurohormonal balance necessary for physiologic birth. Additionally, ‘prolonged labour’ was redefined to capture both the duration of labour and maternal exhaustion, another key consideration in third‐stage management.
Several new variables were also added as nodes in the I‐DAG, identified as key determinants in the causal pathway between third‐stage management and PPH. One of these variables was race, defined as membership in a marginalised versus privileged racial group to emphasise its social rather than biological nature. Additional variables reflecting the mechanisms through which racism and discrimination impact health outcomes were also added, including socio‐economic conditions, access to prenatal care and substance use (drugs, alcohol, smoking). We also added variables related to different aetiologies of PPH, including leiomyomas, severe perineal trauma and uterine rupture. Given the growing literature on the association between assisted reproductive technologies (ART) (in vitro fertilisation or intracytoplasmic sperm injection) and PPH, this variable was included. ‘Transfer of care’ was also added, since in Ontario, only midwives offer a choice in third‐stage management. We excluded the variable ‘surgery this pregnancy,’ which was conditioned on in one study, because we did not consider it meaningfully related to the causal pathway under investigation. Finally, antepartum haemorrhage was combined with ‘placental disorders’ (placenta previa, placenta accreta spectrum, placenta abruption), and fetal growth restriction and oligohydramnios were combined into ‘placental insufficiency’.
The factors causally related to the exposure—physiologic third‐stage care or oxytocin prophylaxis—are outlined in Table 1, based on expert input on clinical decision‐making. During the integration stage (stage 3), we assessed 666 directed edges, of which 265 were retained, 72 were reversed, 2 were considered bi‐directional and 326 were removed. The final I‐DAG, which includes 35 covariates (three specific to multiparous individuals), is presented in Figure 2. The variables are organised into categories that reflect temporal flow from left to right: history and demographic characteristics, co‐morbidities, pregnancy‐related factors, labour‐related factors and delivery‐related factors. The corresponding index of all directed edges is provided in Appendix S6. Table 2 displays the candidate covariates added during the integration stage, along with the minimal sufficient adjustment sets, as produced by DAGitty.
Factors identified as influencing third‐stage management (physiologic care or oxytocin prophylaxis) in a midwifery context in Ontario, Canada.
Adequate prenatal careAlloimmunizationAnaemiaChorioamnionitisFetal distress/separationHypertensive disorders of pregnancyInduction of labourLeiomyomasMembership in a marginalised vs. privileged racial groupMultiplesOperative deliveryOxytocin augmentationPlacental disorder (e.g., previa, accreta)PolyhydramniosPre‐existing clotting disorderPrevious postpartum haemorrhageProlonged labour/exhaustionStillbirthTransfer of careUterine rupture
Directed acyclic graph (DAG) representing the hypothesised causal effect of physiologic third‐stage care versus oxytocin prophylaxis on postpartum haemorrhage (PPH). ART, assisted reproductive technologies; BMI, body mass index; CB, cesarean birth; GDM, gestational diabetes mellitus; HDP, hypertensive disorders of pregnancy; SES, socioeconomic status. This figure is available on DAGitty at: https://dagitty.net/mQNwELHUn.
Candidate covariates added during stage three of the evidence synthesis for constructing directed acyclic graphs protocol, and their corresponding minimal sufficient adjustment sets for estimating the total effect of physiologic third‐stage care versus oxytocin prophylaxis on postpartum haemorrhage, as produced by DAGitty.
Candidate covariates	Minimal sufficient adjustment set	 	1	2	3	4	 	Adequate prenatal care	—	—	—	✓	 	Maternal age	✓	✓	—	—	 	Alloimmunization	✓	—	—	✓	 	Anaemia	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Assisted reproduction technologies	✓	✓	✓	—	 	Body mass index	✓	✓	—	—	 	Chorioamnionitis	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Epidural	—	✓	✓	—	 	Foetal distress/separation	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Gestational diabetes mellitus	✓	✓	✓	—	 	Grand multiparity	—	—	—	—	 	Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Induction of labour	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Leiomyomas	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Macrosomia	✓	✓	✓	—	 	Marginalised vs. privileged group	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Multiples	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Non‐vertex presentation	✓	—	—	—	 	Operative delivery	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Oxytocin augmentation	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Placental disorder	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Placental insufficiency	✓	✓	✓	—	 	Polyhydramnios	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Post‐term gestation	✓	✓	—	—	 	Pre‐existing clotting disorder	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Preterm gestation	✓	—	—	—	 	Previous caesareana	✓	✓	✓	—	 	Previous postpartum haemorrhagea	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Prolonged labour/exhaustion	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Socio‐economic status	✓	—	—	—	 	Severe perineal trauma	—	—	✓	—	 	Stillbirth	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Substance use	✓	✓	✓	—	 	Transfer of care	✓	✓	✓	✓	 	Uterine rupture	✓	✓	✓	✓
Multiparous individuals only.

Comment

Principal Findings
The relationships between third‐stage management, PPH and variables identified in the literature are complex. Using the evidence synthesis for constructing DAGs protocol, we produced an I‐DAG that demonstrates our knowledge, theories and assumptions about the causal relationships within the data, incorporating input from subject‐matter experts. If these assumptions are correct, an unbiased estimate of the total causal effect of third‐stage management (physiologic third‐stage care versus oxytocin prophylaxis) on PPH can be obtained by conditioning on the variables identified in any one of the minimal sufficient adjustment sets. This can be done through restriction, stratification or adjustment of these variables in a multivariable regression model. Stratifying by parity is particularly important to account for the covariates that are specific to multiparous individuals.

Strengths of the Study
One of the strengths of this study is the systematic approach we used to construct the I‐DAGs. We updated the previous systematic review of this research question using Cochrane review methodology, and integrated this with approaches to causal inference through the novel evidence synthesis for constructing DAGs protocol. This combination resulted in a rigorous method of DAG construction that emphasises transparency. We also adhered to the latest recommendations for reporting on DAGs, including visually arranging variables to ensure that arcs flow in the same direction to depict temporality, and including all relevant variables, even those for which direct measurement may not be available. By explicitly including nodes representing selection mechanisms (variables used to define physiologic birth), our I‐DAG makes visible potential biases arising from sample selection. The I‐DAGs from this study, along with the minimal sufficient adjustment sets, can be used to inform study design and analyses for future research on PPH prevention, minimising bias in estimates of causal effects. They can also direct sensitivity analyses and assist in evaluating the risk of bias in non‐randomised studies of interventions using tools like ROBINS‐I, which requires consideration of confounding domains.

Limitations of the Data
This study is not without limitations. The reliability of estimates quantifying the relationship between third‐stage management and PPH relies on the inclusion of all relevant variables without measurement error, as well as the assumption that the underlying hypotheses and theories reflected in the I‐DAGs accurately represent the true data‐generating process. These assumptions are unlikely to hold entirely. First, not all variables will be measurable or feasible to include in the analysis, though the minimal sufficient adjustment sets can still guide sensitivity analyses to quantify the impact of these unobserved confounders. Second, measurement error can bias estimates. In the context of PPH‐prevention research, imprecision in blood loss estimation is a known concern. Although not explicitly represented in our I‐DAG, future work could consider incorporating nodes for mismeasured variables. Third, despite following a structured protocol for DAG construction, subjectivity remains. For example, the factors influencing midwives' decision‐making in the third stage may be represented differently by others in varied contexts. Finally, since the selection of variables was primarily guided by limited previous research, there is a risk that important variables were overlooked, although this was partially mitigated by incorporating expert knowledge.
Overlooked variables related to previous measurements (e.g., previous PPH) are of particular concern because these measurements may share common causes with both the exposure and the outcome. Routine adjustment for previous measurements risks opening non‐causal paths through unmeasured common causes, potentially leading to biased estimates. We mitigated this risk by constructing a detailed causal DAG that includes common causes (e.g., socio‐economic status, membership in a privileged vs. marginalised group). However, the risk of unmeasured confounding remains, highlighting the importance of assessing the robustness of findings to residual confounding.
Despite these limitations, as Tennant et al. point out, a DAG is only considered incorrect if it fails to represent its underlying assumptions and hypotheses, given that the true data‐generating process is never fully known. By explicitly declaring our assumptions and sharing these I‐DAGs, we open them to scrutiny, inviting others to modify or update the provided DAGitty codes based on their own knowledge or emerging evidence.

Interpretation
Among the assumptions made were the factors influencing midwives' decisions regarding the use of physiologic third‐stage care or synthetic oxytocin prophylaxis. The midwives we consulted emphasised factors directly related to the physiologic processes of the third stage. If labour progresses without the need for synthetic oxytocin, the fetal heart rate remains normal, and birth occurs without instrumental assistance, they expect that the placenta will separate without difficulty and that the uterus will continue to contract effectively. This aligns with findings from a qualitative study of expert midwives in Ireland and New Zealand.
Factors that midwives consider when deciding on the use of synthetic oxytocin prophylaxis include those that may prevent effective uterine contractions (e.g., chorioamnionitis, leiomyomas, polyhydramnios, exhaustion), interfere with haemostasis (e.g., coagulopathy, hypertensive disorder, anaemia), hinder placental separation (e.g., placental disorders), inhibit endogenous oxytocin release (e.g., infant separation), or affect the individual's ability to expel the placenta (e.g., exhaustion). Additionally, midwives may consider the need to conserve blood loss in the immediate postpartum (e.g., anaemia, alloimmunisation) when making decisions. In contrast to previous literature, the midwives we consulted did not view epidural use as an independent factor influencing third‐stage management. They noted that intrapartum oxytocin is typically used alongside an epidural, but if the uterus continues to contract effectively without the need for augmentation, they expect it to do so during placental expulsion as well.
Although no data are available for the Canadian context, membership in marginalised versus privileged racial groups was identified as an independent factor influencing third‐stage management approaches among New Zealand midwives. Reasons for this may include cultural preferences, as well as structural inequalities that affect individuals' access to information and resources. Adequate prenatal care is linked with continuity of care, which has been shown to increase use of physiologic third‐stage care.

Conclusions
Using the example of PPH prevention, this paper presented a systematic and replicable framework for DAG construction. The I‐DAG produced through a synthesis of the evidence using the evidence synthesis for constructing DAGs protocol represents the hypothesised causal relationships between third‐stage management, PPH and relevant variables, while also exposing our assumptions about these relationships to scrutiny. As the next step, this I‐DAG will be used to guide the design of a future cohort study aimed at estimating causal effects of third‐stage management on PPH outcomes among midwifery‐led births in Ontario. Given the challenges of conducting RCTs to study physiological childbearing processes, this I‐DAG will be a valuable tool for strengthening the design and analysis of this study, reducing bias, and contributing to evidence‐based practice.

Author Contributions
Vanessa Hébert: conceptualisation, methodology, data curation, investigation, writing – original draft, visualisation. Irina I. Oltean: data curation, investigation, writing – review and editing. Giulia M. Muraca: methodology, writing – review and editing. Nancy Santesso: investigation, writing – review and editing. Elizabeth K. Darling: investigation, writing – review and editing, supervision.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

References
Global Causes of Maternal Death: A WHO Systematic Analysis
Third Stage of Labour Care for Women at Low Risk of Postpartum Haemorrhage
Role of Prophylactic Oxytocin in the Third Stage of Labor: Physiologic Versus Pharmacologically Influenced Labor and Birth
Physiological Third Stage of Labour: Support It or Lose It
Optimising Psychophysiology in Third Stage of Labour: Theory Applied to Practice
Irish and New Zealand Midwives' Expertise in Expectant Management of the Third Stage of Labour: The ‘MEET’ Study
How to… Promote a Physiological Third Stage of Labour
We Do Not Know How People Have Babies: An Opportunity for Epidemiologists to Have Meaningful Impact on Population‐Level Health and Wellbeing
ACOG Committee Opinion No. 766: Approaches to Limit Intervention During Labor and Birth
SOGC Joint Policy Statement on Normal Childbirth
Normal Childbirth: Physiologic Labor Support and Medical Procedures. Guidelines of the French National Authority for Health (HAS) With the Collaboration of the French College of Gynaecologists and Obstetricians (CNGOF) and the French College of Midwives (CNSF)
The Causal Inference Framework: A Primer on Concepts and Methods for Improving the Study of Well‐Woman Childbearing Processes
The Emotional and Hormonal Pathways of Labour and Birth: Integrating Mind, Body and Behaviour
The C‐Word: Scientific Euphemisms Do Not Improve Causal Inference From Observational Data
Causal Diagrams for Epidemiologic Research
Use of Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) to Identify Confounders in Applied Health Research: Review and Recommendations
Confounding, Causality, and Confusion: The Role of Intermediate Variables in Interpreting Observational Studies in Obstetrics
Does Adjusting for Causal Intermediate Confounders Resolve the Perinatal Crossover Paradox?
Reducing Bias Through Directed Acyclic Graphs
Evidence Synthesis for Constructing Directed Acyclic Graphs (ESC‐DAGs): A Novel and Systematic Method for Building Directed Acyclic Graphs
Supporting Healthy and Normal Physiologic Childbirth: A Consensus Statement by the American College of Nurse‐Midwives, Midwives Alliance of North America, and the National Association of Certified Professional Midwives
Systematic Review: The Clinical Effectiveness of Physiological (Expectant) Management of the Third Stage of Labor Following a Physiological Labor and Birth
Use of Labor Neuraxial Analgesia for Vaginal Delivery and Severe Maternal Morbidity
How to Develop Causal Directed Acyclic Graphs for Observational Health Research: A Scoping Review
Robust Causal Inference Using Directed Acyclic Graphs: The R Package ‘Dagitty’
The LENTE Study: The Effectiveness of Prophylactic Intramuscular Oxytocin in the Third Stage of Labor Among Low‐Risk Women in Primary Care Midwifery Practice: A Randomized Controlled Trial
The Significance of Acupuncture in the Third Stage of Labour
A Placebo‐Controlled Trial of Oral Ergometrine to Reduce Postpartum Hemorrhage
Comparison of Active and Physiologic Management of Third Stage of Labor
Comparison of Active Versus Expectant Management of Third Stage of Labour
Holistic Physiological Care Compared With Active Management of the Third Stage of Labour for Women at Low Risk of Postpartum Haemorrhage: A Cohort Study
Postpartum Haemorrhage in Nulliparous Women: Incidence and Risk Factors in Low and High Risk Women. A Dutch Population‐Based Cohort Study on Standard (> or = 500 mL) and Severe (> or = 1000 mL) Postpartum Haemorrhage
Risk Factors for Atonic Postpartum Hemorrhage: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Incidence and Risk Factors for Postpartum Hemorrhage After Vaginal Delivery: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Factors Associated With Severe Postpartum Haemorrhage: Systematic Review Using Bradford Hill's Causality Framework
Postpartum Hemorrhage Outcomes and Race
Race/Ethnicity as a Risk Factor in the Development of Postpartum Hemorrhage: A Thorough Systematic Review of Disparity in the Relationship Between Pregnancy and the Rate of Postpartum Hemorrhage
Risk of Postpartum Haemorrhage Is Associated With Ethnicity: A Cohort Study of 981 801 Births in England
Recommendations for Using Causal Diagrams to Study Racial Health Disparities
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Risk of Adverse Obstetric Outcomes in Dichorionic Twin Pregnancies: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
“Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions Version 6.5 (Updated August 2024)
ROBINS‐I: A Tool for Assessing Risk of Bias in Non‐Randomised Studies of Interventions
Measurement of Blood Loss: Review of the Literature
The Unfulfilled Promise of Longitudinal Designs for Causal Inference
Outcomes of Physiological and Active Third Stage Labour Care Amongst Women in New Zealand