Algorithmic approach for endoscopic management of colorectal polyps: an up-to-date review
With the growing incidence of colorectal cancer worldwide, mainly due to increased early detection in screening programs, usage of endoscopic techniques for management of colorectal lesions have been gaining progressive attention. Each year, more advanced endoscopic techniques come to practice and old ones find technical enhancements. By reviewing guidelines, randomized controlled trials, meta-analyses, and original research, we aim to establish an evidence-based approach for selecting the optimal endoscopic method based on the polyp size, morphology, and classification. We critically analyze the advantages, limitations, and potential complications associated with each technique, providing a comprehensive overview for clinicians and suggest areas which may yet need further studies to be conducted. Our comprehensive review can provide a framework that will help clinicians choose an approach most suitable for their patients. This review attempts to contribute to the optimization of endoscopic management in colorectal polyps, with eventual improvement in patient outcomes.

Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) accounted for approximately 10% of all new cancer cases in 2018, with an estimated total of around 1.8 million cases. The incidence of CRC is predicted to grow even higher by 2030, particularly in the younger population. The rising prevalence of early CRC detection in screening programs has reduced the need for surgical polypectomy. In recent years, the endoscopic management of colorectal polyps has attracted significant attention. The endoscopic removal of colorectal lesions has been indicated to lower the incidence and mortality of CRC, making it a necessary skill for all endoscopists worldwide to acquire. There are various classifications for colorectal polyps, based on size, morphology, and vascular pattern, such as the Paris, Kudo pit pattern, Japan NBI expert team (JNET), and Sano classifications. These classifications can be employed to predict the risk of submucosal invasion (SMI), which can help physicians in risk assessment of lymph node metastasis based on its depth, or in determining the preferred endoscopic technique for managing the polyp. The Paris classification is one of the most credible classifications based on polyp morphology. Sessile and, in particular, depressed lesions are more likely to have advanced histology or SMI. The Kudo pit pattern and JNET are two of the most widely utilized classifications for predicting histology and SMI of colorectal lesions. The Sano classification applies blood vessel irregularity and capillary pattern to predict as well as assess the risk of invasion. This variety of classifications has complicated decision-making for endoscopists. This review aims to examine the current medical evidence on the endoscopic management of colorectal polyps, allowing endoscopists to compare the advantages and disadvantages of these techniques for different polyps and choose the best therapeutic option according to their skills as well as the characteristics of the polyps. Figure 1 displays an algorithmic approach for the endoscopic management of colorectal polyps. In the following sections, we will discuss each technique in detail, with a summary of their performance reported in Table 1.

Methods
We performed a literature search through PubMed for studies published between January 2013 and September 2024. The search terms included 'colon', 'rectum', 'colorectal', 'polyp', and 'polypectomy', in addition to other relevant keywords. Filters were applied to select observational studies, clinical trials, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses, with only studies published in the English language included in the selection.
The algorithm suggested for endoscopic management of colorectal polyps.
Abbreviations: CSP: Cold Snare Polypectomy; EFTR: Endoscopic Full-Thickness resection; ESD: Endoscopic Submucosal Dissection; FTRD: Full-Thickness Resection Device; HSP: Hot Snare Polypectomy; LSL: Lateral Spreading Lesion; SMI: Submocosal Invasion.
1. Pedunculated polyps
Table 2 compares the endoscopic techniques for removal of pedunculated polyps. Hot snare polypectomy (HSP) is the standard and most frequently used technique for removing pedunculated polyps. Nevertheless, the rate of adverse events, such as bleeding and perforation, after HSP is concerning. In recent years, the application of cold snare polypectomy (CSP) for small (<10 mm) pedunculated polyps has attracted attention. Although CSP has a higher rate of immediate bleeding compared to HSP, especially for polyps >6 mm, it has a lower rate of delayed post-polypectomy bleeding (DPPB) as well as a shorter procedure time. The en bloc resection rate of CSP for small pedunculated polyps is approximately 100%.
Large pedunculated polyps (>30 mm), particularly those with thick stalks, have an increased risk of bleeding. For these polyps, for which conventional snare resection is challenging or impossible, endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) has been recently proposed. In a retrospective study, ESD was carried out for pedunculated polyps with a mean diameter of 39.7 mm, where en bloc resection was achieved for 96.5% (28/29) of the polyps without any severe adverse events.
Insulated-tip knife polypectomy is another safe and feasible alternative for removing these difficult pedunculated polyps.
Post-polypectomy bleeding of pedunculated polyps is a major concern. Use of prophylactic endoloop may be effective for preventing immediate bleeding in polyps >15 mm. However, prophylactic clipping before polypectomy and injecting the stalk are linked to a higher rate of DPPB. Although prophylactic epinephrine injection can lower the rate of immediate post-polypectomy bleeding, particularly for large pedunculated polyps, it has no impact on DPPB.
A brief description of endoscopic techniques for removal of colorectal polyps.
Techniques	Description	 	C-CSP	By utilizing a snare without using electrocautery, the polyp and normal tissue within 1-2mm is encircled, grasped, and resected.	 	U-CSP	Complete suction of air of the intestinal tract, partial opening of the lumen with sterile water and immersion of the polyp in water and then resecting the polyp like C-CSP.	 	HSP	HSP is performed similar to a C-CSP, with the only difference being that after capturing the polyp with 1-2mm margin of normal tissue, an electrical current is applied. It uses electrocautery.	 	Forceps polypectomy	It bites the polypoid tissue of by using biopsy forceps.	 	EMR	It involves injecting a solution into the submucosal space of a lesion. Then the lesion will be resected by a snare using high-frequency current (conventional HS-EMR) or without using high-frequency current (CS-EMR).	 	U-EMR	It carries the lesion away from the submucosal layer by emptying the air of the intestine and filling it with water, thus avoiding injection.	 	EMR-P	Snaring is carried out after incising the circumference of lesion.	 	A-EMR	To avoid slippage during ensnaring of the lesion, after injection, using a snare tip, a small incision at the oral side of the polyp is performed.	 	ESD	This technique has an injection phase similar to EMR. The fluid-filled submucosal space separates the layers and the submucosal layer is dissected by incising the circumference of the lesion using an endoscopic knife with an electrical current.	 	Hybrid ESD	Compared with ESD, this method provides a partial dissection of the submucosal layer followed by a snare-assisted resection.	 	EFTR	The FTRD is added to the tip of the endoscope. Then it attaches to the target site in colon and allows the resection of all layers.
Abbreviations: A-EMR: Anchoring EMR; C-CSP: Conventional Cold Snare Polypectomy; CS-EMR: Cold Snare EMR; C-EMR: Conventional EMR; EFTR: Endoscopic Full-Thickness Resection; EMR: Endoscopic Mucosal Resection; EMR-P: EMR Precutting; ESD: Endoscopic Submucosal Dissection; FTRD: Full-Thickness Resection Device; HS-EMR: Hot Snare EMR; HSP: Hot Snare Polypectomy; U-CSP: Underwater CSP; U-EMR: Underwater EMR.
Characteristics of the techniques for removal of the pedunculated polyps.
Method	Characteristics	 	HSP	-Standard and most used technique-High rate of adverse events	 	CSP	-High en bloc resection rate in small (<10 mm) polyps-Lower rate of DPPB and shorter procedure time than HSP-Higher rate of immediate post polypectomy bleeding than HSP	 	ESD	-Suitable for large (>30 mm) pedunculated polyps
Abbreviations: HSP: Hot Snare Polypectomy; CSP: Cold Snare Polypectomy; ESD: Endoscopic Submucosal Dissection.
2. Non-pedunculated polyps
1. Noninvasive polyps
Table 3 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the endoscopic techniques for managing noninvasive non-pedunculated polyps. In the following, these techniques will be compared based on the polyp size.
2.1.1. Small polyps (<10 mm)
CSP
Owing to its high complete resection rate (CRR) and low incidence of adverse events, conventional cold snare polypectomy (C-CSP) has been the preferred and most frequently used method for removing small colorectal lesions. Nevertheless, recent studies have revealed a high incomplete resection rate (IRR) associated with C-CSP, emphasizing the need for improvement in CSP techniques and taking alternative endoscopic methods into account. One of the most recent enhancements in CSP techniques is underwater CSP (U-CSP), which is inspired by underwater endoscopic mucosal resection (U-EMR), though there are few studies on its safety and effectiveness. A study by Zachou, M. et al recorded more extensive muscularis mucosa resection, a higher en bloc resection rate, as well as a lower IRR in U-CSP compared with C-CSP. Higher R0 resection and polyp retrieval rates for U-CSP have also been reported (19).
Characteristics of the techniques for removal of the non-pedunculated polyps with no invasion.
Size	Method	Characteristics	 	<10 mm	C-CSP	-Standard and most frequently used method-High CRR and low rate of adverse events-High rate of IRR	 	U-CSP	-Higher en bloc resection rate, R0 resection rate, polyp retrieval rate and lower IRR compared with C-CSP	 	HSP	-Slightly higher en bloc resection rate, delayed bleeding and lower IRR and immediate bleeding compared with C-CSP-More suitable for polyps >6 mm	 	Forceps polypectomy	-High en bloc resection rate for diminutive (<5 mm) polyps, especially for polyps under 3 or 4 mm	 	CS-EMR	-Use for small polyps is controversial-No difference in IRR, CRR and bleeding ang longer procedure time than CSP	 	U-EMR	-High CRR, en bloc resection rate and R0 resection rate	 	10-19 mm	C-EMR	-Decreased en bloc resection rate with larger polyps-Higher risk of DPPB in polyps over 10 mm-Administration of antibiotic prophylaxis seems not to be effective and considered controversial	 	EMR-P	-Higher en bloc and R0 resection rate higher than C-EMR, especially for polyps >15 mm-Long procedure time	 	A-EMR	-Higher en bloc and R0 resection rate higher than C-EMR	 	U-EMR	-Higher en bloc and R0 resection rate higher than C-EMR	 	CS-EMR	-High en bloc resection rate-Low IRR, polyp recurrence rate and adverse events	 	>20 mm	C-EMR	-Relatively Low en bloc resection rate and requires more than 3 pieces-High recurrence rate-Enhancement of performance with viscus hyper tonic or SIC-800 solution instead of normal saline	 	U-EMR	-Higher en bloc resection rate and IRR, lower polyp recurrence rate, shorter mean procedure time and requiring fewer pieces compared with C-EMR-Lower en bloc resection rate and shorter procedure time compared with ESD	 	CS-EMR	-Low rate of adverse events-High rate of residual adenoma	 	ESD	-High rate of en bloc resection rate, R0 resection rate and low recurrence rate even for polyps exceeding 60 mm (larger polyps have a higher rate of post-ESD coagulation syndrome)-High rate of adverse events compared with EMR but same day discharge is safe	 	Hybrid ESD	-Shorter and less complex procedure compared with conventional ESD-Lower en bloc resection rate
Abbreviations: A-EMR: Anchoring EMR; C-CSP: Conventional Cold Snare Polypectomy; CS-EMR: Cold Snare EMR; C-EMR: Conventional EMR; EMR: Endoscopic Mucosal Resection; EMR-P: EMR precutting; ESD: Endoscopic Submucosal Dissection; HSP: Hot Snare Polypectomy; U-CSP: Underwater CSP; U-EMR: Underwater EMR.
Characteristics of the techniques for removal of the non-pedunculated polyps with superficial SMI.
Method	Characteristics	 	ESD	-High en bloc resection rate-Low recurrence rate	 	EFTR	-Indication in difficult and not endoscopically removable lesions-High en bloc resection rate-Low adverse events	 	EMR	-Effective for <20 mm lesions-En bloc EMR is more suitable for lesions with higher suspicion of superficial SMI-Higher risk of bleeding in piece meal resection of LSLs-EMR-P associated with a higher risk of perforation for polypectomy of LSLs
Abbreviations: EFTR: Endoscopic Full-Thickness Resection; EMR: Endoscopic Mucosal Resection; ESD: Endoscopic Submucosal Dissection.
Hot snare polypectomy (HSP)
A lower incidence of IRR compared to CSP has made HSP a primary candidate for removing small polyps. The most recent study comparing IRR between the two techniques reported an IRR of 4% for HSP, while CSP had an IRR of 7% (16). Even though the rate of immediate bleeding was higher following CSP in several studies, the number of immediate bleeding events requiring intervention was similar between the two techniques. The rates of delayed bleeding, en bloc resection, and CRR were slightly higher in the HSP group (16, 20-22). Notably, although the overall CRR of HSP was only slightly higher than CSP for polyps under 10 mm, a study by Yamamoto, T. et al. indicated that the main difference in CRR between the two methods lied on polyps larger than 6 mm in size (69% in HSP versus. 43.5% in CSP). Histologically, the resection depth of CSP is more superficial than HSP; nevertheless, the rate of obtaining muscularis mucosa was comparable between the two techniques (96% in HSP and 92% in CSP). On the contrary, obtaining submucosal tissue was significantly higher in HSP (81% versus. 24%). Endoscopists should also consider the differences in post-operative follow-up between these methods. An interesting study by de Benito Sainz, M. et al revealed that while a similar number of patients experienced abdominal pain 1 hour following both procedures (18.4% after HSP and 18.3% after CSP), the rate was higher in the HSP group after 5 hours (16.5% versus. 5.9%). Further, fewer patients were asymptomatic 24 hours after HSP compared to CSP, which is in line with the higher number of emergency service visits after HSP compared to CSP.
The efficacy and safety of submucosal injection pre-HSP were reviewed in a study by Kim, S. J. et al (26). The CRR did not differ between the two groups (96.4% in HSP and 95.5% in HSP with submucosal injection), but the HSP group had a significantly lower R0 resection rate (49.7% versus. 74.8%). There were no differences in the incidence of adverse events between the two groups.
Forceps polypectomy
Diminutive polyps (<5 mm) are the most frequently encountered polyps during colonoscopies, highlighting the importance of proper management strategies. While the CRR is higher in CSP compared to cold forceps polypectomy (CFP) for small polyps (<10 mm), various studies have found that this difference almost disappears for polyps under 3 mm or 4 mm in size. A recent meta-analysis has confirmed these findings. For polyps <4 mm, CRR, the mean procedure time and adverse events are similar between CSP and CFP, though the en bloc resection rate is significantly higher in CSP (91.7% versus 42.6%) (30). A meta-analysis by Kamal, F. et al (31) also confirmed that while the overall CRR was slightly higher in CSP for diminutive polyps (94% versus 90.7%), there was no difference in CRR for polyps under 3 mm (97% in CFP and 96.3% in CSP). Nevertheless, the failure of tissue retrieval was higher in CSP. A follow-up study by Kuwai, T, et al reported that after a year, all recurrent polyps following CFP were benign and <3 mm in size, with all of them being successfully removed by re-CFP. No recurrent polyps were recorded in these patients after two years of follow-up.
Jumbo forceps are larger in size than standard forceps. Jumbo forceps polypectomy (JFP) has shown a higher CRR compared to standard forceps polypectomy and requires fewer bites for removing diminutive polyps. In comparison to CSP, JFP has a higher IRR for polyps under 6 mm (7.7% versus 11.1%). On the other hand, for polyps under 5 mm, the CRR revealed no significant difference between the two (92.2% for CSP and 92.0% for JFP).
Endoscopic Mucosal Resection (EMR)
CSP with submucosal saline injection or cold snare endoscopic mucosal resection (CS-EMR) is a more recent method suggested for removing small colorectal lesions. However, there is still considerable controversy surrounding the use of CS-EMR for small polyps. Several studies have demonstrated no significant difference in IRR, CRR, and bleeding between CSP and CS-EMR, while the latter has shown a longer mean procedure time. Further, there are uncertainties regarding the usage of CS-EMR versus hot snare EMR (HS-EMR). CS-EMR has proved to be non-inferior to HS-EMR in terms of CRR and adverse events, including bleeding, but HS-EMR has a significantly higher R0 resection rate.
The efficacy and safety of U-EMR for polypectomy of small polyps have been compared against conventional EMR (C-EMR) in two recent studies. The results revealed that the CRR (87.3% in C-EMR versus 83.1% in U-EMR) and the en bloc resection rate (94.4% in C-EMR and 91.5% in U-EMR) were slightly higher in the C-EMR group. On the contrary, the R0 resection rate was significantly higher in U-EMR (84.7% versus 59.0%), and the mean procedure time was higher in C-EMR, whereas the adverse events were comparable between the two methods.
The ESGE guideline recommends applying CSP for polypectomy of small lesions owing to its high CRR and safety. Some studies have reported the IRR of CSP to be as high as 7% (16) and 8.5% (17) for polyps larger than 5 mm and 6 mm. Further, forceps polypectomy has demonstrated comparable results to CSP for diminutive polyps. Thus, endoscopists should consider all available methods for any given polyp. Notably, a study by Ninomiya Y. et al suggested that low-grade diminutive adenomas under 5 mm may not need polypectomy, and surveillance may be sufficient.
Several studies have indicated that the application of a dedicated snare made of thin wire (0.23 mm) instead of normal wire (0.40 mm) can enhance CSP outcomes. CSP with a dedicated snare presents a higher CRR without elevating the risk of bleeding and adverse events. Further, a study by Makino, T. et al found that the rate of histologically demonstrated submucosal artery injury was significantly lower when using a dedicated snare (4.1% versus 16.1%).
In addition to the techniques discussed above, other methods are also available for the polypectomy of small polyps. Argon plasma ablation has indicated no difference in polyp recurrence rate and adverse events compared to CSP and HSP. The pseudopolyp technique is another novel method that has presented a higher complete histological excision rate compared to CSP (76.3% versus 63.8%) in a study by Din, S. et al.
2.1.2. Intermediate polyps (10-20 mm)
EMR
Although the en bloc resection rate drops when polyp size exceeds 10 mm, endoscopic mucosal resection with submucosal injection remains one of the most frequently utilized polypectomy techniques (50). Various EMR-based techniques can be compared according to their effectiveness and safety with C-EMR.
Despite requiring relatively longer procedure times, EMR precutting (EMR-P) has proved to have higher en bloc and R0 resection rates than C-EMR without augmenting the risk of adverse events. The en bloc and R0 resection rates are particularly higher in polyps larger than 15 mm.
A study by Oh, C. K. et al reported that the CRR, en bloc resection rate, and R0 resection rate were higher in Anchoring EMR (A-EMR) compared to C-EMR. Notably, there was no significant difference in the mean procedure time.
Studies have indicated that U-EMR has a higher R0 resection rate and en bloc resection rate than C-EMR, with comparable procedure times and adverse events. On the other hand, the median resection depth was not significantly different between the two techniques.
CSP is widely accepted as an effective method for removing small polyps (<10 mm), but its use for 10-19 mm polyps has not been extensively researched. A study by Mangira, D. et al (54) found that the incomplete resection rate, polyp recurrence rate, and adverse events for 10-19 mm polyps following CS-EMR were 1.7%, 1.7%, and 3.4%, respectively, demonstrating the safety of this method. Furthermore, the en bloc resection rate of 82.5% and histologic complete resection rate of 63.8% represent the effectiveness of this method, in addition to its safety. The mean procedure time for CS-EMR is also slightly shorter than that of C-EMR.
Even though the ESGE recommend HSP as the preferred endoscopic technique for removing 10-20 mm polyps (7), studies have found that EMR has a higher CRR, particularly for polyps larger than 15 mm. Nevertheless, HSP has a slightly shorter mean procedure time.
As mentioned previously, CSP is typically applied for small polyps, but Ulrich, J. D. et al suggested using CSP with a hybrid snare for polyps within 10-15 mm in size. The CRR following CSP was 85.4%, and when CSP failed, lesions were immediately resected by HSP using the same snare. The CRR after HSP was 61.5%, resulting in an overall CRR of 80.3%. On the other hand, the risk of immediate bleeding after CSP was higher than the HSP.
2.1.3. Large polyps (>20 mm)
EMR
C-EMR is the method suggested by the European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) for managing large nonpedunculated colorectal polyps (LNPCPs) (7). However, C-EMR often requires more than three pieces and has been linked to a relatively low en bloc resection rate and high recurrence in recent studies. Thus, alternative methods should be considered by endoscopists for LNPCP removal.
U-EMR has emerged as an attractive alternative to C-EMR in recent years. U-EMR has demonstrated a higher en bloc resection rate and a lower recurrence rate, together with a shorter mean procedure time, in almost all studies. Notably, Rodriguez Sanchez, J. et al (58) found that this difference is more significant for polyps within 20-30 mm, while Nagl, S. et al (60) demonstrated this significant difference for polyps between 30 and 40 mm. Further, U-EMR offers a higher rate of successful procedures (85% versus 78.7%) and a higher IRR, using significantly fewer pieces than C-EMR. The rate of adverse events is comparable between the two methods.
For polyps within 20-30 mm size range, U-EMR has a significantly lower en bloc rate and R0 resection rate compared to ESD. Nevertheless, the mean procedure time of U-EMR is shorter by a substantial margin, while the recurrence rate is comparable. CS-EMR has gained attention in recent years for its utility in LNPCPs. CS-EMR is associated with lower rates of adverse events, bleeding, and perforation when compared to hot snare EMR (HS-EMR), but it has a higher rate of residual adenoma (23.7% versus 13.8%). In a meta-analysis by Ramai, D. et al, the overall recurrence rate of CS-EMR was recorded as 21%.
The high recurrence rate of EMR can be attributed to piecemeal resection, intraprocedural bleeding, high-grade dysplasia, and lesion size ≥ 40 mm. Several techniques have been suggested to enhance EMR and lower the recurrence rate, including argon plasma coagulation, snare tip soft coagulation, extended EMR, and EMR-P. Both argon plasma coagulation and snare tip soft coagulation lessen the local recurrence rates by thermal ablation of margin defects post-EMR. Usage of hybrid argon plasma coagulation ablation can lower recurrence rates to 0-2.2%. Notably, there is no difference in thermal margin treatment between snare tip soft coagulation and argon plasma coagulation. Snare tip soft coagulation is faster to apply and has lower costs as well as plastic waste, making it a preferred thermal margin treatment post-EMR.
ESD
ESD is one of the preferred endoscopic methods for large polyps, alongside EMR. While ESD offers a considerable advantage over C-EMR in terms of en bloc resection rate, R0 resection rate, recurrence rate, CRR, and lateral margin involvement, it is also linked to longer procedure times, adverse events such as bleeding and perforation, as well as a higher overall need for surgery. Notably, in a recent meta-analysis, Lim, C. X. et al suggested that only right colonic polyps are associated with an increased risk of perforation. Although polyp size over 35 mm appears to be associated with technically challenging ESD (73), no significant difference in en bloc resection rate, CRR, perforation, and bleeding was recorded when comparing ESD in 20-39 mm, 40-59 mm, and over 60 mm polyps.
The application of Hybrid ESD for colorectal lesions is growing to overcome the complexity of conventional ESD. The CRR and en bloc resection rates of Hybrid ESD are similar to or slightly higher than those of ESD. Nevertheless, Hybrid ESD has a shorter procedure time and a higher perforation rate. The rates of adverse events, recurrences, and need for surgery in Hybrid ESD were recorded to be 7.7%, 4.5%, and 3.6%, respectively.
The risk factors associated with unsuccessful ESD include lesion diameter over 40 or 50 mm, submucosal invasion (SMI), right-sided lesions, and severe fibrosis. Lesion diameter over 40 or 50 mm and severe fibrosis are independently associated with a higher rate of perforation. Poor lifting, more frequently occurring with lateral spreading tumors, is significantly associated with a higher risk of perforation. In addition, rectal lesions and the lack of a thin-type endoscope raise the rate of bleeding after ESD (78). A study by Jung, Y. et al indicated that for Hybrid ESD, the en bloc resection rate is significantly related to the degree of visualization during snaring and the presence of fibrosis. The CRR of Hybrid ESD is linked to the endoscopist's skill and the gross morphology of the lesion. They also found that if all these technical factors are considered, the rate of en bloc resection in Hybrid ESD could reach as high as 87.5%, comparable to ESD.
In recent years, various technical advancements have been harnessed to enhance the performance and lower the difficulty of ESD. The application of scissors-type knives can significantly boost the self-completion rate of ESD for inexperienced residents by mitigating the difficulty of the procedure. The application of S-O clips in ESD can enhance the visualization of the endoscopist and achieve shorter procedure times as well as lower rates of adverse events.
The utility of antibiotic prophylaxis in reducing post-polypectomy adverse events in patients undergoing EMR or ESD is under debate. Zhang, Q. S. et al demonstrated that the rate of adverse events when administering antibiotic prophylaxis is significantly lower. There were fewer events of abdominal pain (2.8% versus 14.9%), diarrhea (2.0% versus 9.3%), fever (0.9% versus 8.4%), and inflammatory markers such as leukocytosis (2.0% versus 11.2%) and C-reactive protein (2.0% versus 10.7%) compared to the no-antibiotic group. Shi, Z. et al reported only two cases of infection in patients who underwent EMR and did not take antibiotic prophylaxis. All of them were resolved through taking levofloxacin for 3 days. No difference was reported in polyp relapse, post-operative infection, and wound surface healing. It is shown that antibiotic prophylaxis can significantly lower post-polypectomy coagulation syndrome rates and post-operative events. Conversely, a study by Shichijo, S. et al concluded that use of prophylactic antibiotic did not show impressive outcomes in mitigating the risk of post-ESD coagulation syndrome (PECS). The rate of PECS in the group that took antibiotic prophylaxis was 4.7%, whereas the rate of PECS in the control group was 7.5%.
DPPB is one of the most important adverse events of polypectomy. There are various risk factors linked to DPPB that should be taken into account. Patient-related risk factors include hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, antithrombotic drugs, and aspirin. On the other hand, diabetes, smoking, and warfarin are not risk factors for DPPB. Polyps >10 mm are related to more events of DPPB, whereas the location of polyps in the right or left semicolon is not a risk factor. Among the endoscopic techniques, a recent meta-analysis has demonstrated that EMR is associated with a higher risk of DPPB, while ESD, HSP, argon plasma coagulation, and the experience of the endoscopist are not related to a higher risk for DPPB (86). Risk factors for bleeding in cirrhosis patients include increased age, polypectomy time over 37 minutes, antiplatelet use within 5 days, and lesion diameter >15 mm.
Prophylactic clipping is one of the most utilized methods to prevent DPPB. It is effective for non-pedunculated, adenomatous proximal polyps over 20 mm in size or patients taking antithrombotic drugs, but it does not lower the risk for polyps under 20 mm, distal, large serrated polyps. Prophylactic clipping can mitigate the rate of significant post-EMR bleeding in the right colon, but it has no effect on other adverse events such as delayed perforation and post-EMR pain. Another suggested method to prevent DPPB is cyanoacrylate. In a study by Martines, G. et al, no DPPB was observed in patients who underwent EMR with cyanoacrylate application. Anticoagulants are a risk factor for post-polypectomy bleeding. Some guidelines suggest using heparin-bridge therapy in patients whose anticoagulant treatment is interrupted for polypectomy; however, heparin-bridge therapy seems to be associated with significantly higher rates of post-polypectomy bleeding.
2.2. Submucosal Invasive Cancer (SMIC)
Prediction of the likelihood of SMIC is a critical factor in determining the most suitable polypectomy method. To assess the presence or depth of any submucosal invasion in nonpedunculated polyps, the ESGE recommends using high-definition white light endoscopy in combination with chromoendoscopy before any treatment. High-quality photo- and/or video documentation is often preferred over biopsies for specifying the most advanced pathologies, where biopsies are only required if deep submucosal invasion (SMI) is suspected. Studies have indicated that ulceration, excavation, deep demarcated depression, Paris classification 0-IIc and 0-IIa + IIc, mucosal friability, fold convergence, Sano capillary pattern IIIB, Hiroshima C3, NICE 3, JNET 3, and Kudo pit pattern V are more frequently linked to deep SMIC. The probability of deep SMI is higher in Kudo pit pattern Vn, whereas Kudo pit pattern VI and Sano IIIA are more commonly associated with superficial SMI. Further, the JNET 2B pattern demonstrates the presence of at least high-grade dysplasia and frequently superficial SMI, which may suggest the utilization of endoscopic en bloc resection. Kudo pit pattern V is the strongest indicator of SMIC, where polyps manifesting with this pattern and Paris classification 0-IIc are considered "overt" SMIC, which are easier to detect. In polyps without overt endoscopic evidence of invasion (covert SMIC), Paris classification, surface morphology, size, and location are taken into account to evaluate the risk of invasion. Proximal 0-IIa granular or 0-Is granular lesions have the lowest risk of SMIC (0.7% and 2.3%), whereas distal 0-Is non-granular lesions bear the highest risk (21.4%).
Laterally spreading lesions (LSLs) are a significant precursor to colorectal cancer, and their incidence is increasing. The overall rate of SMI in all LSLs is reported to be 6.1%-8.5%. However, the rate of SMI varies across subtypes: 31.6% in non-granular pseudodepressed LSLs, 10.5% in granular-nodular mixed LSLs, 4.9% in non-granular flat elevated LSLs, and 0.5% in granular homogenous LSLs. SMI is more common in distally located LSLs than proximally located ones, with its proportion growing with the size of LSLs (4.6% in 10-19 mm, 9.2% in 20-29 mm, 16.5% in >30 mm). A study by Yamada, M. et al, they observed that the rate of submucosal invasion was 19% in granular LSLs, with 71% being deep SMI. The risk factors for deep SMI in granular LSLs included the presence of large nodules, depression, and invasive pit patterns. Further, the rate of SMI in non-granular LSLs was 39%, with 54% being deep SMI. Risk factors for deep SMI in non-granular LSLs were the presence of submucosal ass-like elevation, depression, and invasive pit patterns. Owing to the high probability of SMI, managing these lesions can be challenging. EMR and ESD are the standard methods for managing LSLs. Although ESD is technically challenging, time-consuming, and resource-intensive, with a higher rate of perforation and adverse events, it presents a slightly higher en bloc resection rate, R0 resection rate, and lower recurrence rate than EMR. A study by Bahin, Farzan, F. et al (99) suggested that wide-field EMR is sufficient for most LSLs, but selective ESD should be taken into account for LSLs with a high risk of SMI.
2.2.1 Superficial SMI
ESD
ESD is regarded as one of the most suitable endoscopic techniques for the polypectomy of colorectal lesions with a high suspicion of submucosal invasion. Regarding early colorectal cancer, a study by Shin et al. reported an en bloc resection rate of 89.8% following ESD for superficial submucosal invasive (SM1) cancers. The curative resection rate for these lesions was 71.4%, with two recurrences (2%) observed. Among non-curatively resected lesions, 42% underwent additional surgery, with no recurrence observed. Another study by Santos-Antunes et al. reported no lymph node metastasis or residual lesions following non-curative ESD of SM1 lesions.
Endoscopic Full-Thickness Resection (EFTR)
EFTR is a relatively new method that can provide endoscopists with a complete en bloc resection of the entire colorectal wall and may be indicated for lesions that otherwise cannot be removed by EMR and ESD (7). For superficial colorectal neoplasms (SM1, SM2, SM3), EFTR offers a 100% histologically confirmed full-thickness resection. No immediate or delayed bleeding, perforation, or need for emergency surgery is linked to EFTR, making it a safe and feasible alternative for managing polyps with superficial SMI alongside EMR and ESD.
EMR
For suspected submucosal invasive lesions, en bloc EMR is usually only effective for lesions <20 mm. Achieving en bloc resection in larger lesions calls for applying ESD or surgery. For the removal of benign lesions, en bloc EMR offers no major advantage compared with piecemeal EMR, while elevating the risk of deep mural injury; however, it indicates a lower rate of residual or recurrent adenoma for lesions with a suspicion of SMI. Therefore, en bloc EMR should only be reserved for these lesions (103). Table 4 summarizes the characteristics of these three techniques for managing polyps with superficial submucosal invasion.
2.2.2 Deep SMI
If the features of the lesion suggest a high probability of deep SMI, surgery should be considered. Nevertheless, when there is suspicion of superficially invasive colorectal cancer, consultation with an endoscopic center is required before referring patients for surgery (7). Endoscopic tattooing can be employed to enhance the identification of advanced colorectal lesions for future surgical intervention. Preoperative tattooing has been demonstrated to reduce identification time (3.4 versus 11.8 minutes), operation time (155.7 versus 177.2 minutes), and the distance from the lesion to the distal margin (3.7 versus 4.6 cm). Furthermore, tattooing is associated with a slightly higher rate of anal preservation together with a lower rate of first positive resection margin, without any reported incidence of edema, abscess, or necrosis (104). The incidence of localization errors also diminishes with tattooing compared to conventional colonoscopy (9.5% versus 15.4%), without elevating the risk of adverse events (105). Additionally, tattooing is one of the main factors associated with lower rates of repeat preoperative endoscopy (106).

Conclusion
In recent years, endoscopic techniques for colorectal polyp management have significantly advanced. While novel approaches such as hybrid and underwater EMR, and advanced snare devices demonstrate promise, definitive evidence supporting their superiority over traditional methods remains limited. In spite of advancements, adverse events, particularly for larger and complex lesions, continue to be a concern. Ongoing research as well as development of safer and more effective techniques are essential to minimize complications and improve patient outcomes.

Conflict of interests
There is no conflict of interest for authors of this article.

References
Global cancer statistics 2018: GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 185 countries
Increasing disparities in the age-related incidences of colon and rectal cancers in the United States, 1975-2010
Colorectal polypectomy and endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR): European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Clinical Guideline
Effect of colonoscopy screening on risks of colorectal cancer and related death
Colorectal polyp classification and management of complex polyps for surgeon endoscopists
Risk stratification for covert invasive cancer among patients referred for colonic endoscopic mucosal resection: a large multicenter cohort
Colorectal polypectomy and endoscopic mucosal resection: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline - Update 2024
Endoscopic approach to polyp recognition
Safety and efficacy of cold snare polypectomy for pedunculated (Ip) polyps measuring less than 10 mm in diameter
Bleeding risk of cold versus hot snare polypectomy for pedunculated colorectal polyps measuring 10 mm or less: subgroup analysis of a large randomized controlled trial
Cold snare polypectomy in small (<10 mm) pedunculated colorectal polyps: a systematic review and meta-analysis
The management of direct oral anticoagulants for colorectal endoscopic submucosal dissection: a multicenter observational study
Insulated-tip knife endoscopic polypectomy for difficult pedunculated colorectal polyps: a prospective pilot study
Endoscopic characteristics influencing postpolypectomy bleeding in 1147 consecutive pedunculated colonic polyps: a multicenter retrospective study
The effectiveness of prophylactic epinephrine compared to no prophylaxis for postpolypectomy bleeding in endoscopic colorectal surgery: a systematic review and meta-analysis
The efficacy and safety of cold snare versus hot snare polypectomy for endoscopic removal of small colorectal polyps: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Polypectomy for complete endoscopic resection of small colorectal polyps
Results of the COLDWATER randomized controlled trial: enhanced performance of underwater cold snare polypectomy for colorectal polyps 5-10 mm, independent of endoscopist experience
Underwater versus conventional cold snare polypectomy of colorectal polyps 4-9 mm in diameter: a prospective randomized controlled trial
Hot versus cold snare for colorectal polypectomies sized up to 10mm: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Effectiveness and safety of cold versus hot snare polypectomy: A meta-analysis
Cold versus hot snare polypectomy for small colorectal polyps: a pragmatic randomized controlled trial
Histological outcomes between hot and cold snare polypectomy for small colorectal polyps
Width and depth of resection for small colorectal polyps: hot versus cold snare polypectomy
Efficacy and safety of cold versus hot snare polypectomy for small (5-9 mm) colorectal polyps: a multicenter randomized controlled trial
Hot snare polypectomy versus endoscopic mucosal resection for small colorectal polyps: a randomized controlled trial
Cold snare polypectomy versus cold forceps polypectomy for diminutive and small colorectal polyps: a randomized controlled trial
A prospective randomized comparative study of cold forceps polypectomy by using narrow-band imaging endoscopy versus cold snare polypectomy in patients with diminutive colorectal polyps
Cold snare polypectomy compared to cold forceps polypectomy for endoscopic resection of guideline defined diminutive polyps: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials
Comparison of cold biopsy forceps vs cold snare for diminutive colorectal polyp removal: A multicenter non-inferiority randomized controlled trial
Cold snare versus cold forceps polypectomy for endoscopic resection of diminutive polyps: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Endoscopic resection of local recurrences of diminutive polyps by cold forceps polypectomy
What is the most accurate method for the treatment of diminutive colonic polyps?: Standard versus jumbo forceps polypectomy
A prospective randomized study comparing jumbo biopsy forceps to cold snare for the resection of diminutive colorectal polyps
Jumbo biopsy forceps versus cold snares for removing diminutive colorectal polyps: a prospective randomized controlled trial
Efficacy and safety of three different endoscopic methods in treatment of 6-20 mm colorectal polyps
Efficacy and safety of cold snare polypectomy versus cold endoscopic mucosal resection for resecting 3-10 mm colorectal polyps: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Cold snare polypectomy versus cold endoscopic mucosal resection for small colorectal polyps: a multicenter randomized controlled trial
Impact of submucosal saline injection during cold snare polypectomy for colorectal polyps sized 3-9 mm: a multicenter randomized controlled trial
Comparison of cold snare endoscopic mucosal resection and hot snare endoscopic mucosal resection for small colorectal polyps: a randomized controlled trial
Cold versus hot endoscopic mucosal resection for nonpedunculated colorectal polyps sized 6-10 mm: a randomized trial
Underwater versus conventional endoscopic mucosal resection for small size non-pedunculated colorectal polyps: a randomized controlled trial (UEMR vs CEMR for small size non-pedunculated colorectal polyps)
Clinical impact of surveillance colonoscopy using magnification without diminutive polyp removal
Comparison of complete resection rates in cold snare polypectomy using two different wire diameter snares: A randomized controlled study
Comparative efficacy of cold polypectomy techniques for diminutive colorectal polyps: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
Prospective, randomized comparison of 2 methods of cold snare polypectomy for small colorectal polyps
Delayed bleeding following cold snare polypectomy for small colorectal polyps in patients taking antithrombotic agents
Cold snare polypectomy vs hot snare polypectomy vs argon plasma coagulation for small (5-9mm) left-sided colorectal polyps: a prospective randomized trial
A randomized comparison of cold snare polypectomy versus a suction pseudopolyp technique
Comparison of underwater vs conventional endoscopic mucosal resection of intermediate-size colorectal polyps
Endoscopic mucosal resection-precutting vs conventional endoscopic mucosal resection for sessile colorectal polyps sized 10-20 mm
Anchoring endoscopic mucosal resection versus conventional endoscopic mucosal resection for large nonpedunculated colorectal polyps: a randomized controlled trial
Depth of the cutting plane with underwater and conventional endoscopic mucosal resection: Post-hoc analysis of a randomized study
Effectiveness and safety of cold snare polypectomy and cold endoscopic mucosal resection for nonpedunculated colorectal polyps of 10-19 mm: a multicenter observational cohort study
Efficacy and safety of cold-snare endoscopic mucosal resection for colorectal adenomas 10 to 14 mm in size: a prospective observational study
Comparison between endoscopic mucosal resection and hot snare resection of large nonpedunculated colorectal polyps: a randomized trial
Efficacy and safety of cold snare polypectomy of colorectal polyps 10-15 mm with a hybrid snare: a prospective observational pilot study
Underwater versus conventional EMR of large nonpedunculated colorectal lesions: a multicenter randomized controlled trial
Endoscopic En bloc versus piecemeal resection of large nonpedunculated colonic adenomas : a randomized comparative trial
Underwater vs conventional endoscopic mucosal resection of large sessile or flat colorectal polyps: a prospective randomized controlled trial
Efficacy and histologic accuracy of underwater versus conventional endoscopic mucosal resection for large (>20 mm) colorectal polyps: a comparative review and meta-analysis
Outcomes for underwater endoscopic mucosal resection and endoscopic submucosal dissection of 21-30-mm colorectal polyps: a feasible study
Underwater endoscopic mucosal resection versus endoscopic submucosal dissection for 20-30 mm colorectal polyps
Cold versus hot snare endoscopic resection of large nonpedunculated colorectal polyps: randomized controlled German CHRONICLE trial
Cold endoscopic mucosal resection (c-EMR) of nonpedunculated colorectal polyps ≥20 mm: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Endoscopic techniques to reduce recurrence rates after colorectal EMR: systematic review and meta-analysis
Snare tip soft coagulation vs argon plasma coagulation vs no margin treatment after large nonpedunculated colorectal polyp resection: a randomized trial
Hybrid argon plasma coagulation-assisted endoscopic mucosal resection for large sessile colon polyps to reduce local recurrence: a prospective pilot study
EMR combined with hybrid argon plasma coagulation to prevent recurrence of large nonpedunculated colorectal polyps (with videos)
A systematic review and meta-analysis of endoscopic mucosal resection vs endoscopic submucosal dissection for colorectal sessile/non-polypoid lesions
Endoscopic submucosal dissection vs endoscopic mucosal resection for colorectal polyps: A meta-analysis and meta-regression with single arm analysis
Comparing endoscopic mucosal resection with endoscopic submucosal dissection in colorectal adenoma and tumors: Meta-analysis and system review
Predictive factors associated with technical difficulty in colorectal endoscopic submucosal dissection: A Honam Association for the Study of Intestinal Disease (HASID) multicenter study
[Effectiveness analysis of hybrid endoscopic submucosal dissection in patients with colorectal epithelium-derived tumors]
Indications and outcomes of colorectal hybrid endoscopic submucosal dissection: a large multicenter 10-year study
Risk factors for unsuccessful colorectal endoscopic submucosal dissection: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Factors associated with technical difficulties and adverse events of colorectal endoscopic submucosal dissection: retrospective exploratory factor analysis of a multicenter prospective cohort
Factors predictive of complete excision of large colorectal neoplasia using hybrid endoscopic submucosal dissection: a KASID multicenter study
Scissor-type knife significantly improves self-completion rate of colorectal endoscopic submucosal dissection: Single-center prospective randomized trial
Multicenter randomized control study of the efficacy of SO clip in colorectal endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) (SO clip study in colorectal ESD): Randomized controlled trial
Antimicrobial prophylaxis in patients with colorectal lesions undergoing endoscopic resection
Should antibiotics be administered after endoscopic mucosalresection in patients with colon polyps?
Clinical adverse events after endoscopic resection for colorectal lesions: a meta-analysis on the antibiotic prophylaxis
Performance of perioperative antibiotics against post-endoscopic submucosal dissection coagulation syndrome: a multicenter randomized controlled trial
Risk factors for delayed colorectal postpolypectomy bleeding: a meta-analysis
Risk factors associated with postendoscopic mucosal resection bleeding in patients with cirrhosis: a retrospective multicenter cohort study
Clip closure does not reduce risk of bleeding after resection of large serrated polyps: results from a randomized trial
Clip placement to prevent delayed bleeding after colonic endoscopic mucosal resection (CLIPPER): study protocol for a randomized controlled trial
Prevention of delayed post-polypectomy bleeding by prophylactic clipping after endoscopic colorectal polypectomy: a meta-analysis
Effect of prophylactic endoscopic clip placement on clinically significant post-endoscopic mucosal resection bleeding in the right colon: a single-centre, randomised controlled trial
Efficacy of cyanoacrylate in the prevention of delayed bleeding after endoscopic mucosal resection of large colorectal polyps: a pilot study
Heparin-bridging therapy is associated with post-colorectal polypectomy bleeding in patients whose oral anticoagulation therapy is interrupted
Optical evaluation: the crux for effective management of colorectal neoplasia
Advanced imaging for detection and differentiation of colorectal neoplasia: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline - Update 2019
Long-term outcomes of endoscopic treatment for colorectal laterally spreading tumor: a large-scale multicenter retrospective study from China
Endoscopic subtypes of colorectal laterally spreading tumors (LSTs) and the risk of submucosal invasion: a meta-analysis
Endoscopic predictors of deep submucosal invasion in colorectal laterally spreading tumors
Wide-field endoscopic mucosal resection versus endoscopic submucosal dissection for laterally spreading colorectal lesions: a cost-effectiveness analysis
Long-term prognosis of curative endoscopic submucosal dissection for early colorectal cancer according to submucosal invasion: a multicenter cohort study
Risk of residual neoplasia after a noncurative colorectal endoscopic submucosal dissection for malignant lesions: a multinational study
Endoscopic full-thickness resection of superficial colorectal neoplasms using a new over-the-scope clip system: A single-centre study
Impact of en bloc resection on long-term outcomes after endoscopic mucosal resection: a matched cohort study
[Application of endoscopic tattooing with carbon nanoparticlet in the treatment for advanced colorectal cancer]
Preoperative localization of colorectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Rates and predictors of repeat preoperative endoscopy for elective colorectal resections: how can we avoid repeated procedures?