Review of content, teaching, and evaluation methods of immunology for medical students: A systematic review
The traditional immunology course mainly involves lectures and activities outside of the lectures, which prevents any links between basic knowledge and clinical practice. In this systematic review, we aimed to assess and summarize teaching methods of immunology for medical students in top universities of the world. This study adhered to the Joanna Briggs Institute manual for systematic reviews in conducting this study. The following databases were searched: PubMed, ISI Web of Knowledge, Scopus, ProQuest, and the Cochrane Library. After selecting papers, appraising them, and extracting all findings from papers, these findings were categorized based on their concepts and similarities. We summarized and presented the findings in the narrative form. Of 34 articles and abstracts identified, 23 underwent full-text review, and nine were included in this systematic review. The studies involved a total of 2023 students and teachers and five immunology teaching methods. The teaching methods were patient-oriented problem-solving, case-based learning, e-learning packages, audio-visual modules, and clinical simulations. Based on our findings, all new methods of immunology teaching for medical students performed better than dialectic and board lectures. The use of active learning in immunology teaching of medical students will encourage them to learn more actively, which can ultimately increase their clinical performance at their school and in clinical environments.

Introduction
Immunology is considered troublesome to get, actuating anxiety in numerous medical students and doctors. It is important to translate the topic in an easy-to-understand manner and convey knowledge in a practical way. One of the main challenges that medical students face in their courses is connecting the concepts of immunology to the clinic. Expert integration of multiple disciplines and concepts is one of the requirements for understanding immunological concepts. Physicians trained in a wide range of disciplines treat patients with immune disorders, including allergy/immunology and rheumatology. Additionally, certain subject areas have basic immunology curriculum requirements.
Immunology education has traditionally been limited to graduate-level research and is not widely available at the undergraduate level. An evaluation of undergraduate and graduate programs that focus on immunology-based curricula found that there are only a handful of such programs nationally. The traditional immunology course mainly involves lectures and activities outside of the lectures, which prevents any links between basic knowledge and clinical practice. In the lecture-based learning method, the teacher or instructor teaches all topics of the curriculum by himself/herself and there is no student engagement.
Active learning as one of the most influential and essential parts of education by involving students in the learning process enables them to use the acquired knowledge. Lack of active learning causes forgetting the learned knowledge, and using this information without understanding it makes future arguments difficult. Active learning has been recommended as a teaching method for strengthening the learning process. This learning method has been increased in medical schools’ curriculum integrating basic science with clinical cases. Active learning is associated with simulation activities such as role-playing, problem-based learning, and case-based learning. Active learning in medical science focuses on students’ early engagement with the clinical practice, critical thinking, and self-awareness of the learning process and thus increases lifelong skills in their discipline. However, some barriers exist, preventing instructors from using active learning strategies such as lack of time, sticking to traditional teaching methods, and low self-confidence in teaching with a novel method.
To improve the integration and early engagement of medical students with patients and clinical practice in the areas of immunology, the teaching methods of this discipline must be changed. To the best of our knowledge, there was not a comprehensive systematic review, evaluating teaching methods for immunology of medical education. Considering that immunology topics play the most important role in achieving clinical goals for medical students and have a high priority, it is expected that the content and manner of presentation of this course will be given serious attention in Iran’s universities of medical sciences. In this systematic review, we aimed to assess and summarize teaching methods of immunology for medical students in top universities of the world.

Materials and Methods

Study design and setting
This systematic review was conducted to assess immunology teaching methods for medical students in the world. This study adhered to the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) manual for systematic reviews in conducting this study. Inclusion criteria for this study include the following: Population, participants (P): Studies that targeted medical students for whom a new method of immunology course was taught were included; Intervention (I): Studies that included new methods for immunology courses for medical students were considered; Comparison (c): The traditional lecture-based learning for immunology for medical students was considered as a comparison; Outcome (O): Studies that assessed student satisfaction, the final examination of the course, and the knowledge of students were included; Type of studies: Original quantitative studies with different study designs and qualitative studies with different methodologies were included.

Search strategy
The search strategy aimed to consider only published studies. A preliminary limited search of MEDLINE was undertaken in order to develop a search strategy. The main keywords for the search were chosen by interviewing the experts in the field and based on the research question, which were immunology course, teaching method, and medical student. Based on the main identified keywords, both free text and MeSh terms were searched across the included databases. The reference list of all included studies was screened for any additional research. Also, related journals and websites were searched by hand. The studies published only in English were included in this systematic review. The following databases were searched: PubMed, ISI Web of Knowledge, Scopus, ProQuest, and the Cochrane Library. The full search strategy for each database is indicated in additional file 1.

Study selection process
After entering all the identified citations into the Endnote version X8 software, the duplicates were removed. Two independent reviewers screened the titles and abstracts based on the inclusion criteria for the review. The studies that met the inclusion criteria were retrieved in full and assessed in detail.

Quality assessment process
Two independent reviewers assessed included studies for methodological quality using an appropriate appraisal checklist based on the type of studies from JBI. Any disagreements between the reviewers were resolved through discussion; when there was a discrepancy, a third reviewer independently appraised the paper. After summing the checklists’ questions, papers that reached a score of 70% in Yes answers and above were regarded as low risk of bias. This definition was based on consensus among the authors. No studies were excluded based on the low quality.

Data extraction and final report
Two independent reviewers extracted data from the included articles using the standardized data extraction tool from JBI. Based on this tool, the extracted data included study citation, country, study design, study participants, sample size, age and gender, and main outcomes. Any disagreement among the reviewers was resolved through discussion. After extracting all findings from the papers, these findings were categorized based on their concepts and similarities. We summarized and presented the findings in the narrative form.

Ethical consideration
The utmost care was taken in reporting the results of the included studies. All included studies were mentioned with the appropriate reference.

Results
Search results and description of studies: A total of 821 citations were retrieved, reducing 805 citations following the removal of duplicates. Of the 34 articles and abstracts identified, 23 underwent full-text review, and nine were included for data extraction and critical appraisal. The reasons for the exclusion of full-texts included the following: They were not an original article (n = 6), no teaching method was mentioned (n = 5), and the target population was not medical students (n = 3) [Figure 1]. The included studies that were published between 2012 and 2022 provided the teaching methods for immunology for medical students. Five of the studies had cross-sectional designs, two were case-control studies, and two were cohort studies. Studies were conducted in China, the United States, Norway, and Brazil. Two of the studies did not state the country, and one was conducted internationally. Participants were second-year and first-year medical students, osteopathic medical students, residents, and teachers. The studies involved a total of 2023 participants. Also, 152 YouTube videos were included in one of the studies. The full characteristics of the included studies are provided in Table 1.
Diagram of selection of articles
Data extraction table
Citation		Country (University)		Type of study		Participants		Sample size		Gender and number of Participants		Age (Mean±SD)		Outcome*		Teaching method		Effect size	 			 	Male		Female	Intervention group		Control group		P	 	Ma, Xa (2016)		China (Lanzhou University)		Cross-sectional		Second-year students		71		41		30		20.5±1.36		Increase learning motivationPromote self-directed learning skillsImprove peer interactionExtend more related knowledgeHelp to memorize basic knowledgeEnhance clinical problem-solving abilityEnhance clinical reasoning abilityEnhance communication skills		POPS		The average sums of the perception scores: 34.94±4.68		The average sums of the perception scores: 33.99±3.87		0.19	 	Ma, Xb (2016)		China (Lanzhou University)		Cross-sectional		Second-year students		85		39		46		22.3±1.36		Increase study interest in clinical laboratory immunology courseHelp to understand basic concepts Increase learning motivation Enhance clinical reasoning ability Extend more related knowledge Enhance clinical problem-solving ability Improve peer interactionHelp to prepare for exams, 4.47±0.89 4.05±0.97 2.043 (P=0.044)bPromote self-learning skills 4.33±0.82 4.20±0.90 0.708 (P=0.481)Time allotted was appropriate		CBL		The average sums of the perception scores: 43.82±5.59		The average sums of the perception scores: 42.31±5.51		0.079	 	Zhang, Zh (2013)		China (Third Military Medical University of PLA, Chongqing)		Case-control		Second-year students		321 (110 in case group and 221 in control group)		101 in case and 197 in control		9 in case and 24 in control		20.5 in case and 20.3±0.42 in control		Basic knowledge onimmunology (post-test grade–pretest grade)		POPS		Mean scores and SD of the pretest: 2.78±0.67Mean scores and SD of the post-test: 9.05±1.25		Mean scores and SD of the pretest: 2.35±0.54Mean scores and SD of the post-test: 5.53±1.85		Pretest scores: P>0.05Post-test scores: P<0.001	 	Boye, S (2012)		Norway		Cohort		Second-year students		120		57		63		23.6±3.2		Learning outcomes were assessed by immunology questions (students’ score)		E-learning package		The intermediate-range students (interquartile range) on average scored 3.6% better on the immunology part of the examination per hour they had used the e-learning package		0.0046	 	Manglik, N (2017)		Not stated		Cross-sectional		First-year students		52		-		-		-		Module’s usefulness		Audio-visual modules		Most of the students (86.5%) felt that the module was useful when learning material for the first time	 	Stuart, M (2018)		USA (A.T. StillUniversity−Kirksville College of Osteopathic Medicine)		Case-control		Osteopathic medical students		1199 (three groups)		-		-		-		Immunology comprehensive final examination		OCP		Mean final exam score: 81.8%		Mean final exam score: 76.5%		<0.001	 	Mawhirt, S (2019)		Not-stated		Cohort		Medical students and residents		45		-		-		-		Knowledge of the students (Pre- and Post-simulation Assessment Scores)		Clinical simulation		Difference in the mean postsimulation assessment: (93% ± 4%)		Difference in the mean presimulation assessment: (79% ±7%)		<0.0001	 	Van den Eynde, J (2019)		International		Cross-Sectional (review in a certain period of time)		YouTube videos		82 videos about antigen presentation and 70 about immunoglobulin gene rearrangement		Not applicable		Not applicable		Not applicable		Understandability and attractivenessPatient Education Materials Tool reliabilityContent and comprehensivenessThe overall quality of each videoA subjective score according to the pleasantness of watching them		YouTube videos		Videos had a mean understandability and attractiveness score of 6.57/8 and 5.84/8, content and comprehensiveness score of 9.84/20 and 5.84/20, reliability score of 1.65/4 and 1.53/4, global quality score of 3.38/5 and 2.76/5, and subjective score of 2.00/3 and 2.00/3			 	Faggioni, T (2022)		Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (1 public and 1 private University)		Cross-sectional		Medical students and teachers		127 students and 3 teachers		-		-		-		Knowledge of the students (learning capacity improvement through software use via post-test grade–pretest grade)		Audio-visual modules		Score on the pretest: 6.10 (SD 1.44) and score on the post-test: 7.86 (SD 1.61)		Score on the pretest 6.25 (SD 1.40) and score on the post-test: 8.25 (SD 1.71)		<0.0001
*Teaching methods and their effectiveness results are provided in Table 3. POPS: patient-oriented problem-solving, CBL: case-based learning. OCP: oral case presentations

Methodological quality of included studies
The nine included studies were critically appraised using JBI checklists based on the study design. The checklist for cross-sectional studies included eight questions, case-control studies included ten questions, and cohort studies included 11 questions. Only three of the nine studies were at high or unclear risk of bias. However, based on the consensus among reviewers, none of the studies were excluded because of the high risk of bias. Table 2 summarizes the methodological quality of all the included studies.
Quality evaluation table with JBI checklists
Study design		Study citation		Q1		Q2		Q3		Q4		Q5		Q6		Q7		Q8		Q9		Q10		Q11	 	Cross-sectional*		Ma, Xa (2016)		Y		Y		Y		Y		NA		NA		Y		Y		-		-		-	 			Ma, Xb (2016)		Y		Y		Y		Y		NA		NA		Y		Y		-		-		-	 			Manglik, N (2017)		U		N		Y		Y		U		U		U		N		-		-		-	 			Van den Eynde, J (2019)		Y		Y		NA		NA		NA		NA		Y		Y		-		-		-	 			Faggioni, T (2022)		Y		Y		Y		Y		NA		NA		Y		Y		-		-		-	 	Cohort**		Boye, S (2012)		Y		Y		Y		U		U		Y		Y		U		U		NA		Y	 			Mawhirt, S (2019)		Y		Y		Y		U		U		Y		Y		Y		Y		NA		Y	 	Case-control***		Zhang, Zh (2013)		Y		Y		Y		Y		Y		NA		NA		Y		Y		Y		-	 			Stuart, M (2018)		Y		N		Y		Y		Y		NA		NA		Y		Y		Y		-
Y: yes; N: no; U: unknown; NA: not applicable. *Cross-sectional studies: Q1: Were the criteria for inclusion in the sample clearly defined? Q2: Were the study subjects and the setting described in detail? Q3: Was the exposure measured in a valid and reliable way? Q4: Were objective, standard criteria used for measurement of the condition? Q5: Were confounding factors identified? Q6: Were strategies to deal with confounding factors stated? Q7: Were the outcomes measured in a valid and reliable way? Q8: Was appropriate statistical analysis used? **Cohort studies: Q1: Were the two groups similar and recruited from the same population? Q2: Were the exposures measured similar to assign people to both exposed and unexposed groups? Q3: Was the exposure measured in a valid and reliable way? Q4: Were confounding factors identified? Q5: Were strategies to deal with confounding factors stated? Q6: Were the groups/participants free of the outcome at the start of the study (or at the moment of exposure)? Q7: Were the outcomes measured in a valid and reliable way? Q8: Was the follow-up time reported and long enough for outcomes to occur? Q9: Was follow-up complete, and if not, were the reasons for loss to follow up described and explored? Q10: Were strategies to address incomplete follow up utilized? Q11: Was appropriate statistical analysis used? *** Case-control studies: Q1. Were the groups comparable other than the presence of disease in cases or the absence of disease in controls? Q2: Were cases and controls matched appropriately? Q3: Were the same criteria used for identification of cases and controls? Q4: Was exposure measured in a standard, valid, and reliable way? Q5: Was exposure measured in the same way for cases and controls? Q6: Were confounding factors identified? Q7: Were strategies to deal with confounding factors stated? Q8: Were outcomes assessed in a standard, valid, and reliable way for cases and controls? Q9: Was the exposure period of interest long enough to be meaningful? Q10: Was appropriate statistical analysis used?

The main findings of the study
Based on the narrative analysis of the included studies, there were five methods for Immunology teaching for medical students in the included studies as follows: patient-oriented problem-solving (POPS), case-based learning (CBL), e-learning package, audio-visual module, and clinical simulations. All the included studies showed better outcomes in terms of student satisfaction, scores in the final course examination, the effectiveness of the course, learning outcomes, and knowledge of the students in the newly introduced teaching method when compared to the traditional lecture-based learning (LBL) method. Table 3 indicates the details of Medical immunology course schedules in each of the teaching methods and the final results of each study.
Immunology teaching methods in the included studies
Citation		Immunology teaching method		Medical immunology course schedule		Overall results	 	Ma, Xa (2016)		Patient-oriented problem-solving (POPS)		Four hours of didactic lectures in a week (total 44 hours) and one laboratory session in a week (total 28 hours) of 2 or 4 hours duration		The majority of students favored POPS teaching strategy over traditional lectures.	 	Ma, Xb (2016)		Case-based learning (CBL)		At the beginning of the CBL, a facilitator briefed the students about how CBL worked for 1 h. The CBL group was then further divided into five subgroups for thorough discussion. CBL lasted a total of 4 h which included reading the material, discussion and summarization, and during this time, the team facilitator adjusted the time and direction of the discussion in order to ensure smoothness and to avoid deviation from the given topic. In this manner, the program was conducted over four sessions, one per week, 1 h per session.In the first step, CBL students were given the cases and were asked to analyze the five leading problems. In the second step, each individual student was asked to provide a detailed plan for solving problems. In the third step, based on the individually collected solution plans, data were collected. Through discussions, students were encouraged to compare and analyze the source of the problems and to draw various conclusions based on the proposed/discussed solutions.		The CBL group showed significantly better scores in course examination as compared to the lecture-based learning (LBL) group	 	Zhang, Zh (2013)		Patient-oriented problem-solving (POPS)		Problem-solving exercises given to students, then students were instructed to come with reading of related topics and solution of problems. Problem-solving exercises discussed with questions by using power points and audio-visual aids.		Significant improvement in the mean difference between the pre- and post-test scores of those in Groups I and II was seen, demonstrating the effectiveness of POPS teaching	 	Boye, S (2012)		An e-learning package in immunology		As a supplement to the regular teaching, the students were offered a free e-learning package in basic immunology. The e-learning package was made in Macromedia Flash, consisted of 25 sequences, and had a total play-through length of approximately 1.5 h. The e-learning package comprised animations synchronized with audio explanations and with supportive use of graphics and text.		Use of an e-learning package in immunology in addition to regular teaching improved learning outcomes for intermediate-range students	 	Manglik, N (2017)		An original diagram/learning resource, “Immune Response to an Extracellular Microbe,” was published by MedEdPORTAL		A big-picture integrated audio-visual module based on two textbooks written for medical students presents a step-by-step explanation of immune mechanisms involved in a bacterial infection. The module’s purpose is to aid medical students in the organization of their knowledge of the immune system by describing how the various mechanisms in an immune response come together to collectively defend against an extracellular microbe. Relevant pathology and histology images are incorporated.		Over 85% of survey participants felt that the module was a useful resource for learning and reviewing. More than 90% felt that the module helped them to understand the big picture and identify areas for further study	 	Stuart, M (2018)		Oral-case presentations (OCPs)		Curricular changes led to the division of Immunology into an 11-hour foundational course in Semester 1, followed by a 10-hour clinical course in Semester 3. These students participated in the OCP exercise during the Semester 3 clinical course.		Since introducing the oral case presentations exercise into the Immunology course at ATSU-KCOM, comprehensive final examination scores and student satisfaction with the course have improved significantly	 	Mawhirt, S (2019)		Clinical simulations with a high-fidelity, patient simulator		Two original clinical case simulations were developed incorporating SimMan3G: (1) beta-lactam antibiotic-induced anaphylaxis and (2) ACE inhibitor induced angioedema. The cases were standardized and algorithmic, such that incorrect or delayed treatments resulted in the clinical deterioration of SimMan3G at predetermined times. Both cases culminated in progressively worsening clinical manifestations, ultimately hypotensive shock (anaphylaxis) and laryngeal edema with respiratory failure (ACE inhibitoreinduced angioedema) if crucial actions were not performed.		Knowledge improved immediately after the simulation, and knowledge specific to EAI treatment seemed to be retained in the long term. All participants agreed that the simulation was practical to their education	 	Van den Eynde, J (2019)		YouTube videos about two central concepts in immunology		-		YouTube can provide medical students with some useful information about immunology, although content wise it cannot substitute textbooks and academic courses.	 	Faggioni, T (2022)		“Antigen-antibody interactions” module, a part of the Virtual Immunology educational software		The “Antigen-antibody interactions” software module functions in a nonlinear fashion, where users can navigate and access any menu (with different contents) at any time. There is an “Introduction” option that leads to an introductory text for the user to understand the purpose of the software module and the subject that he or she will study. Some definitions for immunological terms used in the animations are also available. All images contain legends, and a help function is available to display didactic molecular and cellular structure representations.		Results indicate suitable evaluations from both students and teachers concerning the “Antigen- antibody module” as an auxiliary tool in immunology teaching. The software was well rated as an educational resource since it allows dynamically viewing immunological phenomena. In addition, its ease of use and immunological process visualization were the best-evaluated parameters by the students, who recommended this software module as an auxiliary learning tool.

Patient-oriented problem-solving method
Two of the included studies in the current systematic review used patient-oriented problem-solving methods for teaching immunology. In these studies, problem-solving exercises were given to medical students at first; then students were instructed to come up with a reading of related topics and find solutions to problems. Problem-solving exercises were discussed with questions by using PowerPoint and audio-visual aids. Improvements in outcomes were reported in both the included studies; however, in one study, no significant diﬀerence in students’ capability perceptions with the educational method was reported (the average sums of the perception scores in the control group and intervention group were 33.99 ± 3.87 and 34.94 ± 4.68, respectively (P = 0.19)), while significant improvement in the mean difference in pre- and post-test scores demonstrated the effectiveness of POPS teaching (the mean scores and standard deviation (SD) of the pretest and post-test were 2.78 ± 0.67 and 9.05 ± 1.25, respectively (P < 0.001)).

Case-based learning method
The case-based learning method for teaching immunology was used in two of the included studies. In these studies, students participated in the oral-case presentations exercise during the Semester 3 clinical course. First, students were given the cases and were asked to analyze the five leading problems. Then students were asked to provide a detailed plan for solving problems individually, and so, data were collected. Students were encouraged to compare and analyze the source of the problems through discussions and to draw various conclusions based on the proposed/discussed solutions. Positive results were reported in both the included studies in CBL groups compared to lecture-based groups; however, these results were not significant (the average sums of the perception scores in the control group and intervention group were 42.31 ± 5.51 and 43.82 ± 5.59, respectively (P = 0.079)).

E-learning packages
In one of the included studies, students were provided an e-learning package as a supplement to the regular teaching of basic immunology, in which students had significantly better examination scores (the intermediate-range students (interquartile range) on average scored 3.6% better on the immunology part of the examination per hour they had used the e-learning package, P = 0.0046). Also, YouTube videos were evaluated in one included study as supplementary teaching material. Although these methods cannot substitute textbooks and academic courses, they can provide medical students with some useful information about immunology.

Audio-visual module
Audio-visual modules were used in two studies. One of them used the “Antigen-antibody interactions” software module functions in a nonlinear fashion, where users can navigate and access any menu (with different contents) at any time. The other study provided students with a big-picture integrated audio-visual module based on two textbooks written for medical students and presented a step-by-step explanation of immune mechanisms involved in a bacterial infection. Both the studies reported positive outcomes; however, a significant difference was noted between the control and tested groups only in one of the included studies (the scores on the pretest and post-test were 6.10 and 6.25, respectively, P < 0.0001). Despite no significant differences in the quantitative evaluation of the other study, the qualitative evaluation indicated that the software’s easy use and immunological process visualization were the best-evaluated parameters by the students.

Clinical simulations
Clinical simulation was used in one study, providing two original clinical case simulations incorporating SimMan3G. Both cases culminated in progressively worsening clinical manifestations, ultimately hypotensive shock (anaphylaxis) and laryngeal edema with respiratory failure (ACE inhibitor-induced angioedema) if crucial actions were not performed. Positive outcomes were reported in this study. Knowledge improved significantly after the simulation, and knowledge specific to epinephrine autoinjector treatment seemed to be retained in the long term (the differences in the mean pre- and postsimulation assessment were 79%±7% and 93%±4%, respectively, P < 0.0001). All participants agreed that the simulation was practical for their education.

Discussion
The current systematic review was conducted to assess immunology teaching methods for medical students in top Universities of the world. The findings of the current study showed that there were five main teaching methods for immunology including patient-oriented problem-solving, case-based learning, e-learning package, audio-visual module, and clinical simulations, which all were preferred by medical students when compared to the traditional lectures. Since no related study was found in this field, it was not possible to compare the results with similar studies; however, each of these five teaching methods is discussed as the following.
Based on the findings of the current study, the system of patient-oriented problem-solving has been shown to enhance motivation, self-directed learning, clinical thinking, and long-lasting memory. Similar to our findings, Singh showed that patient-oriented problem-solving was preferred by students for pathology courses. Also, audio-visual PowerPoint presentations along with patient-oriented problem-solving were more acceptable to the students. Desai and co-authors conducted a pathology-based patient-oriented problem-solving investigation at Nootan Medical College in India and found that students had better outcomes with a patient-oriented problem-solving approach rather than the lecture method. In addition, clinical medicine, nursing, and pharmacy students have been shown to have positive attitudes toward problem-based learning since it goes beyond differences in culture and healthcare systems. However, since there is a need for establishing small groups, which require an instructor, this teaching method cannot be used to achieve all competencies with the specified goals. It seems that in developing countries, due to the enormous number of students and the insufficient number of instructors, there will be difficulties serving adequately all medical students.
Our findings showed that case-based learning and oral-case presentation exercises were preferred by medical students over traditional teaching methodology for immunology courses. Students had better satisfaction and results for the final examination with this methodology. According to Ghosh, case-oriented problem-solving learning is effective in enhancing students’ self-responsibilities in learning and promoting teamwork among them. Results of a meta-analysis of 15 studies showed that case-based learning could be effective in words of student satisfaction, students’ exam scores, learning interests, and self-study abilities. Another similar meta-analysis by Cen and colleagues showed that case-based learning is significantly effective in increasing medical students’ academic performance and their abilities in analyzing cases when compared to other teaching methods. Mixing both didactic lectures and case-oriented problem-solving learning methods may be helpful in coaching medical undergraduates in their first year of training and developing the skills of correlating basic science with clinical science in the later years of their training.
Based on the results of the current systematic review, clinical simulations with a high-fidelity patient simulator were among the novel immunology teaching methods for medical students, which were considered knowledge-improving methods by medical students and residents. Also, all participants agreed that the simulation was practical for their education. According to a concept analysis by Tinôco and colleagues the virtual clinical simulation method in nursing education provided immersive self-regulated training, reproducing real-life experiences and feedback in a virtual environment that was considered safe, interactive, dynamic, and enjoyable. Results of a study by Yu and colleagues indicated that the clinical simulation methods for medical students led to an increase in self-confidence and a decrease in the anxiety of students. Also, their knowledge and satisfaction increased after high-fidelity simulation-based teaching. Results of a scoping review showed that simulation was considered positive by medical students and if implemented appropriately, this method can provide opportunities for experiencing the clinical environment in a safe context by students.
Results of the current study showed that an e-learning package as a supplement to the regular teaching for immunology courses improved learning outcomes for intermediate-range students. Similarly, results of a randomized controlled trial by Mohee and colleagues indicated that an e-learning package was considered as a supplementary means to improve knowledge gained from traditional lecture-based learning, especially in the era of the COVID-19 pandemic while enabling social distancing. However, results of a study by Warnecke and Pearson showed that the e-learning package was enjoyable, useful, and effective in increasing knowledge for consulting skills.
In the current study, YouTube videos about two central concepts in immunology were considered useful by students as supplementary material. Similarly, Nomura and colleagues showed that YouTube videos can be effective in providing the necessary knowledge about CPR to preclinical medical students. Based on the results, utilization of YouTube videos by medical students can be an alternative and supplementary educational methodology during the COVID-19 pandemic. Also, according to Attardi and co-authors, delivering YouTube videos on public social media platforms prior to the course led to the alleviation of medical students’ anxiety in anatomy courses.

Limitations and recommendation
To our knowledge, it was the first systematic review of summarizing immunology teaching methods for medical students, which can shed light on the subject of medical education. Since we reviewed top universities’ teaching methods, we might have missed other important studies in the developing world. Another limitation of the study was excluding non-English studies due to the lack of expertise in translating other languages.

Conclusion
As the world and technology are expanding, approaches to medical education must also change. Traditional lecture-based courses are now recognized as a boring and passive way of learning medical courses which would no longer be effective at improving clinical practice and critical thinking. Based on our findings, all new methods of immunology teaching for medical students performed better than dialectic and board lectures. The use of active learning in immunology teaching of medical students will encourage them to learn more actively, which can ultimately increase their clinical performance at their school and in clinical environments. However, the application of active learning in immunology education is still in its initial stage, and there is a need for the development of systematic standards and rules to follow by both medical education managers and policymakers. Top managers and policymakers in the field of medical education will use the results of this study to design and implement immunology courses based on the country’s setting.

Abbreviations
JBI: Joanna Briggs Institute
POPS: Patient-oriented problem-solving
CBL: Case-based learning
LBL: Lecture-based learning

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

References
Using clinical cases to restore basic science immunology knowledge in physicians and senior medical students
Inoculating a new generation: Immunology in medical education
Encouraging students’ engagement and promoting deep learning in immunology through an interactive clinical case problem-solving (CCPS) approach: Perception among cohort of medical students in Oman
Out of the curricular shadows: Revolutionizing undergraduate immunology education
Design and implementation of an integrated course to teach immunology and infectious disease to first year medical students
Comparison of the medical students attitudes toward problem­ based and lecture-based learning in a course of basic immunology
An active-learning strategies primer for achieving ability-based educational outcomes
Designing cases for case-based immunology teaching in large medical school classes
Integration of lecture and role-play in teaching immunology to medical students
Critical thinking skills of medical students at Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences
Concept maps in immunology: A metacognitive tool to promote collaborative and meaningful learning among undergraduate medical students
Efficacy of role play in concert with lecture to enhance student learning of immunology
Faculty perceptions about barriers to active learning
Joanna Briggs Institute Reviewers’ Manual
Virtual immunology: An educational software to encourage antigen-antibody interaction learning
Comparison of student perception and performance between case-based learning and lecture-based learning in a clinical laboratory immunology course
A perceptions assessment of patient-oriented problem-solving teaching strategy for medical immunology course in Chinese students
Immune response to bacteria: An integrated learning module to enhance preclinical students’ competency in immunology
YouTube videos as a source of information about immunology for medical students: Cross-sectional study
Implementation of oral case presentations in an immunology course
A trial of patient-oriented problem-solving system for immunology teaching in China: A comparison with dialectic lectures
An e-learning course in medical immunology: Does it improve learning outcome?
Utilization of high-fidelity simulation for medical student and resident education of allergic-immunologic emergencies
Combination of didactic lectures and case-oriented problem-solving tutorials toward better learning: Perceptions of students from a conventional medical curriculum
Student performance and their perception of a patient-oriented problem-solving approach with audiovisual aids in teaching pathology: a comparison with traditional lectures
Development and evaluation of the POPBL (Patient-Oriented Problem-Based Learning) module in pathology: A comparative analysis of performance and perception among second-year pathology students
Interprofessional education in problem-based learning: A frontier form of PBL in medical education
Application of case-based learning in psychology teaching: A meta-analysis
Application of case-based learning in medical student education: A meta-analysis
Virtual clinical simulation in nursing education: A concept analysis
Effects of high-fidelity simulation education on medical students’ anxiety and confidence
Simulation-based education for medical radiation students: A scoping review
Comparison of an e-learning package with lecture-based teaching in the management of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT): A randomised controlled study
Medical students’ perceptions of using e-learning to enhance the acquisition of consulting skills
Evaluating effectiveness of YouTube videos for teaching medical students CPR: Solution to optimizing clinician educator workload during the COVID-19 pandemic
YouTube-based course orientation videos delivered prior to matriculation fail to alleviate medical student anxiety about anatomy