Histiocytic neoplasms: a brief review and differential diagnosis
Histiocytic neoplasms (HNs) include juvenile xanthogranuloma, Erdheim-Chester disease, Rosai-Dorfman disease, ALK-positive histiocytosis, and histiocytic sarcoma in the 5th edition of the World Health Organization Classification of Haematolymphoid Tumours. These entities are clinicopathologically distinctive, and typical histological findings have been established. However, the common feature of a proliferation of histiocytic cells often leads to morphological overlap among HNs, and also necessitates a differential diagnosis from several non-HNs or non-neoplastic conditions. In this review, we provide a brief summary of the clinical findings, molecular features, histopathologies, and immunophenotypes of HNs, as well as to discuss their differential diagnosis.

INTRODUCTION
Histiocytic/dendritic cell neoplasms are tumors that originate from or show differentiation towards monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells. The 5th edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Haematolymphoid Tumours categorizes them into plasmacytoid dendritic cell neoplasms, Langerhans cell and other dendritic cell neoplasms, and histiocytic neoplasms (HNs). HNs include juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG), Erdheim-Chester disease (ECD), Rosai-Dorfman disease (RDD), ALK-positive histiocytosis (APH), and histiocytic sarcoma (HS). These entities are clinicopathologically distinctive, and typical histological findings have been established. However, the common feature of a proliferation of histiocytic cells often leads to morphological overlap among HNs, and also necessitates a differential diagnosis from several non-HNs or non-neoplastic conditions. The aim of this review is to provide a brief summary of the clinical findings, molecular features, histopathologies, and immunophenotypes of HNs, as well as to discuss their differential diagnosis.

Juvenile xanthogranuloma
JXG is the most common HN and is characterized by the proliferation of histiocytes displaying varying degrees of lipidization or xanthomatization associated with maturation over time. The median age at diagnosis is 13 years, with a peak incidence in the first year of life and a slight male predilection (a male-to-female ratio of 1.3–1.4), while cases in older people are also seen. Neurofibromatosis 1 patients have a higher incidence of JXG compared to the general population. Approximately 70% of cases exhibit driver alterations in various genes related to the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway or receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK). Among these, mutations in MAP2K1, KRAS/NRAS, or CSF1R, as well as NTRK1 fusion, are relatively prevalent, each occurring at a frequency of about 10%. The most common presentation is a solitary cutaneous lesion with a predilection for the head, neck, and trunk. Multiple cutaneous or extracutaneous lesions can also occur, but systemic involvement is less than 1%. Common sites of extracutaneous lesions include the soft tissue, ocular region, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, and central nervous system (CNS). Cutaneous lesions often undergo spontaneous involution, and the prognosis is generally favorable. However, patients with intracranial lesions can experience serious permanent sequelae, and a few patients with systemic JXG die of the disease.
Macroscopically, a cutaneous lesion, typically 5-to-10 mm in diameter, appears erythematous to yellowish, correlating with the degree of lipidization. Microscopically, three patterns with a time-dependent course are recognized: early JXG (EJXG), classic JXG (CJXG), and late transitional JXG (TJXG). EJXG is characterized by a compact sheet-like infiltrate of small-to-intermediate-sized histiocytes with minimal cytoplasmic lipidization (Figure 1A, B). A few giant cells may be observed, but Touton giant cells are generally absent. CJXG is characterized by foamy or xanthomatized histiocytes with a varying number of Touton and non-Touton giant cells (Figure 1C, D). TJXG is characterized by a proliferation of spindle cells with interspersed collagen deposition, along with foci of foamy histiocytes and giant cells. There is a variable admixture of lymphocytes and eosinophils depending on the case. Two or three patterns can coexist within a single lesion. Extracutaneous lesions often exhibit an EJXG or TJXG pattern, with the absence or near absence of giant cells.
A, B) Early juvenile xanthogranuloma of the skin. A compact sheet-like infiltrate of histiocytes is observed. They are small-to-intermediate-sized with minimal cytoplasmic lipidization. C, D) Classic juvenile xanthogranuloma of the skin. Xanthomatized histiocytes with some Touton giant cells are seen. Lymphocytes and eosinophils are present in the background. E, F) Erdheim-Chester disease involving the kidneys. Dense foamy histiocytes are found. G, H) Rosai-Dorfman disease involving the lymph nodes. Scattered large histiocytes with dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltration are observed. The histiocytes demonstrate obvious emperipolesis, and immunohistochemically express S-100 (inset). (A, C, E, G: low power view; B, D, F, H: high power view)

Erdheim-Chester disease
ECD is characterized by a proliferation of foamy histiocytes. The median age at diagnosis is 55 years, with a male predilection (a male-to-female ratio of 1.3–3.0), and pediatric cases are exceptional. Ten percent of patients show synchronous or metachronous overlap with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia or other myeloid neoplasms. The BRAF V600E mutation is demonstrated in 46–66% of cases, and driver alterations in other genes related to the MAPK or phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway, as well as RTK fusions, are also detected. Almost all patients exhibit bone lesions, with bilateral osteosclerosis of the long bones being characteristic, often accompanied by bone pain. Systemic involvement is observed in 90% of cases, and perinephric, retroperitoneal, cardiovascular, pituitary, other CNS, lung, retro-orbital, and cutaneous involvement are common. While progression is nearly universal and ECD has historically been associated with a poor prognosis, the introduction of targeted therapies with kinase inhibitors has significantly improved the 5-year survival rate to 83%. Retroperitoneal, lung, and CNS involvement are associated with worse survival.
Microscopically, the classical histological appearance of ECD is characterized by the proliferation of foamy histiocytes and scattered Touton giant cells (Figure 1E, F). However, there exists a wide morphologic spectrum influenced by factors such as the number of foamy histiocytes and other inflammatory cells, as well as the degree of lipidization and fibrosis, and several site-related tendencies are known. Subtle histiocytic infiltration, indistinct cell borders, lack of lipidization, and the absence of fibrosis are typical in the CNS. Immunohistochemical assessment is often required to demonstrate the presence of histiocytes. Numerous lymphoplasmacytic infiltrations are common in the retroperitoneum and orbit. Features resembling RDD, such as histiocytes with voluminous cytoplasm, emperipolesis, and a lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, are reported in the testis.

Rosai-Dorfman disease
RDD is characterized by a proliferation of large histiocytes with emperipolesis. Based on localization, associated disease, and heritability, it is divided into sporadic RDD, familial RDD, or cutaneous RDD, and the former is further divided into classical RDD, extra-nodal RDD, RDD with neoplasia (mostly malignant lymphoma), or RDD with immune disease (systemic lupus erythematous, idiopathic juvenile arthritis, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, or human immunodeficiency virus infection). Overall, the median age at diagnosis is 54 years, with a slight male predilection (a male-to-female ratio of 1.4). Somatic activating KRAS mutations are demonstrated in 19–24% of cases, and alterations in other genes related to the MAPK pathway are also detected. Familial RDD is associated with germline mutations in SCL29A3 (familial or Faisalabad histiocytosis, H syndrome, and pigmented hypertrichotic dermatosis with insulin-dependent diabetes) and TNFRSF6 (autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome). Lymph nodes are most frequently involved, and bilateral painless cervical lymphadenopathy is a common manifestation. Sometimes, fever, weight loss, malaise, and night sweats are observed. Extranodal involvement is observed in 43% of cases, with common sites including the skin, nasal cavity/paranasal sinus, soft tissue, eyelid/orbit, bone, salivary gland, and CNS, while systemic involvement is less common. Although 82% of cases undergo spontaneous resolution without any treatment, at least 1.7% died of RDD after more than 1 year of follow-up. Multiple extranodal involvements are unfavorable, and involvement of the kidney, lower respiratory tract, or liver contributes to an adverse prognosis. Cutaneous RDD exhibits a differential demographic distribution, with a median age of 44 years, a slight female predilection (a male-to-female ratio of 0.6), and a predominance among Asian populations. It remains localized to the skin even with long-term follow-up.
Microscopically, the involved lymph node exhibits sinus dilation and capsular fibrosis, leading to distortion of the nodal architecture to varying degrees. The dilated sinus contains large histiocytes characterized by round or oval, large vesicular nuclei, distinct nucleoli, and abundant clear-to-eosinophilic cytoplasm with emperipolesis, which refers to the presence of well-preserved hematopoietic cells, mostly lymphocytes, within the cytoplasm of histiocytes (Figure 1G, H). The dilated sinus and medullary cord often contain numerous plasma cells. Extranodal RDD may demonstrate marked fibrosis, dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, fewer histiocytes, and more subtle emperipolesis.

ALK-positive histiocytosis
APH, first reported in 2008, is a new entity among HNs. It demonstrates ALK gene fusion, with partner genes mostly involving KIF5B, but also COL1A2, CLTC, TPM3, TFG, EML4, DCTN1, and TRIM33. Based on localization, it is divided into three groups: infants with multisystemic disease with liver and hematopoietic involvement, other patients with multisystemic disease, and patients with single-system disease. The median age at presentation is 1.5 months, 15 years, and 7 years for each group respectively, with a slight female predilection (a male-to-female ratio of 0.6 overall). Patients of the first group present with hepatomegaly, anemia, and thrombocytopenia, and often exhibit splenomegaly, leukocytosis, measurable liver dysfunction, and coagulopathy. Involvement of the spleen, skin, kidney, lung, intestine and CNS, in addition to the liver and bone marrow, is observed. In patients of the second group, the CNS, lung, bone, liver, skin, and lymph nodes are common sites, while in patients of the third group, the CNS is most commonly affected. While some patients of the first group undergo spontaneous resolution with only supportive care, a few cases died of APH. ALK inhibitors induce robust and durable responses.
Microscopically, APH demonstrates the proliferation of large histiocytes, characterized by irregularly folded or lobulated nuclei, fine chromatin, and small nucleoli. Approximately one third of cases show foamy histiocytes and Touton giant cells, with a similar frequency of emperipolesis also observed. Breast lesions often show predominant spindled morphology.

Histiocytic sarcoma
HS is a malignant tumor showing morphological and immunophenotypic features of mature histiocytes. The median age is 46 years, with a small peak at 0–29 years and a larger peak at 50–69 years. There is a slight male predilection (a male-to-female ratio of 1.5). Secondary HSs that coexist with or follow lymphoid neoplasms show evidence of a clonal relationship between each other. Additionally, clonal immunoglobulin gene rearrangements are detected in approximately 50% of sporadic HSs. Alterations in genes related to the MAPK pathway are detected in 57–87% of cases, with KRAS, BRAF, or MAP2K1 relatively frequently involved. Lymph nodes are most frequently involved, with the gastrointestinal tract, spleen, soft tissue, and skin being common sites of involvement. Fever, fatigue, night sweats, weight loss, and weakness are relatively common symptoms. HS often recurs, develops distant spread, and usually follows an aggressive clinical course.
Microscopically, HS represents the diffuse proliferation of atypical histiocytoid cells characterized by abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, round-to-irregular nuclei, vesicular chromatin, and distinct nucleoli (Figure 2A, B). Nuclear atypia and mitotic activity are variable, and necrosis and atypical mitoses may be found. Spindled morphology, clear or foamy cytoplasm, and hemophagocytosis within the tumor cells are often observed.
A, B) Histiocytic sarcoma involving the lymph nodes. The diffuse proliferation of atypical histiocytoid cells is observed. Some mitoses are seen. C) Langerhans cell histiocytosis involving the skull. The proliferation of round cells with a nuclear cleft or groove is seen. Eosinophils are also prominent. Immunohistochemically, CD1a is positive in the round cells (inset). D) Interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma involving the lymph nodes. The proliferating atypical histiocytoid cells are difficult to distinguish from those of histiocytic sarcoma. E) Myelomonocytic myeloid sarcoma involving the lymph nodes. Myeloid blasts of myeloid sarcoma are smaller and more monotonous compared to the atypical histiocytoid cells of histiocytic sarcoma. F) Whipple disease involving the lymph nodes. Aggregates of foamy histiocytes are seen. They are strongly positive for periodic acid-Schiff staining (inset). (A: low power view; B, C, D, E, F: high power view)

Immunohistochemistry of histiocytic neoplasms
Several immunohistochemical markers, including CD68, CD163, CD11c, CD4, Factor XIIIa, lysozyme, Ki-M1P, fascin, HLA-DR, and PU.1, which are expressed on monocytes, histiocytes, and/or dendritic cells, are used as “histiocytic” markers in studies including a large number of cases of JXGs, the most common HN. Among them, CD68 and CD163 have been confirmed to be sensitive in a relatively large number of cases of other HNs. It should be noted that these markers are not specific for HNs. For example, it is well known that CD4 is positive in T-cell lymphoma. Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) and some dendritic cell neoplasms can express these markers. Nevus and melanoma can be positive for CD68. CD163 can also be expressed in a portion of breast cancers, bladder cancers, clear cell renal cell carcinomas, pulmonary adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas, and meningiomas. Therefore, in addition to positive results for histiocytic markers, negative results for markers of differential diseases should be confirmed for the diagnosis of HNs.
RDD exhibits a unique monocyte-macrophage phenotype with expression of S-100 and OCT2 (Figure 1H). OCT2 expression is highly specific for RDD (97%) compared with ECD (0%). On the other hand, 61% and 57% of APH and HS are also positive for OCT2. S-100 is not also entirely specific for RDD, as 6–33%, 9–30%, 46–50%, and 33–50% of JXG, ECD, APH, and HS, respectively, are positive for it.
The BRAF V600E-specific antibody has been used as a surrogate marker for detecting the BRAF V600E mutation in melanoma and carcinoma of several organs. In BRAF V600E-mutated ECD, its staining is generally very weak, scattered, and sometimes limited to only a few histiocytes. Therefore, when staining is equivocal, molecular testing should be performed. In contrast to BRAF V600E-mutated ECD, APH is generally diffusely immunoreactive for ALK. Almost all cases demonstrate cytoplasmic staining with or without membranous staining, and nuclear staining is rarely observed. A few cases exhibit focal weak staining or exclusive Golgi dot-like cytoplasmic staining, which could be misinterpreted as negative. Since some cases demonstrate ALK immunoreactivity but no ALK rearrangement, molecular confirmation should be performed whenever possible.

Differential diagnosis of histiocytic neoplasms
The differential diagnosis of HNs encompasses a wide range of diseases. Firstly, diseases that exhibit morphological and/or immunohistochemical similarities to HNs are considered. LCH is characterized by the proliferation of round cells with a nuclear cleft or groove, accompanied by inflammatory cells, mainly eosinophils, lymphocytes, and histiocytes (Figure 2C). Although LCH should be considered in the differential diagnosis of each HN, distinguishing them from JXG, particularly in EJXG, is challenging because they share a pediatric age predilection and morphology. One study reported that approximately 20% of JXGs were initially considered to be LCH. Other dendritic cell neoplasms, such as indeterminate dendritic cell tumour (IDCT), interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma (IDCS), follicular dendritic cell sarcoma (FDCS), and fibroblastic reticular cell tumour (FRCT), also share similarities with HNs in terms of the proliferation of spindle-to-histiocytoid cells, often showing CD68 positivity (Figure 2D). The diagnostic immunophenotypes of LCH, IDCT, IDCS, and FDCS, based on the expression of S-100, CD1a, CD207 (langerin), and follicular dendritic cell markers (CD21, CD23, and CD35), are summarized in Table 1. These markers, except for S-100, are typically negative in HNs. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive inflammatory FDSC is positive for in situ hybridization of EBV-encoded small RNA. FRCT exhibits positivity for cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen, smooth muscle actin, and desmin, with varying frequency and intensity observed among cases. There is rarely mixed histiocytosis, which refers to the synchronous or metachronous occurrence of LCH and a histiocytic neoplasm, mostly ECD. In addition, FDSC and FRCT are reclassified under the category of “stromal-derived neoplasms of lymphoid tissues” from “histiocytic/dendritic cell neoplasms” in the 5th edition of the WHO Classification of Haematolymphoid Tumours.
Immunophenotypes of Langerhans cell and dendritic cell neoplasms
S-100	CD1a	CD207	Follicular dendritic cell markers(CD21, CD23, and CD35)	 	Langerhans cell histiocytosis	+	+	+	-	 	Indeterminate dendritic cell tumour	+	+	-	-	 	Interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma	+	-	-	-	 	Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma	+/-	-	-	+
Myeloid sarcoma (MS) is a tumor mass composed of myeloid blasts at extramedullary sites. Individual cases of MS exhibit the broad spectrum of differentiation and maturation observed in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Myelomonocytic or monoblastic MS can be positive for CD4, CD68, CD163, and lysozyme, which can also present a potential diagnostic pitfall when distinguishing from HS. The atypical histiocytoid cells of HS tend to be more pleomorphic, while myeloid blasts of MS are smaller and more monotonous (Figure 2E). A history or concurrence of AML and the presence of CD34 or myeloperoxidase expression would suggest a diagnosis of MS. However, monoblastic MS often lacks these expressions.
There are many skin lesions morphologically resembling HNs. PU.1 is an Ets family transcription factor required for the proper generation of both myeloid lineages and lymphoid lineages. Recent studies have highlighted PU.1 as a valuable immunohistochemical marker for discerning cutaneous histiocytic and dendritic cell neoplasms, with its distinct nuclear staining pattern. They demonstrated that PU.1 was positive in all cases of LCH, JXG, ECD, RDD, and APH, while dermatofibroma, dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans, Spitz nevus, melanoma, atypical fibroxanthoma, angiomatoid fibrous histiocytoma, and epithelioid fibrous histiocytoma (EFH) consistently tested negative for it. It may not be expressed in a portion of HS. It should be noted that nodular lymphocyte-predominant Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphomas of B-lineage are also positive for it.
There are several ALK-positive tumors, including inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) and EFH, that need to be differentiated from APH. Distinguishing between IMT and APH, especially in breast lesions where spindled morphology is often predominant, poses a particular challenge. Recognition of a component of epithelioid histiocytes and Touton giant cells, and coexpression of ALK and histiocytic markers, suggests APH rather than IMT. EFH is a localized cutaneous tumor that is more circumscribed, surrounded by epidermal collarettes, and negative for CD68, S-100, and PU.1.
Regarding HS, immunohistochemistry of cytokeratin and CD3, CD20, and CD30 may also be necessary to exclude carcinoma or lymphoma.
Secondly, non-neoplastic conditions with histiocytic proliferations, including sinus histiocytosis, hemophagocytic syndromes, lysosomal storage diseases (Niemann-Pick disease and Gaucher’s disease), crystal-storing histiocytosis, infections (mycobacterium infection and Whipple disease), and demyelinating diseases, are considered in the differential diagnosis of HNs (Figure 2F). Although characteristic forms of histiocytes, including Niemann-Pick cells (displaying a “soap bubble” appearance of pale blue cytoplasm filled with lipid droplets) and Gaucher cells (exhibiting a “wrinkled tissue paper” appearance of the cytoplasm due to deposition of glucocerebroside), are observed in some diseases, they are not necessarily pathognomonic. Therefore, integrating clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings is essential to reach the correct diagnosis, and special steins may be needed to exclude infections.
Thirdly, in a portion of RDD, morphologies such as marked fibrosis and numerous plasma cells overlap with those of IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD). Additionally, RDD can exceed cutoff points for the number of IgG4-positive plasma cells specific to each organ, the ratio of IgG4-positive plasma cells among IgG-positive cells, and the serum IgG4 concentration. RDD rarely involves the pancreas, an organ commonly affected in IgG4-RD, while CNS involvement, commonly seen in RDD, is rarely observed in IgG4-RD. Storiform fibrosis and obliterative phlebitis, characteristic features of IgG4-RD, are generally not seen in RDD. Conversely, histiocytes with emperipolesis and expression of S-100, as well as alterations in genes related to the MAPK pathway, are not present in IgG4-RD.
Finally, HNs overlap in their morphologies and may require differentiation, especially in atypical locations. The morphology of JXG, ECD, and APH are often indistinguishable from each other. Emperipolesis can be observed in JXG, ECD, and APH. It is important to interpret histological findings in conjunction with clinical findings, imaging findings beyond the site in question, and molecular features. The typical findings of HNs are summarized in Table 2. Pediatric cases are common in JXG, RDD, and APH, while they are exceptional in ECD. Bilateral osteosclerosis of the long bones suggest ECD, although similar bone lesions are often observed in APH. RDD typically involves lymph nodes, but JXG and ECD rarely involve them. As mentioned above, OCT2 immunohistochemistry is helpful for differentiating RDD from ECD. The Histiocyte Society recommends in its revised classification of histiocytoses to classify all extracutaneous or systemic JXG with gain-of-function mutations of BRAF, NRAS, KRAS, or MAP2K1 as ECD. Additionally, it recommends performing ALK immunohistochemical screening for all clinically progressive histiocytoses lacking BRAF and MAP2K1 mutations.
Summary of the clinical findings, histopathologies, immunophenotypes, and molecular features of histiocytic neoplasms
Juvenilexanthogranuloma	Erdheim-Chesterdisease	Rosai-Dorfmandisease	ALK-positivehistiocytosis	Histiocyticsarcoma	 	Age predilection	Most common in the first year of life	Common in middle-aged individuals, rare in children	Common in middle-aged individuals	Common in infants to young adults, rare in the elderly	Bimodal distribution: small peak at ages 0–29, larger peak at ages 50–69	 	Male to female ratio	1.3–1.4	1.3–3.0	1.4	0.6	1.5	 	Sites of involvement	Skin, soft tissue, ocular region, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, and CNS; systemic involvement is rare	Bone, perinephric tissue, retroperitoneal space, cardiovascular system, CNS including pituitary gland, lung, retro-orbital space, and skin; systemic involvement is common	Lymph node (particularly cervical), skin, nasal cavity/paranasal sinus, soft tissue, eyelid/orbit, bone, salivary gland, and CNS; systemic involvement is less common	Liver and bone marrow (infants with multisystemic disease with liver and hematopoietic involvement); CNS, lung, bone, liver, skin, and lymph node (other patients with multisystemic disease); CNS (patients with single-system disease)	Lymph node, gastrointestinal tract, spleen, soft tissue, and skin	 	Typical clinical presentation	A solitary cutaneous lesion with a predilection for the head, neck, and trunk	Bilateral osteosclerosis of the long bones with bone pain and systemic involvement	Bilateral painless cervical lymphadenopathy	Hepatomegaly, anemia, and thrombocytopenia (infants with multisystemic disease with liver and hematopoietic involvement)	Lymphadenopathy or manifestations of extranodal disease; relatively common symptoms include fever, fatigue, night sweats, weight loss, and weakness	 	Typical morphology	Foamy or xanthomatized histiocytes with Touton and non-Touton giant cells (CJXG)	Foamy histiocytes with Touton giant cells	Large histiocytes with vesicular nuclei, distinct nucleoli, and emperipolesis	Large histiocytes with irregularly folded or lobulated nuclei	Atypical histiocytoid cells with round to irregular nuclei, vesicular chromatin, and distinct nucleoli; nuclear atypia and mitotic activity are variable	 	Immunophenotype other than histiocytic markers		BRAF V600E-specific antibody in BRAF V600E-mutated cases (generally very weak and scattered expression)	S-100 and OCT2 (not entirely specific)	ALK cytoplasmic staining with or without membranous staining		 	Common molecular features	MAP2K1, KRAS/NRAS, or CSF1R mutation, as well as NTRK1 fusion (10% each)	BRAF V600E mutation (46–66%)	KRAS mutation (19–24%)	ALK gene fusion (100%)	Alterations in KRAS, BRAF, or MAP2K1 are relatively prevalent
CJXG, classic juvenile xanthogranuloma; CNS, central nervous system

CONCLUSION
We have briefly summarized clinical findings, molecular features, histopathologies, and immunophenotypes of HNs. Recognition of each typical clinicopathological feature is crucial. Immunohistochemistry is helpful for differential diagnosis from non-HNs. Consideration of clinical, laboratory, and imaging findings is essential to exclude non-neoplastic conditions or for differential diagnosis among HNs. Molecular tests are useful not only for correct diagnosis, but also as surrogate markers for detecting therapeutic targets.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors have no conflict of interest. Y.K. is an editorial board member of JCEH.
FUNDING INFORMATION
This review was not supported by any funding.

REFERENCES
Chan J, Alaggio R, Coupland SE. Histiocytic/dendritic cell neoplasms: Introduction. In: WHO Classification of Tumours Editorial Board (eds): Haematolymphoid Tumours, WHO Classification of Tumours Series, 5th ed, vol. 11 [Internet]. Lyon, International Agency for Research on Cancer. 2024 [cited 2024 Jun 10]. Available from: https://tumourclassification.iarc.who.int/chapters/63.
Demographics and additional haematologic cancers of patients with histiocytic/dendritic cell neoplasms.
Juvenile xanthogranuloma in childhood and adolescence: a clinicopathologic study of 129 patients from the kiel pediatric tumor registry.
Juvenile and adult xanthogranuloma: A 30-year single-center experience and review of the disorder and its relationship to other histiocytoses.
Juvenile xanthogranuloma associated with neurofibromatosis 1: 14 patients without evidence of hematologic malignancies.
Activating mutations in CSF1R and additional receptor tyrosine kinases in histiocytic neoplasms.
Juvenile xanthogranulomas: Examining single, multiple, and extracutaneous presentations.
Risk of intraocular and other extracutaneous involvement in patients with cutaneous juvenile xanthogranuloma.
Long-term outcomes of children with extracutaneous juvenile xanthogranulomas in Japan.
Cutaneous hematolymphoid and histiocytic proliferations in children.
The clinical spectrum of Erdheim-Chester disease: an observational cohort study.
Phenotypes and survival in Erdheim-Chester disease: Results from a 165-patient cohort.
Erdheim-Chester disease. Clinical and radiologic characteristics of 59 cases.
High prevalence of myeloid neoplasms in adults with non-Langerhans cell histiocytosis.
The histopathology of Erdheim-Chester disease: a comprehensive review of a molecularly characterized cohort.
Revised classification of histiocytoses and neoplasms of the macrophage-dendritic cell lineages.
Focal Rosai-Dorfman disease coexisting with lymphoma in the same anatomic site: a localized histiocytic proliferation associated with MAPK/ERK pathway activation.
Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (Rosai-Dorfman disease): review of the entity.
Mutually exclusive recurrent KRAS and MAP2K1 mutations in Rosai-Dorfman disease.
Consensus recommendations for the diagnosis and clinical management of Rosai-Dorfman-Destombes disease.
Treatment of sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (Rosai-Dorfman disease): report of a case and literature review.
Cutaneous rosai-dorfman disease is a distinct clinical entity.
Rosai-Dorfman disease: an overview.
ALK+ histiocytosis: a novel type of systemic histiocytic proliferative disorder of early infancy.
ALK-positive histiocytosis: an expanded clinicopathologic spectrum and frequent presence of KIF5B-ALK fusion.
ALK-positive histiocytosis: a new clinicopathologic spectrum highlighting neurologic involvement and responses to ALK inhibition.
Local ALK-positive histiocytosis with unusual morphology and novel TRIM33-ALK gene fusion.
ALK-positive histiocytosis of the breast: A clinicopathologic study highlighting spindle cell histology.
Distinct clinicopathologic features and possible pathogenesis of localized ALK-positive histiocytosis of the breast.
Histiocytic sarcoma : an updated literature review based on the 2008 WHO classification.
The mutational landscape of histiocytic sarcoma associated with lymphoid malignancy.
High frequency of clonal immunoglobulin receptor gene rearrangements in sporadic histiocytic/dendritic cell sarcomas.
Identification of diverse activating mutations of the RAS-MAPK pathway in histiocytic sarcoma.
Histiocytic and dendritic cell sarcomas of hematopoietic origin share targetable genomic alterations distinct from follicular dendritic cell sarcoma.
Extranodal histiocytic sarcoma: clinicopathologic analysis of 14 cases of a rare epithelioid malignancy.
Histiocytic sarcoma: a study of five cases including the histiocyte marker CD163.
“Juvenile” xanthogranuloma: an immunophenotypic study with a reappraisal of histogenesis.
PU.1 is a useful nuclear marker to distinguish between histiocytosis and histiocyte-rich tumours.
Rosai-Dorfman disease displays a unique monocyte-macrophage phenotype characterized by expression of OCT2.
Langerhans cell histiocytosis and langerhans cell sarcoma: Current understanding and differential diagnosis.
Interdigitating dendritic cell sarcoma and follicular dendritic cell sarcoma: histopathological findings for differential diagnosis.
KP1 (CD 68) staining of malignant melanomas.
Breast cancer expression of CD163, a macrophage scavenger receptor, is related to early distant recurrence and reduced patient survival.
Tumor-promoting macrophages induce the expression of the macrophage-specific receptor CD163 in malignant cells.
CD163-positive cancer cells are potentially associated with high malignant potential in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.
CD163-positive cancer cells are a predictor of a worse clinical course in lung adenocarcinoma.
Expression of CD163 prevents apoptosis through the production of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in meningioma.
Tumours of histiocytes and accessory dendritic cells: an immunohistochemical approach to classification from the International Lymphoma Study Group based on 61 cases.
BRAF V600E mutation-specific antibody: A review.
ALK-positive histiocytosis associated with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma: a multitarget response under ibrutinib.
Indeterminate dendritic cell neoplasm of the skin: A 2-case report and review of the literature.
Multisystem ALK-positive histiocytosis: a multi-case study and literature review.
Cytokeratin-positive malignant tumors with reticulum cell morphology: a subtype of fibroblastic reticulum cell neoplasm?
The triptych of mixed histiocytosis: a systematic review of 105 cases and proposed clinical classification.
Myeloid sarcoma incidentally found in lymph nodes dissected for advanced gastric cancer.
Myeloid sarcomas: a histologic, immunohistochemical, and cytogenetic study.
Histiocytic Sarcoma.
Myeloid sarcoma: clinical and morphologic criteria useful for diagnosis.
Regulation of B lymphocyte and macrophage development by graded expression of PU.1.
The utility of PU.1 as an immunohistochemical marker for histiocytic and dendritic lesions of the skin.
Histiocytic sarcoma: New insights into FNA cytomorphology and molecular characteristics.
Expression profiling of transcription factors Pax-5, Oct-1, Oct-2, BOB.1, and PU.1 in Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas: a comparative study using high throughput tissue microarrays.
EMA positivity in epithelioid fibrous histiocytoma: a potential diagnostic pitfall.
Utility of morphologic assessment of bone marrow biopsy in diagnosis of lysosomal storage disorders.
Pseudo-Gaucher cells in mycobacterial infection: a report of two cases.
A subset of Rosai-Dorfman disease cases show increased IgG4-positive plasma cells: another red herring or a true association with IgG4-related disease?
Rosai-Dorfman disease mimicking IgG4-related diseases: a single-center experience in China.