Approach in inputs & outputs selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) efficiency measurement in hospitals: A systematic review
The efficiency and productivity evaluation process commonly employs Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) as a performance tool in numerous fields, such as the healthcare industry (hospitals). Therefore, this review examined various hospital-based DEA articles involving input and output variable selection approaches and the recent DEA developments. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) methodology was utilised to extract 89 English articles containing empirical data between 2014 and 2022 from various databases (Web of Science, Scopus, PubMed, ScienceDirect, Springer Link, and Google Scholar). Furthermore, the DEA model parameters were determined using information from previous studies, while the approaches were identified narratively. This review grouped the approaches into four sections: literature review, data availability, systematic method, and expert judgement. An independent single strategy or a combination with other methods was then applied to these approaches. Consequently, the focus of this review on various methodologies employed in hospitals could limit its findings. Alternative approaches or techniques could be utilised to determine the input and output variables for a DEA analysis in a distinct area or based on different perspectives. The DEA application trend was also significantly similar to that of previous studies. Meanwhile, insufficient data was observed to support the usability of any DEA model in terms of fitting all model parameters. Therefore, several recommendations and methodological principles for DEA were proposed after analysing the existing literature.

1. Introduction
Efficiency is a well-established concept in the field of economics. Farrell proposed that efficiency measurement should consider all inputs and outputs, avoiding index number issues and providing practical calculation methods. Hence, efficiency-related articles have attracted significant attention from various fields, including statisticians, economists, healthcare, and medicine. Nevertheless, insufficient agreement regarding the optimal method is observed for measuring efficiency. For example, various methodologies are often used for efficiency-related articles in health facilities, including data envelopment analysis (DEA), stochastic frontier analysis (SFA), Pabon Lasso, and ratio analysis. The World Health Organization (WHO) also introduced a unique approach to evaluating the effectiveness of healthcare systems in the Global Programme on Evidence for Health Policy Discussion Paper Series. Compared to a previous study in this field, this approach introduced numerous objectives of the healthcare system, including responsiveness (level and distribution), fair finance, health inequality, and the more traditional goal of improving population health.
Another report by the WHO evaluated the performance of the health system by assessing how well national health systems achieved three main objectives: good health, expectation responsiveness to the population, and fairness of financial contribution. Despite the acknowledgement of this method, disagreement and criticism have occurred over the methodology employed. Conversely, a consensus has been observed regarding the importance of accurately directing these assessments, performing a more critical analysis, adopting a more constructive approach, and facilitating a crucial dialogue among stakeholders in the healthcare system. Recently, the DEA has been used to compute the effectiveness of healthcare systems in 180 countries. This assessment is based on six key dimensions: clinical outcomes, health-adjusted life years, access, equity, safety, and resources. Stakeholders must comprehend that universally applicable efficiency metrics for all healthcare systems are impossible. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of the institutional arrangements, data, and measurements is necessary to select suitable measures, resources, and other health system components.
A framework is required following the analysis process. The optimal approach to implementing performance measurement is not to identify a minor adjustment as a supporting role to enhance one aspect of the health system outcomes. Instead, this identification should be utilised as a general strategy in gauging performance among the various system components. Numerous indicators, such as activity and expense comparison measures, are also available to assess whether limited health resources are utilised most efficiently. The primary focus of these indicators is based on quantitative metrics for evaluating hospital performance. Furthermore, the quality of hospital services can be examined using various indicators. Efficiency comparisons can also be assessed objectively using techniques from a solid economic theory. Currently, the DEA and SFA approaches are frequently applied to measure the efficiency of the healthcare industry. Since the publication of Nunamaker’s study, these strategies have been widely used in healthcare settings over the past 40 years. Although the theoretical and methodological limitations have been acknowledged in DEA, this method has attracted interest from researchers who aim to address the limitations. Hence, these studies have developed multiple methods integrating DEA with other statistical techniques and methodologies to improve efficiency evaluation.

1.1 DEA as an efficiency analysis tool in hospital
The DEA is a mathematical technique for assessing the relative efficiency of homogenous decision-making units (DMUs) with many input and output variables. Initially, this method was developed within operations research and econometrics. The effectiveness of a DMU is then evaluated concerning the effectiveness of each other members of the group. Nevertheless, one drawback of the DEA is its non-parametric and deterministic nature, suggesting that outliers are more easily detected. Meanwhile, an efficient DMU usually involves maximum output production while utilising the same input levels as all other DMUs. Various DEA-related articles have proposed that this outcome is denoted as the Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (CCR) model or constant return to scale (CRS) assumption. This observation allows for examining input-output correlation without considering any congestion effects, indicating that the outputs can present a precise linear correlation with the inputs.
Banker expanded the CCR model and the CRS assumption using a Banker, Charnes, and Cooper (BCC) model and variable returns to scale (VRS) assumption. This assumption suggests that the scales of the economies shifted with higher DMU size. The DEA approach also considers the model orientation (input or output-oriented) alongside the model type and returns to scale assumption. For example, a DMU in the input orientation assumption can control more inputs than outputs. Nonetheless, this statement can be argued that organisations can improve their outputs by utilising efficiency-oriented inputs. Hence, the input and output variables should be carefully considered when using the DEA to measure the effectiveness of a DMU or an organisation. This suggestion indicates that a precise, thorough, pertinent, and appropriate selection and combination of the input and output variables is necessary to effectively portray the functionality of a hospital while meeting the stakeholders’ expectations and assessing its efficiency. Numerous advanced analyses have also been incorporated into DEA, such as the advanced CCR and BCC models, longitudinal or window analysis (Malmquist index), and statistical analysis (regression and bootstrapping methods).

1.2 Input and output selections for hospital-based DEA applications
Multiple articles have demonstrated the practicality and potential of DEA in evaluating hospital efficiency. Despite that DEA rating comparisons across several hospital-based articles produce helpful hypotheses, significant drawbacks are observed as follows:
The input and output metrics vary across different timeframes.
The DEA score distribution is highly skewed, rendering it inaccurate to rely on standard measures of central tendency.
The output metrics in the articles present significant divergence from each other.
The hospital production models and types possess substantial differences.
Certain hospital-based articles have reported that innovative strategies can provide valuable insights to decision-makers. These articles have also included the DEA for hospital-based applications. Generally, DEA-based applications involve health care performance measurement, categorisation or clustering of DEA techniques, DEA comparison with other methods, countries or durations, and development of novel knowledge and approaches concerning DEA assessment. Likewise, each stage in a systematic literature review (SLR) employs organised, transparent, and reproducible techniques to identify and integrate relevant articles to a particular topic comprehensively. The reviewer’s methodology is meticulously recorded, allowing readers to track the decisions and actions taken and evaluate them. Although numerous hospital-based DEA articles have been recorded, inadequate complete analysis has been observed. Consequently, this outcome requires further investigation, leading to a research gap involving hospital-based DEA articles.
This review investigated various hospital-based DEA articles for selecting the most suitable input and output variables. Notably, hospital institutions were chosen due to the significant challenges in assessing their efficiency. This limitation was further complicated by the dynamic nature of service production and variation across several providers. To the authors’ knowledge, no reviews regarding hospital-based DEA articles involving optimal input and output variable selections were reported. Thus, this review addressed this research gap by observing the current trends in hospital-based DEA analyses. The remainder of this review is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the methodology used and the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statements. Section 3 presents the literature review of the relevant articles and their corresponding discussions concerning the input and output variable selections for hospital-based DEA applications. Finally, Section 5 highlights the limitations and conclusions of this review.

2. Methodology
This section discusses the methodology used to obtain relevant hospital-based DEA articles. The PRISMA methodology involved Web of Science, Scopus, PubMed, ScienceDirect, Springer Link, and Google Scholar databases. This process conducted the SLR, eligibility with exclusion criteria, review stages (identification, screening, and eligibility), and data abstraction with analysis.

2.1 PRISMA
The PRISMA methodology concisely collects components for documenting SLRs and meta-analyses based on supported evidence. Even though this approach typically focuses on reporting reviews evaluating intervention effects, it can also be used as a basis for publishing SLRs with objectives other than assessing interventions (Appendices A and B). Hence, a comprehensive manual on the SLR methodological approach is required for future researchers. This SLR initiates with developing and verifying the review method, publication standard, and reporting standard or guidance. These articles can then provide a systematic guideline for researchers outlining the factors necessitating consideration during the review process.

2.2 Journal databases
Various articles published from 2014 until 2022 were obtained on 5th April 2023, using six databases: Web of Science, Scopus, PubMed, ScienceDirect, Springer Link, and Google Scholar. The analysis of the search engines revealed significant performance discrepancies, indicating the absence of an optimal search approach. Therefore, searchers must be well-trained, capable of evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of a system, and able to determine where and how to search based on that information to use them effectively. The six databases were selected based on their potential to provide a meticulously curated medical database with recall-enhancing features, tools, and other alternatives to optimise precision.

2.3 Identification
This systematic review process comprised four stages (identification, screening, quality appraisal, analysis). Several search terms were identified during the first stage, which involved searching previous articles using various terms: “efficiency*”, “performance*”, “productivity*”, “benchmark*”, “hospital*”, “data envelopment analysis”, and “DEA”. The search string was modified according to the requirement of database. The records were exported from the databases into Microsoft Excel sheet for screening. The final query string is as follow:
(((("hospital") AND ("efficiency")) OR (("hospital") AND ("performance")) OR (("hospital") AND ("benchmark")) OR (("hospital") AND ("productivity"))) AND (("data envelopment analysis") OR ("DEA")))

2.4 Screening
The inclusion and exclusion criteria were established in this review. The titles and abstracts were independently screened by three reviewers. Only articles containing empirical data were initially selected, and this process excluded review articles (SLR and SR), book series, books, book chapters, and conference proceedings. Non-English articles were then excluded in the search attempts, avoiding any ambiguity or difficulty in translation. Subsequently, a nine-year duration was chosen for the chronology (2014–2022) to observe significant developments in research and relevant articles. This duration also functioned as a continuation of a previous study by O’Neill et al. (1984–2004), Cantor and Poh (1994–2017), and Kohl et al. (2005–2016). Consequently, 89 articles were finalised for the quality appraisal stage. Fig 1 depicts the PRISMA diagram, which provides a detailed description of the entire search procedure.
The PRISMA diagram of the search process.

2.5 Quality appraisal
A quality appraisal stage was conducted to ensure that the methodology and analysis of the selected articles were performed satisfactorily. This process contained two quality appraisal tools: knowledge transfer and economic evaluations and efficiency measurement. Mitton et al. developed a 15-point scale that covered several topics: literature evaluation, research gap identification, question, design, validity and reliability, data collection, population, sampling, and result analysis and report. These criteria were evaluated using a score range between 0 and 3: 0 for not being present or reported, 1 for being present but of low quality, 2 for being present and mid-range quality, or 3 for being present and of high quality.
Another checklist by Varabyova and Müller employed four dimensions: reporting, external validity, bias, and power. All items on the quality assessment checklist were assigned a score of either 0 (indicating no or unclear) or 1 (indicating yes). One item in the checklist also focused on conducting a second-stage analysis to investigate potential sources of bias in the study. The articles with and without second-stage analysis received maximum scores of 14 and 13, respectively. This checklist assessed the article from an economic perspective to ensure the findings could be used in policy analysis and managerial decisions. Only the items relevant to the design of the article were utilised to establish the maximum score (100%) for each study. Overall, no recognised standards for assessing the planning or implementation of research on healthcare efficiency indicators were recorded. Thus, the scientific soundness of the chosen article was investigated using two tools to improve robustness and minimise bias. Two co-authors from different institutions evaluated each selected article separately using both tools to enhance reliability. A third reviewer was then requested to assess an article if a disagreement occurred.

2.6 Data extraction and analysis
The selected articles were subjected to examination and analysis. Specific articles were also prioritised to meet the objectives directly. The data extraction process could be performed by reading the abstracts and the entire article. Meanwhile, content and quantitative and qualitative analyses were used to determine the input and output selection approaches for the hospital-based DEA articles. Four reviewers extracted the data independently using a standardized data extraction form which is organized using Microsoft Excel. The information in this form included publication year, country of study, studied hospital type, number of hospitals, number of observations (DMUs), model type, returns to scale, model orientation, measured efficiency type, input, output, number of models, application of second stage analysis, and approaches used in selecting input or output variables.

2.7 Statistical analysis
In evaluating the studies, the intra-class correlation (ICC) was used to measure the agreement between two raters (co-authors). This process examined the dependability of ratings by comparing the variability between various evaluations of the same subject regarding the overall variation observed across all ratings and subjects. Each of the evaluation processes was also quantitative. Meanwhile, the ICC coefficient values for Mitton et al.’s (15-point scale) and Varabyova and Müller’s (economic evaluation and efficiency measurement) studies were 0.956 and 0.984, respectively. No articles were excluded at this stage as the review encompassed qualitative and quantitative aspects. Nonetheless, highly rated articles were considered highly in the data analysis and result interpretation processes.

3. Results
All the 89 articles included in this analysis were retrospective studies published between 2014 and 2022. Appendices C and D contain a comprehensive summary of all the selected articles.

3.1 Efficiency analysis
The efficiency analysis in DEA primarily focused on the data by quantifying the set performance of DMUs. Given that the definition of DMU is generic and broad, this review focused on “hospital”. Typically, the four main efficiency concepts are technical, scale, pricing, and allocative efficiencies. Certain studies also described efficiency as technical, pure, scale, allocative, cost, and congestion. The DEA could perform efficiency analysis at a single point in time and over time. Thus, the data could be categorised as cross-sectional (single period) or longitudinal (panel data). Specifically, the longitudinal analysis of DEA utilised two approaches to quantify efficiency: the Malmquist Productivity Index (MPI) and Window Analysis (WA).
Out of the 89 articles, a significant portion of them (32.58%, 29 of 89) focused only on evaluating hospital performance using Pure Technical Efficiency (PTE). This metric is defined as the effectiveness of an input set producing an output on the VRS frontier. Hence, a hospital is deemed technically efficient when it generates the highest quantity of outputs using the fewest inputs. The overall Technical Efficiency (TE) is determined by multiplying the Scale Efficiency (SE) and PTE. Generally, TE refers to the efficiency measured under the CRS production frontier. In contrast, SE measures how much a unit deviates from an optimal scale, which is an area involving CRS in the correlation between outputs and inputs. Hence, the equation for TE is expressed as follows:
Fig 2 provides a geometric representation of the concepts involved in efficiency measurement using the DEA. Of the 89 articles, 26 (29.21%) measured the overall TE. Additionally, 24 (26.97%) computed the TE, PTE, and SE. Even though the remaining articles were assessed by combining TE and PTE, certain articles did not explicitly specify the tested efficiency type (see S5 Appendix).
The efficiency measurement concepts in DEA.

3.2 Model parameters
The DEA was applied using four considerations specified by the researcher: model type, technological assumption of the delivery process, model orientation, and input-output combination. This model could be further analysed or extended through a second stage or integrated with other statistical methods. Consequently, this process could improve efficiency measurement, understanding of the variation or difference in organisational performance, and evaluation of the productivity of the organisation over a specific period. Considering that the performance was analysed over a certain period, the data type was also essential.

3.2.1 Model type
The DEA has been utilised to assess the performance of various entities involved in diverse activities under different circumstances. This process leads to numerous models and extensions explaining the intricate and frequently unpredictable correlations between multiple inputs and outputs in organisation activities or productions. Hence, these models can be described as basic DEA and extension models. Certain articles have also denoted the model as Radial, Non-radial and Oriented, Non-radial and Non-oriented, and Radial and Non-radial. Most articles in this review (80.90%, 72 of 89) used Radial DEA models.
The BCC, CCR, or a mixture of both models were used to measure efficiency by examining the radial changes in input and output values. Nevertheless, only 7.87% (7 of 89) or 4.49% (4 of 89) employed Non-radial and Oriented or Non-radial and Non-oriented models, respectively. The Non-radial model deviated from the conventional approach of proportional input or output changes and instead focused on addressing slacks directly. Only one article was observed using the Radial and Non-radial models, while one combined Radial, Non-radial, and Oriented models to measure efficiency. The remaining four articles did not explicitly specify the model employed in the study (see S6 Appendix).

3.2.2 Model orientation
Orientation refers to the specific direction in which input or output is measured to determine efficiency. The primary evaluation objective is to either increase output or decrease input. Most articles in this review (55.06%, 49 of 89) applied input-orientated DEA models. These articles selected the input orientation to align with the standard practice in healthcare facilities of minimising inputs while achieving a desired output level. Thus, the organisation acquired minimal or non-existent authority over the output.
Approximately 25.84% (23 of 89) of the articles presented contradictory findings. Given the fixed and non-flexible nature of the input, the organisation should strive to raise its output. This outcome implied that output-orientated DEA models were more appropriate in their respective settings. Meanwhile, only 5.62% (5 of 89) or 3.37% (3 of 89) employed non-orientated or combined input and output-orientated DEA models, respectively. The remaining articles did not specify the orientation used in their measurements and did not clearly state their orientation (see S7 Appendix).

3.2.3 Returns to scale assumption
Approximately one-third of the articles (35.96%, 32 of 89) involving the returns to scale assumption combined CRS and VRS assumptions in evaluating efficiency. These articles compared the efficiency score to acquire a more comprehensive understanding of the organisation. Moreover, these articles provided additional knowledge on how they might utilise each assumption to enhance hospital services. Another one-third of the articles (32.58%, 29 of 89) used the VRS assumption and implied a significant correlation between the outputs of organisations (DMUs) (increase or decrease) and inputs. Likewise, 20.22% (18 of 89) assumed that the outputs of their organisations (DMUs) varied (increase or decrease) similarly to the inputs (see S8 Appendix).

3.2.4 Input and output selections
Appropriate input and output selections are necessary for conducting a comprehensive efficiency evaluation. Therefore, identifying the key attributes depicting the investigated process or output is critical. This process implies that all relevant resources should be incorporated into the inputs, while the administrative objectives of the organisations (DMUs) should be outlined in the outputs. Nonetheless, suitable inputs and outputs can present varying features depending on the situation. Data availability also requires significant consideration alongside appropriate input and output selections. Hence, various recommendations have been presented involving locating suitable measures. This process is further discussed as the main objective of this review.
Several articles employed input and output classifications for measuring efficiency, including capacity, labour, and expenses-related or capital investment, labour, and operating expenses. Specific articles also further delineated this classification process into sub-categories. For example, the outputs were classified as inpatient with outpatient services and effectiveness (quality). Other outputs were classified into two categories: activity (inpatient and outpatient) and quality-related (effectiveness dimension). Table 1 lists the input and output classification and sub-classification processes in this review. Tables 2 and 3 summarise the details of each sub-classification frequency distribution and percentages.
Summary of the used input and output categories.
Input	Percentage (%)	Output	Percentage (%)	 	Capacity-related:	30.06	Production-related	94.30	 	Beds	24.85	Inpatients	42.62	 	Capital assets	5.21	Outpatients	24.83	 			Adjusted scores	13.42	 	Cost-related:	15.34	Combination	12.08	 	Total costs	7.06	Monetary	4.70	 	Medication & service costs	5.21	Imaging and Laboratory	2.35	 	Labour costs	2.15			 	Equipment costs	0.92	Quality-related	5.70	 			Patients	72.22	 	Staff-related:	52.76	Staff	27.78	 	Doctors	17.18			 	Nurses	13.19			 	Clinical staff	10.74			 	Non-clinical staff	7.98			 	Combination	3.68			 	Other specific outputs:	1.84
Complete list summary of the used inputs.
Input	Frequency	Percentage(%)	 	Capacity-related:			 	Number of general beds	73	74.49	 	Number of facility types (area, space)	10	10.20	 	Number of medical equipment	5	5.10	 	Number of acute beds	4	4.08	 	Adjusted bed value (ratio, log value)	4	4.08	 	Number of total assets	2	2.04	 	Cost-related:			 	Total operating costs	14	28	 	Fixed costs	7	14	 	Service costs	5	10	 	Consumable costs	5	10	 	Total labour costs	4	8	 	Combination	4	8	 	Medication costs	3	6	 	Clinical staff costs	2	4	 	Capital costs	2	4	 	Beds cost	2	4	 	Non-clinical staff costs	1	2	 	Medical equipment costs	1	2	 	Staff-related:			 	Number of specialist, physician, doctor, GP, dentist	38	22.09	 	Number of nurses, midwives, nursing staff	30	17.44	 	Number of medical staff	23	13.37	 	Number of non-clinical staff	18	10.47	 	Full-time equivalent specialist, physician, doctor, GP, dentist	16	9.30	 	Full-time equivalent nurses, midwives, nursing staff	11	6.40	 	Number of combinations of staff	9	5.23	 	Full-time equivalent non-clinical staff	8	4.65	 	Full-time equivalent medical staff	6	3.49	 	Number of allied health staff	5	2.91	 	Ratio of doctors	2	1.16	 	Ratio of nurses	2	1.16	 	Full-time equivalent combination of staff	2	1.16	 	Number of combinations of medical staff	1	0.58	 	Combination of staff log value	1	0.58	 	Others:			 	Number of admissions	1	16.67	 	Average length of stay	1	16.67	 	Annual revenue	1	16.67	 	Discharge log value	1	16.67	 	Inpatient discharge rate	1	16.67	 	Population	1	16.67
Complete list summary of the used outputs.
Output	Frequency	Percentage(%)	 	Production-related:			 	Number of outpatients	50	16.78	 	Number of Inpatients (admission and discharge)	33	11.07	 	Total number of operations	28	9.40	 	Number of inpatients	23	7.72	 	Number of emergency outpatients	22	7.38	 	Number of inpatient days	14	4.70	 	Bed occupancy rate (BOR)	12	4.03	 	Inpatient adjusted value (Casemix, price, and ratio)	12	4.03	 	Discharge adjusted value (Casemix)	11	3.69	 	Number of general & emergency outpatients	10	3.36	 	Average length of stay (ALOS)	9	3.02	 	Total revenue	8	2.68	 	Ratio adjusted value	7	2.35	 	Number of daycare patients	6	2.01	 	Number of birth deliveries (normal and caesarean)	6	2.01	 	Number of laboratory & radiology (services and examinations)	5	1.68	 	Number of operations	4	1.34	 	Outpatient adjusted value (Casemix, price, and ratio)	4	1.34	 	Number of total patients	3	1.01	 	Number of family medicine outpatients	2	0.67	 	Number of obstetric outpatients (ANC and PNC)	2	0.67	 	Number of emergency outpatient surgeries	2	0.67	 	Bed turnover rate (BTR)	2	0.67	 	Bed turn over interval (TOI)	2	0.67	 	Number of surgeries (minor and major)	2	0.67	 	Log adjusted value	2	0.67	 	Score adjusted value	2	0.67	 	Operating income	2	0.67	 	Inpatient income	2	0.67	 	Number of diagnostics (visits and procedures)	2	0.67	 	Number of medical outpatients	1	0.34	 	Number of allied health outpatients	1	0.34	 	Average number of admissions and discharge	1	0.34	 	Number of special patients	1	0.34	 	Number of total examinations	1	0.34	 	Discharge adjusted value (Casemix)	1	0.34	 	Death adjusted value (Casemix)	1	0.34	 	Outpatient revenue	1	0.34	 	Examination revenue	1	0.34	 	Quality-related:			 	Mortality rate (infant, adult, and specific diseases)	9	50.00	 	Revisit rate (outpatient and emergency)	3	16.67	 	Number of students	2	11.11	 	Patient’s satisfaction score	1	5.56	 	Staff’s satisfaction score	1	5.56	 	Number of medical inquiries	1	5.56	 	Management’s score	1	5.56
3.2.4.1 Capacity-related inputs. The size, capacity, and functioning of a hospital as a health service are determined mainly by its number of fully staffed and operating beds. Out of the 89 articles, 75 of them (84.27%) considered the number of beds (general, intensive care unit and special) as inputs in their analyses. Only seven (9.33%) of the 75 articles used bed-related data as their inputs (bed type, cost, or ratio). Another 12 (16.00%) of the 75 articles studies combined beds and capital assets as capacity-related inputs. Even though only one article employed capital assets as its input, it was combined with cost-related assets. Unlike other articles, it became apparent why this article did not include beds as part of its input. Overall, the primary capacity-related input in these articles was the number of general beds. This input was followed by the number of facility types and the number of medical equipment.
3.2.4.2 Cost-related inputs. Cost-related input was the least utilised in all the articles. Of the 89 articles, only 31 (34.83%) were applicable. Another three of the 31 articles specifically used cost-related inputs. Interestingly, most of these 31 articles (90.32%) combined capacity and staff-related inputs in their analyses. Overall, the primary cost-related input utilised in these articles was total operational cost, followed by fixed costs. Subsequently, service and consumable costs followed behind.
3.2.4.3 Staff-related inputs. Most articles (93.26%, 83 of 89) employed staff-related inputs. Another two of the 83 articles combined the number of staff (staff-related) and labour cost (cost-related) as their inputs. Alternatively, cost-related inputs (labour or operating costs) substituted staff-related input as proxies in six articles. The staff-related input values exhibited variability across the observed articles, while most articles employed arithmetic numbers (actual). A full-time equivalent and a ratio of specific values followed this input. Overall, these articles demonstrated that the number of doctors was the most common input, followed by the number of nurses and clinical staff.
3.2.4.4 Production-related outputs. A significant portion (98.88%, 88 of 89) of the articles highlighted production-related outputs. Only eight (8 of 89) articles combined production and quality-related outputs. The most prevalent production-related output in these articles was the number of outpatients. This output was sequentially followed by the number of inpatients (admission and discharge), the total number of operations, and the number of inpatients.
3.2.4.5 Quality-related outputs. Quality-related outputs were less prominent than production-related outputs, and only nine (9 of 89) articles employed quality-related outputs. Notably, one article focused exclusively on a quality-related output in their research, aligning with the objectives of the study. Overall, the mortality rate (infant, adult, and specific diseases) was the most applied quality-related output. This output was followed by revisit rates (outpatients and emergency) and the number of students.

3.2.5 Extended analysis and data type
Approximately 80 articles (89.89%, 80 of 89) conducted extended analysis in their analyses. The applied data type was also almost equally distributed. Among them, 51 articles (57.30%, 51 of 89) used panel data, In contrast, 38 articles (42.70%, 38 of 89) employed cross-sectional data in their investigations.
Forty extended analyses were identified within the included articles, in which one or multiple extended analyses were used for each study (some mentioned as “stages”). Out of the extended analysis-related 80 articles, 46 integrated two or more extended analysis in their DEA measurements. The maximum number of extended analyses in all 80 articles were five, in which regression analysis (29.11%, 46 of 158) was primarily used for assessing hospital efficiency. This analysis type was sequentially followed by production function analysis (16.46%, 26 of 158), statistical analysis (15.82%, 25 of 158) and resampling methods (15.82%, 25 of 15). Table 4 tabulates the complete list of the specific analyses for each classification (see S4 Appendix).
Complete list summary of extended analyses.
Extended analysis	N	%	Extended analysis	N	%	 	Regression analysis	46	29.11	Production function analysis	26	16.46	 	Tobit regression	26	16.46	Malmquist productivity index	21	13.29	 	Ordinary least squares regression	11	6.96	Window analysis	3	1.90	 	Truncated regression	5	3.16	GMLa Index	1	0.63	 	Generalised estimating equations regression	1	0.63	gMMPb Index	1	0.63	 	Linear regression	1	0.63				 	Multinomial Logit regression	1	0.63	Resampling methods	25	15.82	 	Beta regression	1	0.63	Bootstrap method	24	15.19	 				Monte Carlo simulation	1	0.63	 	Statistical analysis	25	15.82				 	Mann—Whitney U test	5	3.16	Performance measurements	13	8.23	 	Wilcoxon signed-rank test	4	2.53	Benchmarking method	7	4.43	 	Kruskal-Wallis test	4	2.53	Stochastic frontier analysis	2	1.27	 	F-test	2	1.27	Isodata analysis	1	0.63	 	T-test	2	1.27	Super efficiency analysis	1	0.63	 	Paired T-test	1	0.63	Fitting adjustment	1	0.63	 	Central Limit Theorem	1	0.63	Pabon Lasso technique	1	0.63	 	Li-test	1	0.63				 	Chi-square test	1	0.63	Correlation analysis	11	6.96	 	Repeated measures ANOVA	1	0.63	Spearman’s rank correlation	8	5.06	 	Theil index	1	0.63	Pearson’s correlation	2	1.27	 	Unpaired T-test	1	0.63	Grey’s correlation	1	0.63	 	Univariate analysis	1	0.63				 				Clustering analysis	8	5.06	 	Matching methods	3	1.90	Cluster analysis	6	3.80	 	Propensity score matching	3	1.90	k-means clustering	1	0.63	 				MST-kNN clustering algorithm	1	0.63
Note:
a global Malmquist-Luenberger;
b generalised meta frontier Malmquist productivity

3.3 Input and output selection approaches
Various approaches or methods were adopted by the 89 articles in selecting inputs and outputs for hospital-based DEA. Each article relied on previous studies or literature reviews as the main or partial component of their methodology for selecting input and result variables. Only a few articles explicitly indicated using a local DEA efficiency study from their respective country as the reference for input and output selections. Certain articles also employed a combination of methodologies. Meanwhile, 63 of the 89 articles (70.79%) utilised only literature review to determine the input and output variables. Meanwhile, the remaining articles employed a literature review in combination with other approaches, highlighting diverse combinations. Nonetheless, the most prevalent combination approach identified was a literature review combined with data availability (13.48%, 12 of 89). This combination was followed by the literature review with systematic method (5.62%, 5 of 89) and the literature review with DMU limitation (5.62%, 5 of 89). A maximum combination of four was also observed in one article. Table 5 lists the complete list of various specific approaches.
Classification summary of the input and output selection approaches.
Approaches	N	%	 	Literature review	63	70.79	 	Literature review	60	67.42	 	Local studies literature review	3	3.37	 	Literature review and data availability	12	13.48	 	Literature review and data availability	11	12.36	 	Local studies literature review and data availability	1	1.12	 	Literature review and systematic method	5	5.62	 	Literature review and Delphi method	2	2.25	 	Literature review and Promethee method	1	1.12	 	Literature review and bibliometric analysis	1	1.12	 	Literature review and variance filter analysis	1	1.12	 	Literature review and DMU limitation	5	5.62	 	Literature review and expert judgement	3	3.37	 	Literature review, data availability, expert judgement, and DMU limitation	1	1.12

4. Discussions
The size of the DEA universe can be intimidating to unfamiliar individuals. Even when the literature is limited to healthcare applications, reading every previous study to acquire knowledge from their experiences is exceedingly challenging. Consequently, the 89 articles were subjected to meticulous examination to accomplish the objectives of this review. Nunamaker was the first to publish a health application involving the DEA to examine nursing services. Subsequently, Sherman released a second DEA article evaluating the medical and surgical departments of seven hospitals. Hence, these articles have evolved DEA applications in the healthcare industry over the past four decades. The quality of the articles has advanced due to access to resources and information technology.

4.1 Researchers’ input and output selection approaches involving DEA for hospital efficiency measurement
The relative effectiveness of various institutions, including businesses, hospitals, universities, and government agencies, is frequently assessed using DEA. Conversely, these assessments are different from traditional-based analyses. Providing healthcare services in hospital-based environments is also distinct from the manufacturing process. Raw materials undergo a physical transformation to become final commodities in a conventional factory, in which participation and co-production are absent due to the exclusion of the customer component. Therefore, identifying the appropriate variables is difficult due to the involvement of patients in the process. The effectiveness (quality component) in healthcare is also equally crucial alongside performance and efficiency. Even though DEA studies have not highlighted a standard set of input and output, several guidelines have been recommended using analytic procedures or principles to aid the optimal variable selection process.

4.1.1 Literature review
A literature review remains a commonly employed method and is often regarded as one of the most effective techniques to place a study within the body of knowledge. This method contains numerous review types (narrative, rapid, scoping, or systematic reviews) functioning as foundations or building blocks for knowledge advancement, theory development, and improvement area identifications. The literature reviews examined in this study were also the most prevalent approach for input and output selections concerning hospital efficiency-based DEA analyses. This review revealed that all the articles utilised literature review either as the primary method or as part of a combined approach.
None of the articles provided detailed information about their literature review approaches. Nevertheless, few articles explicitly mentioned selecting literature from their local country to compare their findings with previous local studies. Typically, the DEA is a non-parametric technique relying entirely on the observed input-output combinations of the sampled units. This process does not necessitate any presumptions regarding the functional structure correlations between inputs and outputs. Given that the DEA could measure the efficiency value depending on the objectives (even if it yielded a less significant value), an advantage was observed for these articles involving input and output selections based on the literature review. Even though this method remained valid for academicians, other assessors (managers, economists or policymakers) could perceive it as contradictory to their practical perspectives. Hence, several factors must be considered from these individuals’ perspectives, including different indicators, production objectives, and policies.

4.1.2 Data availability
The DEA relies on the homogeneity of the assessment of a unit. The DMU is presumed to produce comparable activities or products using resources and technology in the same environment. Therefore, a common set of similar inputs and outputs can be established. Certain factors also require consideration when large hospital-related datasets are involved, including data quality, availability, scale, and type. Although this review indicated that the examined articles used literature reviews to select the input and output variables, this selection method depended on data availability. These articles only developed a few solutions to address the limitation. For example, few articles exclusively gathered data available within their scopes. Certain articles also omitted the DMUs with incomplete data, focusing their analyses on DMUs with complete data. Thus, the DEA was advantageous in measuring only the relative efficiency or the production frontier of the units included in the analysis. Specific articles also applied the DEA during a defined data availability period to ensure all necessary input and output variables were complete. Although the DEA with missing incomplete data could be addressed, none of the reviewed articles attempted to resolve this issue.

4.1.3 Systematic method
Many possible factors can be listed when determining the input and output variables. Nevertheless, this phenomenon can produce two significant issues: a lengthy input and output list and a negative impact on the DEA in accurately measuring efficiency if a limited number of DMUs are observed. Hence, selecting the significant variables and simultaneously accurately measuring efficiency is essential. The process has also been evaluated in various articles by incorporating systematic procedures. This review identified four systematic approaches: Delphi, Preference Ranking Organisation Method for Enrichment Evaluation (PROMETHEE), bibliometric analysis, and variance filter. Consequently, these systematic approaches could formalise the judgmental process of stakeholder viewpoints (managers, economists, and policymakers). The Delphi method focuses on gathering the most reliable consensus of expert opinion for challenging situations. This forecasting method was initially presented in the 1950s by Olaf Helmer and Norman Dalkey of the Rand Corporation based on the responses from several iterations of questionnaires distributed to a panel of experts. Therefore, the Delphi method is widely recognised in assessing DEA efficiency in various areas.
The PROMETHEE method was initially developed in 1982 and underwent more advancements in 1985. This method is recognised as highly utilised and practical for multiple criteria decision aid (MCDA), including its application with DEA. Compared to other MCDA methods, the PROMETHEE is considered a straightforward and computationally simple ranking system. The system incorporates weights indicating the relative significance of each criterion alongside the preference function associated with each criterion. One of the critical applications of PROMETHEE involves its capability to assist decision-makers in choosing the optimal options for evaluating hospital performance. This process enables investigations to include PROMETHEE in DEA-based applications.
Pritchard is credited with coining the term "bibliometric" in 1969. This method is defined as an “application of mathematics and statistical methods to books and other media of communication”. Therefore, bibliometric analysis evaluates the bibliographic information or metadata properties from a database or collection of documents to enhance understanding of the topic under investigation. Numerous articles have applied bibliometric analysis for various objectives as follows:
To identify new trends in journal performance, collaborative styles, and research components
To lay the groundwork for the new and significant advancements in a field
To systematically understand the massive amounts of unstructured data to interpret and map the cumulative scientific knowledge and evolutionary nuances of established domains
Hence, bibliometric analysis can determine the input and output variables in DEA studies involving the healthcare industry, such as hospitals.
The variance filter is a mechanism used in feature selection. The process determines and retains the most essential traits, helping to reduce noise, lower the computational expense of a model, and occasionally boost model performance. This review suggested that certain studies involved listing the crucial input and output variables. The variance filter (feature selection) allowed these studies to eliminate variables (input or output) with minimal or negligible impact on the efficiency measurement of DMUs. This method was also well accepted and commonly used in DEA-based articles.

4.1.4 Expert judgement
Expert judgement can be utilised by researchers, stakeholders, or decision-makers to refine the input and output variable selections. A value judgement is “logical constructs used in efficiency assessment research that reflect the decision makers’ preferences during the efficiency assessment procedure”. This process includes the decision to exclude or assign a zero weight in the variable, which depends on the efficiency measurement capacity of DEA based on the necessities and requirements of the decision-makers. Nonetheless, various constraints can develop, such as selection bias, input and output exclusions significantly impacting efficiency measurement or incorrect input and output weights. Therefore, researchers are encouraged to incorporate expert or value judgement to achieve their objectives. Different motivations are also observed for managers, economists, government policy makers, and academicians. Despite these individuals being committed to improving productivity, different judgements involving variable selections are presented. Considering that the DEA application possesses benefits and drawbacks, understanding the managerial and statistical implications of employing value judgment in input and output selections is crucial.

4.2 Managerial and economic implications in the input and output selection processes
This review empirically provided the approaches used in input and output variable selections for hospital evaluation-based DEA methods. The healthcare sector encounters daily challenges from public policy, resulting in new organisations, laws, and technology. Hence, managers must address these concerns by implementing practical performance evaluation and decision-making strategies. These concerns necessitate careful performance and decision-making evaluations from economic and managerial perspectives. Generally, the input and output selections in DEA comprise two components: selected methods and variables. This selection process in the analysis can significantly impact the DEA outcomes. Conversely, this review indicated little consideration was devoted to the input and output variable selections in a real-world scenario. The DEA often owns an extensive initial list of potential variables to consider. Therefore, each resource that a DMU uses should be considered as an input variable. The assessment made by a manager or economist to justify the selection process also holds significant importance in practical situations.
The selection process in actual conditions is made more complex by the objective of production economics. These factors can include profit, quality control, and customer satisfaction. Hence, evaluating these several competing factors is a difficult task due to the influence of multiple decision-makers. For example, a profit-oriented DEA assessment can conflict with customer satisfaction. The results may not represent the production objective if the manager combines these measurements simultaneously. After analysing this review, certain judgements made from management and economic perspectives are proposed as follows:
Establish the objective production of the analysis, ensuring that all stakeholders easily understand it
Utilise the existing selection approaches to the greatest extent possible
Introduce a managerial-level committee to evaluate the variables before deciding on the final model
Physical units and managerial or economic perspectives differ according to the objective production of the analysis, such as comparing salary in dollars against the number of employees

4.3 Common DEA model parameters in hospital efficiency evaluation

4.3.1 Model type
Significant advancements and transformations throughout time have been observed in the DEA application. Hence, numerous models are available to assess efficiency, ranging from general models to the more specialised use of DEA. Approximately 80.90% (72 of 89) of the examined articles in this review applied the radial DEA model. The models included were the BCC, CCR, and a combined BCC and CCR model. Consequently, these findings align with other healthcare-based reviews. The focus of a radial DEA model is typically on the proportionate change in input or output values. Therefore, slacks (excess inputs or shortfall outputs still existing in the model) are ignored or treated as optional. Even though the radial model demonstrated various limitations, it is still commonly employed due to its fundamental nature, simplicity, and ease of application (minimal requirements on the production criteria of the DMUs).

4.3.2 Model orientation
Several factors or arguments can influence the DEA orientation selection, such as the decision maker’s level of control, the nature of production, and the researcher’s purpose from the model. Healthcare organisations or hospitals generally possess limited or less control over their outputs. Nevertheless, this observation does not imply that a DEA efficiency evaluation in a hospital must be focused solely on input orientation. Thus, this review discovered that 55.06% (49 of 89) of the articles used input-oriented DEA models. Previous articles also highlighted similar findings with varying proportions. Researchers and hospital managers viewed reducing inputs while achieving a desired output level as a more appropriate measure of hospital efficiency. This outcome was attributed to the limited control hospitals possessed over their outputs.

4.3.3 Returns to scale assumption
Ongoing discussions have been observed concerning which of the two fundamental models (CRS or VRS) are superior. Hospital managers are actively searching for the most effective evaluation methods to assess the efficiency impact of various inputs and outputs on their organisations. Hence, selecting a return to scale involving a hospital is determined by the size of the hospital, organisation factors, input and output process flow, and technological involvement. Adopting an inappropriate return to scale can result in an excessively constrained search region for effective DMUs. Therefore, both assumptions should be examined to comprehend the implications of using either one. This review discovered that most articles applied CRS and VRS assumptions for comparison (35.96%), followed by only VRS assumptions (32.58%). Previous articles also demonstrated a trend towards replacing CRS with VRS assumption in DEA-based applications. Specifically, most hospital efficiency assessments focused on economies of scale and considered the non-proportional correlation between inputs and outputs in the healthcare production function.

4.3.4 Input and output selections
The methodologies involving input and output selections were effectively covered in this review, achieving the main objective of this study. Thus, appropriate input and output selections were crucial for the DEA analysis. Many previous articles denoted that the effectiveness of the DEA efficiency analysis was heavily influenced by the quality and quantity of these indicators. Most articles (52.76%) used staff-related input as one of the variables in efficiency measurement. Given that human resources were significant in any organisation (including hospitals), this outcome was not surprising. Consequently, this finding was similar to previous DEA-related and performance-based articles on healthcare services.
Typically, the analysis unit for staff-related factors is contingent upon the operational dynamics of the organisation. This review suggested two staff-related factors: the actual number of staff and the full-time equivalent. Various staff types were observed, from clinical to non-clinical (see S3 and S4 Appendices). The number of general beds was the highest (74.49%) when examining the sub-type of inputs, which hospital beds were a fundamental capital input for a hospital. This factor was a key indicator to assess hospital performance, capacity, and competency while comparing healthcare services across different countries. Meanwhile, most articles applied production-related outputs rather than quality-related outputs. This phenomenon was attributed to the fact that it was simpler to quantify production-based data and provide stakeholders with a clear objective to improve upon it. Healthcare managers also would not prioritise effectiveness (quality) over efficiency. Overall, this review indicated that the common outputs applied were the number of inpatients, outpatients, and operations. Given that these outputs were the fundamental components of hospital services, the extensive utilisation of these factors was not unexpected.

4.3.5 Extended analysis
The classic DEA model is considered insufficient on its own because of the complexity of hospital processes and the continuous efforts of researchers and practitioners to enhance healthcare efficiency assessment. The majority of recent research studies on healthcare efficiency assessment integrate DEA with various approaches and techniques in order to address the weaknesses of the latter and offer a comprehensive and accurate picture of healthcare efficiency.
Forty extended analysis were observed within the reviewed articles. Despite the fact that each study had a different rationale for performing an extended analysis, a consistent theme was found.
To ascertain how contextual or environmental factors affect the efficiency scores
To quantitatively compare efficiency scores
To resolve the issues with serially linked estimates and produce bias-corrected efficiency estimates by utilising simulated distributions to compute the indices’ standard errors and confidence ranges
To assess healthcare facilities’ long-term performance using panel data analysis
To ascertain the relationship between the indicators that were to be included in the DEA model for input and output
To forecast, following the consideration of exogenous elements in the efficiency assessment, whether or not a healthcare unit should be deemed efficient
Consequently, in order to gain a better understanding of how these approaches were applied and helped the various researchers achieve their goals, it is necessary to recognise and credit these ways.

5. Limitations and conclusion
This novel systematic review represented the comprehensive investigation methods used to identify input-output variables for measuring hospital efficiency using DEA. To the authors’ knowledge, no prior studies were conducted on this topic. The primary objective of this systematic review was to offer an overview of the existing approaches. This review also provided an update on the current application of DEA models for evaluating hospital efficiency. Approximately 89 articles were reviewed and assessed thoroughly with the specified objectives, and the literature review was primarily employed as a method for selecting inputs and output variables in DEA. These articles utilised literature review as a single method or combined with other approaches to enhance the robustness and vigour of the selection process. Considering that the selection of variables in DEA could lead to varying efficiency measurement outcomes, this process was considered crucial. Nevertheless, no definitive approach or methodology could be identified for selecting variables (input-output) in DEA, concurrently representing its advantages and disadvantages.
Researchers and stakeholders should use the DEA to assess the effectiveness of their organisation according to their preferences. Conversely, these individuals should be aware of the limitations and potential constraints of DEA. Even though this review specifically examined methodologies employed in hospital settings, the scope of the findings could be restricted. Alternative procedures or methods could be utilised to select input and output variables for DEA studies in different fields or based on other perspectives. Given that researchers and healthcare professionals aim to improve healthcare efficiency assessment, an optimal input-output selection approach should be identified. Hence, examining past, present, and potential developments in the DEA literature is essential due to its significant impact on DEA studies. The parameters for the DEA models also did not present any evidence to support an optimal or universally fitting model, for which almost all models were utilised multiple times (see S3 and S4 Appendices). Consequently, this review offered guidelines and methodological principles for conducting DEA studies based on established research. This process can provide insights to hospital managers, healthcare workers, policy officials, and students on the efficiency evaluation using DEA.

5.1 Registration and protocol
This study was registered at OSF Registries (https://osf.io/registries). All information regarding the registration and study protocol can be accessed at https://osf.io/nby9m or https://osf.io/e7mj9/?view_only=53deec8e6c6946eeaf0ea6fe2f0f212a.

Supporting information

References
The Measurement of Productive Efficiency
The Evaluation of Hospital Performance in Iran: A Systematic Review Article
Efficiency Measurement in Health Facilities: A Systematic Review in Low- and Middle-Income Countries
A Systematic Review of Health Care Efficiency Measures
Tandon A, Murray C, Lauer J, Evans DB. Measuring Overall Health System Performance for 191 Countries. 2000. https://www.who.int/publications
World Health Organisation. The World Health Report 2000 Health Systems: Improving Performance. 2000. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/924156198X
The World Health Report 2000: 10 years on
The World Health Report 2000: Can Health Care Systems Be Compared Using a Single Measure of Performance?
The World Health Report 2000: Can Health Care Systems Be Compared Using a Single Measure of Performance?
Benneyan J, Ceyhan M, Sunnetci A. Data Envelopment Analysis of National Healthcare Systems and Their Relative Efficiencies. The 37th International Conference on Computers and Industrial Engineering, pp251–261. 2007.
Papanicolas I, Rajan D, Karanikolos M, Soucat A, Figueras J 1959-. Health system performance assessment A framework for policy analysis. 2022. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240042476
Identification of common indicators of hospital performance evaluation models: A scoping review
Indicators of Hospital Performance Evaluation: A Systematic Review
Efficiency measurement of health care: a review of non-parametric methods and applications
Non-Parametric and Parametric Applications Measuring Efficiency in Health Care
Giancotti M, Pipitone V, Mauro M, Guglielmo A. 20 Years of Studies on Technical and Scale efficiency in the Hospital Sector: a Review of Methodological Approaches. 2016.
The measurement of efficiency and productivity of health care delivery
A Literature review on the Identification of Variables for Measuring Hospital Efficiency in the Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA)
A cross-national comparison and taxonomy of DEA-based hospital efficiency studies
Integrated Analysis of Healthcare Efficiency: A Systematic Review
Measuring the efficiency of decision making units
Data envelopment analysis models for identifying and benchmarking the best healthcare processes
Comparative Study of Three Commonly Used Methods for Hospital Efficiency Analysis in Beijing Tertiary Public Hospitals, China
A systematic review on hospital inefficiency in the Eastern Mediterranean Region: Sources and solutions
Eklom B, Callander E. A Systematic Review of Hospital Efficiency and Productivity Studies: Lessons from Australia, UK and Canada. 2020 [cited 3 Nov 2022].
Fitriana, Hendrawan H. Analisis Efisiensi dengan Data Envelopment (DEA) di Rumah Sakit dan PUSKESMAS. CV. Amerta Media; 2021.
Irwandy. Efisiensi dan Produktifitas Rumah Sakit: Teori dan Aplikasi Pengukuran dengan Pendekatan Data Envelopment Analysis. CV. Social Politic Genius (SIGn); 2019.
The use of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) in healthcare with a focus on hospitals
Efficiency of Iranian Hospitals Before and After Health Sector Evolution Plan: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Study
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis
A Systematic Review of Hospital Inputs and Outputs in Measuring Technical Efficiency Using Data Envelopment Analysis
Classifying inputs and outputs in data envelopment analysis
The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
The ABC of systematic literature review: the basic methodological guidance for beginners
Which academic search systems are suitable for systematic reviews or meta-analyses? Evaluating retrieval qualities of Google Scholar, PubMed, and 26 other resources
The comparative recall of Google Scholar versus PubMed in identical searches for biomedical systematic reviews: a review of searches used in systematic reviews
Knowledge Transfer and Exchange: Review and Synthesis of the Literature
Systematic review and meta-analysis of public hospital efficiency studies in Gulf region and selected countries in similar settings
The efficiency of health care production in OECD countries: A systematic review and meta-analysis of cross-country comparisons
Efficiency, ownership, and financing of hospitals: The case of Austria
Determinants of soft budget constraints: How public debt affects hospital performance in Austria
Evaluation of performance and impacts of maternal and child health hospital services using Data Envelopment Analysis in Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China: A comparison study among poverty and non-poverty county level hospitals
Changes in efficiency of tertiary public general hospitals during the reform of public hospitals in Beijing, China
Hospital efficiency and equity in health care delivery: A study based in China
Can integrated care improve the efficiency of hospitals? Research based on 200 Hospitals in China
Investigating the link between medical urgency and hospital efficiency—Insights from the German hospital market
Homogeneity and Best Practice Analyses in Hospital Performance Management: An Analytical Framework
Performance evaluation of nonhomogeneous hospitals: the case of Hong Kong hospitals
Operational efficiency analysis of public hospital systems of india: Application of data envelopment analysis
The efficiency and productivity of Public Services Hospital in Indonesia
Using data envelopment analysis to improve the hospitals efficiency in Indonesia: The case of South Sulawesi Province
Technical efficiency and its affecting factors in Tehran’s public hospitals: DEA approach and Tobit regression
Hospital Efficiency Measurement Before and After Health Sector Evolution Plan in Southwest of Iran: a DEA-Panel Data Study
The effect of Iran’s health transformation plan on hospital performance: Kerman province
Application of a Hybrid Method for Performance Evaluation of Teaching Hospitals in Tehran
Evaluating Hospital Efficiency Adjusting for Quality Indicators: An Application to Portuguese NHS Hospitals
Measuring the efficiency of the Portuguese public hospitals: A value modelled network data envelopment analysis with simulation
How to detect hospitals where quality would not be jeopardized by health cost savings? A methodological approach using DEA with SBM analysis
Examination on level of scale efficiency in public hospitals in Tanzania
Klangrahad C. Evaluation of Thailand’s regional hospital efficiency: An application of data envelopment analysis. ACM International Conference Proceeding Series. 2017;Part F131202: 104–109.
Changes in hospital efficiency and size: An integrated propensity score matching with data envelopment analysis
Integrated k-means clustering with data envelopment analysis of public hospital efficiency
An examination of competition and efficiency for hospital industry in Turkey
Assessment of technical efficiency of public hospitals in Turkey
Assessment of efficiency levels of training and research hospitals in Turkey and the factors affecting their efficiencies
Analysis of the cost and efficiency relationship: experience in the Turkish pay for performance system
Assessment of the impact of public hospital associations (PHAs) on the efficiency of hospitals under the ministry of health in Turkey with data envelopment analysis
Does quality help the financial viability of hospitals? A data envelopment analysis approach
Operational and economic efficiency analysis of public hospitals in Greece
Multilevel Analysis of the Relationship between Ownership Structure and Technical Efficiency Frontier in the Spanish National Health System Hospitals
Inefficiency of public hospitals: a multistage data envelopment analysis in an Italian region
Risk-Based Robust Evaluation of Hospital Efficiency
Aggregate efficiency of industry and its groups: the case of Queensland public hospitals
Technical efficiency of Kosovo public hospitals
A model for multidimensional efficiency analysis of public hospital management
Assessing the technical efficiency of Brazil’s teaching hospitals using data envelopment analysis
Performance of hospital services in Ontario: DEA with truncated regression approach
Efficiency Comparison of Public Hospitals under Different Administrative Affiliations in China: A Pilot City Case
Determinants and Differences of Township Hospital Efficiency among Chinese Provinces
Measuring and Benchmarking Technical Efficiency of Public Hospitals in Tianjin, China: A Bootstrap—Data Envelopment Analysis Approach
A mixed-integer slacks-based measure data envelopment analysis for efficiency measuring of German university hospitals
Correction: Hong Kong Hospital Authority resource efficiency evaluation: Via a novel DEA-Malmquist model and Tobit regression model
A CRITICAL DATA ENVELOPMENT ANALYSIS OF HOSPITAL EFFICIENCY IN INDIA
Do Geographical Locations Affect in Hospitals Performance? A Multi-group Data Envelopment Analysis
Public vs. Private in Hospital Efficiency: Exploring Determinants in a Competitive Environment
Does the Extent of Per-Case Payment System Affect Hospital Efficiency?
Hospital efficiency: how to spend less maintaining quality?
Does competition improve hospital performance: a DEA based evaluation from the Netherlands
A DEA-based Performance Measurement Mathematical Model and Software Application System Applied to Public Hospitals in the Philippines
Measuring performance change in Scottish hospitals: a Malmquist and times-series approach
Productivity growth and quality changes of hospitals in Taiwan: does ownership matter?
Hung SY, Wu TH. Healthcare quality and efficiency in Taiwan. ACM International Conference Proceeding Series. 2018; 83–87.
Ho CC, Jiang YB, Chen MS. The healthcare quality and performance evaluation of hospitals with different ownerships-demonstrated by Taiwan hospitals. Proceedings - 2017 10th International Congress on Image and Signal Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics, CISP-BMEI 2017. 2018;2018-January: 1–4.
A novel DEA model for hospital performance evaluation based on the measurement of efficiency, effectiveness, and productivity
Are hospitals producing quality care efficiently? An analysis using Dynamic Network Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA)
A New Strategy to Evaluate Technical Efficiency in Hospitals Using Homogeneous Groups of Casemix: How to Evaluate When There is Not DRGs?
Analysis of factors influencing technical efficiency of public district hospitals in KwaZulu-Natal province, South Africa
Technical efficiency of public district hospitals in bangladesh: A data envelopment analysis
The impact of healthcare reform on the efficiency of public county hospitals in China
Evaluation and analysis of hospital efficiency in China based on macro- and micro-level analyses
Technical efficiency and productivity of Chinese county hospitals: an exploratory study in Henan province, China
Technical Efficiency of Public and Private Hospitals in Beijing, China: A Comparative Study
A four-stage DEA-based efficiency evaluation of public hospitals in China after the implementation of new medical reforms
Efficiency of Human Resources in Public Hospitals: An Example from the Czech Republic
Productivity and quality of Dutch hospitals during system reform
Technical efficiency of selected hospitals in Eastern Ethiopia
Decomposition of potential efficiency gains from hospital mergers in Greece
Efficiency and productivity assessment of public hospitals in Greece during the crisis period 2009–2012
A window-DEA based efficiency evaluation of the public hospital sector in Greece during the 5-year economic crisis
THE IMPACT OF ECONOMIC CRISIS TO HOSPITAL SECTOR AND THE EFFICIENCY OF GREEK PUBLIC HOSPITALS
DEA: A NEW APPROACH TO MEASURE HOSPITAL OPERATIONS EFFICIENCY
Hospital efficiency measurement in the west of Iran: data envelopment analysis and econometric approach
Congestion analysis to evaluate the efficiency and appropriateness of hospitals in Sicily
Productivity growth, case mix and optimal size of hospitals. A 16-year study of the Norwegian hospital sector
Measuring the efficiency of Palestinian public hospitals during 2010–2015: An application of a two-stage DEA method
Healthcare efficiency assessment using DEA analysis in the Slovak Republic
How efficient are referral hospitals in Uganda? A data envelopment analysis and tobit regression approach
Levels, trends and determinants of technical efficiency of general hospitals in Uganda: Data envelopment analysis and Tobit regression analysis
Impact of the Local Public Hospital Reform on the Efficiency of Medium-Sized Hospitals in Japan: An Improved Slacks-Based Measure Data Envelopment Analysis Approach
DEA-Solver-Pro. DEA-Solver-Pro Newsletter No. 20. In: https://saitech.capoo.jp/en/profile-of-dea-solverpro/ [Internet]. 2022 [cited 26 Jun 2023].
Are public hospitals reforming efficiently in West Bank?
Determinants of Technical Efficiency in Public Hospitals: The Case of Saudi Arabia
Data Envelopment Analysis of Selected Specialized Health Centres and Possibilities of its Application in the Terms of Slovak Republic Health Care System
Analysis of the technical efficiency of the forms of hospital management based on public-private collaboration of the Madrid Health Service, as compared with traditional management
Do hospital reform and ownership matter to Shenzhen hospitals in China? A productivity analysis
Evaluation of efficiency in Colombian hospitals: An analysis for the post-reform period
A cost and performance comparison of Public Private Partnership and public hospitals in Spain
Multifaced Evidence of Hospital Performance in Pennsylvania
Better outcomes at lower costs? The effect of public health expenditures on hospital efficiency
Hospital efficiency measurement and evaluation. Empirical test of a new technique
Measuring routine nursing service efficiency: a comparison of cost per patient day and data envelopment analysis models
A survey and analysis of the first 40 years of scholarly literature in DEA: 1978–2016
Pitfalls and protocols in DEA
Data envelopment analysis: Prior to choosing a model
COOPER-framework: A unified process for non-parametric projects
An application procedure for DEA
Health-care applications: From hospitals to physicians, from productive efficiency to quality frontiers
Literature reviews vs systematic reviews
Literature review as a research methodology: An overview and guidelines
Dealing with missing data based on data envelopment analysis and halo effect
Data envelopment analysis with missing data a reliable solution method
Dalkey NC, Helmer-Hirschberg O. An Experimental Application of the Delphi Method to the Use of Experts. 1962 [cited 17 Jul 2023]. https://www.rand.org/pubs/research_memoranda/RM727z1.html
Business Performance Evaluation for Tourism Factory: Using DEA Approach and Delphi Method
Measuring the efficiency of the Greek rural primary health care using a restricted DEA model; the case of southern and western Greece
An application of delphi and dea to performance efficiency assessment of retail stores in fashion industry
Performance efficiency assessment of Vietnamese ports: An application of Delphi with Kamet principles and DEA model
A multicriteria classification approach based on pairwise comparisons
Use of DEA and PROMETHEE II to Assess the Performance of Older Drivers
A ranking method based on DEA and PROMETHEE II (a rank based on DEA & PR.II)
Integrated data envelopment analysis, multi-criteria decision making, and cluster analysis methods: Trends and perspectives
PROMETHEE: A comprehensive literature review on methodologies and applications
DEA-Based PROMETHEE II Distribution-Center Productivity Model: Evaluation and Location Strategies Formulation
Application of PROMETHEE method for green supplier selection: a comparative result based on preference functions
PROMETHEE methods
Evaluation of hotel websites using the multicriteria analysis of PROMETHEE and GAIA: Evidence from the five-star hotels of Mashhad
Pritchard A. Statistical bibliography or bibliometrics. Journal of Documentation. 1969.
Exploring Topics in Bibliometric Research Through Citation Networks and Semantic Analysis
How to conduct a bibliometric analysis: An overview and guidelines
Agarwal R. The 5 Feature Selection Algorithms every Data Scientist should know. In: https://towardsdatascience.com/the-5-feature-selection-algorithms-every-data-scientist-need-to-know-3a6b566efd2 [Internet]. 2019 [cited 18 Jul 2023].
Rasulov Z. Feature Selection—Filter Method. In: https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/feature-selection-filter-method-43f7369cd2a5 [Internet]. 2021 [cited 18 Jul 2023].
Feature selection using data envelopment analysis
Assessing environmental performance with big data: A DEA model with multiple data resources
Feature Selection in Data Envelopment Analysis: A Mathematical Optimization approach
Weights restrictions and value judgements in Data Envelopment Analysis: Evolution, development and future directions
Incorporating Value Judgments in DEA
Introduction to data envelopment analysis and its uses: With DEA-solver software and references
An introduction to efficiency and productivity analysis
Model misspecification in Data Envelopment Analysis
Key Indicators Affecting Hospital Efficiency: A Systematic Review
Determinants of hospital efficiency: A literature review
Health system efficiency: How to make measurement matter for policy and management
Assessing hospital performance indicators. What dimensions? Evidence from an umbrella review
Variable selection in Data Envelopment Analysis
Guidelines for using variable selection techniques in data envelopment analysis
Stepwise selection of variables in data envelopment analysis: Procedures and managerial perspectives
10.1371/journal.pone.0293694.r001

Decision Letter 0
Ramalho
André
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
5 Feb 2024
PONE-D-23-33407Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospital: A Systematic ReviewPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Aizuddin,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Language and Clarity: There are several instances of typographical errors and language issues that need to be addressed. For example, in Section 3.2.3, the term "return to scale assumption" should be corrected to "returns to scale assumption". We recommend a thorough and careful revision of the English language used throughout the paper to ensure clarity and accuracy.
​Comparative Analysis from Managerial and Economic Viewpoints: The manuscript currently lacks a comparison of the reviewed papers from managerial and economic perspectives. Such an analysis is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of the subject matter. We advise you to incorporate a detailed comparative analysis that reflects these perspectives, thereby enriching the depth and relevance of your review. Please note that these revisions are substantial and critical to enhancing the quality and scholarly value of your paper.
We appreciate the opportunity to consider your work for publication. Your article has undergone a peer review process, and I have also conducted a thorough evaluation. After careful consideration, we have concluded that the manuscript requires major revisions before it can be considered for publication. This decision reflects a consensus between the external reviewer's insights and my own assessment as the second reviewer. The key areas that necessitate revision are as follows:
We believe that addressing these issues will significantly improve the manuscript and better align it with the journal's standards and readership expectations and understand that these revisions may require considerable effort and time. However, we are confident that your dedication to these improvements will make a valuable contribution to the field.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 21 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
André Ramalho, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. Note from Emily Chenette, Editor in Chief of PLOS ONE, and Iain Hrynaszkiewicz, Director of Open Research Solutions at PLOS: Did you know that depositing data in a repository is associated with up to a 25% citation advantage (https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0230416)? If you’ve not already done so, consider depositing your raw data in a repository to ensure your work is read, appreciated and cited by the largest possible audience. You’ll also earn an Accessible Data icon on your published paper if you deposit your data in any participating repository (https://plos.org/open-science/open-data/#accessible-data).
3. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
-------------------------------------------
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Dear Editor,
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to review the paper entitled "Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospital: A Systematic Review" (with Manuscript Number: PONE-D-23-33407).
I have completed reading this paper. It is a interesting review paper. However, based on the following comments, I believe the current version of this paper is not appropriate for publication in "PLOS ONE".
Thus, I recommend major revision for this paper.
Yours sincerely,
Comments:
1. There are several dictations errors in the text. For instance, in the title of Section 3.2.3, the term "return to scale assumption" must be modified to the term "returns to scale assumption". English language of this paper must be revised carefully.
2. The authors have not compared the papers reviewed in this paper from managerial and economic viewpoints.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0293694.r002

Author response to Decision Letter 0
2 May 2024
André Ramalho, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
San Francisco, California, USA
1st May 2024
Dear Dr. André Ramalho:
Thank you for inviting us to submit a revised draft of our manuscript entitled, "Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospital: A
Systematic Review" to PLOS ONE. We also appreciate the time and effort you and each of the reviewer have dedicated to providing insightful feedback on ways to strengthen our paper. Thus, it is with great pleasure that we resubmit our article for further consideration. We have incorporated changes that reflect the detailed suggestions you have graciously provided. We also hope that our edits and the responses we provide below satisfactorily address all the issues and concerns you and the reviewer have noted.
To facilitate your review of our revisions, the following is a point-by-point response to the questions and comments delivered in your letter dated 5th Feb 2024 [PONE-D-23-33407]. The responses to the concerns raised by editor and reviewer are below and are color coded as follows: a) Comments from editors or reviewers are shown as [text]; b) Our responses are shown as [text].
The comments were very helpful overall, and we are appreciative of such constructive feedback on our original submission. After addressing the issues raised, we feel the quality of the paper is much improved.
EDITOR SUGGESTIONS:
1. [We appreciate the opportunity to consider your work for publication. Your article has undergone a peer review process, and I have also conducted a thorough evaluation. After careful consideration, we have concluded that the manuscript requires major revisions before it can be considered for publication. This decision reflects a consensus between the external reviewer's insights and my own assessment as the second reviewer. The key areas that necessitate revision are as follows:]
• RESPONSE: [We wish to thank you and the reviewer for the assessment and consideration for publication. We agree with you and did major revisions throughout our paper. In our revisions, we have attempted to address key areas that necessitate revision. Details of the changes is the document “Revised Manuscript with Track Changes”. However, we have retained the structure of the paper to cover broad reach of audience including those who are new to Data Envelopment Analysis]
2. [Language and Clarity: There are several instances of typographical errors and language issues that need to be addressed. For example, in Section 3.2.3, the term "return to scale assumption" should be corrected to "returns to scale assumption". We recommend a thorough and careful revision of the English language used throughout the paper to ensure clarity and accuracy.]
• RESPONSE: [We thank Editor for this comment. We regret for the typographical errors and language issues. Accordingly, we have revised, edited and proofread the whole paper to improve the clarity and accuracy. We have also replaced the pointed-out term and others to be more in line with your comments. We hope that the edited paper clarifies this comment]
3. [Comparative Analysis from Managerial and Economic Viewpoints: The manuscript currently lacks a comparison of the reviewed papers from managerial and economic perspectives. Such an analysis is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of the subject matter. We advise you to incorporate a detailed comparative analysis that reflects these perspectives, thereby enriching the depth and relevance of your review. Please note that these revisions are substantial and critical to enhancing the quality and scholarly value of your paper.]
• RESPONSE: [We appreciate your insightful and fair comments. We agreed that the paper lacks in the areas mentioned. However, we believed that the paper should interest broad reach of audience both in and outside of DEA discipline. This includes student and those who a new to DEA. Therefore, we incorporated the managerial and economic analysis by adding crucial statements and specific section to reflects the perspective] [Pages and lines referred to manuscript with All Markup] [ The added analysis is highlighted in yellow in the revised manuscript.]
(i) P.15, lines 353-354 – We elaborated the checklist used was specific to assess from economic perspective
(ii) P.38, lines 810-815 – We explained the method mentioned acceptable for academic or research purpose. But as manager or economic purpose the method need to be use wisely.
(iii) P.40, lines 863-865 – We added the statement that, the method stated can formalized the judgmental process. This is important from managerial or economic perspective as they need a concrete base or definitive stand in their decision.
(iv) P.42-43, lines 937-943 – We elaborated the motivation of manager or economist are different. This motivation in managerial and economic area will change their judgement.
• [We added a specific section to enrich the paper as suggested and at the same time keep the paper structure to attract more reader especially those who are new to DEA. P.43-45, lines 951-1005, point 4.2 – Specific section to the main objective of the paper. We expanded the discussion from managerial and economic standpoints and proposed specific recommendation. Again, although this recommendation reflects to the specified group it is also relevance to others who is interested.]
• [We hope these revisions provide a more balanced and thorough discussion in the paper.]
REVIEWER 1 COMMENTS:
4. [Thank you for giving me the opportunity to review the paper entitled "Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospital: A Systematic Review" (with Manuscript Number: PONE-D-23-33407).
I have completed reading this paper. It is a interesting review paper. However, based on the following comments, I believe the current version of this paper is not appropriate for publication in "PLOS ONE".
Thus, I recommend major revision for this paper]
• RESPONSE: [We wish to thank you for your insightful comments and pleased to find that this paper interest you. We revised the paper as you suggested in the document “Revised Manuscript with Track Changes”. Your comments and suggestion have greatly helped us to improve the quality of our paper.]
5. [There are several dictations errors in the text. For instance, in the title of Section 3.2.3, the term "return to scale assumption" must be modified to the term "returns to scale assumption". English language of this paper must be revised carefully.]
• RESPONSE: [We thank you for noting this. We are very sorry for this dictations error and for the English language was somewhat inadequate. Thus, we reviewed back the paper and improved in term of language, structure and related term on DEA. Proofreading was done accordingly to make the paper better. We hope the revised paper addressed your concern]
6. [The authors have not compared the papers reviewed in this paper from managerial and economic viewpoints.]
• RESPONSE: [Thank you for providing these insights. We agreed the paper lacks from the viewpoints mentioned. We also believed it is more appropriate for the paper to be more general as to attract larger and broader audience. Thus, we decided to incorporated the managerial and economic analysis by adding crucial statements and specific section to reflects the viewpoints. Our response is the same as what we replied to the Editor.] [Pages and lines referred to manuscript with All Markup] [ The added analysis is highlighted in yellow in the revised manuscript.]
(i) P.15, lines 353-354 – We elaborated the checklist used was specific to assess from economic perspective
(ii) P.38, lines 810-815 – We explained the method mentioned acceptable for academic or research purpose. But as manager or economic purpose the method need to be use wisely.
(iii) P.40, lines 863-865 – We added the statement that, the method stated can formalized the judgmental process. This is important from managerial or economic perspective as they need a concrete base or definitive stand in their decision.
(iv) P.42-43, lines 937-943 – We elaborated the motivation of manager or economist are different. This motivation in managerial and economic area will change their judgement.
• [We added a specific section to enrich the paper as suggested and at the same time keep the paper structure to attract more reader especially those who are new to DEA. P.43-45, lines 951-1005, point 4.2 – Specific section to the main objective of the paper. We expanded the discussion from managerial and economic standpoints and proposed specific recommendation. Again, although this recommendation reflects to the specified group it is also relevance to others who is interested.]
• [We hope that these revisions are sufficient to make our paper suitable for publication.]
CONCLUDING REMARKS: Thank you for providing us the opportunity to improve our manuscript with your useful suggestions and questions. We worked hard to incorporate your feedback and hope that these changes would persuade you to accept our submission.
Sincerely,
[A Azimatun Noor]
Corresponding Author:
A Azimatun Noor
Associate Prof Dr
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
[Faculty of Medicine UKM
Level 2, Kompleks Pendidikan Perubatan Canselor Tuanku Jaafar
Jalan Yaacob Latif, Bandar Tun Razak
56000 Cheras, Kuala Lumpur
MALAYSIA]
[azimatunnoor@ppukm.ukm.edu.my]
[Tel: +603 – 9145 8693]
[Fax: +603 – 9145 8401]
Additional Contact:
M Zulfakhar Zubir
Dr
Institution/Affiliation Name
[Medical Development Division, Ministry of Health Malaysia, Putrajaya, MALAYSIA]
[dr.zulfakhar@moh.gov.my]
[Tel: +6019 – 6686415]
10.1371/journal.pone.0293694.r003

Decision Letter 1
Ramalho
André
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
21 May 2024
PONE-D-23-33407R1Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospitals: A Systematic Review​PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Aizuddin,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Jul 05 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
André Ramalho, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #1: All comments have been addressed
Reviewer #2: (No Response)
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: Dear Editor,
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to review the revised paper entitled "Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospitals: A Systematic Review" (with Manuscript Number: PONE-D-23-33407R1).
I have completed reading the revised paper. In my opinion, the authors have addressed the points raised in the previous review with patient.
I believe that the revised paper is now acceptable for publication in "PLOS ONE".
Yours sincerely,
Reviewer #2: Thank you for the opportunity of reviewing this work. Authors conducted a systematic review on the use of DEA for performing hospital efficiency assessment, focusing on input-output selection. This review touches a very relevant topic in health economics. Authors have assessed a considered number of publications, summarizing and describing key methodological aspects behind the use of DEA for hospital efficiency assessment. Overall, the issue is relevant, and the review is worth for publication, but some major improvements need to be done. Below I provide comments and suggestions separated by sections:
Introduction
Line 66: "[...] and a framework is designed. in keeping with the analysis. [...]" -> It seems there is text missing in this sentence.
Line 133: " [...] Despite the large number of studies on the use of DEA in hospitals, efforts to comprehensively examine these studies are still missing and warrant more investigation. This article identifies and describes DEA research in hospitals in an effort to close the knowledge gap. [...]" -> I am afraid this may not be entirely true. There are several published review articles that have assessed and described the use of DEA in the hospital sector, including all methodological aspects within this methodology, such as input-output selection. Having said that, the motivation and need for this review should be clarified and authors need to clearly state what the review adds to other existing and similar reviews.
Line 143: "In addition, this study observed the current trend in analysing hospital efficiency using DEA" -> What does this objective means exactly? It does not seem that this analysis was performed in the Results sections. Could you please clarify this point?
Methods
Authors used 6 standard, comprehensive databases and justified their choice. However, Methods section lacks description on the search strategy and query. It was only mentioned the terms used. It is important to present at least the final query used for searching the databases. Also, it is not completely clear how many reviewers participated in each phase (abstract screening, full-text analysis and data extraction). Authors only mention 2 readers and then a third one for consensus in the Quality Appraisal section. Authors need to clarify how the review process was carried out. Furthermore, inclusion and exclusion criteria considered for abstract screening and full-text selection are not explicitly mentioned in the Methods section. This information is usually basic in systematic reviews. Authors only mentioned type of publication, language and period criteria.
Results
I think Tables 1 and 2 need to be restructured. It would be easier to read if Table 1 contains only the full list of input variables and Table 2 only the full list of output variables (including categories and counts), for instance. Moreover, it is important to include the definitions and units of the variables in these tables.
The section "3.2.5 Extended analysis & data type" only lists a series of additional methods employed but provide little to no information on the purpose or usefulness of applying these extended analyses. For instance, some of the methods presented are typically employed in second-stage analysis (e.g., Tobit regression) to explain the efficiency or inefficiency levels found by DEA. Without this information, I do not see what this section adds.
Discussion and conclusions
Authors provided an in-depth discussion on input-output selection, highlighting the existing variability concerning the selection of inputs and outputs. Based on the presented results, it seems that input-output selection is mostly influenced by data availability and research scope, and thus it is not a methodological preference, making it difficult to suggest common practices. However, I missed the main message to be conveyed by the review. I was expecting to find more concrete recommendations and guidelines regarding input-output selection in the Discussion and Conclusion sections, or at least a more directed discussion on how variable selection affects efficiency estimation or what key considerations for variable selection should be addressed.
Finally, it is important that authors carefully review the text in order to improve clarity and English.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: Yes: Mohammad Khoveyni
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0293694.r004

Author response to Decision Letter 1
10 Jun 2024
Response to Reviewers:
André Ramalho, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
San Francisco, California, USA
5th June 2024
Dear Dr. André Ramalho:
Thank you for inviting us to submit a revised version of our manuscript entitled, "Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospital: A Systematic Review" to PLOS ONE. We also appreciate the time and effort you and each of the reviewers have dedicated to providing insightful feedback on ways to strengthen our paper. Thus, it is with great pleasure that we resubmit our article for further consideration. We have incorporated changes that reflect the detailed suggestions you have graciously provided. We also hope that our edits and the responses we provide below satisfactorily address all the issues and concerns you and the reviewer have noted.
To facilitate your review of our revisions, the following is a point-by-point response to the questions and comments delivered in your letter dated 21st May 2024 [PONE-D-23-33407R1]. The responses to the concerns raised by editor and reviewers are below and are color coded as follows: a) Comments from editors or reviewers are shown as [text]; b) Our responses are shown as [text].
The comments were very helpful overall, and we are appreciative of such constructive feedback on our original submission. After addressing the issues raised, we feel the quality of the paper is much improved.
EDITOR SUGGESTIONS:
1. [Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process. Minor Revision]
• RESPONSE: [We are really glad that the article reaches you. We also appreciate the time and effort you and each of the reviewer have dedicated to providing insightful feedback on ways to strengthen our paper. Previously the article needs a major revision, we are delightful that the second revision require minor revision. Thus, it is with great pleasure that we resubmit our article for further consideration. We have incorporated changes that reflect the detailed suggestions you have graciously provided. We also hope that our edits and the responses we provide below satisfactorily address all the issues and concerns you and the reviewers have noted.]
• [We appreciate both of the reviewers insightful and fair comments. Thank you for Reviewer #1 for the recommendation and acceptance for publication. We agreed with Reviewer #2 for the additional comment and suggestion. Therefore, we incorporated the concerns raised by Reviewer #2] [Pages and lines referred to manuscript with All Markup] [ The added content or response to comment is highlighted in yellow in the revised manuscript.]
• [These changes, we hope, will provide the paper a more comprehensive and fair discussion.]
REVIEWER 1 COMMENTS:
[Dear Editor,
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to review the revised paper entitled "Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospitals: A Systematic Review" (with Manuscript Number: PONE-D-23-33407R1).
I have completed reading the revised paper. In my opinion, the authors have addressed the points raised in the previous review with patient.
I believe that the revised paper is now acceptable for publication in "PLOS ONE".
Yours sincerely,]
• RESPONSE: [We would like to thank you for taking the necessary time and effort to review the article. We sincerely appreciate all your valuable comments and suggestions, which helped us in improving the quality of the article. We would like to take this opportunity to thank you for the effort and expertise that you contributed towards reviewing the article, without which it would be impossible to maintain the high standards of peer-reviewed journals. Thank you for considering the article acceptable for publication in “PLOS ONE”.]
REVIEWER 2 COMMENTS:
1. [Thank you for the opportunity of reviewing this work. Authors conducted a systematic review on the use of DEA for performing hospital efficiency assessment, focusing on input-output selection. This review touches a very relevant topic in health economics. Authors have assessed a considered number of publications, summarizing and describing key methodological aspects behind the use of DEA for hospital efficiency assessment. Overall, the issue is relevant, and the review is worth for publication, but some major improvements need to be done. Below I provide comments and suggestions separated by sections:]
• RESPONSE: [We wish to thank you for your insightful comments and pleased to find that this paper interest you. We revised the paper as you suggested in the document “Revised Manuscript with Track Changes”. Your comments and suggestion have greatly helped us to improve the quality of our paper.]
• [ The added content or response to comment is highlighted in yellow in the revised manuscript.]
• [We hope these revisions provide a more balanced and thorough discussion in the paper.]
2. [Introduction
Line 66: "[...] and a framework is designed. in keeping with the analysis. [...]" -> It seems there is text missing in this sentence.
Line 133: " [...] Despite the large number of studies on the use of DEA in hospitals, efforts to comprehensively examine these studies are still missing and warrant more investigation. This article identifies and describes DEA research in hospitals in an effort to close the knowledge gap. [...]" -> I am afraid this may not be entirely true. There are several published review articles that have assessed and described the use of DEA in the hospital sector, including all methodological aspects within this methodology, such as input-output selection. Having said that, the motivation and need for this review should be clarified and authors need to clearly state what the review adds to other existing and similar reviews.
Line 143: "In addition, this study observed the current trend in analysing hospital efficiency using DEA" -> What does this objective means exactly? It does not seem that this analysis was performed in the Results sections. Could you please clarify this point?]
• RESPONSE: [We thank you for noting this. Some of the comments were already changed in the first review. We will point out the comment based on the line you mentioned.]
• Line 66: This statement was changed in the manuscript.
o Line 66: A framework is required following the analysis process. The optimal approach to implementing performance measurement is not to identify a minor adjustment as a supporting role to enhance one aspect of the health system outcomes. Instead, this identification should be utilised as a general strategy in gauging performance among the various system components.
• Line 133: This statement was changed to reflect and clarify the motivation for the produce manuscript. We thank you for mentioning this.
o Line 125: Although numerous hospital-based DEA articles have been recorded, inadequate complete analysis has been observed. Consequently, this outcome requires further investigation, leading to a research gap involving hospital-based DEA articles.
• Line 143: We revised this statement to explain that the review addressed the research gap mentioned. What we meant by the current trend is that we looked at few findings in previous review and compare briefly in the Discussion section.
o Line 131: To the authors' knowledge, no reviews regarding hospital-based DEA articles involving optimal input and output variable selections were reported. Thus, this review addressed this research gap by observing the current trends in hospital-based DEA analyses.
o Line 636: Consequently, these findings align with other healthcare-based reviews [17,21,33].
o Line 651: Previous articles also highlighted similar findings with varying proportions [17,20,21].
o Line 667: Previous articles also demonstrated a trend towards replacing CRS with VRS assumption in DEA-based applications [20,21,33].
o Line 681: Consequently, this finding was similar to previous DEA-related and performance-based articles on healthcare services [180,181].
3. [Methods
Authors used 6 standard, comprehensive databases and justified their choice. However, Methods section lacks description on the search strategy and query. It was only mentioned the terms used. It is important to present at least the final query used for searching the databases. Also, it is not completely clear how many reviewers participated in each phase (abstract screening, full-text analysis and data extraction). Authors only mention 2 readers and then a third one for consensus in the Quality Appraisal section. Authors need to clarify how the review process was carried out. Furthermore, inclusion and exclusion criteria considered for abstract screening and full-text selection are not explicitly mentioned in the Methods section. This information is usually basic in systematic reviews. Authors only mentioned type of publication, language and period criteria.]
• RESPONSE: [Thank you for providing these insights. We agreed the paper lacks from the viewpoints mentioned. Some of the comments were already addressed in the first review.]
• We added the final query for the searching database. General query string is added as the six databases have different search setting and requirement.
• We added in information on reviewers and method involve in each phase.
i. Line 179: The records were exported from the databases into Microsoft Excel sheet for screening. The final query string is as follow:
ii. Line 186: The titles and abstracts were independently screened by three reviewers.
iii. Line 228: Four reviewers extracted the data independently using a standardized data extraction form which is organized using Microsoft Excel.
• The review process was also explained in the Quality Appraisal section
i. Line 216: Thus, the scientific soundness of the chosen article was investigated using two tools to improve robustness and minimise bias. Two co-authors from different institutions evaluated each selected article separately using both tools to enhance reliability. A third reviewer was then requested to assess an article if a disagreement occurred.
ii. We believe this statement is adequate in explaining the process
• The inclusion and exclusion criteria were mentioned in the manuscript and in the PRISMA diagram.
i. Line 187 to 191 explained in details with regards to this matter.
ii. Line 194: PRISMA diagram further explained the process for final articles to be included in the review.
iii. We believe this will give better flow to audience in reading the manuscript.
4. [Results
I think Tables 1 and 2 need to be restructured. It would be easier to read if Table 1 contains only the full list of input variables and Table 2 only the full list of output variables (including categories and counts), for instance. Moreover, it is important to include the definitions and units of the variables in these tables.
The section "3.2.5 Extended analysis & data type" only lists a series of additional methods employed but provide little to no information on the purpose or usefulness of applying these extended analyses. For instance, some of the methods presented are typically employed in second-stage analysis (e.g., Tobit regression) to explain the efficiency or inefficiency levels found by DEA. Without this information, I do not see what this section adds.]
• RESPONSE: [Thank you and we appreciate on the suggestion for the table structure. Table 1 are summary for both input and output and it is presented in aggregated information. We believe this is appropriate for those who are well verse in DEA for quick summary. While Table 2 and 3 are details that explained Table 1. The table 2 and 3 are in raw data which include the self-explained definitions and units.]
o For example, Table 1 for “Beds” is general term, Table 2 describe the type of beds, and units of measurement.
• Thank you for providing these insights. We agreed the paper lacks from the viewpoints mentioned "3.2.5 Extended analysis & data type". Thus, we elaborated this area in the discussion and at the same time we have mentioned the important of this section briefly in previous revision. The added content or response to comment is highlighted in yellow in the revised manuscript.
o Line 76: Although the theoretical and methodological limitations have been acknowledged in DEA, this method has attracted interest from researchers who aim to address the limitations. Hence, these studies have developed multiple methods integrating DEA with other statistical techniques and methodologies to improve efficiency evaluation.
o Line 121: and development of novel knowledge and approaches concerning DEA assessment.
o Line 284: This model could be further analysed or extended through a second stage or integrated with other statistical methods. Consequently, this process could improve efficiency measurement, understanding of the variation or difference in organisational performance, and evaluation of the productivity of the organisation over a specific period.
o Line 697 – 717: New section “4.2.5 Extended Analysis”
5. [Discussion and conclusions
Authors provided an in-depth discussion on input-output selection, highlighting the existing variability concerning the selection of inputs and outputs. Based on the presented results, it seems that input-output selection is mostly influenced by data availability and research scope, and thus it is not a methodological preference, making it difficult to suggest common practices. However, I missed the main message to be conveyed by the review. I was expecting to find more concrete recommendations and guidelines regarding input-output selection in the Discussion and Conclusion sections, or at least a more directed discussion on how variable selection affects efficiency estimation or what key considerations for variable selection should be addressed.
Finally, it is important that authors carefully review the text in order to improve clarity and English.]
• RESPONSE: [We appreciate the comment on this. We added this section during the first revision. Section “4.2 Managerial and economic implications in the input and output selection processes” explained in detail with regards to the review. We outlined the recommendations and guidelines in input-output selection.]
• Furthermore, we also remark few statements in the review to reflects on these perspectives
o Line 208: This checklist assessed the article from an economic perspective to ensure the findings could be used in policy analysis and managerial decisions.
o Line 509: Even though this method remained valid for academicians, other assessors (managers, economists or policymakers) could perceive it as contradictory to their practical perspectives. Hence, several factors must be considered from these individuals’ perspectives, including different indicators, production objectives, and policies.
o Line 541: Consequently, these systematic approaches could formalise the judgmental process of stakeholder viewpoints (managers, economists, and policymakers).
o Line 587: Therefore, researchers are encouraged to incorporate expert or value judgement to achieve their objectives. Different motivations are also observed for managers, economists, government policy makers, and academicians. Despite these individuals being committed to improving productivity, different judgements involving variable selections are presented.
• However, we believed that the paper should interest broad reach of audience both in and outside of DEA discipline. This includes student and those who a new to DEA. Therefore, this added section was written with view to be read and understand by audience regardless of their DEA knowledge background.
• We reviewed back the paper and improved in term of language, structure and related term on DEA. Proofreading was done accordingly to make the paper better. We include the certificate of Proofreading in this revised manuscript. We hope the revised paper addressed your concern
CONCLUDING REMARKS: We appreciate y
10.1371/journal.pone.0293694.r005

Decision Letter 2
Ramalho
André
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
27 Jun 2024
Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospitals: A Systematic Review​
PONE-D-23-33407R2
Dear Dr. Aizuddin,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
André Ramalho, PhD
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. If the authors have adequately addressed your comments raised in a previous round of review and you feel that this manuscript is now acceptable for publication, you may indicate that here to bypass the “Comments to the Author” section, enter your conflict of interest statement in the “Confidential to Editor” section, and submit your "Accept" recommendation.
Reviewer #2: All comments have been addressed
**********
2. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
3. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
4. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
5. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
6. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #2: Dear Editor,
Thank you very much for the opportunity to review the paper entitled "Approach in Inputs & Outputs Selection of Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) Efficiency Measurement in Hospitals: A Systematic Review" (PONE-D-23-33407R1).
I have read the revised content and the authors have carefully addressed all comments made the previous review. The revised version has been substantially improved and all key queries have been solved.
Therefore, I believe that the revised paper is now acceptable for publication in "PLOS ONE".
Kind regards.
**********
7. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #2: No
**********
10.1371/journal.pone.0293694.r006

Acceptance letter
Ramalho
André
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
4 Jul 2024
PONE-D-23-33407R2
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Noor,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Prof. Dr. André Ramalho
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE