How Is Scale Incorporated Into the Economic Evaluation of Interventions to Prevent Obesity or to Improve Obesity‐Related Risk Factors: A Systematic Scoping Review
ABSTRACT
Introduction
Obesity prevention interventions commonly need to be implemented at scale, to address what is a significant population‐level issue. While systematic reviews on the economic evidence for interventions preventing obesity or reducing obesity‐related risk factors exist, to date there has been no empirical focus on the methods used to quantify the impacts of scale on intervention cost‐effectiveness. This systematic scoping review aimed to synthesize the methods used to incorporate scale considerations and provide future directions for incorporating scale into economic evaluation of public health interventions.
Methods
A systematic search was undertaken by two reviewers using six databases in June 2023 to identify published economic evaluations of obesity prevention interventions, from which primary studies that quantitatively incorporated scale into their analyses were identified and included. Narrative synthesis of methods used to incorporate scale considerations.
Results
Fifty‐one relevant primary studies were identified, comprising five within‐trial and 46 modeled economic evaluations of 132 discrete interventions. Within‐trial economic evaluations commonly estimated intervention cost assuming scale, and generally used simplistic methods and assumptions to do so. Only three modeled economic evaluations of interventions actually implemented at scale were identified. The methods used to estimate scale impacts on costs, effects, and populations exposed to interventions were heterogeneous, with few studies including equity‐informed analyses.
Conclusions
More guidance is needed on how to appropriately incorporate scale into economic evaluations, whether conducted within‐trial or using modeling approaches. This is especially important due to the necessity of population‐level interventions to address major health issues like obesity.

Introduction
Obesity is a major public health issue experienced globally. Given the significant health, economic, and social impacts, it is well‐recognized that effective and cost‐effective population‐level interventions delivered at scale are required to moderate or modulate the effects of global obesity drivers.
Scale‐up is defined as the “deliberate efforts to increase the impact of successfully tested health innovations to benefit more people and to foster policy and program development on a lasting basis”. Public health interventions that show promise in controlled or research settings must be implemented cost‐effectively at scale, to improve population health and deliver positive returns on investment to funders. Additionally, the costs and impacts of interventions unsuitable for testing using traditional research methods (such as randomized controlled trials (RCTs)) must be understood. Evidence suggests that innovative methods, such as natural experiments, could be more utilized in evaluating such interventions.
Traditional health economic evaluation involves the comparative analysis of at least two alternatives in terms of both costs and consequences . Economic evaluations can be conducted alongside RCTs in controlled environments, but these conditions may not necessarily represent real‐world conditions accurately. Alternatively, economic evaluations can also be performed using modeling techniques based on best available evidence, to extrapolate the costs and effects of interventions across a longer time horizon and/or broader decision context or for interventions not conducive to scientific testing using methods such as RCTs.
Evidence suggests that intervention effects may change when implemented at scale, as compared to when measured in a controlled research environment, often referred to as the “scale‐up penalty” or “voltage drop”. The costs of interventions at scale may also differ, but little evidence exists on how this should be accounted for in economic evaluations. Recommended guidelines for health economic evaluation, such as the Second Panel on Cost‐Effectiveness in Health, do not provide specific advice on how health economists should determine and report policy and practice‐relevant information related to implementation and scale‐up. The Consolidated Health Economic Evaluation Reporting Standards (CHEERS) recommend reporting uncertainty and discussions of generalizability, but do not provide in‐depth guidance specifically related to the concept of scale and how it may impact cost‐effectiveness findings. In addition, implementation and scale‐up frameworks that are used by implementation scientists to support the translation of research to real‐world settings, such as RE‐AIM, vary in their integration of efficiency and cost‐effectiveness considerations into implementation and scale‐up theory and practice.
Numerous systematic reviews on the cost‐effectiveness of interventions to prevent obesity or obesity‐related risk factors, such as physical inactivity or unhealthy diets, have been published (e.g.,). However, an in‐depth exploration of how the economic evidence incorporates considerations of scale into the analyses has not been undertaken. Given the evidence on “voltage drop” and the potential for uncertainty regarding intervention costs at scale, it is crucial to consider how scale is incorporated into economic evaluations of obesity prevention interventions as it may impact estimates of cost‐effectiveness. This systematic scoping review therefore aims to synthesize the economic evidence of obesity prevention interventions or interventions aiming to improve obesity‐related risk factors delivered at scale; to examine the methods used within the evaluations to reflect scale; and to provide future directions for building rigorous economic evidence of scaled‐up obesity prevention interventions.

Methods
This scoping review is reported following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis extension for scoping reviews (Supporting Information S1: File 1). The protocol for the scoping review was registered with Open Science Framework in July 2023 (https://osf.io/7df9u/).
A two‐step literature review approach was adopted. First, a scoping search of published systematic reviews was undertaken. Second, primary studies in identified systematic reviews were assessed for final inclusion in our review.

Eligibility Criteria
Peer‐reviewed systematic reviews published in English at any time;
Systematically synthesized the evidence from full economic evaluation studies (i.e., studies comparing costs and consequences of at least two alternatives) that aimed to prevent obesity or to improve obesity‐related risk factors (physical inactivity, sedentary behavior, poor diet, insufficient sleep) in child or adult populations.
Systematic reviews meeting the following criteria were included: Systematic reviews were excluded if they focused on economic evaluations of interventions in specific disease groups (e.g., cancer patients).
population‐level interventions, defined as those that focus on social or policy‐level determinants and that aim to change the socio‐cultural and environmental conditions of risk for large populations (i.e., “upstream” interventions).
interventions where the population of interest is at scale (i.e., national populations, representative populations, whole populations, large populations or population segments);
Economic evaluations that incorporate considerations of scale through potential for increased impact so as to benefit more people. Considerations of scale could be hypothetical or actual:
Interventions delivered to a greater number of individuals than that delivered to pre‐scale;
Considerations of scale must be quantitative (i.e., incorporated into quantitative analyses through scale considerations of target population, costs, effectiveness and/or cost‐effectiveness in either base case or sensitivity analyses).
Primary studies that met the following criteria, and were identified from the included systematic reviews, were then selected for final inclusion into our scoping review: Primary economic evaluation studies of treatment interventions, nutrition interventions targeting other outcomes (for instance, salt reduction), gray literature, or partial economic evaluations were excluded. Papers that reported the results of priority‐setting studies were only included if they incorporated results that had not also been reported in single‐study papers. For example, the study by Gortmaker et al. was excluded as all reported economic evaluations had comprehensive stand‐alone papers already included in our review.

Information Sources and Search
Academic Complete, Medline Complete, CINAHL Complete, EconLit (EBSCOHost)
The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
The following electronic databases were searched from inception to 19 July 2023: Example search strategies are presented in Table 1. Full search strategies for each source are given in Supporting Information S1: File 2.
Concepts for search strategy, with example search terms.
Concept	Search terms	 	Systematic review	“systematic review” OR “meta analaysis” OR “meta‐analysis” OR “systematic literature review” OR “meta synthesis” or “meta‐synthese” OR “umbrella review”	 	Economic evaluation	“cost effectiv*” OR “cost‐effect*) OR “cost benefit*” OR “cost–benefit” OR “cost utili*” OR “cost‐utili*” OR “cost minimi*” OR “cost‐minimi*” OR “cost consequence” OR “cost‐consequence” OR “economic* evaluat*” OR “economic* analys*” OR “health economics” OR “economic* model*”	 	Obesity OR obesity‐related behaviors	Obes* or overweight OR BMI OR “body mass” OR “weight gain” OR “weight loss” OR adipos* OR diet OR dietary OR dieting OR nutrition OR nutritional OR nutrient* OR eat OR eating OR fruit OR vegetable* OR “energy intake” OR “physical* activ*” OR exercis* OR “sedentary behavio?r*” OR “sedentary lifestyle*”OR “screen time” OR screentime OR “energy balance” OR “screen based” OR sleep

Selection of Sources of Evidence
Hits from the academic database search were imported into Endnote by one author (CD), and duplicates were removed. Systematic reviews were uploaded into Covidence software, for screening by two independent authors (CD, MS, VB) following PRISMA guidelines. Reasons for exclusion of systematic reviews were documented at the full text screening stage.
The references of all primary studies in each included systematic review were entered into Microsoft Excel. Studies appearing in more than one systematic review were de‐duplicated. The full texts and reference lists of primary studies were retrieved and screened by two independent authors (CD, VB) for final inclusion into our scoping review. Reasons for exclusion of primary studies were documented at the title and abstract, and full‐text screening stages.

Data Charting Process and Data Items
Data from included primary studies were extracted into a Microsoft Excel template using items based on the CHEERS statement. Extracted information included the publication reference details, country, study design, target population, setting, intervention and comparator, measures of effectiveness, study perspective, time horizon, methods for estimating resource use, model specification (if applicable), discount rate, summary of results, uncertainty and sensitivity analyses and funding source. Data was extracted by one reviewer (CD) and cross‐checked by a second reviewer (VB, KM).

Synthesis of Results
Data were narratively synthesized, focusing on the target population, and methods for estimating effectiveness and resource use at scale. The synthesis was undertaken in accordance with the Synthesis Without Meta‐Analysis (SwiM) guidelines (Supporting Information S1: File 3). Quality assessment was not undertaken due to the exploratory aim of the review.

Results
Title and abstract screening of 3095 articles was undertaken, to identify 29 relevant systematic reviews of economic evaluations of obesity or obesity‐related risk factor interventions, from which 51 relevant primary studies were included (Figure 1). These comprised five within‐trial economic evaluations and 46 studies that incorporated modeled economic evaluation. Detailed summaries of the included studies in our review, based on the data extraction template, are available in Supporting Information S1: File 4.
PRISMA flowchart of included studies.

Within‐Trial Economic Evaluations Incorporating Scale Into Analyses
Five within‐trial economic evaluations were identified that considered scale in their analyses. Studies were undertaken in Australia (n = 3), Sweden (n = 1) and Portugal (n = 1). Interventions were conducted in maternal child healthcare (n = 3) and school (n = 2) settings (Appendix 4). Two studies presented cost estimates assuming scale alongside the within‐trial cost‐effectiveness results. Killedar et al. multiplied the within‐trial intervention costs by the number of potential participants should the Communicating Healthy Beginnings Advice by Telephone (CHAT) short‐message‐service or Healthy Beginnings home‐visiting interventions be scaled to delivery to all newborns in New South Wales, Australia. Vieira et al. estimated a lower intervention cost assuming the school‐based intervention was delivered at scale, as compared to costs within the research study, and multiplied costs by the number of children eligible in metropolitan Porto.
Two studies undertook scenario‐based cost‐effectiveness analyses, by reducing the within‐trial estimate of the cost of the intervention for scale‐up. Justification for reduced intervention cost included a halving of meeting time for an early childhood intervention delivered in child health centers to better align with current practices, and a reduction in travel time cost for a home‐visiting intervention for infants due to economies of scale (although the authors noted that travel time savings would not necessarily be achievable in rural or remote settings). The potential for cost‐effectiveness was substantially increased in both cases (Table 2).
Summary of scale considerations in within‐trial economic evaluations.
Study	Summary of study design and how scale was considered	 	Doring et al. 	Within‐trial CEAScenario analysis, where the cost of the intervention was altered to better reflect implementation in current child healthcare practices.Reduction in time costs for intervention delivery to reflect shorter meetings (50% duration)Effect measure kept constantICER reduced from EUR3,109 (base case) to EUR2,128 per BMI unit prevented and probability of cost‐effectiveness increased by approximately 20% in this scenario	 	Hayes et al. 	Within‐trial CEAScenario analysis reflected delivery of program in a “real‐world” setting.Reduction in travel and administration time costs for intervention delivery to reflect shorter travel distances than within‐trialEffect measure kept constantThe probability of the intervention being cost‐effective was substantially increased under this scenario (probability of being cost‐effective of 0.3 as delivered in the trial vs. 0.66; acceptability threshold of $500 for a 0.1 BMI z‐score reduction).	 	Killedar et al. 	Within‐trial CEAIntervention cost estimates assuming scale presented alongside the within‐trial cost‐effectiveness resultsMultiplication of mean intervention cost per child by the number of births in NSW in 2018	 	Sutherland et al. 	Within‐trial CEATwo scenario analyses estimating the cost‐effectiveness of implementing the intervention across secondary schools in NSW (n = 254,923 students).Scenario one assumed costs as per the trial and extrapolated to statewide rollout. Scenario two adjusted costs to reflect real world model of delivery (no equipment cost; rather than employment of PA consultant, release time for current staff to train and conduct intervention)Effect size based on the results of the sensitivity analysis conducted within‐trial (imputation of missing data, not adjusted for scale) for both analyses.Cost per additional minute of MVPA $66 (95% CI $35–656) for scenario one; cost per additional minute of MVPA $27 (95% CI $14–267).	 	Vieira et al. 	CCA alongside non‐randomized pre/post studyIntervention cost estimate assuming scale, presented alongside CCA.Per capita intervention costs adjusted and multiplied by number of children in elementary schools in metropolitan Porto (n = 42,953 eligible children). Per capita intervention cost within study estimated at €36.14; per capita cost assuming scale €18.18.
Abbreviations: CCA, cost‐consequence analysis; CEA, cost‐effectiveness analysis; MVPA, moderate to vigorous physical activity; NSW, New South Wales; PA, physical activity.
Sutherland et al. conducted two sensitivity analyses that estimated the cost‐effectiveness of a multi‐component school‐based physical activity intervention should it be implemented across the state of New South Wales, Australia. The first scenario assumed the implementation model as per the RCT (i.e., employment of a school physical activity consultant). The second scenario acknowledged feasibility challenges with this model at scale given school principal feedback from the trial, and so utilized an existing in‐school teacher for this role.

Modeled Economic Evaluations Incorporating Scale Into Analyses

Overview of Modeled Studies
Forty‐six studies incorporating a modeled economic evaluation of 127 discrete interventions were identified. Studies were conducted in Australia (n = 22, 48%), the United States (n = 12, 26%), the Netherlands (n = 3, 7%), the UK and New Zealand (n = 2 respectively, 4%), and France, Mexico, Italy, and Canada (n = 1 respectively, 2%). One study was conducted across a number of countries, including Brazil, China, India, and Russia. Ninety‐nine interventions were evaluated using cost‐utility analysis (CUA), 21 interventions were evaluated using cost‐effectiveness analysis (CEA), three interventions were evaluated using both CUA and return‐on‐investment (ROI), three interventions were evaluated using both CEA and CUA, and one intervention was evaluated using cost–benefit analysis (CBA).

Studies of Interventions Implemented in the Real World
The majority of economic evaluations were for interventions hypothetically implemented at scale, with only three studies evaluating interventions that had actually been implemented at scale in the real world. Basto‐Abreu et al. undertook a modeled CUA of a sugar‐sweetened beverage (SSB) tax implemented in Mexico. The impact of the tax was estimated based on the annual average decrease in SSB purchases 2 years after implementation, and purchases were assumed to be a close proxy to consumption. Changes in SSB consumption were translated to changes in BMI based on evidence from the literature. Costs were estimated as a fraction of the Ministry of Finance's budget. Frew et al. undertook a modeled CUA of a physical activity program rolled out across the city of Birmingham. A pragmatic approach to estimating the effect of the intervention was taken, as the evaluation started after rollout and so the study used before and after measurements of physical activity levels using self‐reported data. Intervention cost was determined by dividing the total cost of setting up and running the scheme by the number of program members, to obtain average per‐participant annual costs. Mantilla‐Herrera et al. used a difference‐in‐difference analysis of data from pre‐ and post‐implementation of the Health Star Rating (HSR) System in Australia on energy density of products to model potential costs and benefits of implementation on a voluntary (actual) and mandatory (hypothetical) basis. Baseline analysis assumed that changes in energy density of products was 100% attributable to the HSR system, but this was varied in sensitivity analysis. A published government‐commissioned CBA was used in estimating intervention costs.

Estimating Intervention Effectiveness at Scale
In estimating intervention effectiveness at scale, many included studies in our review extrapolated intervention effects from pilot studies (for instance [Supporting Information S1: File 4]). Some studies took a modeled or pathway approach to estimating intervention effect (including those studies using elasticities to estimate potential impacts if an intervention was scaled, for instance). Studies that incorporated estimates of effectiveness derived from meta‐analysis of studies in the literature included the CEA of a hypothetical active physical education policy in schools, or the CUA of hypothetical restrictions to television advertising of unhealthy foods. Few studies attempted to adjust effect estimates from experimental studies in explicit recognition of the potential “voltage drop” effect. One study applied a crude adjustment factor, assuming that 50% of effect estimates reported in experimental studies would translate and be maintained in a real‐world setting. Some studies conducted threshold analyses for effect, to estimate the intensity and/or duration of effect required for the intervention to be cost effective. For example, Ananthapavan et al. assessed the duration of effect required for a hypothetical community‐based intervention to be cost‐effective. Brown et al. estimated the minimum effect size required for the intervention to be cost effective using a AUD50,000 per HALY threshold (Supporting Information S1: File 4).
Estimating combined effects of interventions at scale was considered a challenge in studies that attempted to do so, and methods used were heterogeneous. For example, Bemelmans et al. assumed that effects for those who were exposed to both a community and intensive intervention were additive. In the study by Cecchini et al., a combined strategy (mass media campaign, fiscal measures, food advertising regulation, and food labelling) was estimated assuming the effects of the individual interventions would combine multiplicatively.

Estimating Intervention Costs at Scale
Methods to estimate intervention costs at scale were also heterogeneous, and included pathway analysis, estimates from trial records and the literature (Appendix 4). Few studies incorporated threshold analyses of costs, to assess the cost at which an intervention could be delivered at scale and be considered cost‐effective. For instance, Ekwaru et al. expressed intervention cost as that below which the school‐based health promotion program would be cost‐effective at a CA$50,000 threshold level. Several studies engaged with stakeholders to the intervention if delivered at scale, in order to verify cost estimates. For instance, Long et al. engaged in personal correspondence with a contact from the State Department of Revenue in intervention costing of a SSB excise tax hypothetically implemented nationally.
Availability of real‐world evidence on intervention costs was cited as a limitation in several studies (Supporting Information S1: File 4). For example, Robinson et al. estimated the cost‐effectiveness of alcohol price interventions and used parallel evidence for intervention cost components from government reports of similar interventions for costing. The lack of availability of evidence for downstream impacts or indirect costs of intervention was also cited as challenging. In many instances, such costs were omitted from cost estimates of interventions delivered at scale, although these may have had material impacts on overall cost‐effectiveness results. For example, Huse et al. only included costs to government of mandatory restrictions of price promotions on SSBs in Australia. Due to the lack of available data, it was not possible to accurately estimate the financial impact of the modeled policy on retailers or SSB manufacturers. Potential profit changes to industries impacted by policy‐level interventions were often not able to be incorporated into analyses, although these are relevant from a societal perspective (for instance).

Populations Exposed at Scale
Methods for estimating the populations exposed to interventions at scale were also heterogeneous. Some studies were able to make plausible assumptions based on likely reach, for example for school‐based interventions. One study consulted an advisory group for advice on the plausible reach of five interventions to limit television viewing, and reviewed the gray literature on program participation. Several studies included in our review cited the estimation of potential intervention reach as a limitation. For example, Over et al. (98) assumed that the percentage of general practitioners participating in a pedometer intervention would be equal to that offering a similar intervention currently in place, but noted the need for assumptions re reach and uptake of the intervention due to the lack of available evidence.

Equity Considerations at Scale
Relatively few studies included in our review included equity‐informed analyses, to estimate differential costs and/or effects on different population groups of interventions implemented at scale. For example, the study by Lal et al. undertook an evaluation of a SSB tax hypothetically implemented in Australia, and incorporated analyses by socioeconomic (SEP) quintile. Price elasticities for low, middle and high income households (quintile 1, quintile 3, quintile 5) were sourced from the literature, with estimates for quintiles 2 and 4 interpolated. Data on SSB intake by SEP quintile were also used to estimate differential impacts of the hypothetical intervention.

Acknowledging Limitations at Scale
Many of the studies included in our review acknowledged that assumptions had been made to reflect scale, which may or may not be realistic or accurate reflections. For example, Kenney et al. included a limitation section on the fact that true implementation costs, cost savings and impact of a water consumption intervention are unknown given that analyses were hypothetical and that effect estimates from studies may not be generalizable, particularly if sociodemographic characteristics exist that may have an influence on cost or effect. Other studies explored some of these issues within sensitivity analyses (e.g., Magnus et al.), but the variation of uncertain parameters related to scale to estimate impacts on overall cost‐effectiveness was not consistent across all included studies in our review.

Discussion

Summary of Main Results and Interpretation
Our review identified 51 studies, reporting the economic evaluation of 132 discrete interventions, that incorporated scale considerations quantitatively into analyses. A limited number of within‐trial economic evaluations of obesity prevention interventions have quantitatively incorporated scale considerations into their analyses, with relatively simplistic methods. Economic and resource‐related factors are well‐recognized as significant barriers to successful implementation and scale‐up. More rigorous economic evidence on the potential impacts of scale‐up for interventions tested within research settings is clearly required. This could help to better inform effective and cost‐effective resource allocation decision‐making as research progresses through the research translation phases from testing to dissemination, as well as better support implementation. Our findings also demonstrate the need for more evaluations of programs and policies that have actually been implemented at scale, with only three modeled economic evaluations of interventions actually implemented at scale identified. Clearly there is a significant need for better incorporation of evaluation (including economic evaluation) of the policies and programs that are actually invested in, and implemented, in the real world and at scale. This evidence would be useful to ensure the most efficient use of resources when taking into account contextual and other factors, and to support decisions on where further investment (or disinvestment) may be warranted. A recent review found that scale‐up of obesity prevention interventions often occurs in absence of prior evidence of effectiveness, and can be in response to a serendipitous alignment of health priorities, political opportunity and supportive policy and contextual factors. The review noted however that scale‐up of untested interventions could have unintended consequences, be ineffective and a poor use of scarce health resources that could have best been applied elsewhere.
Our review identified heterogeneous methods for estimating the effects of interventions delivered at scale (Figure 2), and that this may be impacting on overall estimates of cost‐effectiveness. Studies included in our review differed in terms of their sources for evidence of effectiveness, from single estimates from pilot or research trials, to estimates derived from logic pathways and available data, to estimates of effect from meta‐analysis. A recent priority‐setting study of obesity prevention interventions conducted in Australia developed an evidence framework to support explicit and transparent evidence utilization in decision‐making. Criteria for determining the certainty of effect used in the economic evaluations provided decision‐makers with assessments of the strength of evidence based on the rigor of study design and the outcome measured; however, more explicit incorporation of potential scale impacts such as “voltage drop” into this and similar frameworks warrants consideration. Very few studies included in our review incorporated the concept of “voltage drop” into their estimates of effect and this should be further explored in future given evidence of its existence. Presenting implementation considerations, factors that may influence decision‐making but that may not be easily quantified and incorporated into economic evaluation, also presents a positive step in terms of conveying important information related to scale. Such summaries have been incorporated into several studies conducted in Australia and the United States (for instance) but could be tailored to more specifically incorporate potential scale uncertainties and impacts on overall cost‐effectiveness results and routinely presented alongside results from economic evaluations.
Preliminary typology of approaches to incorporate scale in within‐trial and modeled economic evaluations identified from studies included in the review.
Obesity prevention interventions are complex and a diverse set of options for intervention exist across all levels of the socio‐ecological model. Studies included in our review that had attempted to evaluate a package of interventions cited the inherent challenge in doing so (e.g.,). Methodological guidance on estimating the combined effects of interventions delivered simultaneously, or how to best attribute costs and effects to specific interventions, is lacking and this is also an important area for future work.
Estimating the cost of interventions delivered at scale is challenging given the influence of context on resources and resource use. Several studies included in our review incorporated threshold analyses for CUA results, reporting the costs at which an intervention could be delivered up to for it to be considered cost‐effective given commonly accepted CUA thresholds (e.g.,). The incorporation of such analyses allows for not only the provision of cost‐effectiveness information based on best available evidence, but also a cost range for decision‐makers to consider within their own contexts. This practice should be more regularly included into economic evaluations of interventions implemented at scale. The incorporation of qualitative methods and stakeholder engagement to help inform economic evaluations of scaled interventions is also a positive step in the generation of economic evidence that is policy and practice relevant, and should be incorporated wherever feasible. This is particularly important for the accuracy and relevancy of cost‐effectiveness of interventions that may have commercial or other impacts, and where limited publicly‐available data on these impacts may be available. Regardless, real‐world data on costs may continue to remain difficult to capture, especially when considering downstream impacts such as changes in revenue of commercial entities impacted by an intervention.

Implications for Practice
Comprehensive methodological guidance on incorporating scale considerations into economic evaluation does not currently exist. The development of such guidance could better inform health economists on how to factor impacts of scale into their analyses, and increase transparency of the methods commonly used to do so. Transparency in the methods used to account for many of the uncertainties inherent in the economic evaluation of scaled interventions is critical, and much broader scope for the inclusion of more detail on the data and assumptions used to reflect scale in economic evaluations of obesity prevention interventions exists. This work forms part of a broader research agenda, focused on the development of methodological guidance for health economists to consider when undertaking economic evaluations of public health interventions implemented at scale. The findings from this review have informed a preliminary typology of approaches to incorporating scale in economic evaluations of obesity prevention interventions (Figure 2). A key component of this future work will be to further develop and refine this typology of methods that could be used for considering scale in economic evaluations of public health interventions more broadly, and the development of a consensus approach to rigorous, practical, and pragmatic guidance for health economists working in this area. A comprehensive understanding of the ways in which scale is currently incorporated into the economic evaluation of obesity prevention interventions forms a first and important step towards this goal. Evidence of cost‐effectiveness of interventions delivered to diverse population groups at scale is also a significant and well‐recognized area for future work, using equity‐informed methods such as distributional cost‐effectiveness analyses.

Strengths and Limitations
Study strengths of our scoping review included leveraging the systematic reviews of the economic evidence for obesity prevention interventions that have already been published to streamline the search for relevant papers, and the systematic screening, data extraction and synthesis by multiple reviewers. A limitation is that in summarizing a large and disparate body of literature using diverse methods to incorporate scale into analyses, and at times where details of such methods were limited in academic publications, we may have omitted scale‐related considerations. In addition, our review focused on scale considerations in the academic literature, and economic evaluations published in the gray literature were not considered. It is possible that additional economic evaluations of interventions actually implemented at scale will have been published in the gray literature but are not included in our synthesis given the academic literature focus.

Conclusions
To address the population‐level burden of obesity, large‐scale implementation of prevention interventions is required. Findings from our review demonstrate that significant evidence for the cost‐effectiveness of obesity prevention interventions at scale exists. However, methods used to incorporate the impacts of scale on costs and effects, and the populations reached by interventions, is heterogenous. More guidance to health economists on how scale should be appropriately incorporated into economic evaluations is required and is a significant area for future work. This could lead to the more rigorous provision of economic evidence that is relevant to real‐world resource allocation decisions, and could reduce the economic‐related barriers to successful and sustainable delivery of public health interventions to populations.

Author Contributions
V.B. and C.D. conceptualized the study. Search strategies and data extraction were designed and conducted by C.D., K.M., and M.S. Analysis was undertaken by C.D. and V.B., with input from all authors. The first draft of the manuscript was written by C.D. and V.B., and all authors comments on versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Ethics Statement
All data utilized in this manuscript were secondary data (review article), and so ethics approval was not required.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
Data and materials are available on request to the corresponding author.

References
Worldwide Trends in Underweight and Obesity from 1990 to 2022: A Pooled Analysis of 3663 Population‐Representative Studies with 222 Million Children, Adolescents, and Adults
The Global Obesity Pandemic: Shaped by Global Drivers and Local Environments
Intervention Scalability Assessment Tool: A Decision Support Tool for Health Policy Makers and Implementers
How Long Does It Take to Scale‐Up Obesity Prevention Interventions?
Using Natural Experiments to Improve Public Health Evidence: A Review of Context and Utility for Obesity Prevention
Methods for Assessing the Cost‐Effectiveness of Public Health Interventions: Key Challenges and Recommendations
Scaling‐Up Evidence‐Based Obesity Interventions: A Systematic Review Assessing Intervention Adaptations and Effectiveness and Quantifying the Scale‐Up Penalty
How Effective Are Physical Activity Interventions When They Are Scaled‐Up: A Systematic Review
Exploring the Economics of Public Health Intervention Scale‐Up: A Case Study of the Supporting Healthy Image, Nutrition and Exercise (SHINE) Cluster Randomised Controlled Trial
Recommendations for Conduct, Methodological Practices, and Reporting of Cost‐Effectiveness Analyses: Second Panel on Cost‐Effectiveness in Health and Medicine
Consolidated Health Economic Evaluation Reporting Standards 2022 (CHEERS 2022) Statement: Updated Reporting Guidance for Health Economic Evaluations
RE‐AIM Planning and Evaluation Framework: Adapting to New Science and Practice With a 20‐Year Review
A Narrative Review of Economic Constructs in Commonly Used Implementation and Scale‐Up Theories, Frameworks and Models
A Systematic Review of Economic Evaluations of Interventions Targeting Childhood Overweight and Obesity
A Systematic Review of Economic Evaluations of Web‐Based or Telephone‐Delivered Interventions for Preventing Overweight and Obesity and/or Improving Obesity‐Related Behaviors
Methods for the Economic Evaluation of Obesity Prevention Dietary Interventions in Children: A Systematic Review and Critical Appraisal of the Evidence
A Systematic Review of Economic Evidence for Community‐Based Obesity Prevention Interventions in Children
A Systematic Review of Methods, Study Quality, and Results of Economic Evaluation for Childhood and Adolescent Obesity Intervention
PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA‐ScR): Checklist and Explanation
Commentary: What Is a Population‐Based Intervention? Returning to Geoffrey Rose
Increasing the Scale and Adoption of Population Health Interventions: Experiences and Perspectives of Policy Makers, Practitioners, and Researchers
Cost Effectiveness of Childhood Obesity Interventions: Evidence and Methods for CHOICES
Cost Effectiveness of a Sugar‐Sweetened Beverage Excise Tax in the U.S
BMI and Healthcare Cost Impact of Eliminating Tax Subsidy for Advertising Unhealthy Food to Youth
Cost Effectiveness of an Elementary School Active Physical Education Policy
Modeling the Cost Effectiveness of Child Care Policy Changes in the U.S
The PRISMA 2020 Statement: An Updated Guideline for Reporting Systematic Reviews
Synthesis Without meta‐Analysis (SWiM) in Systematic Reviews: Reporting Guideline
Updated Methodological Guidance for the Conduct of Scoping Reviews
A Systematic Review of Economic Analyses of Active Transport Interventions That Include Physical Activity Benefits
Critical Review of Economic Evaluation Studies of Interventions Promoting low‐Fat Diets
Cost‐Effectiveness of Interventions Promoting Physical Activity
A Systematic Review of Cost‐Effectiveness Studies of Interventions With a Personalized Nutrition Component in Adults
Are Physical Activity Interventions in Primary Care and the Community Cost‐Effective? A Systematic Review of the Evidence
Are Brief Interventions to Increase Physical Activity Cost‐Effective? A Systematic Review
Economic Evaluations of Public Health Interventions for Physical Activity and Diet: Systematic Review
Primary Prevention Programs for Childhood Obesity: Are They Cost‐Effective?
Interventions to Prevent Obesity in School‐Aged Children 6‐18 Years: An Update of a Cochrane Systematic Review and meta‐Analysis Including Studies From 2015‐2021
Economics of Interventions to Increase Active Travel to School: A Community Guide Systematic Review
Quality Assessment of Economic Evaluations of Health Promotion Programs for Children and Adolescents—A Systematic Review Using the Example of Physical Activity
Cost‐Effectiveness of Population‐Level Physical Activity Interventions: A Systematic Review
The Long‐Term Cost‐Effectiveness of Obesity Prevention Interventions: Systematic Literature Review
Health Economic Evaluations of Interventions to Increase Physical Activity and Decrease Sedentary Behavior at the Workplace: A Systematic Review
Obesity‐Related Policy/Environmental Interventions: A Systematic Review of Economic Analyses
Economics of Sedentary Behaviour: A Systematic Review of Cost of Illness, Cost‐Effectiveness, and Return on Investment Studies
Impact of Interventions to Reduce Overnutrition on Healthcare Costs Related to Obesity and Type 2 Diabetes: A Systematic Review
A Systematic Review on Economic Evaluations of School‐Based Lifestyle Interventions Targeting Weight‐Related Behaviours Among 4‐12 Year Olds: Issues and Ways Forward
Economic Evaluation of Physical Activity Mass Media Campaigns Across the Globe: A Systematic Review
Systematic Review and Overview of Health Economic Evaluation Models in Obesity Prevention and Therapy
A Systematic Review of Economic Evaluations of Health‐Promoting Food Retail‐Based Interventions
Economic Evaluation of Workplace Health Promotion Interventions Focused on Lifestyle: Systematic Review and meta‐Analysis
A Systematic Review of Economic Evaluations of Local Authority Commissioned Preventative Public Health Interventions in Overweight and Obesity, Physical Inactivity, Alcohol and Illicit Drugs use and Smoking Cessation in the United Kingdom
Economic Evaluation and Transferability of Physical Activity Programmes in Primary Prevention: A Systematic Review
Economic Evaluation of PRIMROSE—A Trial‐Based Analysis of an Early Childhood Intervention to Prevent Obesity
Economic Evaluation of “Healthy Beginnings” an Early Childhood Intervention to Prevent Obesity
Economic Evaluation of the Communicating Healthy Beginnings Advice by Telephone Trial for Early Childhood Obesity Prevention
Cost Effectiveness of a Multi‐Component School‐Based Physical Activity Intervention Targeting Adolescents: The ‘Physical Activity 4 Everyone’ Cluster Randomized Trial
Costs and Benefits of a School‐Based Health Intervention in Portugal
Cost‐Effectiveness of Community‐Based Childhood Obesity Prevention Interventions in Australia
Economic Evaluation of a Randomized Controlled Trial of an Intervention to Reduce Office Workers' Sitting Time: The "Stand Up Victoria" Trial
Projecting the Impact of a Nationwide School Plain Water Access Intervention on Childhood Obesity: A Cost‐Benefit Analysis
Priority‐Setting for Obesity Prevention‐The Assessing Cost‐Effectiveness of Obesity Prevention Policies in Australia (ACE‐Obesity Policy) Study
How can Schools Help Youth Increase Physical Activity? An Economic Analysis Comparing School‐Based Programs
Cost‐Effectiveness of the Sugar‐Sweetened Beverage Excise Tax in Mexico
Nutritional Policy Changes in the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program: A Microsimulation and Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis
The Costs, Effects and Cost‐Effectiveness of Counteracting Overweight on a Population Level. A Scientific Base for Policy Targets for the Dutch National Plan for Action
Obesity‐Related Health Impacts of Fuel Excise Taxation‐ An Evidence Review and Cost‐Effectiveness Study
The Potential Cost‐Effectiveness and Equity Impacts of Restricting Television Advertising of Unhealthy Food and Beverages to Australian Children
The Cost‐Effectiveness of the MobileMums Intervention to Increase Physical Activity Among Mothers with Young Children: a Markov Model Informed by a Randomised Controlled Trial
Tackling of Unhealthy Diets, Physical Inactivity, and Obesity: Health Effects and Cost‐Effectiveness
Cost‐Effectiveness of Interventions to Promote Physical Activity: A Modelling Study
Cost‐Effectiveness of Interventions to Promote Fruit and Vegetable Consumption
Taxes and Subsidies for Improving Diet and Population Health in Australia: A Cost‐Effectiveness Modelling Study
Using Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis to Prioritize Policy and Programmatic Approaches to Physical Activity Promotion and Obesity Prevention in Childhood
Modelled Cost‐Effectiveness of a Package Size cap and a Kilojoule Reduction Intervention to Reduce Energy Intake From Sugar‐Sweetened Beverages in Australia
Increasing Fruit and Vegetable Consumption: A Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis of Public Policies
Cost‐Effectiveness and Return on Investment of School‐Based Health Promotion Programmes for Chronic Disease Prevention
Cost‐Effectiveness of a Community‐Based Physical Activity Programme for Adults (Be Active) in the UK: An Economic Analysis Within a Natural Experiment
Promoting Sport and Physical Activity in Italy: A Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis of Seven Innovative Public Health Policies
Cost‐Effectiveness of a Nutrition Education Curriculum Intervention in Elementary Schools
Impact and Cost‐Effectiveness of a Universal Strategy to Promote Physical Activity in Primary Care: Population‐Based Cohort Study and Markov Model
The Potential Cost‐Effectiveness of Mandatory Restrictions on Price Promotions for Sugar‐Sweetened Beverages in Australia
Cost‐Effectiveness of Water Promotion Strategies in Schools for Preventing Childhood Obesity and Increasing Water Intake
Limiting Television to Reduce Childhood Obesity: Cost‐Effectiveness of Five Population Strategies
Modelled Health Benefits of a Sugar‐Sweetened Beverage tax Across Different Socioeconomic Groups in Australia: A Cost‐Effectiveness and Equity Analysis
Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis and Stakeholder Evaluation of Two Obesity Prevention Policies in Maine, US
The Economic Feasibility of Price Discounts to Improve Diet in Australian Aboriginal Remote Communities
The Cost‐Effectiveness of Removing Television Advertising of High‐Fat and/or High‐Sugar Food and Beverages to Australian Children
Cost‐Effectiveness of Product Reformulation in Response to the Health Star Rating Food Labelling System in Australia
Health Gain, Cost Impacts, and Cost‐Effectiveness of a Mass Media Campaign to Promote Smartphone Apps for Physical Activity: Modeling Study
Cost‐Effectiveness of Active Transport for Primary School Children ‐ Walking School bus Program
The Cost‐Effectiveness of Australia's Active After‐School Communities Program
Assessing Cost‐Effectiveness in Obesity: Active Transport Program for Primary School Children‐‐TravelSMART Schools Curriculum Program
The Cost‐Effectiveness of a Successful Community‐Based Obesity Prevention Program: The Be Active eat Well Program
Cost‐Effectiveness of Counseling and Pedometer Use to Increase Physical Activity in the Netherlands: A Modeling Study
Increasing the Price of Alcohol as an Obesity Prevention Measure: The Potential Cost‐Effectiveness of Introducing a Uniform Volumetric Tax and a Minimum Floor Price on Alcohol in Australia
Cost Effectiveness of Community‐Based Physical Activity Interventions
Lifetime Cost Effectiveness of a Through‐School Nutrition and Physical Programme: Project Energize
Modeling the Long Term Health Outcomes and Cost‐Effectiveness of two Interventions Promoting Fruit and Vegetable Intake Among Schoolchildren
Cost‐Effectiveness of Scaling up a Whole‐Of‐Community Intervention: The Romp & Chomp Early Childhood Obesity Prevention Intervention
In Mexico, Evidence of Sustained Consumer Response Two Years After Implementing a Sugar‐Sweetened Beverage tax
Changes in Sugar‐Sweetened Soda Consumption, Weight, and Waist Circumference: 2‐Year Cohort of Mexican Women
A Trial of Sugar‐Free or Sugar‐Sweetened Beverages and Body Weight in Children
Narrative Review of Models and Success Factors for Scaling up Public Health Interventions
Economic Evaluations of Scaling up Strategies of Evidence‐Based Health Interventions: A Systematic Review Protocol
The Application of an Evidence Framework for Obesity Prevention at the Population‐Level
Translating Social Ecological Theory Into Guidelines for Community Health Promotion
Using Cost‐Effectiveness Analysis to Address Health Equity Concerns