Internet‐Based Interventions in Quality of Life Assessments Among Women Living With Breast Cancer: A Systematic and Meta‐Analytic Approach
ABSTRACT
Introduction
Internet‐based interventions have become a necessity in providing care. To assess quality‐of‐life perceptions among women living with breast cancer (BC) receiving any type of internet‐based treatments.
Methods
The present systematic review and meta‐analysis were registered in PROSPERO with the ID no. CRD42024498834. All internet‐based interventional studies among women living with BC assessing their quality of life perceptions before and after the intervention or between the usual and the intervention group were included. We consulted the British Nursing Database, CINHAL, Embase, Medline, Nursing & Allied Database, PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases. Quality of life perceptions were assessed thanks to the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy–Breast (FACT‐B) and the EORTC‐QLQ‐core Questionnaire (EORTC‐QLQ‐C30).
Results
The heterogeneity test findings of the eight studies exploring the FACT‐B suggested that there was a significant heterogeneity among the selected studies (I 2 = 68%, p = 0.002). The FACT‐B mean score among women living with BC was 0.31 (95% CI: 0.08–0.53). The heterogeneity test among the four studies exploring the EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 score revealed that there was a significant heterogeneity among the selected studies (I 2 = 74%, p = 0.009). The EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 mean score was 0.24 (95% CI: −0.11 to 0.58).
Conclusion
Internet‐based interventions could ameliorate quality of life perceptions since most of the enrolled participants revealed as complicated the home community management allowing regular participation.

Introduction
Breast cancer (BC) has been recognized as the most frequent cancer disease among females, by encountering nearly 2.3 million women suffering worldwide and 685 000 deaths, and it is estimated that by the end of 2020, nearly 7.8 million female survivors had a BC diagnosis in their past 5 years, too. Thus, it should be considered BC as a very interesting subject in our present society. BC usually impacts fatigue patients' perceptions and functioning and thus, their health‐related quality perceptions, recognizing the most usual recorded late effect in all BC available treatments.
In this scenario, most mobile technologies are increasing to ameliorate BC patients' self‐management in several aspects of women's lives, such as fatigue, quality‐of‐life perceptions, and women's functioning.
Compared with usual care, internet‐based interventions seemed to be more suitable without any limitations by time and space, reaching more patients. Past studies have reported advantages in BC patients in self‐management attitudes, functional compliance, self‐efficacy, anxiety and depression, social support, and quality of life (QoL) perception. However, the findings of previous studies were controversial.
Thus, internet‐based interventions become a necessity in providing care. Literature included internet‐based interventions in the “digital health” topic by embracing all the health facilities and information that help to handle disease and its related risks. Health facilities have been developed thanks to several internet‐related approaches, such as mobile health, telemedicine, telemonitoring, digital therapeutics, and related health analytics for health, mainly via websites, mobile applications (apps), and social media software, like WeChat and Facebook. In addition, the Covid‐19 pandemic has advanced the progress and improvement in digital health applications to supply the most efficient care. In this aspect, Basch et al. integrated an internet‐based patient‐reported outcome checking in symptoms recording during cancer treatment and showed lower levels in their quality‐of‐life perceptions, with improvements in readmission and compliance in treatment received. Evidence highlighted several internet‐based interventions in BC, prostate cancer, melanoma, and hematologic malignancy diseases to cope with physical and emotional symptoms, health attitudes, self‐efficacy, or oral anticancer therapy adherence.
Considering what has been reported here, the present systematic and meta‐analyses aimed to assess quality‐of‐life perceptions among women living with BC who received any typology of internet‐based treatments.

Materials and Methods

Data Sources
To perform the present systematic review and meta‐analysis, we consulted online British Nursing Database, CINAHL, Embase, Medline, Nursing & Allied Database, PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases (File S1).

Search Strategy
This systematic review and meta‐analysis were performed according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA) checklist. The review protocol was registered in PROSPERO with the ID no. CRD42024498834.
Search strategy was carried out using a combination of keywords and MeSH terms, and a research question was created thanks to the “Population‐Intervention‐Outcome” (PIO) approach (Table 1).
The PIO tool for the scoping review.
Population	Breast cancer women	 	Intervention	Internet‐based intervention	 	Outcome	Functional and Quality of Life assessments

Eligibility Criteria
We considered only original trials published in the English language, focusing on QoL assessments in women living with BC who received any typology of internet‐based interventions.
Trials that have a qualitative assessment of QoL perceptions without a quantitative tool were excluded from this systematic review.
All duplicated studies and non‐comparison studies or studies involving men living with BC, were excluded from additional analysis.

Data Extraction Process
Initially, titles and abstracts were identified and uploaded to remove duplicates, and a total of 201 records were screened. Then, two independent reviewers (E.V. and K.H.) screened titles and abstracts, and all the full texts were assessed for eligibility, and 138 studies were removed. Thus, a total of 63 eligible records were found. In addition, reviewers included in the present literature research were further hand‐searched and assessed to not exclude any potentially valuable study. However, 51 out of these 63 trials were excluded as they did not meet the inclusion review criteria. Finally, the remaining 12 trials were considered for the present systematic review and meta‐analysis. A summary of the article screening process was displayed in the PRISMA flow diagram (Figure 1).
The PRISMA flow diagram.
All the included studies were illustrated considering study characteristics (author, year of publication, aim, design, setting, and experimental intervention), participants (age, BC stage, type of treatments performed), and QoL perceptions both according to the FACT‐B and EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 scores expressed as mean and standard deviations.

Outcomes
The present systematic review and meta‐analysis included all internet‐based interventional studies among women living with BC assessing their QoL perceptions before and after the intervention or between the usual and the intervention group. Evidence collected allowed us to assess QoL perceptions thanks to the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy–Breast (FACT‐B) and the EORTC‐QLQ‐core Questionnaire (EORTC‐QLQ‐C30). The FACT‐B included a total of 37 items assessing five dimensions of the Health‐Related Quality of Life (HRQOL) among women living with BC, such as physical, social, emotional, and functional. Significant sensitivity was shown from a larger sample with internal consistency FACT‐B total score_α = 0.90, with also good test–retest reliability, convergent, divergent, and group validity, too.
The EORTC Core Quality of Life questionnaire (EORTC‐QLQ‐C30) covered a harmonized system to assess the health QoL in cancer patients involved in international clinical trials by embracing five dimensions, namely: physical, role, cognitive, emotional, and social; plus three symptom assessments, namely: fatigue, pain, nausea and vomiting; and a global health perception with further symptoms usually added in cancer patients, such as: dyspnea, loss of appetite, insomnia, constipation and diarrhea, and perceived financial consequences in the disease experience. The EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 questionnaire showed good internal consistency with α ≥ 0.70.

Quality Assessment and Risk of Bias
All the studies included in the present systematic review were assessed in their methodological qualities thanks to the RoB tool, as shown in Figure 2. The RoB 2 tool included a total of five specific fields, namely: randomization process, deviations from the intended interventions, missing outcome data, measurement of the outcome, and selection of the reported results. A score of low, medium, or high risk of bias was assessed to classify our meta‐analysis for each dimension assessed.
Risk of bias summary of the included studies.

Data Synthesis
The primary outcomes of the included studies (functional and QoL) were compared between participants who received Internet‐based interventions and the participants in the control group who received routine/usual care. The results of the continuous variables (mean and standard deviation) were pooled using a random effects model. The effect size was calculated using standardized mean difference (SMD) with a 95% confidence interval (CI) for each individual study. The heterogeneity of the included trials was evaluated using the I 2 value, categorizing it as low (< 50%), moderate (50%–75%), or high (> 75%) heterogeneity. The data were analyzed and pooled using RevMan v5.3 software.

Results
From our literature research, studies were assessed according to the FACT‐B and the EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 scores. A total of 12 studies were summarized according to their internet‐based interventions by considering study characteristics (author, year of publication, aim, design, setting, and experimental intervention), participants (age, BC stage, type of treatments performed), and outcomes both in FACT‐B (Table 2) and EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 scores (Table 3).
Study characteristics of all the selected articles exploring the FACT‐B assessment (n = 8).
Authors name (year), country	Research design	Sample characteristics	Interventions	Assessment scales	Study outcomes	 	Sample size	Inclusion criteria	Exclusion criteria	 	Amidi et al. (2022), Denmark 	RCT	CG: 54IG: 77T: 131	BC womenAge ≥ 18 yearsHospitalization regimen	Recurrence BCPhysical comorbiditySleep disordersNot Danish language native	CG: Usual careIG: Online program of 6 modules: treatment rationale, stimulus control, cognitive restructuring, sleep hygiene, and relapse prevention	BDI‐IIFACIT‐FISIPSQ	IG reported improvements in sleep quality	 	Hoffmann et al. (2012), UK 	RCT	CG: 115IG: 114T: 229	BC womenAge: 18–80 yearsSurgery, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy treatment	Not English language nativeInability to give consent	CG: Usual careIG: The MBSR yoga‐based stretches, meditation, group discussions, and didactic teaching program	FACT‐BFACT‐ESPOMS	IG showed significant on breast‐ and endocrine‐related fatigue	 	Owen et al. (2005), USA 	RCT	CG: 30IG: 32T: 62	BC women	Multiple illness	CG: Usual careIG: Self‐guided, Internet‐based coping‐skills training	FACT‐B, IESMSASPhysical well‐being	GI significantly improved psychological well‐being	 	Rosen et al. (2018), USA 	RCT	CG: 55IG: 57T: 112	BC womenAge ≥ 25 yearsAbility to use a smartphone or a tablet	NR	CG: Usual careIG: A 6‐month AMT subscription to learn and practice mindfulness skills for 10 days	BRIEFFACT‐BMAASQOL	AMT enhanced QOL	 	Villani et al. (2018), Italy 	RCT	CG: 14IG: 15T: 29	BC womenAge ≥ 55 yearsRadical surgeryNegative staging with metastases	NR	CG: Usual careIG: E‐intervention live‐video; interviews related to cancer experiences, chemotherapy, side effects, modeling to cope with physical and emotional changes	ERQFACT‐B	eHealth interventions gave a challenge and an opportunity to learn	 	White et al. (2018), Australia 	RCT	CG: 202IG: 177T: 379	BC womenAge: 18–50 yearsBC stage: I or IIEnglish speaking	Women with a previous diagnosis of cancer or a prognosis less than 18 months	CG: Usual careIG: Self‐directed website divided into pages covering emotional responses, support services, family responses, and life after cancer	FACT‐BSupportive Care Need Survey‐Breast Cancer	GI recognized a high number of unmet needs	 	Zhou et al. (2020), China 	RCT	CG: 55IG: 56T: 111	BC womenAge ≥ 18 yearsBC stage: I–III	Comorbidity of several illnesses	CG: Usual careIG: WeChat‐based multimodal nursing program administered during hospitalization and 6 months post‐surgery	FACT‐BNRS at pre‐ and post‐surgery	WeChat‐based multimodal nursing program significantly improved QOL in postoperative course	 	Zhu et al. (2018), Australia 	RCT	CG: 57IG: 57T: 114	BC womenAbility to access the internet through the mobile phoneMandarin speaking	Women with concurrent major physical or mentalMental diseases	CG: Usual careIG: The BCS program, including: Learning forum, Discussion forum, ask‐the‐Expert forum, and Personal Stories forum	SICPA–Chinese versionMSPSS–Chinese version	IG recorded better self‐efficacy, symptom interference, and QOL during chemotherapy
Abbreviations: AMT, App‐delivered mindfulness training; BC, breast cancer; BRIEF, The Brief Health Literacy Screening Tool; CG, no. of participants assigned to the control group; eHEALS, eHealth Literacy Scale; EORTC, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer; ERQ, Emotion Regulation Questionnaire; FACT‐B, Functional Assessment of Cancer Treatment‐B; FACT‐ES, Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy‐Endocrine Symptoms; FACIT–Fatigue, Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy—Fatigue Scale; HADS, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale; IG, no. of participants assigned to the interventional group; IES, Impact of Events scale; ISI, insomnia severity index; MAAS, Mindful Attention Awareness Scale; MBSR, mindfulness‐based stress reduction; MSAS, Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale; NR, not reported; NRS, Numerical Rating Scale; POMS, Profile of Mood States Questionnaire; PSQ, Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index; QLQ‐BR, Breast Cancer‐Specific Quality‐of‐Life Questionnaire; QLQ‐C, Quality‐of‐Life Questionnaire Core; QOL, Quality‐of‐Life; SICPA, Stanford Inventory of Cancer Patient Adjustment; SIT, stress inoculation training; T, no. total participants; VCR, Victorian Cancer Registry.
Study characteristics of all the selected articles exploring the EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 assessment (n = 4).
Authors name (year), Country	Research design	Sample characteristics	Interventions	Assessment scales	Study outcomes	 	Sample size	Inclusion criteria	Exclusion criteria	 	Abrahams et al. (2017), Netherland 	RCT	CG: 66IG: 66T: 132	BC womenAge: 18–65 yearsDutch speakingAbility to use a computer and the Internet	BC women with physical and psychological comorbidity	CG: Usual careIG: Cognitive behavioral treatment model of precipitating and perpetuating factors of fatigue and malignancy	EORTC Fatigue: Sickness scale	Cognitive behavioral treatment is effective in reduced severe fatigue and related symptoms	 	Admiraal et al. (2017), Netherlands 	RCT	CG: 69IG: 69T: 138	BC women over the past 8 yearsDutch speakingAbility to assess email	BC women with recurrent and/or metastasis	CG: Usual careIG: ENCOURAGE program with fully automated information problem‐solving strategies for 6 and 12 weeks	EORTCFACT‐B‐Chinese version MDASIHADS	The ENCOURAGE could be a promising program for BC women	 	Fjell et al. (2020), Sweden 	RCT	CG: 75IG: 74T: 149	BC womenAge ≥ 18 yearsSwedish speaking	BC women with physical and psychological comorbidity	CG: Usual careIG: The Interaktor application, including self‐reporting of 14 common symptom‐management during chemotherapy	QOLSelf‐reported symptoms	GI reported reduced symptom burden and improved emotional functioning	 	Hou et al. (2020), China 	RCT	CG: 59IG: 53T: 112	BC womenAge: 20–65 yearsBC stage: 0–III Ability to use a mobile phoneChinese speaking	NR	CG: Usual careIG: BCSMS app included psychosocial support	EORTCQLQ‐BR23	The BCSMS app enhanced self‐management and QOL
Abbreviations: AMT, App‐delivered mindfulness training; BC, breast cancer; BDI‐II, Beck Depression Inventory; BRIEF, The Brief Health Literacy Screening Tool; CG, no. of participants assigned to the control group; eHEALS, eHealth Literacy Scale; EORTC, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer; ERQ, Emotion Regulation Questionnaire; FACT‐B, Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy‐Breast; FACT‐ES, Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy‐Endocrine Symptoms; HADS, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale; IES, Impact of Events Scale; IG, no. of participants assigned to the interventional group; ISI, Insomnia Severity Index; MBSR, mindfulness‐based stress reduction; MAAS, Mindful Attention Awareness Scale; MDASI, M.D. Anderson Symptom Inventory; MSAS, Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale; PSQ, Pittsburg Sleep Quality Index; QLQ‐BR, Breast Cancer‐Specific Quality‐of‐Life Questionnaire; QLQ‐C, Quality‐of‐Life Questionnaire Core; QOL, Quality of life; VCR, Victorian Cancer Registry; SICPA, Stanford Inventory of Cancer Patient Adjustment; SIT, stress inoculation training; T, no. total participants.

Studies Exploring the FACT‐B Assessment
Eight studies were screened, which assessed the FACT‐B score after an internet‐based intervention (Table 2).
The internet‐delivered cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (e‐CBT‐I) was introduced among women living with BC by reporting satisfactory results at 12 months posttreatment, with the recommendation of the antihormonal therapy for at least 10 years and improvements in cancer‐related fatigue (95% CI: 0.30–0.66). In this regard, CBT‐I has just been recognized as a versatile treatment methodology covering a mixture of different approaches, like stimulus control therapy, sleep restriction therapy, relaxation therapy (RT), cognitive therapy (CT), and sleep hygiene education (SHE) to reduce the time in bed when participants are not sleeping and to improve healthy sleep enduring over time.
Another therapeutic approach delivered in online mode was the mindfulness‐based stress reduction (MBSR) approach, which seemed to ameliorate mood, breast‐ and endocrine‐specific QoL, and well‐being. Encouraging results were shown in a randomized‐controlled trial recruiting 229 women living with BC after surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy. Patients were assessed at Weeks 0, 8, and 12. MBSR seemed to ameliorate long‐term emotional and physical adverse effects during medical treatments, including endocrine treatments that were also prolonged at 3 months. Moreover, mindfulness training was improved thanks to a mobile app‐delivered strategy. Women using this mobile app recorded greater and significant QOL levels. A self‐guided, internet‐based coping skills training approach was improved among women living with BC in their QoL perceptions, considering that internet‐based approaches seemed to be effective in providing psychological support for cancer survivors. This approach reported a significant improvement in self‐reported health condition and treatment in perceived health, with an important reduction in sadness and anxiety, cognitive processing, and health‐related demonstrations. Another internet‐based and self‐guided approach adopted for women living with BC was a 2‐week e‐health stress inoculation training (SIT) intervention on emotion regulation and cancer‐related well‐being. Thanks to SIT, patients recorded significant reductions in emotional inhibition and increased cancer‐related psychological well‐being in leisure, along with a reduction of anxiety and a satisfactory level of adoption in their usual psychosocial care path within a multi‐stratified care model. A WeChat‐based multimodal nursing program was implemented for women living with BC reporting pain, fatigue, and sleep disturbance. The WeChat‐based multimodal nursing program included 6 months of usual nursing care plus WeChat intervention. Data reported a significant improvement in the FACT‐B, as well as in social, family, and functional well‐being (p < 0.05) in clinical and transitional nursing care. Another web‐based program was scheduled to support women in discovering the information and facilities that were considered necessary. A total of 202 participants belonged to the Intervention Group and entered the website at least once for a mean of 19 min. Total QoL was better in the intervention group than in the control one. However, most of the unmet needs were recognized, as further approaches assessing these needs were necessary. In this regard, Zhou et al. recognized that women living with BC who experienced chemotherapy reported unmet supportive care needs. Therefore, an app‐based BC e‐support program was created to guide women living with BC in their self‐efficacy, social support, symptom distress, QoL, anxiety, and depression. This e‐support program guided women for 12 weeks in 4 cycles of chemotherapy, with a significant amelioration in QoL (95% CI: 0.77–12.50; p = 0.03) by showing successful and undoubtedly increased involvement in improving women's self‐effectiveness, symptom intrusion, and QoL during chemotherapy.

Studies Exploring the EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 Assessment
Four studies assessed BC women's QoL thanks to the EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 score after experiencing an internet‐based intervention (Table 3). An internet‐based cognitive behavioral therapy (I‐CBT) was improved among BC patients, and their QoL was assessed. The I‐CBT program included a total of three face‐to‐face sessions and eight other web‐based modules, followed by further electronic consultations, like emails, telephone, or video consultations. The I‐CBT seemed to have positive effects in severely fatigued survivors of BC. Another web‐based tailored psychoeducational intervention called “ENCOURAGE” was performed by Admiraal et al. to support women living with BC in their unmet requirements in information and psychosocial needs after treatment completion. The ENCOURAGE program provided a total of 12 weeks of access to improve problem‐solving approaches, resources, and services, and reported greater optimism and control attitudes in women living with BC involved. A breast cancer self‐management support (BCSMS) through the mHealth app was designed for women living with BC, and the QoL was assessed and recorded at significantly higher levels among the experimental group versus the control group at 3 months. However, there was a lack of apps for women living with BC for immediate clinical management, as explained by Hou et al., especially among patients at home. As the BCSMS app, the Interaktor app could also represent a disease self‐management tool that regularly monitors patients and improves health‐related QoL, also in symptom management, like nausea, vomiting, feeling sad, appetite loss, and constipation.

Meta‐Analysis Results
The heterogeneity test findings of the eight studies exploring the FACT‐B among women living with BC suggested that there was significant heterogeneity among the studies selected (I 2 = 68%, p = 0.002). The random effect model assessed for the FACT‐B mean score was 0.31 (95% CI: 0.08–0.53) (Figure 3).
Forest Plot for the FACT‐B assessment among women living with BC.
The heterogeneity test findings of the four studies exploring the EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 score among women living with BC revealed that there was a significant heterogeneity among the studies selected (I 2 = 74%, p = 0.009). The random effects model assessed for the EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 mean score was 0.24 (95% CI: −0.11 to 0.58) (Figure 4).
Forest plot for the EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 assessment among women living with BC.

Discussion
A total of 12 studies were summarized based on their internet‐based interventions, considering the FACT‐B and the EORTC‐QLQ‐C30 scores. Data collected highlighted a significant trend in both preference and outcome for in‐person or no online interventions. However, we should consider that cancer disease frequently induces fatigue, and no standard treatments were scheduled with the two co‐occurring symptoms in its related etiology. Live‐video interviews were evaluated as helpful and satisfying, also in brief mindfulness meditation programs, which could be favorably combined in self‐support interventions through new technologies and mobile apps. Although internet‐based interventions may improve fatigue outcomes, most participants showed retention (67% completed all measures), since several participants revealed that the home community management was complicated over the difficulty of allowing regular participation, like the consent process and lengthy questionnaires to complete. Generally, retraction seemed to be greater among participants recording important baseline QOL and better pain intrusion. In addition, early BC experience showed that age could be judged as an influencing factor in patients' distress, which in turn could be recognized as one of the main factors of vulnerability to long‐term distress. Positive effects in internet‐based programs could entail participation for several weeks and represent a probable cause in the study's shortcoming of participation in the intervention group, who reported lower levels of engagement with the internet‐based facilities. Thus, the access to all the internet‐based interventions proposed in all the studies included necessary access to the information section, which needed time to read and then to speedily use. By considering that women living with BC were doubtful to cope with possible adverse effects in the posttreatment phase, like severe nausea, vomiting, hair loss, and fatigue, a pretreatment counseling which could help women to improve their nursing knowledge and advance engaged approaches to better deal with the prescribed treatment. This approach could ameliorate the online participation for these patients, with promising outcomes in emotion regulation and cancer‐related well‐being appeared winning. Therefore, patients' engagement appeared essential in internet‐based interventions. For example, in the Amidi et al. study, sleep outcomes were considered as predictors of decreased fatigue levels and reported a significant amelioration in fatigue and sleep disorders, too. These results seemed to be equally promising as the face‐to‐face approach at 12 months after intervention. Even interesting findings were found in Hofmann et al.'s study regarding the MBSR intervention in mood, anxiety, depression, anger, vigor, fatigue, and confusion, QoL, emotional, physical, social, functional, and general well‐being, which agreed with the current online interventional outcomes. However, the recommendation for women living with BC to adopt MBSR to improve mood and QoL could also involve endocrine symptoms, too. In this regard, there was a tendency to imagine an emotional well‐being improvement and related QoL in internet‐based interventions. Conversely, Owen et al. showed no significant improvements in women living with BC with three general patterns adopted, like: deeply ventilation of feelings linked to anxiety and sadness, and important achievements to recognize all the cancer‐related treatment pathway and its concerns. Stanton et al. explained a theoretical relationship between emotional strategic coping to stressful conditions, which might improve the reassessment of the stressor, empower social relationships, and improve knowledge of individual actionable outcomes. The e‐health involvement empowered at least three adaptive approaches usually linked to psychological well‐being, like acceptance, emotional elaboration, and expression, in order to facilitate patients' communication, accomplished by relaxation and meditation to reduce patients' stress. This approach was observed in the AMT program through free access to mindfulness app content. The WeChat‐based multimodal nursing was employed during the postoperative follow‐up time in women living with BC and reported significantly lower effects in women living with BC. On the other hand, the BCS usage found no long‐term effects for women living with BC at 6 months. The app‐based BCS program could supply qualified functions and perform similar effects as computer‐based programs, whereas women enrolled registered different goals at 6 months, since most of them had concluded chemotherapy and returned to their habitual physical, psychological, and social lives at 6 months. Maybe the BCS program could focus on chemotherapy support without any sufficient records for the posttreatment phase, which should be considered for future app‐based studies.
As regards the quality‐of‐life assessment, in the Abrahams et al. study, ICBT therapists helped patients through the website and by email by suggesting mandatory and optional modules to read. The web‐based intervention, compared to the face‐to‐face CBT for severe fatigue, registered similar effects in decreasing severe fatigue. This result was also obtained by a previous meta‐analysis showing the effects of face‐to‐face CBT compared to therapist‐guided ICBT, and findings suggested no significant differences in patients suffering from psychiatric and somatic disorders. On the other hand, Yun et al. reported an important amelioration in fatigue goals by using a web‐based self‐management training program. Also, in the ENCOURAGE program, no positive effects compared with the standard care were observed, especially among women living with BC with optimism and control for the future. Thus, the program could report positive effects only for patients' subgroups, maybe directly related to treatment or emotional symptoms. In addition, Kondylakis et al. showed emotional improvement in utilizing a digital self‐management application. However, the emotional functioning assessed by the EORTC QLQ‐C30 could be influenced during the treatment or maybe an effect of the remaining symptom burden. Also, the BCSMS app users recorded significantly higher scores in their functional assessments. Based on these results, mobile health apps could successfully encourage patients in their chronic disease self‐handling. Other evidence has shown that mobile health apps were linked to knowledge amelioration of the disease and self‐handling, covering self‐efficacy with performing functional exercises during and after chemotherapy, thanks to a personalized approach.

Conclusion
From our systematic review and meta‐analysis, selected studies underlined a significant trend in both preference and outcome for in‐person interventions. These results seemed to be equally promising as the face‐to‐face approach, both in mood, anxiety, depression, anger, vigor, fatigue, and confusion, QoL, emotional, physical, social, functional, and general wellbeing. Internet‐based interventions could ameliorate QoL perceptions, since most of the enrolled participants revealed the home community management as complicated, allowing regular participation. However, it should be considered that the total number of studies (n = 12) was not good enough to generalize our conceptual results (eight for FACT and four for EORTC scales), so further studies will be needed to better understand our findings.

Author Contributions
Elsa Vitale: conceptualization (lead), data curation (lead), investigation (lead), methodology (lead), resources (equal), supervision (lead), visualization (lead), writing – original draft (lead), writing – review and editing (lead). Kurvatteppa Halemani: conceptualization (supporting), investigation (equal), methodology (equal), supervision (supporting), visualization (supporting). Asha Shetty: data curation (equal), resources (supporting). Annarita Fanizzi: methodology (equal). Samantha Bove: investigation (equal). Maria Colomba Comes: data curation (equal). Raffaella Massafra: resources (lead).

Disclosure
The authors affiliated with the IRCCS Istituto Tumori “Giovanni Paolo II,” Bari, are responsible for the views expressed in this article, which do not necessarily represent the Institute.

Ethics Statement
The authors have nothing to report.

Consent
The authors have nothing to report.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

Data Availability Statement
Data are collected all in the File S1 and in Tables 1, 2, 3.

References
Survivorship: Cognitive Function, Version 1.2014
Mobile Applications for Breast Cancer Survivorship and Self‐Management: A Systematic Review
The Association of Mobile Health Applications With Self‐Management Behaviors Among Adults With Chronic Conditions in the United States
Effectiveness of a Self‐Management Mobile App on the Quality of Life of Women With Breast Cancer: A Study in a Developing Country
Characteristics and Components of Self‐Management Interventions for Improving Quality of Life in Cancer Survivors: A Systematic Review
Effects of Nurse‐Led Support via WeChat, a Smartphone Application, for Breast Cancer Patients After Surgery: A Quasi‐Experimental Study
Benefits of a WeChat‐Based Multimodal Nursing Program on Early Rehabilitation in Postoperative Women With Breast Cancer: A Clinical Randomized Controlled Trial
Effects of a Web‐Based Expert Support Self‐Management Program (WEST) for Women With Breast Cancer: A Randomized Controlled Trial
A Web‐Based Self‐Management Exercise and Diet Intervention for Breast Cancer Survivors: Pilot Randomized Controlled Trial
PRISMA 2020 Explanation and Elaboration: Updated Guidance and Exemplars for Reporting Systematic Reviews
What Is E‐Health?
Digital Health for Optimal Supportive Care in Oncology: Benefits, Limits, and Future Perspectives
Digital Interventions to Support Adolescents and Young Adults With Cancer: Systematic Review
eHealth and mHealth Interventions in Pediatric Cancer: A Systematic Review of Interventions Across the Cancer Continuum
A Systematic Review of the Feasibility, Acceptability, and Efficacy of Online Supportive Care Interventions Targeting Men With a History of Prostate Cancer
Acceptability of Online Exercise‐Based Interventions After Breast Cancer Surgery: Systematic Review and Narrative Synthesis
The Effectiveness of Digital Self‐Management Interventions on Health Outcomes Among Childhood Cancer Survivors: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Telemedicine in Malignant and Nonmalignant Hematology: Systematic Review of Pediatric and Adult Studies
Developing a Digital Intervention for Cancer Survivors: An Evidence‐, Theory‐ and Person‐Based Approach
“WHO Guideline: Recommendations on Digital Interventions for Health System Strengthening,”
Symptom Monitoring With Patient‐Reported Outcomes During Routine Cancer Treatment: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Digital Health in Melanoma Posttreatment Care in Rural and Remote Australia: Systematic Review
Mobile Health in Adherence to Oral Anticancer Drugs: A Scoping Review
“Breast Cancer,”
Reliability and Validity of the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy‐Breast Quality‐of‐Life Instrument
The EORTC Core Quality of Life Questionnaire (QLQ‐C30): Validity and Reliability When Analysed With Patients Treated With Palliative Radiotherapy
The Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy (FACIT) Measurement System: Properties, Applications, and Interpretation
RoB 2: A Revised Tool for Assessing Risk of Bias in Randomised Trials
Changes in Sleep Following Internet‐Delivered Cognitive‐Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia in Women Treated for Breast Cancer: A 3‐Year Follow‐Up Assessment
Reduced Symptom Burden With the Support of an Interactive App During Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy for Breast Cancer—A Randomized Controlled Trial
Quality of Life of Women After a First Diagnosis of Breast Cancer Using a Self‐Management Support mHealth App in Taiwan: Randomized Controlled Trial
Quality of Life Among Women Diagnosed With Breast Cancer: A Randomized Waitlist Controlled Trial of Commercially Available Mobile App‐Delivered Mindfulness Training
Promoting Emotional Well‐Being in Older Breast Cancer Patients: Results From an eHealth Intervention
Does Access to an Information‐Based, Breast Cancer Specific Website Help to Reduce Distress in Young Women With Breast Cancer? Results From a Randomised Trial
Mobile Breast Cancer e‐Support Program for Chinese Women With Breast Cancer Undergoing Chemotherapy (Part 2): Multicenter Randomized Controlled Trial
Web‐Based Tailored Psychoeducation for Breast Cancer Patients at the Onset of the Survivorship Phase: A Multicenter Randomized Controlled Trial
The Efficacy of Internet‐Based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Severely Fatigued Survivors of Breast Cancer Compared With Care as Usual: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Effectiveness of Mindfulness‐Based Stress Reduction in Mood, Breast‐ and Endocrine‐Related Quality of Life, and Well‐Being in Stage 0 to III Breast Cancer: A Randomized, Controlled Trial
Randomized Pilot of a Self‐Guided Internet Coping Group for Women With Early‐Stage Breast Cancer
Cancer‐Related Fatigue and Sleep Deficiency in Cancer Care Continuum: Concepts, Assessment, Clusters, and Management
Does a Meditation Protocol Supported by a Mobile Application Help People Reduce Stress? Suggestions From a Controlled Pragmatic Trial
Effectiveness of Online Mindfulness‐Based Interventions in Improving Mental Health: A Review and Meta‐Analysis of Randomised Controlled Trials
Can Mindfulness and Acceptance Be Learnt by Self‐Help?: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis of Mindfulness and Acceptance‐Based Self‐Help Interventions
Indicators of Distress in Newly Diagnosed Breast Cancer Patients
Predictors of Emotional Distress in Uveal Melanoma Survivors: A Systematic Review
A Systematic Review of Types and Efficacy of Online Interventions for Cancer Patients
Stress Intervention. A Model of Stress Inoculation Training
BREATH: Web‐Based Self‐Management for Psychological Adjustment After Primary Breast Cancer—Results of a Multicenter Randomized Controlled Trial
Internet‐Delivered Cognitive‐Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia in Breast Cancer Survivors: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Long‐Term Effects of Two Formats of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia Comorbid With Breast Cancer
Randomized Controlled Trial of Mindfulness‐Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) for Survivors of Breast Cancer
Coping Styles Associated With Psychological Adjustment to Advanced Breast Cancer
Coping Through Emotional Approach: Scale Construction and Validation
Differential Effects of Mindful Breathing, Progressive Muscle Relaxation, and Loving‐Kindness Meditation on Decentering and Negative Reactions to Repetitive Thoughts
Change in Decentering Mediates Improvement in Anxiety in Mindfulness‐Based Stress Reduction for Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Internet‐Based Interactive Support for Cancer Patients: Are Integrated Systems Better?
Effects of Cognitive Behavior Therapy in Severely Fatigued Disease‐Free Cancer Patients Compared With Patients Waiting for Cognitive Behavior Therapy: A Randomized Controlled Trial
Guided Internet‐Based vs. Face‐to‐Face Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Psychiatric and Somatic Disorders: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Web‐Based Tailored Education Program for Disease‐Free Cancer Survivors With Cancer‐Related Fatigue: A Randomized Controlled Trial
A Prospective Exploration of Symptom Burden Clusters in Women With Breast Cancer During Chemotherapy Treatment
Differences in Symptom Clusters Identified Using Symptom Occurrence Rates Versus Severity Ratings in Patients With Breast Cancer Undergoing Chemotherapy
Patient Empowerment for Cancer Patients Through a Novel ICT Infrastructure
Evidence‐Based Guidelines for Interpreting Change Scores for the European Organisation for the Research and Treatment of Cancer Quality of Life Questionnaire Core 30
The Impact of Health Symptoms on Health‐Related Quality of Life in Early‐Stage Breast Cancer Survivors
Usability Evaluations of Mobile Mental Health Technologies: Systematic Review
Methodological Quality of User‐Centered Usability Evaluation of Ambient Assisted Living Solutions: A Systematic Literature Review
Developing a Mobile Health App for Chronic Illness Management: Insights From Focus Groups