A roadmap for a patient-centred approach to Pompe disease management
Introduction
Pompe disease is a rare, progressive genetic disorder caused by pathogenic variants in the GAA gene. Emerging gene therapies offer the potential for long-term disease management, although logistical and clinical challenges demand specialised centres with defined protocols. A scientific steering committee of 8 European experts deliberated on the requirements for establishing gene therapy centres of excellence for Pompe disease.
Methods
A modified think-tank approach was used to develop expert-based recommendations through qualitative research utilizing expert opinion methodology. Discussion topics were validated in an online kick-off meeting. Experts were assigned specific topics and tasked with generating content. Multiple online meetings facilitated expert presentations, discussions, and validation of recommendations for each topic.
Results
Optimised patient management and timely access to treatment require accurate diagnosis and evaluation of Pompe disease. The committee recommended expanding newborn screening programs for infantile-onset Pompe disease and developing protocols for follow-up of presymptomatic late-onset Pompe disease. A specialised multidisciplinary team trained in Pompe disease and gene therapy should manage the patient journey. Pre-gene therapy assessments were recommended to mitigate risks. Patients should be hospitalized and continuously monitored during gene therapy infusions. After gene therapy, guidelines recommend corticosteroid immunosuppression, monitoring for adverse events (including hepatoxicity, myocarditis, thrombocytopenia, thrombotic microangiopathy, and hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis), and Pompe disease assessments (including motor functional assessments, magnetic resonance imaging of the muscles, and patient-reported outcomes). Centres of excellence require infrastructure with standard operating procedures for gene therapy products.
Conclusions
Implementing gene therapy for Pompe disease requires a coordinated multidisciplinary effort to overcome gaps in knowledge, infrastructure, and patient management.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00415-026-13687-3.

Introduction
Pompe disease, also known as glycogen storage disease type II (MIM#232300), is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic biallelic variants in the GAA gene, which encodes the lysosomal enzyme acid alpha-1,4-glucosidase (GAA) and is crucial for the degradation of glycogen into glucose within lysosomes. The deficiency of GAA activity leads to a progressive accumulation in the lysosome, which may rupture and release glycogen into the cytoplasm.
The pathogenesis of Pompe disease is driven by glycogen accumulation and the broader cellular dysfunction resulting from lysosomal and autophagic impairment. Although the disease can affect multiple organs, the most severe clinical manifestations involve skeletal and cardiac muscles.
Pompe disease includes a spectrum of phenotypes, from the classic infantile form, which leads to mortality in early infancy, to the late-onset form, characterised by a more gradual progression primarily affecting skeletal and respiratory muscles in older children and adults. Infantile-onset Pompe disease (IOPD) is characterised by pathogenic variants that affect both alleles, resulting in a total or near-total deficiency of GAA enzyme activity (<1%) and an onset before 12 months of age. Clinically, IOPD is marked by generalised muscle weakness, severe hypotonia, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, respiratory insufficiency, and cognitive decline. Without timely intervention, the disease is fatal, with most affected infants dying within the first year of life. Late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) is a heterogeneous disorder characterised by residual GAA activity levels ranging from 1 to 30%. LOPD can present at any age, typically after the first year of life, with variable progression rates and generally without significant cardiac involvement. LOPD clinically manifests as progressive weakness of the axial and limb-girdle muscles, often with early respiratory involvement, ultimately leading to substantial motor disability and respiratory failure.
Estimates of Pompe disease prevalence have varied over time, influenced by newborn screening (NBS) initiatives and increased disease awareness. Epidemiological studies have consistently shown regional discrepancies due to variability in disease classification, differences in diagnostic approaches across NBS programs, and variations linked to consanguinity, race, and ethnic composition. Prevalence estimates vary widely across studies and countries, with frequencies reported as low as 1:297,387 in Japan and as high as 1:62,182 in Taiwan for IOPD and from 1:82,914 in Taiwan to 1:2628 in the US state of Washington, DC, for LOPD.
Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with recombinant human alpha-glucosidase (rhGAA) was approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) in 2006 for all patients with Pompe disease. Early initiation of the treatment has been linked to improved outcomes. However, especially in patients with IOPD, responses to ERT can vary significantly, influenced by factors such as cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) status, the development of anti-rhGAA immunoglobulin G antibodies, age at treatment initiation, ERT dosing, and the presence of severe cardiac involvement, invasive ventilation, or failure to thrive at baseline. To mitigate the negative impact associated with elevated anti‑drug antibody levels, immunosuppressive strategies may be implemented. The development of next‑generation ERT, together with other emerging therapeutic modalities, has broadened the available options for managing Pompe disease, as extensively reviewed in recent literature. Furthermore, the European Pompe Consortium has published expert recommendations detailing criteria for initiating, switching, or discontinuing ERT to guide clinical decision‑making.
Gene therapy is a novel approach to boost endogenous GAA production in affected cells. One of the key benefits of gene therapy is its ability to provide prolonged transgene expression following a single drug application, in contrast to the frequent infusions required for ERT. Adeno-associated viruses (AAVs) are the most promising vectors for therapeutic gene delivery in this context as they are non-pathogenic, can target a broad spectrum of tissues, and provide sustained gene expression with limited genome integration. There are a few gene therapies in early clinical stages for Pompe disease, mainly in patients with LOPD. AAV8-MSP-hGAA (AT-845) is an AAV-based gene for LOPD that was initiated as a phase I/II clinical trial (FORTIS; NCT0417405) in October 2020. Interim results from four participants over 2 years showed good tolerance, evidence of muscle vector transduction, and allowed three patients to stop ERT. In addition, other gene therapy programs for Pompe disease are currently in clinical development, including the AAV9-mediated gene therapy GC301 for both IOPD and LOPD (NCT06391736); the AAV gene therapy AB‑1009 for LOPD (PROGRESS‑GT; NCT07282847); ACTUS‑101 (NCT03533673) and SPK‑3006 (RESOLUTE; NCT04093349), both liver‑directed AAV gene therapies, for LOPD; and the RNA interference–based therapy ABX1100 (NCT06109948).
Gene therapy has the potential to represent a breakthrough for this patient population. Still, only a limited number of centres possess the necessary expertise and resources to administer and manage this type of treatment. There is no prior experience, established standard operating procedures (SOPs), or specialised centres dedicated to managing gene therapy for Pompe disease. However, experience from the administration of gene therapy medicinal products (GTMPs) for other conditions, such as spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) type 1, haemophilia, Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), and aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency, serves as valuable references.
In this context, this report aims to define the requirements for establishing a centre of excellence or specialised unit for Pompe disease capable of incorporating gene therapy into patient management based on the expertise of a multinational scientific steering committee with extensive experience in managing Pompe disease and gene therapy, while acknowledging that these recommendations may require refinement pending the definitive therapeutic indications and regulatory requirements are clarified following potential approval.

Methods
An exploratory online survey was conducted among thirteen members of the European Pompe Consortium (EPOC) to assess their clinical experience with gene therapy and their awareness of European, national, and local recommendations for gene therapy (Supplementary Appendix).
A multinational Scientific Steering Committee of eight experts was established based on their expertise in Pompe disease and on their clinical experience managing patients receiving gene therapies for neuromuscular and lysosomal disorders. The experts were six neurologists, one expert in lysosomal storage disorders, and one hospital pharmacist (Error! Reference source not found.). A chairperson led the committee.
Methodological process
Expert-based recommendations were developed through qualitative research using a nominal group technique (or expert opinion). This modified think-tank methodology uses structured, facilitated meetings in which experts collaboratively gather insights on the topic through structured discussion. An overview is shown in Fig. 1. The chairperson developed a list of candidate discussion topics focused on optimising the management of gene therapy within a centre of excellence for Pompe disease. During an online kick-off meeting, the Steering Scientific Committee validated the topics: (1) Patient diagnosis and evaluation; (2) Patient follow-up and support for patients and caregivers; (3) Multidisciplinary expertise and research and development initiatives; and (4) Infrastructure and resources for the handling, administration, and management of gene therapy treatments and products. Experts were then assigned to specific topics based on their areas of expertise. Each expert developed content for their assigned topic, including (1) a review of current state-of-the-art knowledge and evidence, (2) identification of key clinical practice challenges, and (3) proposed solutions to address these challenges, initiating group discussions to reach consensus-based recommendations. Following individual topic analyses, the chairperson and selected members of the Steering Committee conducted an initial review of the content via email. An online meeting facilitated expert presentations of findings on each topic, discussions of identified challenges, and individual recommendations. A collaborative consensus on each recommendation and its degree of support was achieved through facilitated discussion, ensuring that all expert opinions were considered. This consensus was documented, followed by the review and validation by each expert. The Steering Committee approved the final expert-based recommendation document.

Results

Patient diagnosis and evaluation
Pompe disease diagnosis. aAppropriate treatment in IOPD includes ERT and immunomodulation. CK Creatine kinase; CRIM Cross-reactive immunological material; DBS Dried blood spot; ERT Enzyme replacement therapy; GAA Acid alpha-1,4-glucosidase; GLC4 Glucose tetrasaccharide; IOPD Infantile-onset Pompe disease; LOPD Late-onset Pompe disease; NBS Newborn screening
Delays in diagnosing Pompe disease are common due to its rarity, heterogeneity, and the lack of resources for a comprehensive evaluation of patients. Fig. 2 outlines the main steps for IOPD and LOPD diagnosis.
NBS for Pompe disease is recommended for all newborns, following its inclusion in the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel (RUSP) in 2015 and subsequent adoption by several countries. However, it is essential to note that NBS may encounter challenges, including the relatively high incidence of pseudodeficiencies, the detection of disease carriers, and variants of unknown significance. Once a IOPD diagnosis is confirmed (Fig. 2), disease-modifying ERT should be initiated as soon as possible, as it is most effective when initiated early. CRIM status determines ERT-treatment response since CRIM-positive patients produce some endogenous GAA, enabling immunological tolerance of rhGAA and generally leading to more favourable ERT outcomes. Approximately 20% of patients with IOPD are CRIM-negative and lack detectable endogenous GAA, developing high-titre antibodies against exogenous rhGAA and reducing the long-term efficacy of ERT. Immunomodulation can mitigate the immune response against rhGAA.
Despite NBS can also identify LOPD, most LOPD cases are diagnosed when they are symptomatic. LOPD often manifests with proximal muscle weakness associated with respiratory insufficiency, although it can also be identified in a presymptomatic phase by elevated CK levels. Among presymptomatic individuals with LOPD identified by NBS, the unpredictable onset of symptoms demands a standardized and close longitudinal monitoring to ensure that treatment is initiated promptly after evidence of clinical pathology. Evidence suggests that optimal response to ERT may occur when therapy is initiated at the earliest detectable signs of disease activity (skeletal or respiratory muscle weakness identified on clinical examination and/or spirometry). The 2017 European consensus recommends follow‑up for presymptomatic individuals every six months during the first year after diagnosis and annually thereafter. According to the Pompe Disease Newborn Screening Working Group, asymptomatic infants should be evaluated at 3 months of age and every 3 months in the first year, with continued evaluations every 3–12 months depending on clinical findings. Thus, presymptomatic patients require careful clinical management and long-term monitoring. The dried blood spot (DBS) test is an effective screening tool, but diagnostic confirmation is always required (Fig. 2), including identification of pathogenic biallelic variants in the GAA gene. The Pompe disease GAA variant database (http://www.pompevariantdatabase.nl) provides a curated, open-source resource listing of disease-associated variants and associated clinical phenotypes. Importantly, no clear genotype-phenotype correlation has been established among patients with LOPD, and intrafamilial variability has been documented.

Diagnostic tools
Diagnostic tools
Diagnostic Tools – IOPD and LOPD	 	GAA activity analysis	Methods:FluorometryTandem mass spectrometry	Substrates:Glycogen4-methylumbelliferyl-α-D-glucoside (4MUG)	Tissues:Blood (DBS)Does not differentiate IOPD/LOPDLeukocytesDoes not differentiate IOPD/LOPDFibroblastsMuscle	Highlights:GAA activity is reduced in:Individuals with pseudodeficiency allelesSome carriers of the c.−32-13T>G variant It does not predict clinical outcomes for LOPD 	 	Urinary HEX4/GLG4	Method:UPLC-MS/MS assay 	Sensitivity: 98.5% Specificity: 92%	Highlights:Correlate with muscular glycogen content in quadriceps biopsies in IOPD Not elevated in asymptomatic LOPD Increased levels in the absence of the c.−32-13T>G variant 	 	CK levels	Frequently > 2-5x the ULN in patients with Pompe disease 	 	EMG	Can reveal a myopathic pattern with myotonic discharges in the paraspinal muscles or fibrillation potentials	 	Muscle biopsy	When?Complementary tests yield inconclusive results	Marker:Acid phosphatase activity is the most sensitive histochemical marker	Result:Activity elevated in up to 82% 	 	Muscle MRI	Advantages:High sensitivityDetecting fat replacement in muscleLack of side effectsAvoiding ionising radiation exposure	Highlights:Most evidence is focused on patients with LOPD.In LOPD, MRI shows a consistent pattern of muscle involvement with progressive fatty replacement.Direct measurement of glycogen content through magnetic resonance spectroscopy represents a promising biomarker	 	Comprehensive evaluation	Motor function assessments (as manual muscle testing)Functional motor scalesTimed performance testsRespiratory evaluationsCardiac monitoringCerebrovascular and aortic arc dilatation screening
4MUG 4-methylumbelliferyl-α-D-glucoside; CK Creatine kinase; DBS Dried blood spot; EMG Electromyography; GAA Acid alpha-1,4-glucosidase; GLG4 Glucose tetrasaccharide: HEX4 Hexose tetrasaccharide; IOPD Infantile-onset Pompe disease; LOPD Late-onset Pompe disease; MRI Magnetic resonance imaging; ULN Upper limit normal; UPLC-MS/MS Ultraperformance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
Several tools are used to accurately diagnose Pompe disease. GAA activity in Pompe disease is measured using different methods, substrates, and tissues (Table 1). Caution is warranted, as GAA testing can yield false results due to improper blood spotting, sampling errors, and environmental conditions (e.g., high temperatures during transport). Nevertheless, it can be performed using urinary glucose tetrasaccharide (GLC4) analysis, which helps identify IOPD in NBS programs. Concerning LOPD, the relationship between urine GLC4 levels and clinical severity has yet to be fully explored.
CK levels are often altered in Pompe disease, and their assessment can be helpful in the diagnostic pathway (Table 1). However, no correlation has been established between CK levels and the severity of muscle weakness. Electromyography (EMG) is an unspecific and not very useful diagnostic tool for Pompe disease, and muscle biopsy can still play a role in diagnosing the disease, although vacuolar myopathy can be missed in approximately 30% of patients with LOPD (Table 1). Muscle magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a non-invasive tool that has become the preferred modality for muscle imaging, supporting the diagnosis of Pompe disease and enhancing patient follow-up. Finally, a thorough evaluation of patients with Pompe disease should consider all potentially affected organs, including the respiratory, cardiac, and cerebrovascular systems (Table 1).

Challenges and recommendations
Diagnostic and evaluation recommendations for a centre of excellence for Pompe disease. CK Creatine kinase; CRIM Cross-reactive immunological material; DBS Dried blood spot; GAA Acid alpha-1,4-glucosidase; GLC4 Glucose tetrasaccharide; LOPD Late-onset Pompe disease; MRI Magnetic resonance imaging; NBS Newborn screening
Improving diagnosis and evaluation is crucial for optimising patient management in Pompe disease. Fig. 3 outlines recommendations for a gene therapy centre of excellence for the disease. Early diagnosis remains a significant challenge and should be prioritized to ensure timely treatment initiation and effective disease management.
Experts recommended expanding, where feasible, NBS programs to accurately and rapidly detect IOPD cases and assess CRIM status. The implementation of comprehensive diagnostic protocols combining enzymatic assays and genetic testing is highlighted. To optimise the follow-up of presymptomatic patients with LOPD, experts recommend developing specific protocols for this subgroup.
Currently, no LOPD biomarkers are available that reliably predict clinical outcomes or guide treatment initiation decisions. The experts support further research to find and confirm reliable biomarkers, highlighting the direct measurement of glycogen content through magnetic resonance spectroscopy as a promising biomarker despite its technical challenges in implementation.
There is also a need to standardise motor function tests that most accurately reflect the clinical status and progression of patients with Pompe disease.
After considering all the aforementioned challenges, experts recommended that the diagnosis and evaluation of patients with Pompe disease should be conducted at neuromuscular disease referral centres or lysosomal storage disorder centres, such as centres of excellence. These centres should also establish external collaborations when needed to enhance their capabilities.

Patient follow-up and support for patients and caregivers
Recommendations for the follow-up of a patient before, during, and after the administration of gene therapy. aFrom enzyme replacement therapy trials. 6MWT 6-minute walk test; ALT Alanine aminotransferase; AST Aspartate aminotransferase; FVC Forced vital capacity; HLH Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis; INR International normalised ratio; MEP Maximum expiratory pressure; MIP Maximum inspiratory pressure; MRI Magnetic resonance imaging; PROMs Patient-reported outcome measures; PTT Partial thromboplastin time; SARS-CoV-2 Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; TMA Thrombotic microangiopathy
A gene therapy centre of excellence for Pompe disease must have resources and detailed protocols to ensure a thorough patient evaluation before, during, and after therapy (Fig. 4), followed by long-term monitoring.

Before gene therapy administration
Several aspects must be addressed before administering gene therapy to optimise patient outcomes and mitigate potential risks, as previously reported with GTMPs for other conditions, such as SMA or DMD.

Evaluation of pre-existing anti-AAV antibodies
Screening patients for total antibodies against the vector is crucial to optimise transduction efficiency and minimise the risk of adverse events (AEs) related to immune responses against the viral vector. Many adults may have pre-existing immunity to AAV due to environmental exposure to naturally occurring AAV, and even low titres of neutralising antibodies can affect the transduction of the gene of interest. Consequently, all potential candidates for AAV gene therapy products should be assessed for total or neutralizing antibodies to AAV.

General patient evaluation
A comprehensive pre-infusion evaluation should determine whether the patient is suitable for gene therapy, minimising risks and improving monitoring and therapeutic outcomes (Fig. 3). Pre-treatment evaluations comprise hepatic, renal, haematological, and cardiac functions.

Corticosteroid immunosuppression
Immunomodulation with corticosteroids is recommended before and after gene therapy administration to mitigate the immune response to the AAV capsid (Fig. 3).

Vaccination
Patients must receive all vaccines recommended in current guidelines before receiving the gene therapy (Fig. 4). However, concurrent use of corticosteroids may reduce vaccine efficacy, and several GTMPs protocols adapt vaccination schedules accordingly. Pompe disease is recognised as a risk factor for severe COVID-19, and vaccination for all patients is strongly recommended according to local guidelines and the current epidemiological situation, given its demonstrated safety and effectiveness in preventing severe COVID-19.

During gene therapy administration
During gene therapy administration, it is recommended to continuously monitor vital signs, including body temperature, axillary temperature before and after dosing, pulse rate, respiration rate, and blood pressure during the infusion.

After gene therapy administration
Main adverse events of gene therapy with an AAV vector
Adverse Event	Description	Recommended short-term monitoring (first 30 days)	Recommended long-term monitoring (from day 30)	 	Hepatotoxicity	Elevated aminotransferase levels, generally manifested by increased ALT and/or AST levels, may indicate immune-mediated hepatotoxicity and potentially lead to severe liver injury and acute liver failure.	Weekly monitoring with adjustments to the corticosteroid regimen if clinically indicated. In clinical trials of onasemnogene abeparvovec, cases of severe adverse events (SAEs) related to hepatotoxicity, such as elevated serum aminotransferase levels, were managed with prednisolone treatment.	Weekly monitoring with adjustments to the corticosteroid regimen if clinically indicated. Regular monitoring of liver function until the results return to normal. In clinical trials of onasemnogene abeparvovec, cases of SAEs related to hepatotoxicity, such as elevated serum aminotransferase levels, were treated with prednisolone.	 	Myocarditis	Signs of myocarditis include elevated troponin I levels, decreased ejection fraction, focal wall-motion abnormalities on echocardiography, and increased T2-weighted signal on cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).	Weekly troponin I monitoring and bi-weekly echocardiogram monitoring.	Continued monitoring if clinically indicated.	 	Thrombocytopenia	Transient decreases in platelet counts, some of which met the criteria for thrombocytopenia. The lowest platelet count often occurred during the first week after the infusion.	Weekly monitoring for the first two/three weeks.	Continued monitoring if clinically indicated.	 	Thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA)	TMA, an acute and life-threatening condition, is characterised by thrombocytopenia and microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia and may occur following infusion with gene therapy.	Platelet counts should be closely monitored during the first two/three weeks following infusion, with ongoing monitoring thereafter. In cases of thrombocytopenia, further evaluation, including diagnostic tests for haemolytic anaemia and renal dysfunction, should be promptly conducted.	Continued monitoring if clinically indicated.	 	Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)	HLH, a rare, life-threatening hyperinflammatory syndrome, is characterized by fever, markedly elevated ferritin, and cytopenia. This immune dysregulation might lead to multi-organ damage. HLH has been rarely reported following high-dose AAV gene therapy.	Daily monitoring of ferritin, fever, and cytopenia during the first week following infusion. Continuous monitoring should be maintained throughout the first 30 days, with daily assessments if liver transaminase levels are elevated.
AAV Adeno-associated virus; ALT Alanine aminotransferase; AST Aspartate aminotransferase; HLH Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis; MRI Magnetic resonance imaging; SAE Severe adverse events; TMA Thrombotic microangiopathy
Following infusion, patients should ideally remain in the hospital for several days to closely monitor potential treatment-related AEs (Fig. 4). In clinical trials, biochemical parameters, biomarkers, and immunological, physical, and pulmonary assessments were monitored for up to two years to assess safety and efficacy. The main AEs and recommended monitoring with other GTMPs using AAV vectors are outlined in Table 2.

Support for patients and caregivers
Caregivers play a crucial role and must be well-informed throughout the process. They should understand the corticosteroid regimen, including the importance of adhering to the prescribed dosage and contacting a healthcare provider immediately if the patient misses a dose or vomits shortly after taking one. They should also be aware of the vaccination schedule to ensure timely and appropriate immunisations, the primary risks associated with gene therapy, including its signs and symptoms, the requirement to test patients for the presence of AAV antibodies, and the need for increased vigilance to prevent, monitor, and manage infections before and after AAV infusion.

Challenges and recommendations
Developing robust follow-up and monitoring protocols and recommendations for gene therapy in Pompe disease relies on leveraging experience from similar diseases. The expert recommendations are outlined in Fig. 4. It should be acknowledged that recommendations may vary depending on the specific gene therapy and the outcomes of ongoing clinical trials. Further development of these recommendations is needed to include detailed guidance on monitoring disease status following gene therapy, which is crucial for informing decisions about discontinuing or initiating ERT. More advanced immunosuppressive strategies, including the addition of non-steroidal immunosuppressants, should also be considered.
Treatment approaches and monitoring might be tailored to the phenotype. For example, IOPD may require a more intensive strategy with close monitoring due to its rapid progression and severity, whereas managing patients with LOPD may involve less frequent reviews tailored to individual needs, unless there is a significant clinical decline. Monitoring neurological involvement is also important, and cranial MRI has been mainly recommended in IOPD, but also for patients with LOPD. Additionally, formal cognitive assessments should be considered when there are clinical concerns or if progressive leukodystrophy is detected. Furthermore, emerging biomarkers, such as plasma glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and neurofilament light chain (NfL), are being studied for their potential diagnostic value in evaluating CNS involvement.
In addition, experts emphasised the need to prepare for the future expansion of gene therapy availability, advocating for sufficient centres of excellence for Pompe disease in each country to ensure patients receive follow-up care close to home. In countries such as France, Germany, and Poland, no fewer than 10 specialised centres care for patients with SMA. Experts considered this range of centres appropriate for follow-up and treatment administration for patients with Pompe disease.
Moreover, improved home monitoring of patients in real-world settings could facilitate the evaluation of the benefits of gene therapy and their impact on quality of life. Thus, experts recommend developing digital applications and wearable or connected devices to continuously monitor movement speed, activity levels, gait patterns, and respiratory function, providing valuable data to optimise patient care and outcomes.

Multidisciplinary expertise and research and development initiatives
A specialised multidisciplinary team in Pompe disease and gene therapy is essential to adequately manage the entire patient journey within a centre of excellence. Evidence from similar conditions can guide the establishment of the optimal team composition. In addition, research and development initiatives would generate real-world evidence to advance scientific knowledge and guide and improve future treatment protocols.

Challenges and recommendations

Multidisciplinary team
Multidisciplinary team profiles recommended by the experts for a gene therapy centre of excellence for Pompe disease. MRI magnetic resonance imaging; SOP standard operating procedure
Multidisciplinary team profiles recommended by the experts for a centre of excellence for Pompe disease are presented in Fig. 5.
An appropriate team leader would be a neurologist, a paediatric neurologist, or a clinician with expertise in metabolic disorders, who would coordinate and guide all experts involved in the patient’s diagnosis, assessment, and gene therapy treatment. Consulting specialists, including cardiologists, pulmonologists, hepatologists, geneticists, immunologists, and haematologists, could collaborate in pre-treatment assessment and post-treatment monitoring, including managing the immunosuppression of patients. All specialists should operate within well-defined SOPs. In addition, a specialised nursing team would be necessary to coordinate multidisciplinary activities, maintain direct communication with patients and caregivers, and educate patients and families about the disease and its management to ensure adherence to follow-up requirements. Clinical pharmacists would be essential for handling gene therapy products, including receiving, storing, and transporting them. Finally, radiologists would be responsible for muscle MRI assessments, and physiotherapists would be responsible for functional evaluations.
Regularly scheduled structured committee meetings would allow effective coordination of the multidisciplinary team and individual patient status updates.
Establishing an online European community with experts supporting healthcare professionals in managing gene therapy for Pompe disease would be valuable. The European Network of Reference Centres for Neuromuscular Diseases (ERN EURO-NMD), the European Academy of Neurology (EAN), and the World Muscle Society (WMS) could facilitate this community, promoting cross-border collaboration and best practices in clinical care.
Multidisciplinary team members should systematically document their expertise, qualifications, and prior experience, including involvement in administering gene therapy for other indications in clinical trials or routine care.
Developing educational programs with harmonised objectives would build and standardise disease-specific knowledge and expertise across Europe, allowing professionals to stay up to date with the latest advancements in gene therapy applications. Such programs should include formalised curricula in various formats, including webinars, presential workshops, accredited training, local and national study days, clinical observation opportunities, reading materials, and e-learning modules.

Research and development
Multidisciplinary teams are recommended to execute research and development initiatives, including systematically collecting data by participating in professionally curated databases within each country's specific resources and logistical constraints, thereby generating solid real-world evidence to build knowledge and improve treatment protocols.

Infrastructure and resources for gene therapy
Key considerations for developing protocols for the administration of gene therapy
Checklist for the utilisation of infrastructure and resources for gene therapy
Risk assessment	 	1.	Gene therapy vector details: plasmid map, transgene, additional sequences, and manufacturing process.	 	2.	Biosafety risk group classification of the GTMP and potential hazards and risks to human health.	 	3.	Patients involved and route of delivery.	 	4.	Facilities for: Reception of GTMP prior to administration. Storage of GTMP prior to administration. Infusion of GTMP. Immediate post-infusion care. Continuation of post-infusion care. Disposal of infusion materials and waste.	 	5.	Responsible person for GTMP preparation for infusion.	 	6.	Qualification and training relevant to the administration and handling procedures and responsible person for ensuring compliance.	 	7.	Need for specific handling of the GTMP and whether segregation of patients is required (e.g. immunodeficient patients on the ward, family members including siblings).	 	8.	Any possible interactions between GTMP and other concurrent medications.	 	9.	Any concerns regarding GTMP shedding in body fluids after patient discharge.	 	10.	Specific hazards identification: Safe transport, storage, and preparation. Concerns about inoculation or exposure to body fluids of healthcare workers.
Minimal pharmacy facility, equipment, and technology requirements	 	11.	Pharmacy personal protective equipment depending on the activity performed, including disposable lab coats, gowns or aprons, safety glasses or goggles, gloves, and splash protection (i.e. face masks).	 	12.	Qualified ultra-low temperature freezers for drug storage with 24-h calibrated temperature monitoring device.	 	13.	Biological safety cabinet Class II type B or pharmaceutical grade isolator compliant with European standard EN 12469:2000 (recommendations for risk group 1 and risk group 2 GTMPs).	 	14.	Spill kits for the decontamination of areas after drug spills.	 	15.	Biohazard-labelled leak-proof containers for transport around the institution.	 	16.	Virucidal agents appropriate to the GTMP (enveloped or capsid vector).
Purchase, reception, and storage	 	17.	Pharmacy personnel should wear appropriate personal protective equipment when unpacking GTMPs in case of transport-related damage.	 	18.	Store the GTMP in a designated area (fridge or freezer) according to the specified storage conditions.	 	19.	Display a biohazard warning sign on the storage unit, the entrance to the storage room, and the cleanroom where the product is prepared.	 	20.	Control the storage temperatures using a calibrated temperature-monitoring system.
Preparation	 	21.	Prepare, if possible, the GTMP in a Class II Type B biosafety cabinet or within a pharmaceutical-grade isolator, with background cleanroom standards complying with local regulations.	 	22.	Apply the stability data outline in the SmPC or clinical documents (if the GTMP is aseptically prepared in a grade A cleanroom environment).	 	23.	All preparation steps should be supervised by a second individual.
Transport and containment	 	24.	Transport GTMPs in a double-enclosed system (i.e. a plastic bag and a leak-proof biohazard-labelled container).	 	25.	Transport personnel should be explicitly trained in GTMPs safe handling.	 	26.	Adhering to stability data and temperature requirements according to the SmPC or clinical trial documentation is essential.	 	27.	GTMP waste should be managed through incineration, autoclaving, or heat inactivation.	 	28.	Materials used during administration must be disposed of under careful regulations.	 	29.	Universal precautions with patent material must be taken to ensure the safety of healthcare personnel and family members.
Administration	 	30.	Patients may need to be isolated during and after the administration.	 	31.	Administration of the GTMP within the timeframe outlined in the SmPC, with the dose ideally being used immediately without storage in a second location.	 	32.	Coordination between clinical staff and the hospital pharmacy is crucial to ensure timely reconstitution and administration of the GTMP.	 	33.	Guide patients and caregivers about precautions to take at home.
Waste disposal and management of spills and accidental exposure	 	34.	Availability of a spill management kit, along with an appropriate decontaminant, in all areas where a GTMP is handled.	 	35.	Seek medical attention and report the incident to the occupational health department, biosafety or infection control officer, and/or incident-report group, following established local protocols.
Risk assessment adapted from the Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, UK protocols
GTMP Gene therapy medicinal products; SmPC Summary of Product Characteristics
The use of gene therapy is expanding rapidly, with new GTMPs being approved each year. However, up-to-date guidelines and SOPs are needed to ensure the safe and efficient handling of GTMPs throughout the entire treatment process. Existing SOPs for intravenously administered licensed products can inform the development of SOPs for gene therapy in Pompe disease. Key aspects of developing gene therapy protocols are shown in Fig. 6 and Table 3 and are further discussed below.

Risk assessment
A thorough risk assessment must be conducted for new GTMPs in a hospital setting, primarily based on the EMA Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) and clinical trial documents. GTMPs should receive appropriate containment measures based on the risk assessment, which considers factors such as replication competence, potential for genome integration, and transgene toxicity. For instance, GTMPs classified as Risk Group 1 require containment under biosafety level 1. All AAV serotypes fall under Risk Group 1 since they are non-infectious and not associated with disease in healthy adult humans, representing the lowest risk level.
According to protocols from hospitals with experience in GTMPs, such as the Great Ormond Street Hospital in London, UK, the clinical team lead should conduct the risk assessment, which should be reviewed and approved by a genetically modified organism (GMO) committee from the hospital, including pharmacists, clinical laboratory leads, hospital infection control leads, scientists with expertise in gene therapy viral vectors, and clinicians experienced in leading gene therapy clinical trials. Key elements for risk assessment are shown in Table 3.

Minimal pharmacy facility, equipment, and technology requirements
Centres administering GTMPs should meet the minimum standards for pharmacy facilities, equipment, and technologies, as outlined in Table 3.

Purchase, reception, and storage
Pharmacists are typically responsible for purchasing, receiving, and storing GTMPs. Particular attention must be paid to financial clearance and purchasing procedures, given the significant economic costs associated with these therapies. Upon delivery, personnel should wear the appropriate equipment, and GTMPs should be stored appropriately, as indicated in Table 3.

Preparation
In vivo GTMPs should, whenever possible, be prepared within pharmacy departments to reduce the risks of environmental contamination, microbial exposure, and medication errors. It is recommended that preparation is conducted Class II Type B biosafety conditions (Table 3) and that a second individual verify all critical preparation steps. If the GTMP is aseptically prepared in a grade A cleanroom environment, the stability data outlined in the SmPC or clinical trial documents can be applied. Otherwise, the product must be administered immediately after preparation.
Safety protocols, such as those outlined in the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) General Chapter Hazardous Drugs—Handling in Healthcare Settings, provide standards for handling hazardous drugs to protect healthcare staff, patients, and the environment. Moreover, according to the PAN UK Pharmacy Working Group for Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products, process maps are recommended as an effective tool for developing aseptic preparation workflows. A risk assessment of the aseptic preparation process should cover the transfer processes in and out of the cleanroom and isolator, reconstitution procedures, required consumables, disposal of used materials, format of final packaging, labelling, stability and storage requirements, development of worksheets and SOPs, and actions in the event of spillage.

Transport and containment
Prepared GTMPs should be transported in a double-enclosed system and by trained personnel (Table 3). Any remaining GTMP waste should be disposed of, ensuring appropriate decontamination. Non-disposable items should undergo decontamination procedures on the ward. Furthermore, strict precautions must be observed when handling and disposing of needles and other sharps to prevent accidental injuries or contamination. After GTMP administration, universal precautions must be taken with patient material, ensuring the safety of healthcare personnel and family members based on available data on viral shedding for the specific therapy.

Administration
GTMP administration is typically the responsibility of the treating physicians, with support from the nursing team. Depending on the extent of viral shedding, patients may need to be isolated during and after administration (Table 3). Before administration, it is critical to double-check the product, prepare the administration site, and ensure the patient is ready to receive the treatment promptly after preparation. The GTMP should be administered within the timeframe outlined in the SmPC, preferably immediately after preparation. Thus, coordination between clinical staff and the hospital pharmacy is crucial. Moreover, patients and caregivers must be guided on necessary precautions at home, as viral shedding could lead to antibody development in family members with the same condition. For example, with onasemnogene abeparvovec, caregivers are instructed to wear protective gloves when handling the patient's faeces and to practice rigorous hand hygiene for approximately 60 days after the infusion.

Management of spills and accidental exposure
A spill management kit and an appropriate decontaminant should be available in all areas where a GTMP is handled to ensure safety and containment of any unintentional exposure. The recommended contents of the spill kit include two disposable gowns or arm covers, four pairs of gloves, two masks, two aprons, two pairs of goggles, four pairs of disposable shoe covers, two disinfectant sachets or pre-prepared decontaminants, absorbent paper towels, two disposable forceps, two biohazard incineration bags, the emergency contact number, and a copy of the spillage procedure.
In the event of accidental exposure to viral vectors, seek medical attention and report the incident to the occupational health department, the biosafety or infection control officer, and/or the incident-report group, following established local protocols. Inhalation, skin exposure, eye or mucous membrane splash, and needlestick injury should be addressed promptly.

Challenges and recommendations
Experts recognised that enhanced expertise is needed to handle GTMPs and conduct vector risk assessments, which challenge the implementation of centres of excellence for Pompe disease. Table 3 collects the minimal requirements and procedures for implementing such a centre. Some specific aspects are discussed below.

Infrastructure
Only a few hospitals meet the minimal requirements for pharmacy facilities, equipment, and technologies necessary to handle GTMPs safely. For instance, many pharmacies lack dedicated biosafety units, Class II biological safety cabinets, or ultra-low temperature freezers. Experts recommend that centres of excellence for Pompe disease proactively assess their infrastructure and equipment to ensure compliance with national regulations and to be adequately prepared to administer GTMPs.

Training
Staff may have concerns about handling GTMPs, often due to the potential for these costly therapies to spill and the risk of accidental self-exposure. Experts advise that centres of excellence for Pompe disease implement comprehensive training programs for all staff involved in GTMP management, including personnel responsible for cleaning patient rooms, biosafety laboratories, and transport staff, who should also receive training in spill management protocols. Importantly, these therapies are typically approved medications, likely classified as Risk Group 1, posing minimal harm to humans. Training will promote a safer working environment and improve staff confidence in handling GTMPs. Furthermore, patient and family education with explicit, easily understandable materials in the appropriate languages should ensure compliance with safety measures.

Guidelines and SOPs
There are no mandatory European guidelines governing the handling of GTMPs, and national regulations vary significantly across European countries. Experts recommend that each centre of excellence develop comprehensive institutional SOPs and policies that address all aspects of GTMP application, adhere to the SmPC and clinical trial documents, and include the critical points outlined in Table 3. Additionally, a thorough risk assessment for each GTMP is essential before its initial administration. Experts strongly advise starting this process as soon as possible, as administrative procedures can be time-consuming and vary by country.

Prescribing systems
Adopting new dosing units, such as vector genomes, must be consistently reflected across electronic prescribing systems and medical records. Consequently, experts recommend that centres of excellence for Pompe disease evaluate whether these new units are integrated into their existing systems to ensure accurate dosing and effective management of gene therapy treatments.

Conclusion
Gene therapy for Pompe disease represents a paradigm shift in the management of this rare genetic disorder, offering the potential for long-term, transformative benefits. However, gene therapy also presents significant logistical, clinical, and organizational challenges that could be managed by establishing centers of excellence. Centers of excellence should bring together multidisciplinary teams with expertise in Pompe disease and gene therapy to provide comprehensive, patient-focused care. Key priorities include early and accurate diagnosis of patients through NBS programs, DBS screening of patients with muscle symptoms, and the use of all available diagnostic tools, and implementing optimised follow-up protocols pre- and post-gene therapy. Continuous monitoring for AEs, particularly during the acute and long-term post-infusion periods, would ensure patient safety and maximise therapeutic outcomes. The complexities of gene therapy administration demand specialised infrastructure and resources, including upgrading pharmacy facilities, availability of biosafety-level equipment, and developing specific SOPs for gene therapy. Additionally, training programs for healthcare professionals and caregivers would enhance their capacity and confidence in managing this advanced therapy.
Research and development should be fundamental in centres of excellence, contributing to refining treatment protocols and identifying novel biomarkers to guide clinical decision-making. European collaborative networks can harmonise standards, promote best practices, and establish a unified framework for gene therapy delivery.
In summary, implementing gene therapy for Pompe disease requires a coordinated effort to overcome existing gaps in knowledge, infrastructure, and care delivery. Overcoming these challenges would allow healthcare systems to fully realize gene therapy's potential, leading to better patient outcomes and setting a new standard for managing rare diseases.

Supplementary Information
Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Author contributions
B.S. developed the scope of this article, prepared and proposed a list of topics and chaired the meetings. C.D.G., P.L., A.H., P.G., A.K.P., A.T., and J.V. approved the list of topics, reviewed the current evidence for the assigned topic, identified challenges, and proposed recommendations. All authors discussed the individual recommendations and reached a collaborative consensus on each. All authors critically reviewed the manuscript and approved the published version of the manuscript.

Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. Astellas Gene Therapies. The statements and opinions contained in this publication are solely those of the individual authors and not of Astellas Gene Therapies.

Data availability
Data availability is not applicable, as this expert opinion article presents recommendations derived from a collaborative consensus among experts.

Declarations

Conflicts of interest
Benedikt Schoser has received research grants from the EU Horizon 2022 programs ComPaSS, PaLaDIn, and ENTRY-DM, PepGen DM research; received consulting fees from Alexion, Amicus, Astellas, Avidity, Denali, Dyne, Sanofi, and Johnson&Johnson; honoraria from Alexion, Argenx, Astellas, Dyne, Kedrion, and Sanofi; support for attending meetings and/or travel from Astellas, Amicus, and Sanofi; have participated in advisory boards for Amicus, Astellas, Avidity, Dyne, and Encoded; and declares no stocks or shares. Cristina Dominguez has received research grants from UCB Pharma, Pretzel Therapeutics and Instituto de Salud Carlos III; received speaker's honoraria or consulting fees from Astellas, Amicus, Pretzel Therapeutics, Sanofi, Roche, and UCB; and declares no stocks or shares. Pascal Laforet has received research grants from Amicus Therapeutics and Sanofi; consulting fees or speaker's honoraria or support for attending meetings and/or travel from Amicus Therapeutics, Astellas, and Sanofi; and declares no stocks or shares. Paul Gissen has received consulting fees from BioMarin and Travere Therapeutics; received speaker's honoraria from BioMarin; is a member of the MRC Molecular and Cellular Medicine Board, the Scientific Committee for International Niemann Pick Disease Registry, the Medical and Scientific Advisory Board for Batten Disease Family Association, and of Telethon Grants; and declares shares of Bloomsbury Genetic Therapies. Anna Kostera-Pruszczyk has received research grants from Sanofi, Biogen, and Kedrion; speaker's honoraria from Novartis, Roche, Biogen, Alexion, UCB, Takeda, CSL Behring, and AstraZeneca; is a member of the Council of Rare Diseases (Advisory to Ministry of Health); and declares no stocks or shares. Andreas Thalmeier has received consulting fees from Astellas and Roche. John Vissing has received research grants from NOVO Nordic foundation and an EU grant for Becker muscular dystrophy; consulting fees from Sanofi, Dyne Therapeutics, and Roche; speaker's honoraria from Edgewise Therapeutics, UCB Biopharma, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals; has participated in advisory boards for Dyne Therapeutics; and declares no stocks or shares. Andreas Hahn has received research grants from Sanofi and consulting and/or speaker’s honoraria from Amicus, Sanofi, Astellas, Pfizer, Roche, and Novartis.

Ethical approval
The manuscript does not contain clinical studies or patient data.

References
Pompe's disease
Characterization of pre- and post-treatment pathology after enzyme replacement therapy for Pompe disease
Pompe disease: new developments in an old lysosomal storage disorder
An integrative correlation of myopathology, phenotype and genotype in late onset Pompe disease
European consensus for starting and stopping enzyme replacement therapy in adult patients with Pompe disease: a 10-year experience
Rate of progression and predictive factors for pulmonary outcome in children and adults with Pompe disease
A retrospective, multinational, multicenter study on the natural history of infantile-onset Pompe disease
Clinical insight meets scientific innovation to develop a next generation ERT for Pompe disease
Severe CNS involvement in a subset of long-term treated children with infantile-onset Pompe disease
Toward deconstructing the phenotype of late-onset Pompe disease
Global variations in diagnostic methods and epidemiological estimates in Pompe disease: findings from a scoping review
Newborn screening of neuromuscular diseases
Transforming the clinical outcome in CRIM-negative infantile Pompe disease identified via newborn screening: the benefits of early treatment with enzyme replacement therapy and immune tolerance induction
Immunological challenges and approaches to immunomodulation in Pompe disease: a literature review
Optimizing treatment outcomes: immune tolerance induction in Pompe disease patients undergoing enzyme replacement therapy
Clinical insights in enzyme replacement therapy for metabolic storage disorders: lessons from Pompe disease
Enzyme replacement therapies in adults with Pompe disease: from trials to real-world data
Current avenues of gene therapy in Pompe disease
Start, switch and stop (triple-S) criteria for enzyme replacement therapy of late-onset Pompe disease: European Pompe consortium recommendation update 2024
What's new and what's next for gene therapy in Pompe disease?
NIH, Gene Transfer Study in Patients With Late Onset Pompe Disease (FORTIS).
Two-year safety and exploratory efficacy of AT845 gene replacement therapy for late onset Pompe disease: FORTIS, a phase 1/2 open-label clinical study
AAV9-mediated gene therapy for infantile-onset Pompe’s disease
Phase I study of liver depot gene therapy in late-onset Pompe disease
From clinical trials to clinical practice: practical considerations for gene replacement therapy in SMA type 1
Expert recommendations and clinical considerations in the use of onasemnogene abeparvovec gene therapy for spinal muscular atrophy
Recommendations for gene therapy of spinal muscular atrophy with onasemnogene abeparvovec-AVXS-101: Consensus paper of the German representatives of the Society for Pediatric Neurology (GNP) and the German treatment centers with collaboration of the medical scientific advisory board of the German Society for Muscular Diseases (DGM)
Gene therapy: practical aspects of implementation
[Gene therapy of Hemophilia: Recommendations from the German, Austrian, and Swiss Society for Thrombosis and Haemostasis Research (GTH)]
Practical considerations for Delandistrogene Moxeparvovec gene therapy in patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Gene therapy for aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase deficiency: requirements for safe application and knowledge-generating follow-up
Consensus methods for medical and health services research
Light and Shadows in newborn screening for lysosomal storage disorders: eight years of experience in Northeast Italy
Early treatment with alglucosidase alpha prolongs long-term survival of infants with Pompe disease
Cross-reactive immunologic material status affects treatment outcomes in Pompe disease infants
Predicting cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) status in Pompe disease using GAA mutations: lessons learned from 10 years of clinical laboratory testing experience
Recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase enzyme therapy for infantile glycogen storage disease type II: results of a phase I/II clinical trial
Chinese hamster ovary cell-derived recombinant human acid alpha-glucosidase in infantile-onset Pompe disease
Management of confirmed newborn-screened patients with Pompe disease across the disease spectrum
Should patients with asymptomatic pompe disease be treated? A nationwide study in France
Making diagnosis of Pompe disease at a presymptomatic stage: to treat or not to treat?
Prevalence of Pompe disease in 3,076 patients with hyperCKemia and limb-girdle muscular weakness
Update of the Pompe variant database for the prediction of clinical phenotypes: novel disease-associated variants, common sequence variants, and results from newborn screening
Broad spectrum of Pompe disease in patients with the same c.-32-13T->G haplotype
Novel GAA variants and mosaicism in Pompe disease identified by extended analyses of patients with an incomplete DNA diagnosis
Phenotypic expression of late-onset glycogen storage disease type II: identification of asymptomatic adults through family studies and review of reported families
Late-onset Pompe disease in France: molecular features and epidemiology from a nationwide study
Follow-up of late-onset Pompe disease patients with muscle magnetic resonance imaging reveals increase in fat replacement in skeletal muscles
Multisystem late onset Pompe disease (LOPD): an update on clinical aspects
Diagnostic tools in late onset Pompe disease (LOPD)
Enzymatic diagnosis of Pompe disease: lessons from 28 years of experience
Acid α-glucosidase (GAA) activity and glycogen content in muscle biopsy specimens of patients with Pompe disease: a systematic review
Rapid ultraperformance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry assay for a characteristic glycogen-derived tetrasaccharide in Pompe disease and other glycogen storage diseases
Newborn screening for Pompe disease in Italy: long-term results and future challenges
Urine glucose tetrasaccharide: a good biomarker for glycogenoses type II and III? A study of the French cohort
Characteristics of patients with late-onset Pompe disease in France: insights from the French Pompe Registry in 2022
Diagnosis of Pompe disease: muscle biopsy vs blood-based assays
Whole-body muscle MRI in 20 patients suffering from late onset Pompe disease: involvement patterns
Skeletal muscle magnetic resonance imaging in Pompe disease
Diagnosis and treatment of late-onset Pompe disease in the Middle East and North Africa region: consensus recommendations from an expert group
Practical recommendations for diagnosis and management of respiratory muscle weakness in late-onset Pompe disease
Pompe disease: a neuromuscular disease with respiratory muscle involvement
Intracranial arterial abnormalities in patients with late onset Pompe disease (LOPD)
Abnormalities of cerebral arteries are frequent in patients with late-onset Pompe disease
Screening for later-onset Pompe's disease in patients with paucisymptomatic hyperCKemia
Clinical features of late-onset Pompe disease: a prospective cohort study
Long-term monitoring of patients with infantile-onset Pompe disease on enzyme replacement therapy using a urinary glucose tetrasaccharide biomarker
Evaluation of muscle glycogen content by 13C NMR spectroscopy in adult-onset acid maltase deficiency
Simultaneous monitoring of glycogen, creatine, and phosphocreatine in type II glycogen storage disease using saturation transfer MRI
EMA, Zolgensma Summary of Product Characteristics. https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-information/zolgensma-epar-product-information_en.pdf. Accessed 27 Feb 2025.
Pre-existing anti-adeno-associated virus antibodies as a challenge in AAV gene therapy
Prevalence of serum IgG and neutralizing factors against adeno-associated virus (AAV) types 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, and 9 in the healthy population: implications for gene therapy using AAV vectors
Impact of pre-existing immunity on gene transfer to nonhuman primate liver with adeno-associated virus 8 vectors
Influence of pre-existing anti-capsid neutralizing and binding antibodies on AAV vector transduction
Mild disease course of SARS-CoV-2 infections and mild side effects of vaccination in Pompe disease: a cohort description
Single-dose gene-replacement therapy for spinal muscular atrophy
Gene therapy vector-related myocarditis
Donald A, Jones S, Byrne B, Cron R, Feng C, Albanis E, Bibbiani F, Cobb S, Jordan J (2025) Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)/hyperinflammatory syndrome following high dose AAV9 therapy. American Society of Gene + Cell Therapy
Diagnosis, management and monitoring of patients with Pompe disease in the UK
The involvement of central nervous system across the phenotypic spectrum of Pompe disease: a systematic review
Plasma glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) is a biomarker for central nervous system involvement in infantile-onset Pompe disease
Neurofilament light and its association with CNS involvement in patients with classic infantile Pompe disease
Safety and efficacy of cipaglucosidase alfa plus miglustat versus alglucosidase alfa plus placebo in late-onset Pompe disease (PROPEL): an international, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group, phase 3 trial
Safety and efficacy of avalglucosidase alfa versus alglucosidase alfa in patients with late-onset Pompe disease (COMET): a phase 3, randomised, multicentre trial
Delivery of gene therapy in haemophilia treatment centres in the United States: practical aspects of preparedness and implementation
European association of hospital pharmacists (EAHP) guidance on the pharmacy handling of in vivo gene therapy medicinal products
Gene replacement therapy: a primer for the health-system pharmacist
NHS Specialist Pharmacy Service. Pan UK Pharmacy Working Group for ATMPs, Gene therapy medicinal products: governance and preparation requirements Version 3 (2024).
GMO medicines and hospital pharmacy practice: a review
Viral-mediated gene therapy and genetically modified therapeutics: a primer on biosafety handling for the health-system pharmacist
Biosafety considerations for viral vector gene therapy: an explanation and guide for the average everyday-hero pharmacist
ADKA-leitlinie Herstellung und Prüfung von Arzneimitteln, Krankenhauspharmazie
Decoding gene therapy: current impact and future considerations for health-system and specialty pharmacy practice