Complete Revascularisation in ST-elevation MI: Do We Really Buy It? Challenging the Current Approach to Bystander Percutaneous Coronary Intervention
Complete revascularisation during ST-elevation MI (STEMI) has Class 1A guideline support based on multiple randomised controlled trials showing improved clinical outcomes compared with culprit-only percutaneous coronary intervention. However, the concept that all STEMI patients with bystander disease should undergo complete revascularisation is flawed. The randomised controlled trials have highly variable anatomical and physiological inclusion criteria and drivers for outcome benefit, to the extent that it is hard to pick out a possible mechanism of effect. There is a case to pursue some fundamental questions about how prophylactic stenting may help bystander disease in STEMI patients, as well as to try to establish whether there are high-risk patients/vessels/lesions that derive substantial benefit from stenting and, conversely, others in whom it is futile.
The evidence supporting primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for culprit lesions in ST-elevation MI (STEMI) patients is unequivocal, as reflected in international guidelines that have supported this practice for many years. In contrast, the management of atheromatous lesions in non-infarct-related arteries (NIRAs) has historically been variable, and this is important because such bystander disease is common. For example, in one pooled analysis of 28,282 STEMI patients across eight clinical trials, 52.8% of patients had obstructive disease in NIRAs, defined as ≥50% diameter stenosis in at least one non-culprit vessel. This prevalence was consistent with the findings of two large real-world registries, KAMIR (51.7%) and the Duke Cardiovascular Databank (53.4%).
Traditionally, management of bystander lesions in STEMI patients has included a variety of options, including: optimal medical therapy alone, with revascularisation considered only in those with ongoing symptoms; optimal medical therapy plus objective assessment of ischaemia in the NIRA territory using non-invasive tests as the arbiter for further revascularisation; pressure wire assessment of NIRA with targeted PCI of those with flow limitation; and stenting of NIRA based on appearance. All these options are pursued atthe discretion ofthe supervising cardiologist. This is illustrated by a large-scale analysis from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry (NCDR) CathPCI Registry. Specifically, between July 2009 and March 2018, 359,879 STEMI admissions with multivessel coronary disease across 1,598 US hospitals were analysed. Overall, 38.5% of these patients received multivessel PCI within 45 days of presentation, of whom 76.2% achieved complete revascularisation (CR). The use of multivessel PCI varied significantly across institutions, with a median rate of 37.9% (interquartile range 30.0–46.5%).
However, the evidence base has changed substantially over the past decade with the presentation of nine randomised controlled trials (RCTs) (Table 1) that have consistently shown significant outcome benefit for CR of bystander lesions over culprit-only PCI. This has resulted in both European and US guidelines supporting the CR strategy in STEMI with a Class 1A level of recommendation.
However, despite guideline endorsement, the uptake of CR in clinical practice remains inconsistent among interventionalists. There are likely to be various reasons for this, such as challenging bystander anatomy, a lack of enthusiasm for more complex procedures out of hours or in sick STEMI patients and pressure on cath lab time. However, an important factor is that although the headline results of these RCTs consistently provide evidence of clinical superiority of CR versus a culprit-only strategy, closer inspection of the details reveals substantial heterogeneity in trial design, inclusion criteria (especially the definition of significant disease) and composite clinical endpoints. This heterogeneity raises important questions about the concept that all suitable bystander lesions should undergo PCI, without any personalisation of this strategy. In particular, the suggestion that lesions of a certain diameter stenosis will benefit from stenting demands some greater insight into the mechanism of benefit. Is CR effective by sealing inflammatory lesions? Or by improving the degree of flow limitation? Regardless, it would be expected that prophylactic stenting would reduce the rate of spontaneous MI, which has actually only been seen in some of the trials (e.g. PRAMI and COMPLETE).
Summary of the Nine Randomised Controlled Trials Informing Complete Revascularisation in Acute MI
Study	Intervention	Control	Definition of Significant Stenosis	Primary Endpoint	Outcome	 	PRAMI (2013)	NCL PCI during index procedure	CL-only PCI	Visual: DS >50%	Cardiac death, non-fatal MI, refractory angina	CR 9% versus CL 23% (HR 0.35)	 	CvLPRIT (2015)	NCL PCI at index procedure/admission	CL-only PCI	Visual: DS >70% in one view or >50% in two views	All-cause death, recurrent MI, HF, ischaemia-driven revascularisation	CR 10% versus CL 21.2% (HR 0.45)	 	DANAMI-3-PRIMULTI (2015)	NCL PCI at index admission	CL-only PCI	Angiography: DS >90%;	 	FFR: DS >50% and	 	FFR ≤0.80	All-cause death, reinfarction, ischaemia-driven revascularisation	CR 13% versus CL 22% (HR 0.56)	 	COMPARE-ACUTE (2017)	NCL PCI guided by FFR	CL-only PCI	QCA: DS >50% and FFR ≤0.80	Death, MI, revascularisation, stroke	CR 7.8% versus CL 20.5% (HR 0.35)	 	COMPLETE (2019)	NCL PCI at index admission or staged	CL-only PCI	Angiography: DS >70%; FFR: DS 50–69% and FFR ≤0.80	CV death and MI;CV death, MI or ischaemia-driven revascularisation	CR 7.8% versus CL 10.5%, (HR 0.74)CR 8.9% versus CL16.7%, (HR 0.51)	 	FLOWER-MI (2021)	FFR-guided NCL PCI at index procedure or admission	Angiography-guided CR	Visual: DS ≥50% and FFR ≤0.80	Death, MI, unplanned revascularisation	FFR-guided 5.5% versus angiography4.2% (not significant)	 	FRAME-AMI (2023)	FFR-guided CR at index admission	Angiography-guided CR	FFR ≤0.80; visual: DS >50%	MACE (death, MI, repeat revascularisation)	FFR-guided 7.4%, angiography-guided 19.7% (HR 0.43)	 	FIRE (2023)	Physiology-guided CR in elderly (age ≥75 years)	CL-only PCI	Visual (50–99%) or physiology-guided (FFR/QFR)	Death, MI stroke, or ischaemia-driven revascularisation at 1 year	CR 15.7% versus CL 21% (HR 0.73)	 	Full REVASC (2024)	FFR-guided CR during index admission	Usual care (culprit-only PCI)	Visual: 50–99%; FFR <80%	Death, MI or unplanned revascularisation	CR 19.0% versus CL 20.4% (p=0.53); no significant difference observed
CL = culprit lesion; CR = complete revascularisation; CV = cardiovascular; DS = diameter stenosis; FFR = fractional flow reserve; HF = heart failure; MACE = major adverse cardiovascular events; NCL = non-culprit lesion; PCI = percutaneous coronary intervention; QCA = quantitative coronary angiography; QFR = quantitative flow ratio.
This review critically appraises the current evidence supporting CR in STEMI. We explore whether enthusiasm for the universal adoption of a CR strategy may be misplaced, as well as whether greater efforts should be made to understand which patients, vessels and lesions actually benefit from prophylactic PCI and, conversely, which do not so that we may, in future, develop a personalised approach to CR. The fact that all the RCTs show some outcome advantage to the CR strategy implies that there is definite benefit for some STEMI patients, but does not move us closer to working out whether this benefit applies at the patient, vessel or lesion level, or whether some patients undergo CR completely unnecessarily.

Current Guidelines and Their Rationale
The most recent European Society of Cardiology guidelines endorse complete revascularisation as a Class 1A recommendation for stable STEMI patients, specifically either during the index procedure or within 45 days. Further, it is also a Class 1B recommendation that PCI of non-culprit lesions be guided by angiographic severity (i.e. visual estimation). The US guidelines also give a Class 1A recommendation to CR in STEMI, as follows:
“In selected, hemodynamically stable patients with STEMI and multivessel disease, after successful PCI of the infarct-related artery, PCI of significantly stenosed non-infarct related arteries is recommended to reduce the risk of death or MI and improve the angina-related quality of life.”
These international guidelines are based on the consistent superiority of the CR versus culprit-only strategy in STEMI patients in a series of nine RCTs, whose design and outcomes are summarised in Table 1. In every case, the RCTs show benefit for CR, and yet, given the discrepant and discordant inclusion and drivers for advantage, there remain some important concerns and uncertainties about this strategy and, in particular, the appropriateness for its universal application.
Some studies have also now reported long-term follow-up, including CvLPRIT (5.6-year follow-up) and DANAMI-3-PRIMULTI (10-year follow-up), and these demonstrate sustained benefit over the long term. Despite these data, detailed forensic analysis raises important questions about the strength of the case for the universal application of the CR strategy in STEMI.

Evidence from Randomised Controlled Trials: The Case for Clinical Uncertainty
The RCTs that have been published in this field show extensive variability in inclusion criteria, definition of bystander disease, clinical composite endpoints and drivers for advantage in a CR strategy. Our intention here is to undertake a forensic examination of these differences and, following a comprehensive description of them, to analyse how the flaws in our current data could be addressed by research looking at mechanistic questions.

Patient Selection
First, as is always the case for RCTs, the generalisability of the results to consecutive patients in front-line clinical practice is unclear, given the highly selective nature of the trial inclusion criteria. For example, the PRAMI trial only enrolled 19% of screened patients. Furthermore, a secondary publication by the DANAMI-3-PRIMULTI authors, examining the top recruiting site, identified evidence of unreported exclusions and potential sampling bias. Their main findings were that: non-screened patients had similar characteristics and all-cause mortality compared with the excluded patients, from which it could be inferred that unreported screening and exclusion of the target population had occurred; and randomised study participants had a lower mortality rate than eligible but excluded individuals (HR 3.41; 95% CI [2.69–4.32]; p<0.001) and eligible but non-screened individuals (HR 3.37; 95% CI [2.36–4.82]; p<0.001). These findings suggest that trial participants are not representative of the broader real-life STEMI population. It is particularly notable that 44% of the non-screened cohort (131 patients) did not meet any exclusion criteria and were omitted from the screening log for unspecified reasons.
The second important consideration regarding patient selection is the substantial variability in the criteria by which the trials defined bystander disease. As indicated in Table 1, some trials relied on purely visual angiographic assessment of the NIRA lesions, but the degree of stenosis varied significantly (e.g. >50% stenosis in PRAMI; >70% stenosis in a single view or >50% in two views in CvLPRIT). In other RCTs, a combination of visual estimation of a varying degree of diameter stenosis and functional significance by pressure wire assessment was used to define target bystander lesions (e.g. DANAMI-3-PRIMULTI used angiographic stenosis >90% or >50% with fractional flow reserve [FFR] ≤0.80, whereas COMPLETE used visual stenosis >70%, or 50–69% with FFR ≤0.80). Inevitably, this range of definition must mean that some bystander disease would be a candidate for CR in one trial but not in another. This introduces uncertainty about the optimal population on which to focus the CR strategy in real-world clinical practice, and certainly raises a question about the likelihood of universal benefit.

Differences in Trial Primary Outcomes and Variability in Drivers of Positive Outcomes
The composite endpoints for the RCTs are highly variable, as indicated in Table 2. It is notable that the observed benefit was driven by mortality in only one trial, FIRE, although it is surely important that only 35% of the enrolled cohort in that RCT were STEMI patients, with the rest being non-STEMI patients. With the exception of FIRE, mortality is not a driver for the clinical advantage of CR in these trials. In fact, the components of the composite endpoints that drove the difference between the strategies are highly variable across the trials. For example, in the 10-year DANAMI-3-PRIMULTI outcome data that have recently been published, the main driver was revascularisation, with the rate of MI and death being very similar between the groups. In contrast, in COMPLETE, the component that dominated the difference between the groups was MI.
In several trials, the main driver for the significant difference in the composite endpoint was revascularisation, rather than MI or death. The COMPARE-ACUTE trial evaluated FFR-guided revascularisation in STEMI patients with multivessel disease. At 1 year, the primary outcome occurred in 7.8% of the CR group, compared with 20.5% of the infarct-artery-only group, with revascularisation accounting for most of the observed benefit. However, only one-third of these revascularisations were performed for acute coronary syndrome (ACS). The remainder were triggered by stable angina (29.1%), silent ischaemia (3.9%) or angiographic findings alone in the absence of symptoms or demonstrable ischaemia (33%). Overall, therefore, 72.8% of these procedures were classified as non-urgent. This raises an important question: if the need for revascularisation differs between groups over the follow-up period, but the incidence of MI and death does not, can a routine early strategy of CR truly be justified? There is a strong argument that a more efficient approach would be to defer bystander intervention until it is ischaemia-driven. This interpretation of the data seems to be reinforced by the recently presented 10-year follow-up of DANAMI-3-PRIMULTI, in which there was a significantly lower rate of the composite endpoint among the CR patients, but this was due to fewer revascularisations in the CR group, with no numerical difference in MI or death. The obvious advantages of deferring CR are that, without exposing the patients to a higher rate of MI or death, it would save cath lab time and operator stress in performing routine CR at the index primary PCI or soon after, and that the overall number of patients receiving CR would be substantially fewer than via the currently recommended pathway. In addition, this would be achieved without any cost to the patients in terms of hard events like MI or death.

Is the Benefit of Complete Revascularisation Really Large Enough to Justify Applying it as a One-size-fits-all Strategy?
Across the RCTs, a substantial proportion of patients in the culprit-only group experienced no adverse events during follow-up, whereas many patients in the CR group still experienced events, despite having undergone intervention on all angiographically or physiologically significant lesions. For example, in PRAMI, 23% of patients in the culprit-only arm had an adverse event, meaning that 77% remained event-free; in the CR arm, 9% still experienced an event. COMPARE-ACUTE reported similar findings: 79.5% of patients in the culprit-only group remained event-free, whereas 7.8% of those in the CR group still experienced an adverse event. These observations should logically raise questions about the mechanism of benefit of the CR strategy. Specifically, if the concept is that bystander lesions are at risk of precipitating future events, perhaps by virtue of pan-coronary inflammation, and that stenting these lesions can prophylactically interfere with this risk, then would we not expect a much higher proportion of subsequent events to be avoided? Clearly, to test this concept, the inclusion of any revascularisation event that is not driven by ACS in the composite endpoint is flawed.
Given that all nine RCTs show benefit for CR, it would be foolhardy to suggest that this approach is not beneficial, but it is logical to question whether it benefits all patients and all their bystander lesions. Specifically, the variability of the size of the benefit for CR and the driver for that difference allows for the hypothesis that some patients/lesions benefit from prophylactic stenting and that some do not. If we were able to identify more precisely which patients/lesions do obtain outcome benefit from this intervention and which do not, it would be possible to devise a more targeted approach to CR that would yield larger differences between the CR group and the culprit-only group despite less prophylactic PCI. This surely must be the focus for future research in this field.

Beyond a Binary Approach
Given the data presented so far, it seems implausible that all bystander lesions of a certain severity in all STEMI patients require stenting. Given the consistent advantage for CR over culprit-only strategies in current RCTs, despite variability in what drives that benefit, it seems increasingly likely that identifying the specific features of bystander lesions that confer benefit from stenting could pave the way for more selective approaches: targeting only high-risk lesions for PCI while managing low-risk lesions with optimal medical therapy alone. To this end, there are now imaging systems available that show great promise in the identification of the risk of future ischaemic events, and even mortality, in patients with coronary disease. It is, therefore, possible that application of these technologies to patients with STEMI and bystander disease may be able to shed light on which of these patients and their lesions are most likely to cause events and conversely, which lesions are very low risk for this natural history.
Study Outcomes and Driver of Benefit
Study	Primary Endpoint Components	Individual Outcomes	Main Driver of Benefit	 	PRAMI (2013)	Cardiac death, non-fatal MI, refractory angina	CR versus CL only:Cardiac death: 1.7% versus 4.3%Non-fatal MI: 3.0% versus 8.7%Refractory angina: 5.1% versus 13.0%	Refractory angina	 	CvLPRIT (2015)	All-cause death, MI, heart failure, IDR	CR versus CL only:Death: 2.7% versus 6.9%MI: 1.3% versus 2.7%Heart failure: 3.3% versus 6.9%IDR: 5.3% versus 11%	IDR	 	DANAMI-3–PRIMULTI (2015)	All-cause death, reinfarction, IDR	CR versus CL only:All-cause death: 5% versus 4%Non-fatal reinfarction: 5% versus 5%IDR: 5% versus 17%	IDR	 	COMPARE-ACUTE (2017)	Death, MI, any revascularisation, stroke	CR versus CL only:Death: 1.4% versus 1.7%MI: 2.4% versus 4.7%Any revascularisation: 6.1% versus 17.5%Stroke: 0.0% versus 0.7%	Any revascularisation	 	COMPLETE (2019)	CV death or MI;CV death, MI or IDR	CR versus CL only:Cardiovascular death: 2.9% versus 3.2%MI: 5.4% versus 7.9%IDR: 1.4% versus 7.9%	Reduction in MI	 	FLOWER-MI (2021)	Death, MI, unplanned hospitalisation for revascularisation	CR in all patients (FFR-guided versus angiography-guided):Death: 1.5% versus 1.7%Non-fatal MI: 3.1% versus 1.7%Urgent revascularisation: 2.6% versus 1.9%	No significant difference	 	FRAME-AMI (2023)	Death, MI, repeat revascularisation	CR in all patients (FFR-guided versus angiography-guided):	 	Death: 2.1% versus 8.5%	 	MI: 2.5% versus 8.9%	 	Repeat revascularisation 4.3% versus 9%	Death	 	FIRE (2023)	 	(35% STEMI patients only)	Death, MI, stroke, IDR at 1 year	Physiology-guided CR versus CL only:Death: 9.2% versus 12.8%MI: 4.4% versus 7%Stroke: 1.7% versus 1.0%IDR: 4.3% versus 6.8%	Death overall (not stratified by STEMI versus NSTEMI)	 	Full REVASC (2024) (91% STEMI patients, 9% high-risk NSTEMI)	Death, MI or unplanned revascularisation	FFR-guided CR versus CL only:Death: 9.9% versus 9.3%,MI: 8.0% versus 7.5%Unplanned revascularisation: 9.2% versus 11.7%	No significant difference
CL = culprit lesion; CR = complete revascularisation; CV = cardiovascular; FFR = fractional flow reserve; IDR = ischaemia-driven revascularisation; NSTEMI = non-ST segment elevation MI; STEMI = ST-elevation MI.

Tools for Personalised Risk Stratification of Future Acute Coronary Syndrome Events

CT Coronary Angiography-based Predictive Tools
It has become widely recognised that there are high-risk plaque features associated with future ACS events. These adverse plaque characteristics (APCs) on CT coronary angiography (CTCA) include positive remodelling, low-attenuation plaque, napkin-ring sign and spotty calcification. These APCs are associated with established intravascular ultrasound and histological features of advanced atherosclerotic plaque and thin-cap fibroatheroma, both of which are risk factors for future ACS. Based on a wide range of evidence from studies, including ROMICAT II, SCOT-HEART and PROMISE, lesions can be labelled as high-risk plaque by the CAD-RADS 2.0 system when two or more features are present. This stratification tool facilitates the application of aggressive primary prevention strategies in stable patients and the diagnosis and management of ACS patients. The true role of CTCA-derived high-risk plaque labelling is probably still unresolved.

Predictive Models Based on CT-derived Fractional Flow Reserve
FFR derived from CT (FFRCT; HeartFlow) is an imaging tool that uses raw data from standard CTCA plus other clinical data to model coronary blood flow using computational fluid dynamics within an anatomical construction of the coronary anatomy and myocardial mass. This allows for modelling of FFR in all the major coronary vessels, providing an estimate of flow limitation down these vessels in a lesion-specific manner.
Studies Showing the Benefit of CT-derived Fractional Flow Reserve
Study	Design and Population	Comparator	Key Results	 	PLATFORM (2015–16)	Prospective non-randomised trial: 584 patients with suspected CAD	Stratified by diagnostic strategyNon-invasive cohort: usual care versus CTCA ± FFRCTICA cohort: usual care versus CTCA ± FFRCT	ICA cohort: No obstructive disease in 73.3% (usual care) versus 12.4% (experimental), p<0.001	 	ICA cohort: ICA cancelled in 60% of CTCA/FFRCT group	 	ICA cohort: cost benefit US$12,145 (usual care) versus US$8,127 (experimental), p<0.0001	 	Very low MACE rates in all groups (0–1%)	 	ADVANCE (2020)	Prospective registry: 5,083 patients with suspected CAD	All patients had CTCA ± FFRCT Clinical decision-making before versus after FFRCT result	Change in management plan: 66.9%	 	Of patients recommended for revascularisation after FFRCT, 68.9% were revascularised	 	Revascularisation occurred in 38.4% of patients with FFRCT ≤0.80 versus 5.6% with FFRCT >0.80 (p<0.001)	 	MACE occurred in 43 patients with FFRCT ≤0.80 versus 12 patients with FFRCT >0.80 (RR 1.81; 95% CI [0.96–3.43]; p=0.06)	 	MACE occurred with lower mean (±SD) FFRCT values (0.70 ± 0.13 versus 0.74 ± 0.12; p=0.02)	 	Patients with FFRCT ≤0.80 had significantly higher rates of CV death or MI (0.8 versus 0.2%; p=0.01)	 	FISH&CHIPS (2023)	Observational cohort study: 90,573 patients with suspected CAD	Pre-versus post-FFRCT implementation	Post-FFRCT group:Lower CV mortality (1.1% versus 1.3%; OR 0.88; p=0.03)No significant difference in all-cause mortality or MIFewer ICA (9.9% versus 11.6%; OR 0.84; p<0.001)Higher rates of PCI (5.6% versus 5.2%; OR 1.07; p=0.02)Fewer downstream non-invasive cardiac tests (14.7% versus 17.8%, p<0.001)	 	FORECAST (2020)	RCT: 1,400 patients with stable angina	Usual care versus CTCA ± FFRCT	Resource use: £1,491 (usual care) versus £1,605 (experimental); mean difference +£114 (95% CI [-£112, £337]; p=0.10)	 	22% fewer ICA in experimental group (p=0.01)	 	MACCE rate: 10.6% (usual care) versus 10.2% (experimental) (p=0.8)	 	PRECISE (2023)	RCT: 2,103 patients with stable angina	Usual care versus precision strategy including FFRCT	ICA without observed CAD, death or MI: 11.3% (usual care) versus 4.2% (experimental group)	 	ICA without obstructive CAD: 10.2% (usual care) versus 2.6% (experimental)	 	Revascularisation rate 5.2% (usual care) versus 9.2% (experimental)
CAD = coronary artery disease; CTCA = CT coronary angiography; CV = cardiovascular; FFRCT = CT-derived fractional flow reserve; ICA = invasive coronary angiography; MACE = major adverse cardiovascular events; PCI = percutaneous coronary intervention; RCT = randomised controlled trial.
FFRCT has been progressively validated with reference to invasive coronary angiography and intracoronary pressure wire-derived FFR in the DISCOVER-FLOW, DeFACTO and NXT studies. The diagnostic performance of FFRCT is robust, with a pooled sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 72% relative to invasive FFR in one meta-analysis that included 18 studies (1,535 patients). The clinical value of FFRCT has now been tested in a series of studies (including PLATFORM, ADVANCE, FISH&CHIPS) and two randomised trials (FORECAST and PRECISE), as summarised in Table 3. These studies have presented some consistent outcomes for the use of FFRCT in clinical practice that can be summarised as follows: the use of FFRCT is associated with a lower rate of other tests, including invasive coronary angiography, as well as a lower rate of invasive coronary angiography that demonstrates no significant atheroma, is cost neutral overall (or cost saving in some subgroups) and this is all achieved with no excess in adverse events, such as MI or death.
There are limited data available that use FFRCT in the context of STEMI. In XPECT-MI, baseline FFRCT was performed in 38 STEMI patients within 10 days of the index event, and intracoronary FFR was measured in NIRAs at baseline and at follow-up (45–60 days after STEMI). FFRCT showed a closer correlation with the follow-up (versus baseline) invasive FFR (sensitivity 100.0%, specificity 90.0%). These data imply that FFRCT soon after an index STEMI may be a better assessment of the functional significance of NIRA lesions than early invasive FFR.

Artificial Intelligence-enabled Quantitative Coronary Plaque and Haemodynamic Analysis
Invasive intracoronary imaging studies, most notably PROSPECT I and PROSPECT II, have demonstrated that vessel- and lesion-specific characteristics predict future coronary events. In these studies, a plaque burden ≥70%, minimum luminal area ≤4 mm² and the presence of thin-cap fibroatheroma were independent predictors of subsequent events. These invasive findings provide a foundation for contemporary non-invasive approaches, such as artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled quantitative plaque and haemodynamic analysis, which seek to identify similar high-risk features without the need for intracoronary imaging. The original EMERALD study retrospectively assessed the CTCA characteristics of 72 patients who were admitted with an ACS event and who had undergone CTCA up to 2 years before that admission. The study compared APCs and newly defined adverse haemodynamic characteristics (AHCs; including FFRCT, change in FFRCT across the lesion (ΔFFRCT), wall shear stress and axial plaque stress) in both culprit and non-culprit lesions to determine whether there was a dose–response relationship between these factors and high-risk lesions. Not only did culprit lesions have a greater degree of stenosis and longer lesion length, but they also exhibited more APCs and AHCs.
Subsequently, and based on the findings of EMERALD, the EMERALD II study enrolled 351 patients with ACS who had also had a recent CTCA and used a newly designed AI model to further refine the risk stratification of lesions according to plaque characteristics, including APC and AHC and other clinical data. The best-performing AI-enabled quantitative coronary plaque and haemodynamic analysis (AI-QCPHA) features identified in the derivation cohort were ΔFFRCT, total plaque volume, low-attenuation plaque volume and averaged percentage total myocardial blood flow. ΔFFRCT was the single most impactful predictor. The area under the receiver operator characteristic curve increased from 0.78 using CTCA characteristics alone to 0.84 with the addition of AI-QCPHA features, and, again, this was associated with the number of characteristics in the model.
EMERALD II provides a persuasive proof of concept for future research strategies that aim to identify lesion-specific risk based on plaque characteristics. In the context of STEMI, where non-culprit lesions are often judged solely based on their visual appearance, such AI-guided assessment could potentially shift CR from a largely empirical approach to a more risk-guided, precision strategy.

Coronary Artery-specific Inflammation as a Biomarker for Risk: The Fat Attenuation Index
The development of coronary atheroma is the product of a complex vascular inflammatory pathological pathway. Epicardial adipose tissue around coronary arteries is involved in a dynamic interaction with the underlying vessel by releasing proinflammatory adipocytokines that influence the adjacent vascular wall. High levels of vascular inflammation have been shown to be associated with suppressed differentiation of perivascular fat cells and reduced lipid accumulation; these factors modify the composition of perivascular adipose tissue. The result is a higher water content and lower lipid content in perivascular adipose tissue; this can be detected on CT imaging and has recently been described as the perivascular fat attenuation index (FAI). FAI represents a novel CTCA-derived biomarker that can quantify metabolic changes in perivascular adipose tissue, hence representing a surrogate for coronary inflammation.
The initial promising validation experiment demonstrated that FAI values were significantly lower in individuals without coronary artery disease than in those with atherosclerosis, and this was independent of conventional risk factors as well as plaque burden and calcification. Follow-on experiments demonstrated an association between higher FAI and plaque with high metabolic activity and inflammation, as indicated by the uptake of 18F-sodium fluoride on PET imaging, and intravascular ultrasound features of high-risk plaque. An association between FAI and significant vessel flow limitation as assessed by FFR has also been demonstrated.
Based on the extensive validation data, FAI was then tested in clinical studies as a potential imaging biomarker for cardiovascular risk. In the CRISP-CT study, FAI was a strong and independent predictor of both cardiac and all-cause mortality in two large cohorts of patients (derivation and validation) undergoing CTCA. In both populations, high FAI values in all three coronary vessels were significantly associated with the risk of all-cause mortality. Specifically, in the derivation cohort (n=1,872), a high perivascular FAI around the right coronary artery (RCA) was independently associated at a median of 6 years with a significantly higher risk of both all-cause mortality (adjusted HR 2.55; 95% CI [1.65–3.92]; p<0.0001) and cardiac mortality (adjusted HR 9.04; 95% CI [3.35–24.40]; p<0.0001). The validation cohort included 2,040 patients and a median follow-up of 4.5 years, and reported similar associations between FAI and both all-cause mortality (HR 3.69; 95% CI [2.26–6.02]; p<0.0001) and cardiac mortality (HR 5.62; 95% CI [2.90–10.88]; p<0.0001). However, the association with cardiac mortality was statistically significant only for the RCA and left anterior descending artery, and not for the left circumflex artery. The FAI was restricted to the RCA, which was used as the reference vessel for subsequent analysis. In both populations, FAI improved the area under the curve for prognostic discrimination. This RCA FAI represents a potentially powerful tool with which to risk stratify for mortality.
Subsequently, the ORFAN study has added to the evidence that FAI may have a future role in screening for cardiovascular mortality. ORFAN was a multicentre UK cohort study that evaluated the prognostic value of FAI, using an AI-enabled, CTCA-derived risk stratification tool in patients undergoing CTCA. An initial observational cohort (Cohort A) included 40,091 patients and was used to quantify major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), including cardiac death at a median of 2.7 years. In ORFAN, although 81.1% of patients (n=32,533) had no obstructive coronary artery disease, they nevertheless accounted for 63.7% of cardiac deaths (1,118/1,754) and 66.3% of total MACE (2,857 of 4,307). This illustrates the potential flaw associated with assessment of risk based solely on anatomical parameters such as atheroma burden.
In a nested cohort of 3,393 patients, elevated FAI scores across the three major coronary arteries (left anterior descending artery, left circumflex artery, RCA) independently predicted cardiac death and MACE at a median of 7.7 years, even among patients with no or minimal plaque. Specifically, the presence of one or more ‘inflamed’ artery(ies), defined as FAI >75th percentile, carried a nearly 30-fold increased risk of cardiac mortality and a 13-fold higher risk of MACE compared with low FAI vessels. Furthermore, the availability of AI-risk FAI resulted in a change in management in 45% of 744 real-world patients, manifested as statin initiation, dose escalation or the addition of anti-inflammatory therapies.
These properties make both AI-QCPHA and AI-risk FAI attractive tools with which to risk assess STEMI patients and vessels in those with disease in NIRA.

Potential Future Application of AI-driven Biomarkers for Identification of High-risk Bystander Disease in Patients with STEMI
The all-or-nothing approach to CR used in previous RCTs has clearly demonstrated benefit. However, the current guideline-directed strategy for universal CR places a significant burden on cath lab time, resources and operator workload, without equipping interventionists with the tools to identify which patients or lesions stand to benefit most. Emerging technologies that enable detailed imaging and risk profiling may allow us to personalise bystander revascularisation. After all, how do we know that bystander revascularisation must be complete in every individual? A more selective patient- or lesion-specific approach could ultimately achieve equivalent or even superior clinical outcomes with less intervention.
The PICNIC study (NCT06506448) is investigating whether we can identify markers for patient-, vessel- and lesion-level risk in a STEMI population with bystander coronary disease after culprit primary PCI. During the index admission, blood tests will be taken for prespecified inflammatory markers and a CTCA will be performed, which will be used to apply AI-QCPHA and FAI analyses. Patients will be followed for 24 months for a composite endpoint (all-cause mortality, cardiac arrest, ACS, additional revascularisation by coronary artery bypass grafting or PCI, rehospitalisation for angina, heart failure, stroke and ventricular tachyarrhythmia at 24 months) and an association sought between clinical and AI-CTCA parameters and clinical events. We hypothesise that the risk associated with non-culprit lesions is highly variable and that an AI model incorporating clinical and AI-QCPHA and FAI parameters will be able to risk stratify patients and lesions. The concept of AI-guided CTCA for all STEMI patients with multivessel disease is appealing but may inevitably raise logistical and capacity challenges for cardiac CT services. However, PICNIC is designed to establish this proof of concept, which, if successful, may lay the foundation for a new generation of trials focused on precision targeting of bystander revascularisation.
Extent, location, and clinical significance of non-infarct-related coronary artery disease among patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction.
Temporal changes and institutional variation in use of percutaneous coronary intervention for ST-elevation myocardial infarction with multivessel coronary artery disease in the United States: an NCDR research to practice project.
Randomized trial of preventive angioplasty in myocardial infarction.
Randomized trial of complete versus lesion-only revascularization in patients undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention for STEMI and multivessel disease: the CvLPRIT trial.
Complete revascularisation versus treatment of the culprit lesion only in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction and multivessel disease (DANAMI-3-PRIMULTI): an open-label, randomised controlled trial.
Fractional flow reserve-guided multivessel angioplasty in myocardial infarction.
Complete revascularization with multivessel PCI for myocardial infarction.
Multivessel PCI guided by FFR or angiography for myocardial infarction.
Fractional flow reserve versus angiography-guided strategy in acute myocardial infarction with multivessel disease: a randomized trial.
Complete or culprit-only PCI in older patients with myocardial infarction.
FFR-guided complete or culprit-only PCI in patients with myocardial infarction.
2023 ESC guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes.
2025 ACC/AHA/ACEP/NAEMSP/SCAI guideline for the management of patients with acute coronary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines.
Long-term follow-up of complete versus lesion-only revascularization in STEMI and multivessel disease: the CvLPRIT trial.
10-Year outcome of complete or infarct artery-only revascularization in STEMI with multivessel disease: the DANAMI-3-PRIMULTI study.
Unreported exclusion and sampling bias in interpretation of randomized controlled trials in patients with STEMI.
CAD-RADS™ 2.0 – 2022 Coronary Artery Disease-Reporting and Data System: an expert consensus document of the Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography (SCCT), the American College of Cardiology (ACC), the American College of Radiology (ACR), and the North America Society of Cardiovascular Imaging (NASCI).
High-risk plaque detected on coronary CT angiography predicts acute coronary syndromes independent of significant stenosis in acute chest pain: results from the ROMICAT-II trial.
Coronary artery plaque characteristics associated with adverse outcomes in the SCOT-HEART study.
Use of high-risk coronary atherosclerotic plaque detection for risk stratification of patients with stable chest pain: a secondary analysis of the PROMISE randomized clinical trial.
Coronary CT angiography-derived fractional flow reserve.
Diagnosis of ischemia-causing coronary stenoses by noninvasive fractional flow reserve computed from coronary computed tomographic angiograms. Results from the prospective multicenter DISCOVER-FLOW (Diagnosis of Ischemia-Causing stenoses Obtained via Noninvasive Fractional Flow Reserve) study.
Noninvasive fractional flow reserve derived from computed tomography angiography for coronary lesions of intermediate stenosis severity: results from the DeFACTO study.
Diagnostic performance of noninvasive fractional flow reserve derived from coronary computed tomography angiography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT trial (Analysis of Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angiography: Next Steps).
Meta-analysis of diagnostic performance of coronary computed tomography angiography, computed tomography perfusion, and computed tomography-fractional flow reserve in functional myocardial ischemia assessment versus invasive fractional flow reserve.
Clinical outcomes of fractional flow reserve by computed tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic strategies vs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary artery disease: the prospective longitudinal trial of FFRCT: outcome and resource impacts study.
1-year outcomes of FFRCT-guided care in patients with suspected coronary disease: the PLATFORM study.
1-Year impact on medical practice and clinical outcomes of FFRCT: the ADVANCE registry.
CT FFR in stable heart disease and coronary computed tomographic angiography helps improve patient care and societal costs.
Fractional flow reserve derived from computed tomography coronary angiography in the assessment and management of stable chest pain: the FORECAST randomized trial.
Comparison of an initial risk-based testing strategy vs usual testing in stable symptomatic patients with suspected coronary artery disease: the PRECISE randomized clinical trial.
Coronary CT-based FFR in patients with acute myocardial infarction might predict follow-up invasive FFR: the XPECT-MI study.
A prospective natural-history study of coronary atherosclerosis.
Identification of vulnerable plaques and patients by intracoronary near-infrared spectroscopy and ultrasound (PROSPECT II): a prospective natural history study.
Identification of high-risk plaques destined to cause acute coronary syndrome using coronary computed tomographic angiography and computational fluid dynamics.
Artificial intelligence-enabled quantitative coronary plaque and hemodynamic analysis for predicting acute coronary syndrome.
Pericoronary fat attenuation index – a new imaging biomarker and its diagnostic and prognostic utility: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Detecting human coronary inflammation by imaging perivascular fat.
Peri-coronary adipose tissue density is associated with 18F-sodium fluoride coronary uptake in stable patients with high-risk plaques.
CT attenuation of pericoronary adipose tissue in normal versus atherosclerotic coronary segments as defined by intravascular ultrasound.
Serial change of perivascular fat attenuation index after statin treatment: insights from a coronary CT angiography follow-up study.
Non-invasive detection of coronary inflammation using computed tomography and prediction of residual cardiovascular risk (the CRISP CT study): a post-hoc analysis of prospective outcome data.
Inflammatory risk and cardiovascular events in patients without obstructive coronary artery disease: the ORFAN multicentre, longitudinal cohort study.