Grasping at water: a gap‐oriented approach to bridging shortfalls in freshwater biodiversity conservation
ABSTRACT
Freshwater biodiversity is the fastest declining part of the global biota, threatened by multiple stressors including habitat loss and fragmentation, climate change, invasive species, water pollution, and abstraction by humans. A multitude of recent agenda‐setting publications have pointed out key objectives and goals for addressing this freshwater biodiversity crisis, but important gaps must be overcome to reach ambitious conservation targets. In this perspective, we complement these high‐level papers in freshwater conservation by highlighting important gaps in knowledge, governance, and implementation. This gap‐oriented approach is designed to facilitate meaningful action by highlighting missing ‘pieces’ in the conservation process, and their connection to existing and emerging solutions in the literature. We derive 13 overarching gaps from a conference session and informal synthesis of recent literature in freshwater biodiversity conservation to catalyse research, advocacy, and action to meet freshwater goals for the post‐2020 Kunming–Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF). Key gaps include inventory data on global freshwater biodiversity, collating and mobilizing conservation evidence in practice, improving coordination of ecological governance at scale —including within and across catchments—and navigating trade‐offs between economic development, resource consumption, and priorities for freshwater biodiversity. Finally, we apply this gap‐oriented approach to key language describing GBF goals for freshwater biodiversity conservation, and point out existing and emerging solutions which may help address important gaps. Major themes that address multiple gaps include the use of Nature‐based Solutions and Other Effective Area‐based Conservation Measures (OECMs), navigation of water management trade‐offs between human and environmental needs, co‐production of knowledge with Indigenous and local people and other stakeholders, integration of conservation research and action between aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, and funding and policy mechanisms to facilitate conservation action and support meaningful monitoring of conservation evidence across hydrological scales.

INTRODUCTION
Water is essential for life and central to many of the most daunting sustainability challenges of the 21st century (Rosa et al., ; van Vliet et al., ). The conservation of biodiversity in fresh water, the most threatened realm of life on Earth, remains prominent among these, with catastrophic declines across taxa, extensive habitat degradation and impairments in ecosystem services (Barrett et al., ; He et al., ; Albert et al., ). Although decades of excellent scholarship have identified the major threats to freshwater biodiversity as well as the urgent conservation needs of these ecosystems (Dudgeon et al., ; Strayer & Dudgeon, ; Reid et al., ), insufficient progress has been made in halting the trends of decline and in making freshwater biodiversity conservation more effective (Acreman et al., ; Erős, Hermoso & Langhans, ). There have been multiple calls for simultaneously managing fresh water for the benefit of people and nature (Postel & Richter, ; Arthington et al., ; Anderson et al., ) and for integrative approaches to freshwater biodiversity conservation considering its value for all life (Geist, ; Finlayson, Arthington & Pittock, ), and a multitude of recent, rigorous frameworks and priorities point to new pathways for safeguarding freshwater life in a post‐2020 conservation paradigm, including systematic identification of research needs, enabling factors, and actions to overcome barriers to implementation (Tickner et al., ; Arthington, ; Harper et al., ; van Rees et al., ; Maasri et al., ; Barouillet et al., ).
The Kunming–Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework [Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), ] sets out two targets (targets 2 and 3) for the restoration, effective conservation, and management of 30% of inland waters by 2030 with emphasis on areas of importance for biodiversity and ecosystem services. Accomplishing this goal for inland waters requires a bold new agenda of activities to restore and conserve freshwater biodiversity (Tickner et al., ; Albert et al., ). A comprehensive, integrated and more effective approach to sustainable water management and freshwater biodiversity conservation is therefore imperative (Barth, Geist & Cherry, ; Cooke et al., ; Dudgeon & Strayer, ). Herein, we refer to freshwater biodiversity conservation in its broadest sense, comprising the full range of actions from relatively static approaches for maintaining genetic diversity, single species or life stages of species, to restoration and protection of functional habitats, ecological processes and ecosystem resilience.
Amongst the many important contributions of this new wave of thinking on freshwater biodiversity conservation, it is worth considering not only goals, actions and prerogatives, but also the gaps between them; the negative spaces through which biodiversity conservation objectives might fall through the metaphorical cracks. Taoist monks used the properties of water as a metaphor for attaining a state of enlightenment, which cannot be achieved by effort alone. Trying actively to grasp and hold water, it runs easily between our fingers, slips away, and is lost. Accommodating the fluidity and mutability of water by cupping the hands instead, it may be contained with little effort or strain. This may be a useful metaphor for approaches to biodiversity conservation (Barmuta, Linke & Turak, ) with profound lessons for the struggle for a liveable and just Anthropocene. Perhaps, similar to cupping one's hands to hold water, a different approach is needed in managing a resource as dynamic as water. This includes problems as complex as protecting freshwater biodiversity in a world of declining water security and navigating increasingly frequent conflicts over water use and access. By neglecting the spaces between the many separate ‘fingers’ of academic disciplines, sectors, and cultures seeking to address these complex issues, we risk that freshwater biodiversity, too, will continue to slip away through the gaps.
Complementing recent agenda‐setting scholarship addressing the freshwater biodiversity crisis, we inventory critical gaps that hinder effective and lasting conservation of freshwater biodiversity. In doing so, we highlight unresolved practical issues, disconnected bodies of knowledge, governance barriers, logistical shortfalls, and understudied topics that, if addressed, could increase the integrity and efficacy of global conservation efforts for freshwater ecosystems. We consider gaps as a finer thematic resolution from broader challenges to the field, with the key advantage that they can be more easily matched with existing and emerging solutions. This perspective paper is founded on an informal review of recent literature, presentations from a special session on freshwater biodiversity conservation at the Freshwater Sciences 2023 conference held in Brisbane, Australia, and subsequent synthesis of gaps and emerging solutions.
We organize these gaps into three major domains (i) Knowledge (ii) Governance and Legislation, and (iii) Implementation, based on common themes in influential papers on adaptive management for conservation and natural resources management (Armitage et al., ; Wyborn et al., ; Dale et al., ; Cooke et al., ). Each of these domains is part of an idealized cycle of knowledge co‐production, action (i.e. implementation) and adaptive decision‐making (Fig. 1). This approach could ideally be developed into a theory of change which can be optimized based on internal feedback loops. For instance, implementation involving stakeholder engagement and associated communication and consultation strategies can directly contribute to well‐informed conservation evidence, with direct adaptation of government‐based conservation planning. Each gap represents a potential stumbling block or limiting factor preventing desired changes necessary to bend the curve for freshwater biodiversity conservation (sensu Tickner et al., ), and bridging such gaps may facilitate the achievement of change.
Major gaps across three domains (Knowledge, Governance and Legislation, Implementation) embedded in the adaptive process of freshwater biodiversity conservation, which forms the conceptual basis of this synthetic review.

KNOWLEDGE GAPS
Two decades ago, Dudgeon et al. called for research to document, appreciate and conserve freshwater biodiversity. Although a vast and expanding literature has since accumulated, important gaps in foundational knowledge and between key disciplines continue to constrain effective conservation and restoration of biodiversity in the freshwater realm (e.g. Geist, ; Finlayson et al., ; Barouillet et al., ; Table 1).
Summary and relevant citations for knowledge gaps in freshwater biodiversity conservation.
Gap	Key points	Citations	 	BiodiversityInventory	• Biodiversity inventories are lacking for many freshwater ecosystems	Lynch et al. ; Jähnig et al. 	 	• Certain geographical regions such as Africa and South America are under‐represented	Belle et al. 	 	• Traditional and local ecological knowledge is seldom sought nor integrated in biodiversity inventories	Jackson et al.; Souther et al. 	 	Natural drivers and ecological processes	• Integrated river–riparian–floodplain ecosystem models with transferable relationships are lacking	Wymore et al. 	 	• Prominent gaps in functional geomorphic processes and hydro‐ecological science	Yarnell & Thoms 	 	• Poor understanding of terrestrial, freshwater and marine connectivity hinders effective conservation	Thieme et al.; Franklin et al. 	 	Stressors	• Failure to address the major causal drivers of biodiversity decline inhibits ecosystem recovery and conservation	Tickner et al.;Obura et al. 	 	• Ecological consequences of small dams and hydropower developments are still poorly understood	Buchanan et al.; Zaidel et al.; Knott et al. 	 	• Emerging threats (engineered nanomaterials, microplastics, pharmaceuticals), salinization and artificial light at night) are poorly understood	Cunillera‐Montcusí et al.; Hölker et al. 	 	• Weak understanding of multiple‐stressor effects can lead to inappropriate management practices and unexpected outcomes	Sinnatamby et al.; Birk et al. 	 	• Effects of climate change and multiple stressor interactions on freshwater biodiversity are neglected, weakening opportunities to minimize biodiversity losses	Capon et al.; Wild et al.; Dudgeon & Strayer 	 	Conservation evidence	• Governments, practitioners and the public need convincing evidence that conservation policies and practices can effect change	O'Brien et al.; Watson et al. 	 	• Prominent deficiencies in the design, indicators and frequency of protected area evaluations hamper evidence‐based conservation decisions	Acreman et al.; Christie et al. 	 	• Greater evidence for the efficacy and potential contributions of Other Effective Conservation Measures (OECMs) to freshwater biodiversity conservation is needed	Gurney et al.; Cook 	 	• Evidence is also needed for the freshwater biodiversity conservation benefits of Nature‐based Solutions (NbS), Green Infrastructure, and Natural Infrastructure	van Rees et al. ; Cuenca‐Cambronero et al.

The biodiversity inventory gap
Among the most fundamental knowledge gaps in freshwater biodiversity conservation is a comprehensive understanding of the species relying on freshwater habitats and their distributions and phenology. Strayer & Dudgeon estimated that 10% of all known species spend some or all of their lifetime in fresh water, an estimate that may well increase over time as neglected habitats are explored, and with greater inclusion of groups that are poorly documented in spite of their diverse ecological functions, utility in ecosystem health monitoring, ecosystem services and societal values [e.g. invertebrates, non‐vascular plants (Jähnig et al., ; Lynch et al., )]. There is also a strong geographical bias in biodiversity inventories with a distinct underrepresentation of Africa, South America, and the tropics in general (e.g. Belle, Stoeckle & Geist, ).
Furthermore, several culturally and economically important ecosystem types remain overlooked in research. For example, intermittent rivers and ephemeral streams and episodic arid‐zone floodplain habitats that cease to flow or dry completely at some point in space and time are the world's most widespread type of lotic ecosystem, and their global extent is increasing annually with climatic drying and human water use (Datry et al., ). However, their biodiversity and ecosystem processes are understudied and largely unprotected in many regions (Steward, Datry & Langhans, ).
Groundwater‐dependent ecosystems are another neglected ecosystem type despite holding the largest volume of water of all freshwater biomes and being vital sources of freshwater for human consumption and ecosystem services (Stewart‐Koster et al., ; Saccò et al., ). In spite of significant research on hyporheic biota and cave stygofauna, fundamental knowledge of their biodiversity is limited (Hose et al., ); this is particularly true for aquatic microfauna (Mueller et al., ). For example, subterranean biodiversity hotspots and unique cave faunas (including the olm salamander Proteus anguinus, the world's largest cave amphibian) in the Western Balkans are not captured in the European Biodiversity Strategy for 2030 (Fišer et al., ).
Although groundwater‐dependent springs are recognized as important reservoirs of relict lifeforms in many countries, they are poorly protected (Cantonati et al., ). Wetlands in general have been well studied and are prominent in global conservation agendas (e.g., the Ramsar Convention). Yet non‐floodplain palustrine (forest wetlands, peat bogs, marshes and fens), especially small or isolated ones, have been relatively neglected despite their extent, biodiversity value and ecosystem services (Bao et al., ; Chen et al., ). Globally, more than half of palustrine wetlands are external to river floodplains and coastal habitats (Lane et al., ).
The knowledge gaps outlined in these examples are indicative of a much wider deficit of biodiversity inventories and appreciation of ecosystem services to inform freshwater science, restoration, conservation and sustainable use of the world's freshwater ecosystems. Furthermore, most biodiversity inventories exclude or overlook the knowledge of Indigenous people and local communities or include such information only as an afterthought (Souther, Colombo & Lyndon, ), neglecting non‐Western perspectives and epistemologies (Anderson et al., ; Jackson et al., ).

The natural drivers and ecological processes gap
Effective ecosystem restoration and biodiversity conservation depend upon a credible foundation of scientific, stakeholder and traditional knowledge, ecological process understanding and a capacity to model, predict and evaluate ecological and societal outcomes from natural processes, human pressures and conservation actions (Cooke et al., ; Barouillet et al., ). A rigorous understanding of the drivers of environmental change in freshwater ecosystems, and the ecological processes within them that sustain biodiversity, is a critical knowledge gap inhibiting more effective conservation.
Rivers, riparian systems and floodplains, wetlands, and lakes have been studied for decades yet there remain major gaps in quantifying relationships between the natural drivers and processes that sustain their biodiversity and ecosystem services in space and time (Wymore et al., ; Finlayson et al., ). Despite massive efforts to quantify the role of water regimes in driving structure and function in freshwater ecosystems (Poff, Tharme & Arthington, ; Yarnell et al., ), prominent knowledge gaps remain. Examples include interactions between river flow and sediment regimes, erosion and deposition processes and their consequences for channel dynamism, habitat structure and patterns of connectivity to riparian zones and floodplains (Yarnell & Thoms, ). Flow‐related connectivity is essential to many species and ecosystem processes in river networks (Pander, Mueller & Geist, ), and to wider linkages with other freshwater systems, and the terrestrial and marine realms (Thieme et al., ). For example, hydrological connectivity governs the export of materials and energy, organism movements across the freshwater–marine interface, and the maintenance of estuarine and within‐channel habitat heterogeneity (Chilton et al., ). Yet poor understanding and neglect of longitudinal, lateral, vertical and temporal connectivity patterns and meta‐population processes (Cid et al., ) continue to limit the effectiveness of ecosystem restoration and conservation (Leal et al., ). Knowledge of drivers and ecological processes gained via standard approaches can be supplemented by citizen science and the accumulated knowledge of local and Indigenous people, yet such knowledge is commonly either discounted or sought after in ways that do not respect cultural values and data sovereignty (Jackson et al., ; McDowell et al., ).

The stressors gap
Freshwater ecosystems are disturbed, degraded and destroyed by anthropogenic activities and their byproducts (Reid et al., ; Tickner et al., ). Understanding the stressors and drivers of biodiversity decline in freshwater systems is therefore critical for their conservation. The major knowledge gaps around stressors are (i) insufficient basic knowledge of novel and emerging threats, and (ii) applied knowledge on how different combinations of stressors interact, and how best to manage them. Our failure to recognize and reverse the major drivers of biodiversity decline seriously inhibits ecosystem recovery and conservation (Obura et al., ).
Numerous small dams (1 m to <7.5 m head height) and culverts have cumulative impacts on stream ecology (Mueller, Pander & Geist, ; Geist, ), and present social, economic, and safety risks, yet they are poorly managed relative to large dams (Buchanan et al., ). Depending on the regional context, this is due not only to poor understanding or indifference to ecological damage, but also to lack of incentives, funding and regulatory requirements to address these problems. Irrespective of the reasons, this leads to underestimation of stream fragmentation, habitat loss, effects on stream temperature, water quality, sediment regime and organismal movements (Zaidel et al., ). Furthermore, the ecological consequences of hydropower developments beyond their effects on economically important fish species are also poorly understood (Geist, ) and insufficiently accommodated in policy and water management practice, despite growing knowledge on the topic (Pfeifle, Kennedy & Palmer, ). Emerging threats (Reid et al., ) include new contaminants (engineered nanomaterials, microplastics, pharmaceuticals; Sumpter, Johnson & Runnalls, ), acceleration of anthropogenic salinization (Cunillera‐Montcusí et al., ) and artificial light at night, which can affect diverse behavioural responses and cause physiological harm even at low light levels (Kühne et al., ; Hölker et al., ). Interactions among these stressors, and with the multifarious impacts of climate change, warrant far more attention and investigations to mitigate ecological damage (Dudgeon & Strayer, ).
Beyond the basic knowledge gaps around novel stressors and their impacts, interactions between multiple stressors and their prioritization for management represent a second form of applied knowledge gap. Most catchments and their waterbodies are exposed to multiple simultaneous threats, each exerting varying types and levels of pressure on species, communities and ecosystems across spatial and temporal scales (Ormerod et al., ; Craig et al., ). Urbanization is one of the most pervasive multiple‐stressor syndromes, with serious consequences for freshwater biodiversity (Üblacker et al., ). Although scientific studies have produced some management guidance to mitigate the impacts of urbanization (e.g. limiting impervious catchment cover to 10% or less; Stanfield & Kilgour, ), the interactions of many smaller landscape modifications made by individual property owners, summed over large spatial scales, can amount to large cumulative impacts on watersheds. Multiple co‐occurring threats and interactions can lead to additive, synergistic, and even reversal effects. For example, Wild, Nagel & Geist point to the underestimated synergistic impacts of increased fine sediment, temperature, and low flow on egg survival of riverine fishes.
Limited understanding of the types, locations, intensity and interactions of environmental stressors, against a background of variation in natural drivers, can lead to inappropriate management practices and unexpected outcomes (Sinnatamby et al., ). There remain huge gaps in the ‘strategic portfolios of measures’ (Tickner et al., , p. 338) that could be transferred and applied to systems with similar combinations of stress. Climate change, itself a complex mix of stressors, already compounds multiple‐stressor syndromes by altering river flow, flooding and drought regimes, while rising temperatures drive higher evaporation rates, water scarcity, changes in water quality and aquatic habitat loss (Sabater et al., ; Capon, Stewart‐Koster & Bunn, ; Wild et al., ). Disentangling multiple stressors and deciding which particular stresses can be alleviated (and in what order of priority and feasibility) in surface and groundwater systems is a complex process calling for strong guiding principles, interactive stressor–response models and targeted solutions based on available management options (Craig et al., ; Birk et al., ).

The conservation evidence gap
Evidence‐based practice, wherein researchers collate and act upon the results and impacts of conservation interventions, is lacking throughout much of the conservation sector (Sutherland & Wordley, ) but will be essential to safeguarding freshwater biodiversity (van Rees et al., ). Conservation evidence is vital to make best use of available resources, and to motivate practitioners, funders and policymakers with proof of efficacy (Cooke et al., ; O'Brien et al., ; Watson et al., ). Furthermore, it permits large‐scale syntheses and meta‐analyses, which protect against the influence of poorly designed studies or limited sample sizes that could otherwise lead to costly failures (Reid et al., ).
Protected areas are an illustrative example of the conservation evidence gap in freshwater systems. Evidence of their effectiveness in conserving freshwater biodiversity is patchy and poorly documented (Hermoso et al., ; Finlayson et al., ). A recent evaluation found that only 51% of 75 case studies (from >2,800 publications) contained quantitative evidence of biodiversity benefits in protected areas compared to similar unprotected areas or the same area before designation; the remainder recorded neutral or negative outcomes (Acreman et al., ). This study and others reveal prominent deficiencies in the design, indicators, and frequency of protected area effectiveness evaluations (Geist & Hawkins, ; Christie et al., ). Evidence gaps around protected areas stem from inadequate or inappropriate control or reference systems, few applications of Before–After–Control–Impact (BACI) designs, and limited recognition of time‐lagged population responses and community outcomes in highly variable systems (Turak et al., ; van Rees et al., ). For example, in the case of fishes, it can take decades for species with complex life cycles to show population responses (Pander, Winter & Geist, ). Furthermore, limited support for monitoring the outcomes of conservation actions, and lack of reporting and documentation of unsuccessful interventions increases the risk of repeated failures (Geist, ).
Conservation evidence is especially important for emerging and high‐priority conservation themes like Other Effective Area‐Based Conservation Measures (OECMs) and Nature‐based Solutions (NbS), both of which may play a large role in meeting the ambitious goals of initiatives like 30 × 30 (CBD, ) or half‐Earth (Wilson, ), which call for 30% and 50% of Earth's sea and land areas to be protected, respectively. OECMs (e.g. pastoral lands, fisheries‐management areas and Indigenous territories) provide opportunities to strengthen biodiversity conservation alongside formal protected area designations where land and water management objectives align with conservation goals (Finlayson et al., ; Alves‐Pinto et al., ; Gurney et al., ), but empirical evidence of their conservation benefits is presently limited (Cook, ). While freshwater NbS like constructed wetlands, levee setbacks, and managed drainage ditches have clear potential to contribute to freshwater biodiversity recovery (reviewed in van Rees et al., ), few cases provide robust causal links between actions and meaningful conservation outcomes such as population recovery or enhanced ecosystem function (Cuenca‐Cambronero et al., ; van Rees et al., ). Importantly, implementation of both OECMs and NbS is slow and uncoordinated, limiting the realization of their anticipated impacts (Chausson et al., ; Cook, ). Deficiencies in empirical evaluations of the effectiveness of these and other conservation interventions hamper coordinated efforts, limiting uptake where mainstream applications are needed, and can result in wasted efforts where significant investments are made without evidence of their efficacy (Christie et al., ; Gurney et al., ; van Rees et al., ). Furthermore, ambiguity in the technical definition of NbS compounds problems with the slow pace of uptake, leading to uncoordinated and inconsistent implementation (Sowińska‐Świerkosz & Garcia, ).
Importantly, the mechanisms driving knowledge creation through conservation evidence (namely a retrospective focus and the use of meta‐analysis or replicated studies) somewhat impede its contributions to this field where interventions are novel (i.e. with few case studies), or where they cover larger spatial scales, giving a less discrete unit of analysis. The former poses a major problem for OECMs and some newer forms of NbS, while the latter may be a broader problem in freshwater systems, where hydrological connectivity and catchment‐level dynamics greatly expand the spatial extent of analysis.

GOVERNANCE AND LEGISLATION GAPS
Effective governance is a primary enabling factor for biodiversity conservation, affecting the equity and efficacy of outcomes and the availability of funding (Armitage, de Loë & Plummer, ; Miller, Agrawal & Roberts, ; Salerno et al., ). To guide and precipitate the necessary conservation action, scientific knowledge must be incorporated into governance practices and structures, whether formally as legislation or informally through cultural norms, community values, and expectations. Governance and policy‐related factors are a prominent part of 21st century frameworks for freshwater biodiversity conservation (Tickner et al., ; van Rees et al., ), but significant gaps remain in bringing the ambitions of such frameworks into reality (Table 2).
Summary and relevant citations for governance and legislation gaps in freshwater biodiversity conservation.
Gap	Key points	Citations	 	Recognition	• Freshwater biota suffer from a ‘public relations crisis’	van Rees; Kalinkat et al. 	 	• Public awareness and education on freshwater biodiversity is poor	Pascual et al. 	 	• Freshwater systems are insufficiently recognized in global policy frameworks and are lumped with terrestrial systems in most policies	van Rees et al.; Cooke et al.; Lynch et al. 	 	• The links between Earth systems (especially water), biodiversity and human well‐being are poorly recognized by decision‐makers and the public	Rockström et al. 	 	• Public under‐appreciation of the scale and rate of biodiversity decline, and difficulty of recovery	Lynch et al. ; Obura et al. 	 	Scales	• Societal and ecological variables behave differently across spatial scales, requiring scale‐specific management	Vörösmarty et al.; Tickner et al. 	 	• Water‐management strategies are not coordinated across hydrological scales	Cooke et al.; Lynch et al. ; Cid et al. 	 	• Governance and legislation do not accommodate multi‐dimensional connectivity, including longitudinal, lateral, vertical, and temporal connectivity, nor metacommunity and population processes in freshwater networks	Cid et al.; Thieme et al. 	 	• Fragmented power across levels of governance and top‐down regulatory requirements reduce flexibility to deal with uncertainty and change	Geist; Ford et al. 	 	Planning	• Present freshwater biodiversity conservation planning manages only for a stationary future; there is a need for more prospective (future‐looking) planning taking climate non‐stationarity and uncertainty into account	Judd et al.; Lynch et al. ; Üblacker et al.; Harvey & Henshaw 	 	• Lack of combined planning of water resource‐oriented and biodiversity‐related objectives	Capon et al. 	 	• New policy frameworks and governance structures will be needed for biodiversity conservation targets to become part of mainstream infrastructure development and climate change mitigation strategies	Barth et al.; Girardin et al.; McKay et al.; van Rees et al. 	 	Local and bottom‐up	• Disparity between top‐down, target‐setting conservation initiatives and bottom‐up local implementation	Vollmer & Harrison; Vollmer et al. 	 	• Top‐down conservation and water‐management practices risk inequitable outcomes, with disenfranchisement of Indigenous people and local communities	IPBES 	 	• Local buy‐in and governance is a crucial factor in successful conservation measures like Other Effective Area‐Based Conservation Measures (OECMs) and environmental flows (e‐flows)	Arthington et al.; Vollmer et al.

The recognition gap
Before environmental priorities can be sustainably and justly managed, their value, threats, and relation to people must be sufficiently recognized by governance actors, including decision‐makers, policymakers, the public, and local stakeholders. This has been a major problem in freshwater conservation due to the fragmented distribution, limited visibility, and pervasive degradation of freshwater biodiversity, which remains poorly recognized by lawmakers and the public (Moravek et al., ). At the level of international governance, the unique needs and threats of freshwater habitats and their biota are neglected by their treatment as either part of the terrestrial or aquatic (along with marine systems) realms in important agenda‐setting documents like previous drafts of the Convention on Biological Diversity (van Rees et al., ; Cooke et al., ; Lynch et al., ); the recognition of inland waters in the new Global Biodiversity Framework may contribute much to alleviating this problem from a top‐down perspective.
At the scale of local or regional governance, scientists highlight a public relations crisis for freshwater biodiversity, which is often less visible to, and recognized by, the public than marine or terrestrial flora and fauna (Kalinkat et al., ; van Rees, ). Specifically, public knowledge of freshwater ecosystems and their biodiversity is poor, and many people remain largely unaware of important fauna and flora and their habitats compared to that in other realms of biodiversity (Pascual et al., ). Poor public recognition of the severity of the problem and the role of society in perpetuating it results in limited support for critically important conservation initiatives like efforts to reduce resource consumption or consider the downstream consequences of development decisions.
More broadly, both decision‐makers and the public are insufficiently aware of the links between ecosystems, biodiversity, and human well‐being (Rockström et al., ; Lynch et al., ; Obura et al., ). While urban ‘blue spaces’ supporting freshwater biodiversity are linked to therapeutic effects on people, emotionally and physically (Völker & Kistemann, ), and many freshwater species are used directly in traditional and modern healthcare practices (Lynch et al., ), public appreciation of these benefits is poor. This lack of awareness makes it difficult to convey the importance of biodiversity conservation and other important measures of environmental sustainability, resulting in legislation reflecting only those aspects of biodiversity which can be exploited to produce market values (Pascual et al., ). A similar lack of awareness around the concept and negative impacts of habitat fragmentation in freshwater systems was highlighted as a key impediment to effective freshwater biodiversity conservation in a recent review on connectivity (Thieme et al., ). Assuming good faith in decision‐makers, this lack of recognition or understanding leads to the prevalence of commercial interests in short‐term material gains, typically for a privileged few, over the sustained well‐being of most of our planet's population, especially marginalized Indigenous and local communities. Arguably, the underlying values driving preferences for material wealth over long‐term ecological sustainability stem at least in part from this disconnect, and better public recognition might make good‐faith decisions perpetuating the status quo increasingly untenable. Coupled with this issue is an underestimation of the scale and rate of biodiversity decline, and the overwhelming degree of ecological change and degradation being brought on by accelerating exploitation in the Anthropocene (Obura et al., ). Without a shared understanding of the gravity of the situation, the extent of its progression, and its present and future consequences for human well‐being, it will be difficult for any amount of scientific knowledge and ingenuity in freshwater biodiversity conservation to make their way into governance and eventually into action.

The scales gap
Decision‐making for water management and biodiversity conservation occurs across multiple jurisdictional, hydrological, and ecological scales, making coordinated governance a major challenge (Tickner et al., ; van Rees et al., ). In the simplest sense, freshwater ecosystems like lakes and rivers often cross between or constitute jurisdictional boundaries among states, counties, and provinces, complicating unified governance. Furthermore, the individuals and activities involved with decision‐making at finer (local or project‐level) scales are very different from those at larger (regional, national, organizational) scales, necessitating different skillsets and (inter‐) disciplinary training (Kaufman & Boxshall, ). Different disciplinary backgrounds, priorities, and governance processes lead to poor communication and process fragmentation, impeding the coordinated action and functioning necessary for system‐wide restoration and conservation (Bell‐James, ; Cooke et al., ). For example, poor coordination among policymakers, management agencies, scientists, and local communities is cited as a major issue disrupting both conservation interventions and monitoring of freshwater systems in India (De & Dwivedi, ).
Differences in problem framing and process among jurisdictional scales can also be counterproductive, as when national‐level policies mandate actions or solutions that are inappropriate for local implementation. For example, in Germany, larger river restoration projects require detailed planning and environmental assessment implementation, sometimes on a level of detail which may need to include the positioning of individual stones in the riverbed (J. Geist, personal observations). As a consequence, the flexibility of restoring ecological processes and their resulting variability can be impaired. Such a scale disconnect between high‐level policies and institutional bodies and local contexts can lead to ineffective implementation and an inability to handle the fundamental uncertainty and potential for unintended consequences inherent to restoration (Ford et al., ).
The scales gap is also detrimental where environmental legislation affecting only small‐scale decision‐making fails to account for larger‐scale ecological and hydrological processes like runoff, river connectivity and metapopulation dynamics (Cid et al., ; Thieme et al., ). While piecemeal, uncoordinated environmental governance may have limited effects on isolated protected areas, the highly networked structure of freshwater metacommunities is negatively affected when neglected by policy (Geist, ; Cid et al., ). For example, failure to account for the impacts of land use on downstream freshwater biodiversity results in a paucity of necessary policy controls to mitigate such hydrologically mediated pressures as nutrient‐laden effluent from agriculture (Pharaoh et al., ).

The conservation planning gap
The magnitude of projected hydrological impacts of climate change, burgeoning demand for water and water‐related infrastructure, and coming paradigm shifts in environmental sustainability necessitate new policy and governance structures to support a future‐looking approach to freshwater biodiversity conservation (Darwall et al., ; Lynch et al., ; van Rees et al., ). Decision‐making processes and supporting legislation are not taking future conditions and uncertainty sufficiently into account (Judd et al., ). Given the inadequacies of the current, largely static approach to freshwater biodiversity conservation, namely via protected areas (Lynch et al., ; Miqueleiz, Ariño & Miranda, ), future efforts may require proactive approaches that take factors like future climate, land use and water demand into account. While scientific research is producing prospective methods and knowledge, this knowledge is not transferring into governance and legislation, preventing necessary conservation action (Kaufman & Boxshall, ).
The prevailing tone of global biodiversity conservation is shifting towards an emphasis on restoration, rewilding, and/or resilience, and balancing societal and ecological goals (Obura et al., ; van Rees et al., ), with ambitious calls for transformative governance and paradigm shifts (IPBES, ; Visseren‐Hamakers et al., ; CBD, ). Governance and legislation will be essential to enable and spur such ambitious and systemic change (Bell‐James, ). Unless governance structures and legal contexts change to encourage and support conservation planning better for a biodiverse future, uncoordinated and piecemeal actions are unlikely to be sufficient.
While the potential for NbS (and related concepts like Green or Natural Infrastructure) to contribute to freshwater biodiversity conservation goals is increasingly recognized (Cuenca‐Cambronero et al., ; van Rees et al., ), the policy and governance capacity to facilitate their development and planning remain a critical need. Major changes in funding allocation, cost–benefit analysis, environmental standards and regulations, and institutional responsibility will be necessary for NbS implementation to provide biodiversity conservation benefits at scale. For example, in the USA, biodiversity per se is not easily accounted for as a useful co‐benefit of infrastructure development, leading to a systemic under‐valuation of green infrastructure projects despite their many advantages (McKay et al., ; van Rees et al., ; Chambers et al., ).

The local and bottom‐up gap
Prevailing practices in environmental governance and conservation policy result in largely static, technocratic and top‐down approaches to conservation planning and prioritization (Büscher & Fletcher, ; Sullivan, Manfredo & Teel, ). This creates a substantial governance gap between scientific experts, large‐scale decision‐makers, and local communities. This is an especially large concern for freshwater biodiversity, given the importance of watersheds to local communities and the many scales at which water is managed (see Section III.2). While conservation initiatives may come from academic authorities and higher‐level governing bodies, conservation and sustainability issues often manifest locally and are place‐based, requiring a nuanced and sensitive approach (Vollmer & Harrison, ; Vollmer et al., ). Conservation organizations and higher governance authorities typically do not engage with or understand local politics and culture, undermining the efficacy of conservation solutions and creating risks for perpetuating social inequities and environmental injustice (Vähäkari et al., ; Ford et al., ). This is an especially large concern with regard to Indigenous people, whose water‐management practices and ecological knowledge are often neglected and marginalized, but are extremely relevant to place‐based and shared‐use conservation approaches (Parsons & Fisher, ; O'Donnell et al., ).
Local governance and bottom‐up approaches are an essential and mostly missing piece to mainstreaming OECMs and NbS, which require and greatly benefit from local awareness, participation, and engagement (Martin, Fischer & McMorran, ; van Rees et al., ). Dourado, Rallings & Viers and Arthington et al. both cite poor integration with formal and informal local governance systems as a major obstacle to wider and more successful environmental flow implementation, noting the importance of making conservation actions relevant and meaningful to local communities. Where the public is unaware of how and why environmental management decisions are being made, conservation projects are less likely to succeed and unintended consequences are a greater risk (Waylen et al., ; Madani & Shafiee‐Jood, ).
Importantly, local‐scale initiatives and priorities will not always be beneficial to biodiversity. Local interests in economic development, water security, or food sovereignty can run counter to the priorities of national or international conservation interests. Such situations will require careful attention to possibilities for win–win scenarios and strategic management of trade‐offs where those are persistent (see Section IV.3).

IMPLEMENTATION GAPS
Despite the intensity of the scientific discussion and effort on freshwater biodiversity conservation, the translation of knowledge and agendas into conservation action is insufficient to halt the decline of freshwater biodiversity and protect threatened species and ecosystem services. Recently, Barouillet et al. asked why freshwater conservation often gets ‘lost in limnology’ (i.e. why researchers rarely translate scientific knowledge into conservation applications). Twardek et al. suggest an urgent need for mobilizing practitioners to support the emergency recovery plan (Tickner et al., ) for freshwater biodiversity. Key gaps in implementation of freshwater biodiversity conservation are related to stakeholder involvement, communication, trade‐offs, adaptive management, and funding (Table 3).
Summary and relevant citations for implementation gaps in freshwater biodiversity conservation.
Gap	Key Points	Citations	 	Stakeholder engagement	• New conservation paradigms are centred around stakeholder engagement	Anderson et al.; Alexander et al. 	 	• Social equity and environmental justice aspects of stakeholder engagement are insufficiently appreciated	Reid et al.; Arthington et al. 	 	• The knowledge and values of local people, especially marginalized groups [low‐income, Indigenous People and Local Communities (IPLCs), rights holders] must be better integrated into conservation actions	Cooke et al.; Thieme et al. 	 	Communication	• Scientific knowledge is not reaching governing bodies, decision‐makers and action agencies	Reid et al.; Twardek et al.; Harper et al.; Judd et al.; Kaufman & Boxshall 	 	• Language barriers between disciplines and countries impede coordination and knowledge exchange	Amano et al.; O'Reilly & Starrs 	 	• Differences in discipline, training, value and worldviews require bridging and reconciliation for cooperation	Miranda; Hein et al.; Kuiper; Kramer et al. 	 	Trade‐offs	• Lack of methods for navigating trade‐offs between human and environmental water needs	van Rees & Reed; van Rees et al. 	 	• Available methods are seldom applied to assess conflicts and resolutions	Arthington et al.; Widén et al.; Dalcin et al.; Poff et al. 	 	• Need to acknowledge inevitable trade‐offs between climate, biodiversity, and human well‐being priorities	Opperman et al.; Keskinen et al.; Baldwin‐Cantello et al. 	 	Adaptive management	• Lack of evidence hampers adaptive management practices, including technical progress and disciplinary learning	Maasri et al.; van Rees et al.; Cid et al.; Acreman et al.; Adams et al.; Geist 	 	Funding	• Funding is insufficient for supporting necessary action	Cooke et al.; Arthington et al. 	 	• Funding is typically too short‐term, and lacking adequate spatial scale	Transforming Evidence Funders Network (TEFN); van Rees et al. 	 	• Differential appeal and awareness of issues leads to disproportionate funding for certain systems	Wineland et al. 	 	• There is a need to combat investments that harm biodiversity	Zu Ermgassen et al.

The stakeholder engagement gap
Conservation implementation increasingly involves the direct engagement and involvement of stakeholders, ideally throughout the process of goal‐setting, planning, action, and monitoring and evaluation (i.e. co‐production). Despite the existence of stakeholder engagement models (Arthington et al., ) and practical examples (Barouillet et al., ; Nagel et al., ), co‐production remains more an ideal than a common practice in implementation.
Given the ubiquitous importance of freshwater resources for human needs (e.g. food production, waste disposal and sanitation, urban and industrial supply), stakeholder involvement in freshwater management issues is especially critical (Geist, ; Geist & Hawkins, ), and has been highlighted by many recent agenda‐setting publications in freshwater conservation (Harper et al., ; van Rees et al., ; Dourado et al., ; Vollmer et al., ). In particular, it is a necessary step for increasing the social equity of conservation decisions and avoiding environmental injustices, and a key component in managing freshwater environments as social‐ecological systems (Cooke et al., ; Stewart‐Koster et al., ). Stakeholder co‐production greatly increases project acceptance by the public (Serra‐Llobet et al., ) and can accordingly facilitate social sustainability of ongoing efforts. Widespread stakeholder engagement for conservation action, especially with regard to water and its diversity of economic and spiritual values to people must respectfully and ethically engage with historically marginalized groups, Indigenous and local people, and other rights holders (Schick et al., ; Reid et al., ; Arthington et al., ). Such efforts must be coordinated across projects, institutions and scales to encourage multiple forms of participation (Chaplin‐Kramer et al., ).

The communication gap
Communication gaps are common between the scientific community and decision‐makers as well as action agencies responsible for implementation (Bickford et al., ). Although conservation priorities and ecological knowledge develop quickly in the peer‐reviewed literature, this knowledge does not easily reach decision‐makers, who may be unable to or uninterested in accessing the peer‐reviewed scientific literature, and intermediate media for communicating key points are limited. More efficient channels for communicating key concepts and priorities for actions to decision‐makers and the public are critically important. For example, user‐friendly outputs and social media platforms can build understanding and knowledge exchange with participant stakeholders and broader communities (Djenontin & Meadow, ). A well‐structured engagement and communication strategy can help convey important messages, exchange insights, and help shift the mindsets of a wide range of stakeholders, community groups and decision makers towards biodiversity protection (Arthington et al., ). Such strategies will benefit from psychology‐informed methods like focusing on values and lived experience and seeking to influence cultural norms, which have large impacts on public and policymaker behaviour (Toomey, ).
Different disciplinary languages and terminology influenced by different training backgrounds, worldviews and mind‐sets also require bridging by flexible forms of communication, for example cross‐sectoral meetings or colloquia. Most recently, communication from the public back to the scientific community has received increasing attention, for example leveraging community science (also known as citizen science) as a way to build relationships (e.g. O'Reilly & Starrs, ). Such broader participation in conservation science can be very useful to engage the wider public yet can also become problematic when people who want to be part of practical solutions are not properly guided, and even may in some cases do harm (for example, disturbance of endangered species during field observations, or disempowerment of participants; Walker, Smigaj & Tani, ). Furthermore, since conservation action typically relies on inter‐institutional workflows, coordination and communication among actors with similar directives and goals is essential to avoid wasted effort and align efforts for greater efficacy (van Rees et al., ). For example, in the USA, civil engineering and environmental management interests are increasingly aligned around ecosystem restoration for NbS development, but a shared vocabulary and more frequent professional interaction and knowledge exchange are needed to support effective project delivery teams (McKay et al., ; van Rees et al., ).
Language barriers are an underappreciated hindrance to communication among disciplines, sectors, and geographic regions working in support of conservation science. Non‐English speakers are at a distinct disadvantage both in accessing the scientific literature and in sharing important findings via peer‐reviewed publication (Amano & Sutherland, ; Amano et al., ). This results in missed opportunities and blind spots in the ecological and conservation literature, reducing its potential for meaningful action. Recent developments in artificial intelligence, including large language models, may help address this bias (Berger‐Tal et al., ).

The trade‐offs gap
Freshwater resources management requires accommodating multiple simultaneous demands for freshwater (e.g. water security, energy and food production, transportation, biodiversity conservation). Given projections of rising water demand and increasing scarcity, trade‐offs among water uses for societal and environmental goals are a present concern that is likely to grow in the future (van Rees et al., ; Vollmer & Harrison, ; Baldwin‐Cantello et al., ; Judd et al., ). Trade‐offs arise where freshwater biodiversity conservation goals involve curtailing water consumption for societal needs, or where water management for socioeconomic ends directly contributes to ecological degradation (Maasri et al., ; Judd et al., ). Ideally, judicious management of trade‐offs can highlight opportunities for ‘win–win’ or mutual gains solutions where societal and conservation goals are met simultaneously, although this may not be realistic in all cases (van Rees & Reed, ; van Rees et al., ). Indeed, such trade‐offs among competing water uses and their public perception, especially in water‐scarce regions, are considered one of the foremost barriers to the implementation of environmental flows (Wineland et al., ; Arthington et al., ), and anticipated hydrological changes in coming decades portend an increase in the frequency and urgency of such situations as societal water security declines (Vanham et al., ; Erős et al., ). Accordingly, the anticipation, understanding, and management of trade‐offs between human and environmental water needs is a major priority for the next generation of approaches to freshwater biodiversity conservation (van Rees et al., ; Widén et al., ; Opperman et al., ).
Water allocation among competing demands is a contentious subject in water scarce and arid regions, although they are poorly studied with respect to freshwater biodiversity (Graham et al., ). Greater rates of imperilment for freshwater ecosystems in such climates suggests that low water security may compromise the allocation of water for environmental needs (Feio et al., ; van Rees, ). Consumptive water uses like river withdrawals for agricultural irrigation in water‐scarce areas are an intuitive manifestation of water trade‐offs, where water allocation to support conservation goals may restrict water use for food production and human livelihoods (Vanham et al., ; Wineland et al., ). For example, in the Mujib River in Jordan, extensive groundwater abstraction for upland agriculture compromises baseflow, likely impairing macroinvertebrate communities and contributing to reduced flooding and habitat homogenization (Graham et al., ). With increasing droughts due to climate change and demands for water to maintain food security under future population growth these competing water demands are likely to increase. Minimizing such trade‐offs and seeking win–win solutions is a critical priority for implementation and governance (Erős et al., ).
Surprisingly, available methods to assess conflicts and seek trade‐off resolutions are seldom applied in conservation science, despite the existence of a robust literature on water resource conflict management (e.g. Biswas, ; Hileman, Hicks & Jones, ; Thieme et al., ) and past efforts to bridge the gap between disciplines like water resources management, environmental flows and conservation biology (van Rees & Reed, ; van Rees et al., ). As with the communication gap between academics and decision‐makers (see Section IV.2), additional communication shortfalls between academic fields like sustainable development, water resources management, and limnology may be partly responsible for these apparently useful frameworks going largely unnoticed in biodiversity conservation. Thus, despite the obvious importance of managing and quantifying trade‐offs in freshwater biodiversity conservation (e.g. Poff et al., ; Harper et al., ; Thieme et al., ; Arthington et al., ), case studies applying these tools are limited, leaving a prominent gap for achievement of the goals envisioned in the Kunming–Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework. Bridging this gap and better recognizing and managing environmental water trade‐offs may be a key enabling factor for mainstreaming NbS and other synergistic water management solutions (van Rees et al., ; Vollmer et al., ).

The adaptive management gap
Conservation actions for freshwater biodiversity must necessarily be agile and flexible to cope with the complex dynamics of freshwater social‐ecological systems. Notably, while monitoring is the foundation for adaptive management, funding and support for post‐project monitoring remains rare in conservation (see Section IV.5). Among projects with monitoring, only a small fraction includes a BACI design or comparison to suitable control or reference sites (Geist, ; Acreman et al., ; see Section II.4). The absence of long‐term post‐implementation monitoring and coherent data collection over time facilitating meta‐analyses are also substantial challenges (Maasri et al., ).
The lack of monitoring is an especially major implementation gap for emerging approaches like NbS, where robust monitoring data are scarce and critical to validate conservation evidence approaches (van Rees et al., ). Another challenge comes with monitoring at mismatched spatial scales, or without proper consideration of societal variables and their scales of interaction with ecological processes (Cid et al., ). Whilst responses of some species groups and life stages can be rapid in freshwater systems, effects on the entire life cycles of long‐lived species such as fishes may take decades or longer (e.g. Pander, Mueller & Geist, ; Pander, Winter & Geist,). Consequently, time‐lag effects in population and community responses must be considered in post‐implementation monitoring (Acreman et al., ; van Rees et al., ). Existing policy frameworks may also limit the adaptiveness and agility of conservation project implementation. Pre‐approval of the plans by the responsible agencies is typically mandatory, locking action agencies into planned procedures and project designs. These approval processes do not allow adjustments based on actual field observations during the conservation or restoration action, limiting improved designs or management strategies revealed by new information (Geist, ; see Section III.2). Without such freedom to adapt, long‐term projects will have limited efficacy with respect to the non‐stationary futures forecast under global climate change (Capon et al., ).

The funding gap
In most cases, mandating and implementing necessary conservation action requires dedicated and consistent funding for staff and equipment over long periods of time. For instance, a recent survey on conservation efforts related to captive breeding of endangered freshwater mussels across Europe identified limited funding, and especially limited long‐term funding, as one of the major challenges for effective conservation of this highly endangered and long‐lived group (Geist et al., ). In this case, funding is necessary not only to sustain and monitor habitat restoration and captive breeding efforts for sufficiently long as to allow recruitment in the population (which can be on the order of 10–15 years in some species), but also to evaluate the efficacy of captive breeding programs (Rytwinski et al., ). In parallel, strategies for financing large‐scale conservation efforts, especially in the 21st century context of restorations and NbS, are also critically needed (van Rees et al., ).
Available funding is typically directed towards the most charismatic flagship species within freshwater systems, such as salmonids (Geist, ), whereas less‐popular keystone species of great functional importance can be left out. From the standpoint of decision‐makers, highly visible interventions that generate positive media attention are typically more popular than actual process‐based conservation measures such as restoration of nature‐like flow regimes with more complex and less obvious or prolonged outcomes (Arthington et al., ). This bias similarly neglects important but unglamorous conservation work like long‐term monitoring, resulting in severe information shortfalls (van Rees et al., ; Maasri et al., ; see Section IV.4).
Furthermore, funding provided for conservation purposes is often small compared to investments for other societal needs. In the context of enhancing river navigation or flood protection, the alignment of conservation goals with other water‐management goals in a multi‐benefit framework makes strategic use of this disparity (Serra‐Llobet et al., ). More generally, the integration of conservation opportunities and actions into large‐scale infrastructure projects or other investments may offer opportunities to incentivise action through green financing and integrating nature into decision‐making and operations via natural capital (McKay et al., ; van Rees et al., ).
Another major funding gap is to subsidize management decisions that avoid impacts to freshwater biodiversity, for example reductions in fertilizer or pesticide applications or the restoration of riparian buffers in catchment areas with sensitive freshwater ecosystems. Funding schemes like payments for ecosystem services, natural capital investments, and green bonds or green financing might provide support to compensate landowners for foregone capital gains in such circumstances (Park, ; Salzman et al., ). However, the frameworks, metrics, and tools enabling such approaches, and the financial resources to fund them, remain critically underdeveloped (Wiegand et al., ; Thompson et al., ).

CUPPING OUR HANDS: USING GAPS TO IDENTIFY SOLUTIONS AND PRIORITIZE INNOVATION
Ultimately, the goal in highlighting gaps and shortfalls is to point the way toward relevant solutions that can bridge important gaps and increase the integrity of global freshwater biodiversity conservation. While a critical review of the many potential strategies for filling the gaps presented herein is beyond the scope of this perspective article, it is illustrative to connect these gaps to an emerging issue in freshwater biodiversity conservation by way of example. Here, we examine key freshwater biodiversity‐related language in the Convention on Biological Diversity's Kunming–Montreal post‐2020 Global Biodiversity Framework (CBD, ) through the lens of knowledge, governance, and implementation gaps. Although this exercise is by no means exhaustive, we hope it illustrates how a gap‐based approach can identify the necessary but missing pieces involved with achieving conservation targets and highlight corresponding existing or emerging solutions. A larger list of recommendations, matched with multiple gaps and solutions is presented in Table 4.
Key language from Target 3 of the Kunming–Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework, associated gaps in knowledge, governance, and implementation, and examples of existing and emerging solutions and recent examples from the freshwater conservation and broader conservation science literature (not necessarily the seminal or earliest publication of the solutions mentioned). Knowledge gaps are highlighted in blue, governance and legislation gaps in red, and implementation and management gaps in green.
Target 3 language	Gaps	Key points	Potential solution(s)	References	 	‘at least 30% of terrestrial inland and water areas’	Recognition	Severity of ecological decline not recognized by public and policymakers	Citizen science, better or compulsory coverage of conservation topics at all levels of education	De & Dwivedi 	 	Communication tools like Safe and Just Boundaries	Rockström et al.; Stewart‐Koster et al. 	 	Public pressure and expectations to influence policymakers	Twardek et al. 	 	Inclusive and pluralist governance that better integrates non‐Western values of biodiversity	Visseren‐Hamakers et al.; Pascual et al. 	 	Science‐thought leadership	Kaufman & Boxshall 	 	Importance of freshwater biodiversity not recognized and appreciated	Storytelling and narrative approaches	Thieme et al. 	 	Social media and local relationships	Dudo & Besley; Ahmed et al. 	 	Compilations of evidence, large‐scale syntheses	Lynch et al. 	 	Communication	Scientific knowledge not reaching decision‐makers	Clearer conveyance of conservation and management implications	Birnie‐Gauvin et al.; Reid et al. 	 	Communicate risk, build public trust via transparency	Paulik et al. 	 		Funding	Funding for establishing new protected areas insufficient	Other Effective Area‐Based Conservation Measures (OECMs), Nature‐based Solutions (NbS), Natural Infrastructure	van Rees et al. ; McKay et al.; Watson et al. 	 	Many current investments contribute to biodiversity loss	Better nature‐positive investments, biodiversity safeguards	Zu Ermgassen et al. Narain et al. 	 	‘Ecologically representative freshwater systems’	Biodiversity inventory	Poor biodiversity knowledge limits understanding of ‘representativeness’	IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology	Keith et al. 	 	Taxonomic gaps and neglect of cryptic taxa	Novel inventory techniques [e.g. drones, environmental DNA (eDNA)]	Harper et al. 	 	Geographic bias; underrepresentation of tropics and Global South	Harmonize eDNA practice worldwide; coordinated international funding for underrepresented regions	Belle et al.; Moliner Cachazo et al. 	 	Indigenous People and Local Communities (IPLC) knowledge of species and distributions underrecognized	Ethnobiology approaches, databases of IPLC knowledge	Albuquerque et al. 	 	Funding	Limited funding for non‐charismatic species and habitats	Freshwater flagship species	Carrizo et al.; Kalinkat et al. 	 	Citizen experts and local knowledge for cost savings	Metcalfe et al.; von Gönner et al. 	 	Focus on freshwater ecosystem services in decision‐maker communication	Lynch et al. 	 	Harmonize methodologies for monitoring and management across agencies and partners	Boon et al. 	 	Planning	Current protected areas may only be representative under present and not future conditions	Explicitly account for anticipated future ranges	Bush et al. 	 	Permanent versus dynamic conservation areas	D'Aloia et al. 	 	Adaptive management of existing protected areas	Capon et al. 	 	Prioritize unmodified and unregulated freshwater systems and their catchments as refuges	Capon et al. 	 	Critical Zone Science approach	Wymore et al. 	 	Nature Future Framework	Kramer et al. 	 	Multiple conservation options (historical, hybrid & novel ecosystems)	Erős et al.; Lynch et al. 	 	Resist–Accept–Direct (RAD) Framework	Ward et al. 	 	‘effectively conserved and managed’	Conservation evidence	Empirical evidence of efficacy of many conservation interventions and management strategies insufficient	Conservation evidence databases, systematic reviews	Acreman et al. 	 	More rigorous empirical testing of conservation intervention outcomes	Reid et al. 	 	Measure process in addition to structure in conservation monitoring	Cheung & Burrows 	 	Communication	Lack of interdisciplinary collaboration limits effective conservation research and action	Identify key, priority issues for cross‐disciplinary collaboration (e.g. soil conservation, flood control)	Serra‐Llobet et al.; McKay et al. 	 	Ecopracticology	Xiang; Cooke & Birnie‐Gauvin 	 	Symposia and working groups	Cooke & Birnie‐Gauvin 	 	Raise visibility of non‐English language science, translate scientific terms, provide publication support to non‐native English speakers	Amano et al.; Miranda 	 	Language barriers impede international collaboration for more effective management	Research distillation into centralized (and multi‐language) national evidence base(s)	Reid et al. 	 	Artificial intelligence for integrating literature across languages and sources	Berger‐Tal et al. 	 	Threats and multiple stressors	Current efforts do not address drivers of declines	Strategic portfolios of actions, Social Ecological System framework	Arthington; Birk et al.; Thieme et al. (); Dudgeon & Strayer 	 	Ecological consequences of infrastructure still poorly understood	Integrate ecological modelling with planning processes	Opperman et al.; van Rees et al. 	 	New and emerging threats remain underrecognized	Systematic prioritization via Delphi method	Aldridge et al. 	 	Multiple stressors inadequately addressed	Unified and comprehensive Multiple Stressors Assessment Framework	Lima et al. 	 	Local and bottom‐up	Top‐down, conventional approaches disconnected from local needs	Watershed Health concept	Vollmer et al. 	 	Integration with local water needs via Nature‐based Solutions	van Rees et al. ; Vollmer et al. 	 	Local buy‐in and governance crucial for conservation success	Participatory planning; decision‐making using diverse values	Pascual et al. 	 	Funding	Conservation funding is often too short‐term or small in scale for effective management	Aligning ecological and societal water needs	van Rees et al. ; McKay et al.; Erős et al. 	 	Equitable and sustainable water funds	Bremer et al. 	 	Scales	Fragmented legislation and governance compromise large‐scale management	Integrative governance	Visseren‐Hamakers et al. 	 	Enabling government action across scales	Bell‐James 	 	‘ecosystem functions and services’	Recognition	Links between ecosystem functions and human well‐being not recognized	Storytelling and outreach materials for the public, stakeholder meetings	Thieme et al. 	 	Social media and stakeholder–scientist relationship‐building	Dudo & Besley; Ahmed et al. 	 	Alliance for Freshwater Life	Darwall et al. 	 	Trade‐offs	Ecosystem service delivery and biodiversity conservation goals must be balanced	Economic valuation of biodiversity and ecosystem services, unified indicators for quantification	Loomisa et al.; Xu et al. 	 	Biodiversity accounting and offsetting, credits	Ferreira 	 	Ecological Stakeholder Analogs	van Rees et al. 	 	‘Well connected… systems of protected areas’	Scales	Water management differs across scales, complicating connectivity	Meta‐system approach for environmental flows (e‐flows)	Cid et al.; Messager et al. 	 	Watershed‐scale protection and water management measures	Thieme et al. 	 	Integrative governance	Visseren‐Hamakers et al. 	 	Natural drivers and ecological processes	Knowledge gaps in geomorphic processes, hydro‐ecological science, hydrological dynamics among habitats	Fluvial biogeomorphology, broader syntheses between biodiversity science and river network dynamics	Doretto et al.; Gurnell & Bertoldi 	 	Poor understanding of terrestrial, freshwater and marine connectivity	Adaptive management via monitoring, decision‐making tools, integration among sustainability objectives	Franklin et al. 	 	Critical Zone Science approach to river corridor processes	Wymore et al. 	 	‘equitably governed’	Stakeholder engagement	Social equity and environmental justice require careful and ethical engagement with local people and rights‐holders	Ethical co‐production frameworks, convivial conservation	Büscher & Fletcher; Massarella et al. 	 	‘sustainable use’	 	New conservation and sustainability paradigms call for stakeholder co‐production	 	‘other effective area‐based conservation measures’	 	‘recognizing and respecting the rights of Indigenous peoples and local communities’	Conservation evidence	Evidence base for OECMs, NbS and other shared‐use landscapes or protected areas is lacking	Research and Development monitoring, adaptive monitoring for learning	van Rees et al.; Geist & Hawkins 	 	Adaptive management	Insufficient monitoring of biodiversity in shared‐used landscapes and watersheds	Participatory modelling for spatial prioritization of monitoring	Flitcroft et al.; van Rees et al. 	 	Communication	Broader interdisciplinary collaboration is a critical missing piece to implementing OECMs and NbS	Symposia, inter‐institutional working groups	van Rees et al. 	 	Language barriers and differing epistemologies may impede collaboration between IPLCs and broader scientific community	Artificial Intelligence (AI) translation resources, abstract indexing in different languages	Amano et al.; Büscher & Fletcher; Massarella et al. 	 	Biodiversity inventory	IPLC knowledge of biodiversity, sustainable use and shared landscapes underrecognized	Braided knowledge co‐production, community‐led participatory management	Zhang et al.; Brierley et al. 	 	Trade‐offs	Competing environmental versus societal water demand must be managed to protect local communities	Watershed health concept	Vollmer et al. 	 	OECMs require careful management of water resources trade‐offs	Ecological Stakeholder Analogs	van Rees et al. 	 	Local and bottom‐up	Conventional conservation approaches may perpetuate disenfranchisement of IPLCs	Indigenous leadership and participation in conservation science	Alexander et al. 	 	Equity and justice in practice, ‘convivial conservation’	Büscher & Fletcher
Conserving ‘at least 30% of terrestrial inland and water areas’ (CBD, ) will require bridging the Recognition gap to garner public support and get policymakers and decision‐makers across scales to recognize and prioritize the issue. The practice of ‘science–thought’ leadership is intended to facilitate the translation of knowledge across the science‐policy interface; Kaufman & Boxshall list 11 enabling factors that might facilitate such exchange and increase recognition and action around the freshwater biodiversity crisis. Other authors have suggested myriad strategies for bridging the recognition gap, including increasing public pressure and expectations on policymakers (Twardek et al., ), providing high‐level communication tools like the Safe and Just Earth System Boundaries (Rockström et al., ; Stewart‐Koster et al., ), and distilling large compilations of biodiversity evidence into formats communicable with decision makers (Lynch et al., ).
OECMs show particular promise as a solution to meeting the funding gap associated with this ambitious Convention on Biological Diversity goal, by including a diversity of restored, anthropogenic, and working waterscapes and thus reducing the need for the acquisition and establishment of new, pristine reserves (Erős et al., ; Flitcroft et al., ). NbS and Natural Infrastructure may play an especially large role in addressing funding shortfalls for protected areas by encouraging restoration and protection efforts intended to preserve ecosystem functions for climate adaptation or resilient infrastructure services (McKay et al., ; van Rees et al., ). Such integrated management of ecosystems and infrastructure may create opportunities for large‐scale funding through infrastructure agencies, which typically have substantially higher budgets than conservation initiatives. Holistic frameworks for freshwater habitat protection like the Durable Freshwater Protection framework (Higgins et al., ) may be especially important to ensuring the conservation efficacy of networks of natural, artificial, and mixed‐use hydroscapes in meeting this ambitious area‐based goal.
The Global Biodiversity Framework explicitly references OECMs in conjunction with meeting area‐based conservation goals while promoting ‘sustainable use’ and ‘recognizing and respecting the rights of Indigenous peoples and local communities’ (CBD, ), but their broader implementation is hampered by gaps including conservation evidence, communication, and trade‐offs. van Rees et al.  suggest interdisciplinary certificate programs and symposia convening civil engineers, landscape architects, ecologists, and environmental and conservation scientists at national and international scales to bridge the communication gap and promote the interdisciplinary dialogue and collaboration necessary for mainstreaming NbS as OECMs. Conservation evidence approaches like Research and Development monitoring for natural infrastructure (van Rees et al., ) may be especially valuable in the context of improving and mainstreaming OECMs by facilitating a data‐driven approach to a departure from conventional protected areas. Continued attention to meta‐analytical results of freshwater conservation outcomes (e.g. Acreman et al., ) and large‐scale evidence syntheses (Reid et al., ) must be leveraged to vet the potential application of these and other conservation strategies properly.
The goal of specifically conserving ‘ecologically representative freshwater systems’ corresponds directly with the biodiversity inventory gap, and our relatively poor understanding of the diversity and distribution of global freshwater biodiversity. The new IUCN Global Ecosystem Typology for freshwater systems provides a broad‐scale framework with which to approach this issue and prioritize under‐studied habitat types (Keith et al., ). The interdisciplinary science of ethnobiology, which seeks a greater understanding of human relationships to nature and the epistemologies of environmental knowledge among Indigenous people and local communities may also make substantial contributions towards bridging this gap, as local ecosystems and their resident biodiversity are typically well known to native inhabitants. The combined technologies of environmental DNA (eDNA) and metabarcoding offer increasingly rigorous technological solutions for inventorying even highly biodiverse freshwater communities (Marques et al., ; Espinosa Prieto et al., ).

CONCLUSIONS
The conversations and literature synthesis that led to this perspective revealed that much of the broader freshwater biodiversity conservation literature is focused on highlighting and diagnosing problems, while references to specific solutions are somewhat generalized and limited. The inventory of major knowledge, action, and governance gaps provided in this review is intended to mobilize the global freshwater biodiversity conservation community towards specific solutions for addressing these critical gaps. We highlight 13 cross‐cutting gaps limiting the efficacy and implementation of effective freshwater biodiversity conservation and demonstrate how these can be used to highlight effective solutions in the growing literature around safeguarding freshwater life.
We demonstrate how a gap‐focused analysis can provide actionable, problem‐oriented guidance to achieving objectives from global decision‐makers that are typically phrased using aspirational language. By taking a gap‐focused approach, we can match emerging and existing scholarship to the missing pieces hindering the achievement of these often ambitious objectives, streamlining the identification of context‐specific solutions.
Major knowledge gaps remain surrounding the biodiversity and ecological dynamics of understudied ecosystem types (including intermittent rivers, non‐floodplain wetlands, and ephemeral streams and phreatic systems), their threats, and conservation solutions. Biodiversity in such neglected ecosystems will continue to be lost until these and other critical knowledge gaps are filled. Conservation evidence for freshwater conservation interventions is generally lacking, and support for monitoring will be important to address such gaps.
The multiple overlapping governance structures affecting water resources management and freshwater biodiversity conservation are poorly coordinated across scales and jurisdictional boundaries, creating inefficiencies that impede adaptive and effective conservation. This reduces the adaptive capacity of conservation efforts to change in response to new goals, initiatives, or information, and precludes the necessary large‐scale coordination needed to enact watershed‐scale protections or protect migratory species across river networks or biologically connected wetlands.
Conventional science and policy approaches to sustainable water management and biodiversity conservation remain largely technocratic and top‐down in nature, reducing opportunities for productive dialogue among subject experts, decision‐makers, and local and Indigenous communities. Conventional solutions consequently lack the essential nuance needed for addressing the diverse values of water and the idiosyncrasies of freshwater biodiversity at the local scales at which conservation is implemented.
Strategies for bridging the gap between biodiversity conservation and water management are urgently needed for identifying win–win scenarios in water use, and managing potential trade‐offs if they arise (what we call ‘the trade‐offs gap’). Trade‐offs between human and environmental needs for water are mentioned repeatedly as a research and implementation gap in recent agenda‐setting papers, and will require unprecedented interdisciplinary synthesis and potentially new, context‐specific governance structures to address. Co‐production and participatory exercises with stakeholders, Indigenous communities and other local people are additional critical components to navigating such complexities that are underutilized. Ultimately, the goal of confronting such trade‐offs is to seek mutual gains or win–win outcomes where societal and environmental water needs are met simultaneously. This will require greater integration between water resources management, ecohydrology, and conservation biology to close the gap.
Funding to support freshwater biodiversity conservation continues to be insufficient for achieving meaningful results. Recent, global‐scale enthusiasm for and interest in Nature‐based Solutions (NbS) and natural infrastructure may represent a windfall of multiple‐use funds that contribute to the restoration and conservation of freshwater ecosystems and their resident biota. Given the rapid growth of the literature on freshwater NbS for flood and drought mitigation and stormwater management, growing NbS investments can and should be judiciously leveraged to safeguard freshwater biodiversity.

REFERENCES
Protected areas and freshwater biodiversity: a novel systematic review distils eight lessons for effective conservation
Measuring benefits of protected area management: trends across realms and research gaps for freshwater systems
Threats, challenges and sustainable conservation strategies for freshwater biodiversity
Scientists' warning to humanity on the freshwater biodiversity crisis
Advancing ethnobiology for the ecological transition and a more inclusive and just world: a comprehensive framework for the next 20 years
Freshwater mussel conservation: a global horizon scan of emerging threats and opportunities
Bridging indigenous and Western sciences in freshwater research, monitoring, and management in Canada
Opportunities and challenges of other effective area‐based conservation measures (OECMs) for biodiversity conservation
The role of non‐English‐language science in informing national biodiversity assessments
Ten tips for overcoming language barriers in science
Four barriers to the global understanding of biodiversity conservation: wealth, language, geographical location and security
Understanding rivers and their social relations: a critical step to advance environmental water management
Environmental governance and its implications for conservation practice
Grand challenges to support the freshwater biodiversity emergency recovery plan
The Brisbane declaration and global action agenda on environmental flows (2018)
Accelerating environmental flow implementation to bend the curve of global freshwater biodiversity loss
The triple challenge: synergies, trade‐offs and integrated responses for climate, biodiversity, and human wellbeing goals
The relationship between hydrological connectivity changes inside and outside biodiversity hotspots and its implication for sustainable environmental management
Bridging the gap between ‘planning’ and ‘doing’ for biodiversity conservation in freshwaters
Freshwater conservation: lost in limnology?
Integrate strategies to save biodiversity and groundwater
Taxonomic and geographical representation of freshwater environmental DNA research in aquatic conservation
From the silo to the landscape: the role of law in landscape‐scale restoration of coastal and marine ecosystems
Leveraging AI to improve evidence synthesis in conservation
Science communication for biodiversity conservation
Impacts of multiple stressors on freshwater biota across spatial scales and ecosystems
The RACE for freshwater biodiversity: essential actions to create the social context for meaningful conservation
Cooperation or conflict in transboundary water management: case study of South Asia
Developing a standard approach for monitoring freshwater pearl mussel (Margaritifera margaritifera) populations in European rivers
Toward more equitable ecosystem investment programs—adaptation and equity are central to the design and functioning of successful water funds
A plural knowledges model to support sustainable management of dryland rivers in western India
A machine learning approach to identify barriers in stream networks demonstrates high prevalence of unmapped riverine dams
Towards convivial conservation
Freshwater conservation planning under climate change: demonstrating proactive approaches for Australian Odonata
Characteristics, main impacts, and stewardship of natural and artificial freshwater environments: consequences for biodiversity conservation
Future of freshwater ecosystems in a 1.5°C warmer world
Freshwater megafauna: flagships for freshwater biodiversity under threat
Nature‐based solutions for leveed river corridors
Conservation needs to integrate knowledge across scales
Mapping the effectiveness of nature‐based solutions for climate change adaptation
A typological framework of non‐floodplain wetlands for global collaborative research and sustainable use
Structural and functional indicators in freshwater ecosystem monitoring programs
Environmental flow requirements of estuaries: providing resilience to current and future climate and direct anthropogenic changes
Poor availability of context‐specific evidence hampers decision‐making in conservation
From meta‐system theory to the sustainable management of rivers in the Anthropocene
Kunming‐Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework
Progress developing the concept of other effective area‐based conservation measures
The conservation and restoration of freshwater ecosystems and biodiversity can be enhanced with ecopracticology
Is it a new day for freshwater biodiversity? Reflections on outcomes of the Kunming‐Montreal global biodiversity framework
Stewardship and management of freshwater ecosystems: from Leopold's land ethic to a freshwater ethic
Evidence‐based restoration in the Anthropocene—from acting with purpose to acting for impact
Meeting the challenge of interacting threats in freshwater ecosystems: a call to scientists and managers
Challenges and opportunities in the use of ponds and pondscapes as nature‐based solutions
Freshwater salinisation: a research agenda for a saltier world
Dynamic adaptive environmental flows (DAE‐flows) to reconcile long‐term ecosystem demands with hydropower objectives
A conceptual model to improve links between science, policy and practice in coastal management
Coupled networks of permanent protected areas and dynamic conservation areas for biodiversity conservation under climate change
The Alliance for freshwater life: a global call to unite efforts for freshwater biodiversity science and conservation
Flow intermittence and ecosystem services in rivers of the Anthropocene
Bridging gaps in the Indian freshwater biodiversity conservation through science‐based and policy‐backed recommendations
The art of co‐production of knowledge in environmental sciences and management: lessons from international practice
The river continuum concept: lessons from the past and perspectives for the future
Overcoming persistent challenges in putting environmental flow policy into practice: a systematic review and bibliometric analysis
Freshwater biodiversity: importance, threats, status and conservation challenges
Bending the curve of global freshwater biodiversity loss: what are the prospects?
Scientists' prioritization of communication objectives for public engagement
Leading the path toward sustainable freshwater management: reconciling challenges and opportunities in historical, hybrid, and novel ecosystem types
Toward freshwater plant diversity surveys with eDNA barcoding and metabarcoding
Fish and macroinvertebrate assemblages reveal extensive degradation of the world's rivers
The contested instruments of a new governance regime
The European green deal misses Europe's subterranean biodiversity hotspots
Making global targets local for freshwater protection
Scale, evidence, and community participation matter: lessons in effective and legitimate adaptive governance from decision making for Menindee Lakes in Australia's Murray‐Darling basin
Aquatic connectivity: challenges and solutions in a changing climate
Integrative freshwater ecology and biodiversity conservation
Seven steps towards improving freshwater conservation
Green or red: challenges for fish and freshwater biodiversity conservation related to hydropower
Habitat recovery and restoration in aquatic ecosystems: current progress and future challenges
Captive breeding of European freshwater mussels as a conservation tool: a review
Nature‐based solutions can help cool the planet—if we act now
Using environmental flows to inform integrated water resource management in critically water scarce regions
Plants and river morphodynamics: the emergence of fluvial biogeomorphology
Biodiversity needs every tool in the box: use OECMs
Twenty‐five essential research questions to inform the protection and restoration of freshwater biodiversity
Rewilding and the water cycle
The global decline of freshwater megafauna
Research on coupled socio‐ecohydrological systems—implementing a highly integrative and interdisciplinary research agenda in the doctoral school ‘Human River systems in the 21st century c, (HR21)
The role of protected areas for freshwater biodiversity conservation: challenges and opportunities in a rapidly changing world
Durable freshwater protection: a framework for establishing and maintaining long‐term protection for freshwater ecosystems and the values they sustain
An alternative framework for analysing and managing conflicts in integrated water resources management (IWRM): linking theory and practice
Light pollution of freshwater ecosystems: principles, ecological impacts and remedies
Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science‐Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
Methodological Assessment Report on the Diverse Values and Valuation of Nature of the Intergovernmental Science‐Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
River rhythmicity: a conceptual means of understanding and leveraging the relational values of rivers
Revisiting global trends in freshwater insect biodiversity
Perceptions of climate change adaptation barriers in environmental water management
Flagship umbrella species needed for the conservation of overlooked aquatic biodiversity
Eleven enablers of science thought leadership to facilitate knowledge exchange in environmental regulation
A function‐based typology for Earth's ecosystems
Water diplomacy paths–an approach to recognise water diplomacy actions in shared waters
Habitat quality and biological community responses to innovative hydropower plant installations at transverse in‐stream structures
New paths for modelling freshwater nature futures
Impact of different wavelengths of artificial light at night on phototaxis in aquatic insects
Outstanding need for more freshwater scientists in IPBES
Mapping global non‐floodplain wetlands
Integrated terrestrial‐freshwater planning doubles conservation of tropical aquatic species
A roadmap for multiple stressors assessment and management in freshwater ecosystems
People need freshwater biodiversity
Future‐proofing the emergency recovery plan for freshwater biodiversity
A global agenda for advancing freshwater biodiversity research
Socio‐hydrology: a new understanding to unite or a new science to divide?
GAPeDNA: assessing and mapping global species gaps in genetic databases for eDNA metabarcoding
Who decides? The governance of rewilding in Scotland ‘between the cracks’: community participation, public engagement, and partnerships
Exploring convivial conservation in theory and practice: possibilities and challenges for a transformative approach to biodiversity conservation
Lived experiences of ‘peak water’ in the high mountains of Nepal and Peru
Jointly advancing infrastructure and biodiversity conservation
A metasystem approach to designing environmental flows
Applied citizen science in freshwater research
Biodiversity, governance, and the allocation of international aid for conservation
Spatial priorities for freshwater fish conservation in relation to protected areas
Facing our freshwater crisis via fluid and agile communication: a grand challenge
A review of the freshwater diversity in the Okavango Delta and Lake Ngami (Botswana): taxonomic composition, ecology, comparison with similar systems and conservation status
Centering 30 × 30 conservation initiatives on freshwater ecosystems
The effects of weirs on structural stream habitat and biological communities
The effects of stream substratum texture on interstitial conditions and bacterial biofilms: methodological strategies
Fish and chips: conservation of freshwater fish populations through an integrative multi‐stakeholder approach
Global assessment of the biodiversity safeguards of development banks that finance infrastructure
A co‐development approach to conservation leads to informed habitat design and rapid establishment of amphibian communities
Achieving a nature‐and people‐positive future
Cultural water and indigenous water science
Balancing renewable energy and river resources by moving from individual assessments of hydropower projects to energy system planning
Science citizen: shifting to a ‘science‐first’ approach and recognising the trade‐offs between objectives in a long‐term citizen science program
Multiple stressors in freshwater ecosystems
Succession of fish diversity after reconnecting a large floodplain to the upper Danube River
Habitat diversity and connectivity govern the conservation value of restored aquatic floodplain habitats
Ecological indicators for restoration success: development of fish diversity in a large restored floodplain over twelve years
Investors as regulators: green bonds and the governance challenges of the sustainable finance revolution
Indigenous peoples and transformations in freshwater governance and management
Diverse values of nature for sustainability
The case for effective risk communication: lessons from a global pandemic
Timing is everything: rethinking flexible hydropower operations for the economy and environment
Potential drivers of changing ecological conditions in English and welsh rivers since 1990
Sustainable water management under future uncertainty with eco‐engineering decision scaling
Emerging threats and persistent conservation challenges for freshwater biodiversity
Developing a national level evidence‐based toolbox for addressing freshwater biodiversity threats
Safe and just earth system boundaries
Global agricultural economic water scarcity
What evidence exists for evaluating the effectiveness of conservation‐oriented captive breeding and release programs for imperilled freshwater fishes and mussels?
Effects of human‐driven water stress on river ecosystems: a meta‐analysis
Groundwater is a hidden global keystone ecosystem
More robust local governance suggests positive effects of long‐term community conservation
Payments for ecosystem services: past, present and future
People‐centered and ecosystem‐based knowledge co‐production to promote proactive biodiversity conservation and sustainable development in Namibia
Restoring rivers and floodplains for habitat and flood risk reduction: experiences in multi‐benefit floodplain management from California and Germany
Considering multiple anthropogenic threats in the context of natural variability: ecological processes in a regulated riverine ecosystem
Integrating traditional ecological knowledge into US public land management: knowledge gaps and research priorities
What are nature‐based solutions (NBS)? Setting core ideas for concept clarification
Effects of percent impervious cover on fish and benthos assemblages and instream habitats in Lake Ontario tributaries
The terrestrial and semi‐aquatic invertebrates of intermittent rivers and ephemeral streams
Living within the safe and just earth system boundaries for blue water
Freshwater biodiversity conservation: recent progress and future challenges
Technocracy in a time of changing values: wildlife conservation and the ‘relevancy’ of governance reform
Pharmaceuticals in the aquatic environment: no answers yet to the major questions
Evidence complacency hampers conservation
Measures to safeguard and restore river connectivity
Navigating trade‐offs between dams and river conservation
Paying for nature‐based solutions: a review of funding and financing mechanisms for ecosystem services and their impacts on social equity
Bending the curve of global freshwater biodiversity loss: an emergency recovery plan
Why facts don't change minds: insights from cognitive science for the improved communication of conservation research
Essential biodiversity variables for measuring change in global freshwater biodiversity
Mobilizing practitioners to support the emergency recovery plan for freshwater biodiversity
Cross‐continental evaluation of landscape‐scale drivers and their impacts to fluvial fishes: understanding frequency and severity to improve fish conservation in Europe and the United States
The future in sustainability transitions ‐ interlinkages between the multi‐level perspective and futures studies
Water diplomacy from a duck's perspective: wildlife as stakeholders in water management
Wetland conservation in Hawaii and the need for flagship species
Perspectives from the global south inform and affirm the contemporary river conservation paradigm: a commentary on Feio et al
Ecological stakeholder analogs as intermediaries between freshwater biodiversity conservation and sustainable water management
Reimagining infrastructure for a biodiverse future
The potential for nature‐based solutions to combat the freshwater biodiversity crisis
A strategic monitoring approach for learning to improve natural infrastructure
Safeguarding freshwater life beyond 2020: recommendations for the new global biodiversity framework from the European experience
Global water scarcity including surface water quality and expansions of clean water technologies
The number of people exposed to water stress in relation to how much water is reserved for the environment: a global modelling study
Transformative governance of biodiversity: insights for sustainable development
The impact of blue space on human health and well‐being–Salutogenetic health effects of inland surface waters: a review
A watershed moment for healthy watersheds
H2O≠ CO2: framing and responding to the global water crisis
Citizen science promotes knowledge, skills and collective action to monitor and protect freshwater streams
Impair‐then‐repair: a brief history & global‐scale hypothesis regarding human‐water interactions in the Anthropocene
The benefits and negative impacts of citizen science applications to water as experienced by participants and communities
Reimagining large river management using the resist–accept–direct (RAD) framework in the upper Mississippi River
Priorities for protected area expansion so nations can meet their Kunming‐Montreal global biodiversity framework commitments
Effect of local cultural context on the success of community‐based conservation interventions
Environmental flow scenarios for a regulated river system: projecting catchment‐wide ecosystem benefits and consequences for hydroelectric production
Payment for ecosystem services: an efficient approach to reduce eutrophication?
Climate change effects on hatching success and embryonic development of fish: assessing multiple stressor responses in a large‐scale mesocosm study
The environmental flows implementation challenge: insights and recommendations across water‐limited systems
Is there enough water? How bearish and bullish outlooks are linked to decision maker perspectives on environmental flows
Future oriented conservation: knowledge governance, uncertainty and learning
Viewing river corridors through the lens of critical zone science
Ecopracticology: the study of socio‐ecological practice
Wetland ecosystem services research: a critical review
A functional flows approach to selecting ecologically relevant flow metrics for environmental flow applications
Enhancing the functionality of environmental flows through an understanding of biophysical processes in the riverine landscape
Impacts of small dams on stream temperature
Are corporate biodiversity commitments consistent with delivering ‘nature‐positive’ outcomes? A review of ‘nature‐positive’ definitions, company progress and challenges