Multimodal spectrum of approach in poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma (an updated analysis)
Thyroid malignancy represents the most common type of endocrine cancer, with an increasing incidence all over the world, including an increasing rate of detection among younger adults, 90% to 95% of all cases being non-medullary types. Poorly differentiated thyroid cancer, accounting 1% to 5% of all thyroid malignancies, is a less understood neoplasm compared to the other more frequent and better described thyroid cancers, associating various histological patterns that might bring pitfalls of diagnosis in everyday practice. We aimed to provide an updated analysis in the field of poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma, based on a multimodal approach, including emergent biomarkers. The current data offers a robust framework for elucidating the biology of poorly differenced thyroid malignancy and further on, it provides the basis for a multilayered therapeutic approach. Emergent biomarkers might be detected from cytological analysis based on fine-needle aspiration or blood assays as cell-free deoxyribonucleic acid (cfDNA), but the most important remains the identification of the molecular and genetic constellation in terms of analyzing RAS, telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT), B-Raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase (BRAF), tumor protein p53 (TP53), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), copy number alterations (CNA) and phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha (PIK3CA) profile, which serve as prognostic markers and pointers of anti-cancer medical therapy. Overall, despite recent advances in multimodal management, the prognostic remains severe. The issue is ongoing, and we expect a massive expansion within the following years, across a guideline-based, as well as a personalized decision.

Introduction
Thyroid malignancy represents the most common type of endocrine cancer with an increasing incidence all over the world, including an increasing rate of detection among younger adults, 90% to 95% of all cases being non-medullary types. Aggressive types have a low impact from an epidemiological perspective, but they carry an important disease burden due to a recurrent/persistent condition and a poor outcome. While many areas regarding the pathogenic mechanisms and prognostic markers are still a matter of debate, these malignancies have been recently re-classified to provide a new practical perspective amidst a multimodal approach.
World Health Organization (WHO) Classification 2022 introduced the category of high-grade follicular cell-derived malignancy, which includes prior described (since 2004) category of poorly differentiated type and a novel one, namely, high-grade differentiated thyroid carcinoma, which identifies a subgroup of individuals with a worse prognosis among the general panel of differentiated cancers. Currently, most aggressive forms are considered high-grade differentiated, poorly differentiated and anaplastic. The first two are characterized by an increase in mitotic activity and the identification of tumor necrosis, in the absence of anaplastic elements, as opposite to the anaplastic carcinoma. The landscape of understanding has been continuously expanding, and their management addresses an evaluation of the molecular biology and genetic profile, noting that many areas are still an open issue.
Modern multilayered approach includes the traditional basis of therapy, as applied in differentiated types, surgery (thyroidectomy associated and, if needed or required, lymph nodes dissection), radioiodine ablation and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) suppressive Levothyroxine therapy under serum thyroglobulin lifelong surveillance, in addition to novel medical therapies such as multi-kinase inhibitors, which might improve the overall prognosis, particularly, in radioiodine-resistant types.
Overall, poorly differentiated thyroid cancer, accounting 1% to 5% of all thyroid malignancies, represents a less understood neoplasm compared to the other more frequent and better described thyroid cancers, presenting various histological patterns that might bring pitfalls of diagnosis in every day practice, and a complex constellation of molecular and genetic contributors that provide modern clues of the outcome, which otherwise, despite recent advances of the multimodal management, remains severe.

Aim
We aimed to provide an updated analysis in the field of poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma, based on a multimodal approach, including emergent biomarkers.

Methods
This is a narrative review. We searched across PubMed database from January 1 until August 8, 2025, using the key terms “poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma”. We refined the data presentation across several subsections [e.g., cytological report, histological and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis, molecular and genetic markers, the clinical data concerning the clinical use of tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs)] and only included original human studies with no restriction of the study design. Exclusion criteria were: non-English papers; experimental models; cell line studies; cohorts that did not provide specific data with concern to the patients diagnosed with poorly differentiated thyroid cancer; pediatric population; paper abstracts not freely accessible; editorial or conference proceedings; duplicates; book/e-book chapters; guidelines/consensus; deep learning machine-generated data, and bioinformatics analyses. Overall, 1999 papers were identified and, after applying the timeframe restriction, 78 articles were then found; 26 studies (22 retrospective and one prospective design, as well as three case reports) were included in the final analysis, after manually checking the title and abstract (Figure 1).
Flowchart diagram of search according to our methods

Un updated spectrum of approach in poorly differentiated thyroid malignancy
While generally regarded as being less aggressive than the anaplastic type of cancer, poorly differentiated type associates a five-year survival rate of 65%. The incidence among other histological types is very low, the impact on the overall thyroid cancer-related burden is relatively small. For instance, a single-center study for almost 20 years showed that anaplastic cancer accounts for 40% of all thyroid malignancy-related deaths, while poorly differentiated type accounts only for 3%.
Approximately one out of five patients has distant metastases at diagnosis and one third of the cases present lymph nodes involvement from the start. The history of papillary or follicular thyroid cancer might not be registered in one individual’ records, but the differentiated histological pattern might be confirmed in certain background areas only at postoperative histological examination.
The clinical evolution is rapid, mostly with a progressive goiter associating local compressive symptoms and signs or extra-thyroid manifestations (which are positive in more than half of the subjects at first diagnosis). An early surgical intervention might help the overall outcome, complete resection being a good predictor, despite a general aggressive behavior. The average age at diagnosis involves the sixth decade of life. The mean tumor diameter was found of 4.89 cm in one meta-analysis, while a size larger than 4 cm represented a predictor of radioiodine refractoriness, which is typically the expected profile (but it might not be registered from the start). Other poor prognostic markers at histological exam are the lack of an encapsulated tumor, and extensive vascular invasion, while pre-operatory imaging exploration might show additional elements serving as prognostic markers such as the confirmation of an extra-thyroidal extension, tracheal and esophageal invasion, local venous thrombosis, etc..
Recently, emergent biomarkers were provided via the molecular and genetic profile, specifically mutations of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) and RAS genes (grossly affecting 35% to 45% of the patients for each gene, and both pathogenic variants have been associated with a radioiodine resistant profile), and rarely, of B-Raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase (BRAF) (BRAFV600E being mutually exclusive with RAS), tumor protein p53 (TP53), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), and phosphatidyl-inositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase catalytic subunit alpha (PIK3CA) alterations. A poor prognostic has been observed in different gene combinations, such as TERT + RAS or TERT + PIK3CA.

Fine-needle aspiration
Cytological exam offers a heterogeneous perspective in poorly differentiated carcinoma, unless surgery is not feasible in order to provide a complex histological and IHC characterization. This is opposite to the more common types of thyroid malignancy, namely, differentiated forms (particularly, papillary cancer), whereas ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration (FNA) cytology represents an extremely useful, guideline-based tool in daily practice. Yet, at this point, disease-specific behavior might be pointed out from the preoperatory cytological report upon analyzing mutations profile and this kind of research currently represents a cutting edge perspective in the field of cytological analysis. For instance, we mention the retrospective, single-center study conducted by Calcaterra et al. in 70 adults diagnosed with thyroid nodules to whom TERT pathogenic variants [TERT promoter mutation (C228T/C250T)] were assessed (alone or in combination) in the preoperative FNA samples [by ThyroSeq v3 (TSv3) testing]. Single TERT mutation involved 26% of the subjects, and multiple TERT mutations affected 74%, specifically, driven mutations TERT + BRAFV600E (44%), and RAS (37%), and genetic alterations (copy number alterations – CNA) (29%). Single-TERT mutation versus combinations involved older patients (p=0.007), with similar nodule size (p=0.18), similar distant metastases rate at 13.1 months median of follow-up (32.7% versus 33%, p=0.65), and local recurrence rate (0% versus 25%, p=0.31), while poorly differentiated carcinoma and anaplastic types equally affected both subgroups (one third of each).
Similarly, an eight-year retrospective study in 24 nodules coming from 23 patients who underwent FNA and were found with cytologically indeterminate thyroid nodules [Bethesda III (n=19) or IV (n=5)] showed than PTEN mutations were correlated with a 25% risk of malignancy (notably, a single histological report showed a poorly differentiated cancer).
Due to inconclusive results amidst using FNA in daily practice, core biopsy is sometimes required in cases with poorly differentiated carcinoma. A particular issue has been raised by Coleman et al., namely, the risk of cutaneous tumor seeding, as described in a case of 75-year-old female that was confirmed postoperative. Of note, another case of 71-year-old woman was detected at intervention site after radiofrequency ablation for a presumed benign nodule, which was finally confirmed as a poorly differentiated cancer.

Histological and immunohistochemistry exam amid aggressive follicular cell-derived thyroid cancers
As mentioned, the histological exam represents the traditional tool of diagnosis and the most important method, despite challenges of recognition and changing WHO Classifications (Figure 2A, 2B, 2C, 2D, 2E, 2F).
One retrospective study on 138 patients with advanced follicular cell-derived thyroid malignancy included differentiated high-grade (22/138) and poorly differentiated (10/138) versus non-high-grade (106/138) thyroid carcinoma, who underwent thyroidectomy followed by radioiodine therapy. When compared to the poorly differentiated, differentiated high-grade type showed a decreased size, a lower rate of necrosis, and increased mitotic count, with an overall better prognosis, but worse than found in non-high grade differentiated thyroid malignancy. The presence and extension of intra-tumor fibrosis (upon scoring that showed a strong agreement between two observers and between observers and digital image quantification) was analyzed and found as prognostic marker in a cohort of 132 thyroid cancers (including 48 cases of poorly differentiated type).
Shi et al. performed a single-center study in 97 patients diagnosed with papillary type (25/97 of them had poorly differentiated thyroid malignancy) who have been thyroidectomy candidates between January and December 2020. The authors explored phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK1) expression via tissue microarray and subsequent IHC analysis. PGK1 represents an enzyme in the glycolytic chain, which has been associated with malignancy progression (mostly in non-thyroid malignancies). In this cohort, PGK1-positive expression correlated with poorly differentiated profile, the presence of lymph node metastases, a tumor diameter larger than 1 cm, and advanced tumor, node and metastasis (TNM) stages (III or IV), as well as recurrence of the condition during a three-year post-surgery follow-up.
Another retrospective study included 73 patients from January 2010 to December 2023 who were diagnosed with high-grade differentiated (eight cases), poorly differentiated (35 cases) or anaplastic carcinomas (30 cases). All types associated with differentiated components, but at different rates (8/8, 5/35 and 19/30 patients, respectively). The expression of programmed cell death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) based on IHC analysis varied (5/8, 0/35 and 9/19, respectively). In addition, molecular analysis of BRAFV600E and TERT promoter mutations was performed based on the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) extracted from the paraffin-embedded samples and showed that 26% were BRAF-positive (19 patients, including 5/8, 0/35 and 14/30, respectively) and 21.9% were TERT-positive (16 cases, including 0/8, 2/35 and 14/30, respectively). 62.5% of the TERT-positive subjects associated a PD-L1-positive status. Hence, PD-L1 inhibitors might show a limited applicability in poorly differentiated carcinoma; however, a subset of these subjects could benefit from checkpoint inhibitors, specifically, radioiodine-resistant, BRAF-positive individuals.
Moreover, thyroid neoplasms affected by neurotrophic tropomyosin receptor kinase (NTRK)1/2/3 or anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) translocation represent less than 2%, and most data suggested that papillary cancer involves these anomalies. Ghossein et al. conducted a retrospective study in 82 patients with various histological types of thyroid malignancies (including 3/82 with poorly differentiated cancer) and showed that pan-tropomyosin receptor kinase (TRK) and ALK IHC features might serve as screening methods and, in case any weak or focal positive staining is detected, further confirmatory molecular analysis is needed. ALK or NTRK fusions were detected in 12 cases, and one case was a poorly differentiated type.
Sample case: a poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma in a male adult in his 50s: (A) Microscopy imaging showing poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma (HE staining, ×200); Immunohistochemistry aspect of the tumor cells: (B) CK19 positive in some areas of the tumor cells (×200); (C) Thyroglobulin positive in some areas of the tumor cells (×100); (D) Ki67 20% positive in the tumor cells (×200); (E) PAX8 diffusely positive in the tumor cells (×40); (F) TTF-1 diffusely positive in the tumor cells (×40). CK19: Cytokeratin 19; HE: Hematoxylin–Eosin; PAX8: Paired box 8; TTF-1: Thyroid transcription factor-1

Molecular and genetic characterization
Over the last four decades, the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Sanger, as well as parallel sequencing analysis allowed a re-characterization of malignant tumors, including endocrine cancers. Being employed to provide a complex genomic profile, they offered new diagnosis and prognostic tools, and potential therapeutic targets. Differentiated thyroid cancers originating from follicular epithelial cells keep the primary cellular programming of these follicular cells (e.g., papillary, follicular and oncocytic/Hürthle carcinomas) and 90% to 95% of them associate an identifiable genetic driver, noting two main clusters: BRAF- and RAS-driven mutations causing molecular alterations that induce an aggressive clinical behavior. Thus, understanding the genetic and molecular constellation becomes particularly useful in poorly differentiated type, having BRAF and RAS as predominant drivers, as opposite to anaplastic cancer with TP53, TERT promoter and phosphoinositide 3-kinase/protein kinase B (PI3K/AKT) signaling as main drivers, but the landscape remains heterogeneous and intricate.
Autophagy-related molecules [β-catenin, microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 isoform B (LC3B), and p62] were analyzed via dual-color immunofluorescence in 70 patients what underwent surgery for thyroid nodules (6/70 of them had poorly differentiated cancer). P62 immuno-reactivity was rarely observed in this type, as opposite to papillary category, especially classical and tall cell subtypes, whereas co-localized LC3B and β-catenin in intra-nuclear cytoplasmic inclusions. P62 and LC3B and β-catenin co-localization correlated with BRAFV600E mutation. Abnormal β-catenin may reflect autophagy dysfunction triggering genomic instability, as a loop in carcinogenesis. Another observational study in 21 patients with anaplastic carcinoma and 26 subjects with poorly differentiated thyroid cancer, respectively, used formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples to analyze the immune interactions (which are typically hot or altered immunosuppressed, and inert or cold immunophenotypes, respectively) via exploring Wnt/β-catenin pathway in relationship with TP53 mutations. The rate of mutations varied from 83.3% [with a high expression of β-catenin-regulated C–C motif chemokine ligand 4 (CCL4)] to 12.5%, respectively. In cold immuno-phenotypes of poorly differentiated type, β-catenin was overexpressed. Loss of p53 function was inversely associated with β-catenin expression. Of note, TP53 mutations were found to be poor prognostic factors in cancers originating from the follicular cells. These were the results of the Molecular Screening and Therapeutics (MoST) program that included 40 patients with differentiated (n=17), poorly differentiated (n=13) and anaplastic (n=10) cancers. The rate of mutations was as follows: 42.5% (TP53), 27.5% (BRAFV600E), 22.5% (NRAS) and 17.5% (TERT promoter). Independent poor prognostic factors were found: the presence of TP53 and/or PI3K/AKT pathway mutations, respectively, the confirmation of poorly differentiated cancer and anaplastic cancer [hazard ratio (HR) of 4.73, p=0.017; HR of 5.19, p=0.039; and HR of 12.93, p=0.04)].
As mentioned, the early identification of BRAF/RAS/TERT mutations amid the cytological analysis might help the overall case management. A retrospective study from 1993 until 2015 analyzed the FNA (only Bethesda IV category) with concern to C228T mutation of TERT promoter and post-surgery specimens. Out of 61 cases, 12.6% (10 patients) had a positive mutation with a higher rate in poorly differentiated carcinoma, while half of the subjects with persistent disease also had it. Another study on 91 patients (41/91 with papillary, 15/91 with poorly differentiated and 35/91 with anaplastic thyroid cancer) providing 215 FFPE samples identified TERT amplification in 17%, 20% and 17% of them, respectively, this event being associated with tumor recurrence and fatal outcome, as well as TERT activation (in 67% of the cases with poorly differentiated and 100% of anaplastic cancers, respectively), which correlated with tumor dedifferentiation. Overall, TERT amplification might serve as risk stratification marker in daily practice.
Additionally, a larger study in 345 patients (124/345 had anaplastic, 47/345 had poorly differentiated and 174/345 had papillary cancers, respectively) provided a proteogenomic characterization upon using FFPE samples for whole exome sequencing (WES). The most frequent mutations in poorly differentiated and anaplastic cancers were: TP53 (48%; 58.8% versus 28.6%), TERT promoter (36.5%; 46.3% versus 18.2%). BRAF mutation (affecting 23% of the patients from these two types) correlated with an older age. Of note, DICER1 mutations were also identified (25% versus 7.8%). Mutations associated with poor prognosis included TP53 (p=0.006), BRAF (p=0.00027) and TERT promoter (p<0.0001).
The tumor suppressor folliculin (FLCN) gene, which is connected to Birt–Hogg–Dubé syndrome, has been studied in relationship with thyroid cancer, but only inconclusive results have been generated so far. Less than 1% of the thyroid malignancies present alterations of this gene. In 2025, a novel case report of a 59-year-old female was reported to associate an oncocytic poorly differentiated carcinoma, while co-presenting FLCN (FLCN p.E464), retinoblastoma 1 (RB1) (RB1 p.R320) and TP53 (TP53 p.E336fs) mutations amid next-generation sequencing (NGS). The disease had a poor prognosis despite multimodal approach across a two-year survival (thyroidectomy, radioiodine therapy, radiotherapy for distant metastases, in addition to Sorafenib, Pembrolizumab, and Lenvatinib were offered to the patient).
Among novel biomarkers, cell-free DNA (cfDNA), which is provided from peripheral blood, offered so far, a limited amount of information amidst thyroid malignancies. A prospective study conducted between 2020 and 2024 enrolled 40 patients with thyroid cancers (including 11 subjects with poorly differentiated type) and analyzed 50 key cancer-related genes via Oncomine Precision Assay panel upon extracting cfDNA. Ninety percent of the patients presented tumoral mutations, noting the sensitivity of cfDNA was 86% before using therapy with TKIs and decreased to 54% after treatment. Increasing cfDNA status was correlated with a worse progression-free survival (p<0.01), and further exploration of cfDNA-based assays is mandatory.

Multimodal therapeutic management
Multi-targeted TKIs are continuously expanding their indications in advanced, aggressive, and radioiodine-resistant thyroid cancers. For example, Lenvatinib represents a first-line approved drug in radioiodine-resistant type. A systematic review from 2025 (upon a search from inception until July 2024) showed that the drug achieved a partial response or a stable disease in the radioiodine-resistant form, and only potential usefulness in poorly differentiated cancer, and very limited effects as monotherapy in anaplastic type. The combination with immune check point inhibitors (e.g., Pembrolizumab) seemed promising in non-responders to monotherapy. For medullar thyroid cancer, the level of statistical evidence was based on phase II studies at this point. A real-world, single-center, retrospective study analyzed the use of first-line Lenvatinib as monotherapy in 77 patients with advanced follicular cell-derived cancer (including 13 subjects with poorly differentiated type, representing 17%), between 2015 and 2023. The patients underwent thyroidectomy (79%) followed by radioiodine therapy (median cumulative dose of 231 mCi). At Lenvatinib initiation, they presented lung (81%), bone (53%), and liver (8%) metastases. Median discontinuation time was 33 months, and a shorter duration correlated with an older age, hepatic spreading, and TP53-positive expression. Of note, among the subgroup of 19 subjects with a poor response, 2/19 (11%) had poorly differentiated type, while the subgroup with an excellent response included three other patients (3/19, representing 16%) with the same histological profile. BRAFV600E-positive patients with contraindications to Lenvatinib (e.g., risk of fistulization) became candidates to BRAF/mitogen-activated extracellular kinase (MEK) inhibitors as first-line monotherapy; therefore, they were not included in this study which might be a bias.
Neoadjuvant therapy in aggressive thyroid malignancy currently associates a rather low level of statistical evidence based on small-sized clinical trials. This represents an emergent approach in locally advanced thyroid tumors. A single-center, real-life study analyzed this regime in 16 patients with locally advanced thyroid cancer (2/16 of them had poorly differentiated thyroid cancer), between January 2019 and June 2024. The patients either underwent thyroidectomy after therapy or refused surgery, but they all received a combination of TKIs, immune checkpoint inhibitors or chemotherapy. Objective response rate was of 50%, and disease control rate was of 81.25%, while the median overall survival was 17 months, including 11/16 patients without recurrence in this time (one of these 11 subjects was diagnosed with poorly differentiated carcinoma). Further evidence is mandatory. As specified, a therapeutic alternative in BRAFV600E-positive cancers (anaplastic and poorly differentiated histological types) was represented by neoadjuvant BRAF-targeted therapy and immunotherapy before thyroidectomy. A single-center, retrospective study in 30 patients who underwent this therapy for at least 30 days applied 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) to noninvasively assess the residual high-risk disease, thus serving as an early potential prognostic marker.
In addition, the approach for advanced/refractory thyroid cancers might include salvage therapy with Pemetrexed-Carboplatin, which was studied amid a Mayo Clinic experience starting with 2019. The study retrospectively analyzed the outcome in 11 patients (and four of them had poorly differentiated cancer), thus suggesting the potential efficacy of using Pemetrexed-Carboplatin.
A retrospective bi-centric study from 1997 to 2018 included 51 patients with resectable, poorly differentiated thyroid cancer who received adjuvant postoperative intensity-modulated external beam radiotherapy. Fifty-three percent of them had metastases, and external radiotherapy improved the five-year local control (100% versus 17.5%, p=0.02). Positive resection margins, as well as extra-thyroid extension were associated with a poor survival rate (across univariate analysis, which was not confirmed in the multiple regression analysis).
With regard to prognostic markers, the histological, IHC and molecular analysis in addition to the imaging assessment are essential, and they might lead to a multimodal strategy from the start. For instance, a retrospective study in 136 subjects confirmed with either aggressive papillary thyroid cancers (n=72) versus 62 patients with high-grade follicular cell-derived malignancies (poorly differentiated carcinoma and differentiated high-grade type) confirmed a female predominance (70.3% versus 59.7%, p=0.0005). After a three-year follow-up, the rate of disease persistence/recurrence was 40.3% versus 29.3% (p=0.137), while the mortality rate was 4.5% versus 1.3% (p=0.38). The risk of recurrence/persistence was correlated with the vascular invasion (HR of 2.5, p<0.05), extra-thyroid spreading (HR of 4.2, p<0.05). Another potential prognostic factor was Ki67 proliferative index (recurrence was higher in those with a value of ≥20%). Another single-center study in 65 individuals confirmed with thyroid cancer and positive NTRK fusions (an oncogenic driven in thyroid malignancies) also included 4/65 cases with poorly differentiated type. These fusions were correlated with an extensive follicular pattern of cells growth, while in patients who underwent therapy with Larotrectinib, NTRK solvent front mutations were correlated with drug resistance in poorly differentiated and anaplastic types, which recommended caution in using TKIs.
On short note, in this sample-focused analysis, we reviewed the main aspects of research which are currently found in the topic of poorly differentiated carcinoma (Table 1).
Study-focused analysis according to our methods
Reference	 			 	Study design	 			 	Study population	 			 	Assessments	 			 	Main findings	 		 		 	Yamazaki	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Single-center, retrospective study	 			 	503 recorded deaths due to thyroid cancer (from January 2005 until June 2024)	 			 	Analysis of thyroid cancer-related mortality	 			 	31% had anaplastic thyroid cancer; 63% had differentiated type; 3% had poorly differentiated type; 2% had medullary type	 		 		 	The most common mechanisms: 38% – respiratory insufficiency; 19% – local causes; 4% – brain-related conditions	 		 		 	Maeda	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	79 patients with thyroid cancer (8/79 had poorly differentiated type)	 			 	MRI	 	versus	 	CT features	 			 	Hypointensity was more frequent in papillary	 	versus	 	anaplastic	 	versus	 	poorly differentiated (60%	 	versus	 	0%	 	versus	 	13%,	 	p	 	<0.01)	 		 		 	Intra-tumor ring-shaped hypointensity on T2WI was more frequent in anaplastic	 	versus	 	poorly differentiated	 	versus	 	papillary type (64%	 	versus	 	13%	 	versus	 	18%,	 	p	 	<0.01)	 		 		 	Calcaterra	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Single-center, retrospective study	 			 	70 patients with thyroid nodules who underwent FNA cytology and	 	TERT	 	testing	 			 	TERT	 	promoter mutation (	 	C228T	 	/	 	C250T	 	) in the preoperative FNA samples	 	via	 	TSv3 testing: single mutation (26% of the patients)	 	versus	 	combination	 	TERT	 	+	 	BRAF	 		 	V600E	 		 	,	 	RAS,	 	CNA (74% of the patients)	 			 	33% of each group involved poorly differentiated or anaplastic carcinoma	 		 		 	Schlegel	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	23 patients (1/23 with poorly differentiated carcinoma) who underwent FNA and had indeterminate thyroid nodules	 			 	PTEN	 	mutation upon cytological analysis	 			 	PTEN	 	mutations were correlated with a 25% risk of malignancy in cytological indeterminate thyroid nodules	 		 		 	Coleman	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Case report	 			 	75-year-old female with poorly differentiated carcinoma	 			 	Total thyroidectomy and left-sided selective neck dissection	 			 	Cutaneous tumor seeding upon core biopsy	 		 		 	Seok	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Case report	 			 	71-year-old female with poorly differentiated carcinoma	 			 	RFA (initially the tumor was considered benign)	 			 	Cutaneous tumor seeding after RFA	 		 		 	Caldeira	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	138 patients with advanced follicular cell-derived thyroid cancer who underwent thyroidectomy and radioiodine therapy (22/138 had differentiated high-grade cancer, 10/138 had poorly differentiated cancer, 106/138 had non-high-grade thyroid carcinoma)	 			 	Clinicopathological assessment and outcome	 			 	Differentiated high-grade	 	versus	 	poorly differentiated type had lower size, a lower rate of necrosis, and an increased mitotic count, a better prognosis	 		 		 	Independent poor prognostic factors (	 	n	 	=138): ≥55 years (HR 19.625,	 	p	 	=0.005); male gender (HR 7.441,	 	p	 	=0.029)	 		 		 	Orlando	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	132 patients with thyroid cancer (48 patients with poorly differentiated type)	 			 	Presence of fibrosclerosis was assessed as the percentage of tumor area and semi-quantitatively scored of intra-tumoral fibrosis	 			 	Intra-tumoral fibrosis associated with	 	a large tumor size, extent of vascular invasion, necrosis, high mitotic index, positive nodal status, and aggressive clinical outcome	 		 		 	Shi	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Single-center, retrospective study	 			 	97 patients with papillary cancer (25/97 patients had poorly differentiated cancer)	 			 	PGK1 expression	 	via	 	IHC analysis	 			 	31.96% of patients experienced recurrence correlated with PGK1-positive expression	 		 		 	PGK1-positive	 	versus	 	-negative patients had a lower survival rate of 79.2%	 		 		 	Piermattei	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective	 			 	73 patients with aggressive cancer (8/73 had high-grade differentiated carcinoma, 35/73 had poorly differentiated, and 30/73 had anaplastic carcinoma)	 			 	PD-L1	 	via	 	IHC analysis	 			 	PD-L1 positive: 5/8, 0/35, and 9/19	 		 		 	BRAF	 		 	V600E	 		 	and	 	TERT	 	promoter analysis (DNA extracted from the paraffin-embedded tissue)	 			 	BRAF	 	-positive: 5/8, 0/35, and 14/30	 		 		 	TERT	 	-positive: 0/8, 2/35, and 14/30	 		 		 	Ghossein	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Single-center, retrospective study	 			 	82 patients with various histological types of thyroid cancer (3/82 had poorly differentiated cancer)	 			 	Pan-TRK and ALK IHC analysis	 			 	Sensitivity of pan-TRK IHC: 98%	 		 		 	Sensitivity of ALK IHC: 88%	 		 		 	Sailaubekova	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	70 patients with surgery for thyroid nodules (7/70 patients had poorly differentiated cancer)	 			 	Autophagy-related molecules (	 	β	 	-catenin, LC3B, p62)	 	via	 	dual-color immunofluorescence	 			 	Poorly differentiated carcinoma had a low p62 immunoreactivity as opposite to papillary cancer	 		 		 	Moretti	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Observational study	 			 	21 patients with anaplastic carcinoma	 	versus	 	26 patients with poorly differentiated thyroid cancer	 			 	Analysis of Wnt/	 	β	 	-catenin pathway in relationship with	 	TP53	 	mutations	 			 	Rate of	 	TP53	 	mutations: 83.3%	 	versus	 	12.5%	 		 		 	Novis	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	40 patients with differentiated (	 	n	 	=17), poorly differentiated (	 	n	 	=13) and anaplastic (	 	n	 	=10) cancers	 			 	Rate of mutations and analysis of prognostic factors	 			 	Rate of mutations: 42.5% (	 	TP53	 	), 27.5% (	 	BRAF	 		 	V600E	 		 	), 22.5% (	 	NRAS	 	), and 17.5% (	 	TERT	 	promoter)	 		 		 	Bella Burgos	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	61 patients with Bethesda IV at FNA cytology	 			 	C228T	 	mutation of	 	TERT	 	promoter in FNA and post-surgery specimens	 			 	Positive mutation correlated with a higher rate of poorly differentiated cancer	 		 		 	Sara	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	91 patients with thyroid cancer (41/91 had papillary cancer, 15/91 had poorly differentiated cancer, 35/91 had anaplastic type)	 			 	TERT	 	analysis in FFPE samples	 			 	TERT	 	amplification in 17%, 20% and 17% of them, respectively	 		 		 	TERT	 	amplification correlated with vascular invasion (	 	p	 	=0.03637), distant metastases (	 	p	 	=0.04482), and death (	 	p	 	=0.000829)	 		 		 	Pan	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	345 patients with thyroid cancer (124/345 had anaplastic, 47/345 had poorly differentiated, 174/345 had papillary type)	 			 	FFPE samples for WES	 			 	Mutations in poorly differentiated and anaplastic cancers were:	 	TP53	 	(48%);	 	TERT	 	promoter (36.5%);	 	BRAF	 	mutations (23%);	 	DICER1	 	mutations (32%)	 		 		 	Hassan	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Case report	 			 	59-year-old female with oncocytic poorly differentiated carcinoma	 			 	FLCN	 	(	 	FLCN	 	p.E464	 	),	 	RB1	 	(	 	RB1 p.R320	 	) and	 	TP53	 	(	 	TP53 p.E336fs	 	) mutations	 			 	Two-year survival despite multimodal management	 		 		 	Wijewardene	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Prospective study	 			 	40 patients with thyroid cancer (11 patients had poorly differentiated type)	 			 	cfDNA extraction followed by the analysis of 50 key cancer-related genes	 	via	 	Oncomine Precision Assay panel	 			 	cfDNA sensitivity was 86% before tyrosine kinase inhibitors and decreased to 54% after treatment	 		 		 	Increasing cfDNA status was correlated with a worse PFS (	 	p	 	<0.01)	 		 		 	Ruicci	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Single-center, retrospective study	 			 	77 patients with advanced follicular cell-derived cancer (13/77 had poorly differentiated cancer)	 			 	The patients underwent adjuvant therapy with first-line monotherapy Lenvatinib after thyroidectomy and radioiodine therapy	 			 	Subgroup of 19 subjects with a poor response included 2/19 (11%) with poorly differentiated cancer	 		 		 	Subgroup with an excellent response included 3/19 (16%) with poorly differentiated cancer	 		 		 	Xu	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Single-center, retrospective study	 			 	16 patients diagnosed with locally advanced thyroid cancer (2/16 patients had poorly differentiated cancer)	 			 	The patients underwent neoadjuvant therapy followed or not by thyroidectomy	 			 	Objective response rate: 50% disease control rate – 81.25%; median overall survival – 17 months	 		 		 	Dagher	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Single-center, retrospective study	 			 	30 patients with anaplastic and poorly differentiated thyroid cancer	 			 	18	 		 	F-FDG-PET/CT evaluation of the efficacy for neoadjuvant	 	BRAF	 	-targeted therapy and immunotherapy before thyroidectomy	 			 	High-risk (including eight patients with poorly differentiated cancer) detection at the optimal threshold of SUL	 		 	max	 		 	≥2.75): sensitivity of 0.784 (95% CI, 0.628–0.886)	 	versus	 	specificity of 0.702 (95% CI, 0.573–0.805); accuracy of 0.734 (95% CI, 0.637–0.813)	 		 		 	Lee	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	11 patients with advanced/refractory thyroid cancer (four patients had poorly differentiated type)	 			 	Efficacy analysis under Pemetrexed-Carboplatin	 			 	Median PFS of 29 months in differentiated plus poorly differentiated group (	 	n	 	=7)	 		 		 	Jonker	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Bi-center, retrospective study	 			 	51 patients with resectable, poorly differentiated thyroid cancer	 			 	The patients underwent adjuvant postoperative intensity-modulated external beam radiotherapy	 			 	External radiotherapy improved the five-year local control (100%	 	versus	 	17.5%,	 	p	 	=0.02)	 		 		 	Radi	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Retrospective study	 			 	136 patients with aggressive papillary thyroid cancer (	 	n	 	=72)	 	versus	 	patients with high-grade follicular cell-derived malignancies (poorly differentiated carcinoma and differentiated high-grade type,	 	n	 	=62)	 			 	Longitudinal analysis of prognostic (clinical data)	 			 	Disease persistence/recurrence was 40.3%	 	versus	 	29.3% (	 	p	 	=0.137)	 		 		 	Risk of recurrence/persistence was correlated with vascular invasion (HR 2.5,	 	p	 	<0.05), extra-thyroid spreading (HR 4.2,	 	p	 	<0.05)	 		 		 	Marczyk	 	et al.	 	(2025) 		 	Single-center, retrospective study	 			 	65 patients with thyroid cancer and	 	NTRK	 	fusions (5/65 had poorly differentiated type)	 			 	NTRK	 	fusions analysis	 			 	NTRK	 	solvent front mutations correlated with resistance to Larotrectinib in poorly differentiated and anaplastic cancer
18F-FDG PET/CT: 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography; ALK: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase; BRAF: B-Raf proto-oncogene, serine/threonine kinase; cfDNA: Cell-free deoxyribonucleic acid; CI: Confidence interval; CNA: Copy number alterations; CT: Computed tomography; DNA: Deoxyribonucleic acid; FFPE: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded; FLCN: Folliculin; FNA: Fine-needle aspiration; HR: Hazard ratio; IHC: Immunohistochemistry; LC3B: Microtubule-associated protein light chain 3 isoform B; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; NRAS: Neuroblastoma RAS viral (V-Ras) oncogene homolog; NTRK: Neurotrophic tropomyosin receptor kinase; PD-L1: Programmed cell death-ligand 1; PFS: Progression-free survival; PGK1: Phosphoglycerate kinase 1; PTEN: Phosphatase and tensin homolog; RB1: Retinoblastoma 1; RFA: Radiofrequency ablation; SUL: Standardized uptake value (SUV) corrected for lean body mass; T2WI: T2-weighted imaging; TERT: Telomerase reverse transcriptase; TP53: Tumor protein p53; TRK: Tropomyosin receptor kinase; TSv3: ThyroSeq v3; WES: Whole exome sequencing

Further research
Anomalies of mitochondrial respiration, as expressed, for instance, by microribonucleic acid (miRNA)-590-5p dysfunction has been analyzed in various cancers; at this point, their role in the apoptosis of thyroid cancer cells is under study, and further clinical data might be useful to address the mitochondrial process as a therapeutic target.
Tumor ecosystem heterogeneity associates a large spectrum of microenvironment-related contributors to the thyrocytes proliferation, and single-cell RNA sequencing was applied in order to describe transcriptomes from para-tumor’ landscape, such as extracellular matrix cancer-associated fibroblasts_lysosomal associated membrane protein family member 5 (emCAFs_LAMP5), fibroblast activation protein (FAP), etc., which in the future might become useful prognostic markers in the clinical practice, or in order to analyze the transcriptome of metastasis-associated genes. Generally, the interaction between thyroid malignancy and its microenvironment contributes to the tumor progression, extracellular matrix being an additional clue for understanding the neoplasia behavior and potential therapeutic target (e.g., tumor-associated macrophages or tumor-associated mast cells, etc.). Moreover, an inadequate oxygen supply to the microenvironment stabilizes hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1α and -2α, which leads to oncogenic effects, including epithelial–mesenchymal transition, as they had been described in aggressive thyroid cancers. This opens new therapeutic options to be identified.
Thyroid hormone receptor beta (TRβ) signaling acts as a transcription factor for tumor suppression by communicating with chromatin-modifying protein complexes, and recent data suggested it may be part of the epigenome coregulatory proteins mediation in poorly differentiated thyroid cancer. This new paradigm in the field of thyroid malignancy (as currently researched in the complex domain of neuroendocrine neoplasia) and further reprogramming tumor epigenetics might become a next step in clinical management. Moreover, innovative techniques such as patient-derived tumor organoid models based on patients’ cells and pluripotent stem cells might help elucidating tumor biology and offering a tailored strategy of management.
As mentioned, DICER1 pathogenic variants, either germline or somatic, have been associated with an increased risk of developing multiple tumors, either benign or malignant, including of follicular thyroid cell origin underlying a large morphological spectrum.
Additionally, cluster of differentiation 44 (CD44) represents a transmembrane glycoprotein that interferes with cell adhesion and migration, thus, additional information might be provided by the analysis of CD44 variants, as tumor progression contributor, as well as potential factor in multidrug resistance. Allele frequency (AF) has been studied in relationship with BRAF, TERT, RAS and TP53 mutations, and AF detection via NGS might provide useful insights of a targeted personalized therapeutic intervention.
Moreover, noting than on the background of a poorly differentiated carcinoma, islets of differentiated (e.g., papillary) type might be still identified, further research of papillary thyroid malignancy progression and contributors to a poor outcome is needed, included factors such as integrin family, for instance, integrin α3 promotes cell proliferation and migration via signal transduction interferences on protein tyrosine kinases, or mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade that represents a key element in malignancy development (involving RAS and BRAF mutations). Similarly, common pathogenic factors in papillary thyroid cancer and autoimmune Hashimoto’s thyroiditis [e.g., serpin family A member 1 (SERPINA1) gene] may be related to the progression of a poorly differentiated cancer.

Study limitations
As limits of the current work, we mention the single database search and the time frame amid a non-systematic design, but we intended to provide a wider spectrum of the current perspective in the field of poorly differentiated type.

Conclusions
The current data offers a robust framework for elucidating the biology of poorly differenced thyroid malignancy and further on, it provides the basis for a multimodal therapeutic approach. Emergent biomarkers might be detected from cytological analysis based on FNA or blood assays as cfDNA, but the most important thing remains the identification of the molecular and genetic constellation in terms of evaluating RAS, TERT, BRAF, TP53, PTEN, CNA and PIK3CA profile, which serve as prognostic markers and pointers of anticancer medical therapy. The issue is ongoing, and we expect a massive expansion within the following years, across a guideline-based, as well as a personalized decision.

Conflict of interests
The authors declare that they have no affiliations with or involvement in any organization or entity with any financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript.

References
High-grade encapsulated follicular cell thyroid carcinomas]
Comparison of ultrasound findings of papillary thyroid carcinoma subtypes based on the 2022 WHO Classification of thyroid neoplasms
Prioritization of predisposition genes for familial non-medullary thyroid cancer by whole-genome sequencing
Aggressive types of malignant thyroid neoplasms
The road ahead: a brief guide to navigating the 2022 WHO Classification of endocrine and neuroendocrine tumours
WHO 2022 updates on follicular cell and C-cell derived thyroid neoplasm
A comparison of the WHO 2004 and WHO 2017 thyroid tumor classifications
The 2022 WHO Classification of thyroid tumors: novel concepts in nomenclature and grading
Update from the 2022 World Health Organization Classification of thyroid tumors: a standardized diagnostic approach
The new endocrine WHO Classification: what does this mean for thyroid cytology
Changes and perspectives in the new 2022 WHO Classification of thyroid neoplasms]
Identification of specific biomarkers for anaplastic thyroid carcinoma through spatial transcriptomic and immunohistochemical profiling
Cell cycle and HIF-1 related gene expression alteration in thyroid cell lines under microgravity
Metastases in daily endocrine practice
Risk factors and outcomes of metastatic poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma
Hydrogel-driven innovations for targeted delivery, immune modulation, and tissue repair in thyroid cancer therapy
Age-specific risk of second primary malignant neoplasm after radioactive iodine treatment for differentiated thyroid cancer
Progression of follicular thyroid carcinomas to anaplastic thyroid carcinomas: molecular and clinicopathologic characteristics with comparison to papillary thyroid carcinoma-derived anaplastic thyroid carcinomas
Reproductive factors, sex hormone levels, and differentiated thyroid cancer risk: a Mendelian randomization study
Multidisciplinary Canadian consensus on the multimodal management of high-risk and radioactive iodine-refractory thyroid carcinoma
Aggressive thyroid carcinomas clinical and molecular features: a systematic review
Analysis of immediate 503 thyroid carcinoma deaths: trend of single institution in 2005-2024
Multinodular and vacuolating neuronal tumor - challenges and perspectives
Predictive value of hematologic parameters and clinicopathological features of poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma
Management of poorly differentiated thyroid cancer and differentiated high-grade thyroid carcinoma
The long journey towards personalized targeted therapy in poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma (PDTC): a case report and systematic review
MRI features of histological subtypes of thyroid cancer in comparison with CT findings: differentiation between anaplastic, poorly differentiated, and papillary thyroid carcinoma
Ultrasound and histopathological assessment of benign, borderline, and malignant thyroid tumors in pediatric patients: an illustrative review and literature overview
Prognosis of poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Molecular diagnostics enable targeted therapies for anaplastic and poorly differentiated thyroid cancer]
Molecular pathology of thyroid tumors: essential points to comprehend regarding the latest WHO Classification
Anaplastic and poorly differentiated thyroid carcinomas: genetic evidence of high-grade transformation from differentiated thyroid carcinoma
Fine-needle aspiration cytologic diagnosis of intrathyroidal thymic carcinoma: a review of the literature
Disease-specific and histological outcomes of preoperative TERT promoter mutation detected in isolation or in combination with other mutations in thyroid neoplasms
Detection of PTEN mutations in fine needle aspiration biopsies of indeterminate thyroid nodules: impact on diagnosis and prognosis
Cutaneous tumour seeding following percutaneous sampling of a thyroid malignancy
Anaplastic and poorly differentiated thyroid carcinomas at intervention sites: implications of track seeding and the importance of follow-up monitoring - report of two cases
Comparative analysis of follicular cell-derived thyroid carcinoma: assessing the impact of high-grade features in an advanced disease cohort
Prognostic impact of fibrosclerotic changes in non-papillary, non-anaplastic, follicular cell-derived thyroid carcinomas
Phosphoglycerate kinase 1 as a potential prognostic biomarker in papillary thyroid carcinoma
Evaluation of PD-L1, TERT promoter mutations, and BRAFV600E mutation in poorly differentiated, differentiated high grade thyroid carcinoma and anaplastic carcinoma of the thyroid: our institutional experience
Expanding the histologic spectrum of thyroid neoplasms with NTRK1/2/3 or ALK translocation: a single-center retrospective study of 82 cases
Update on somatic genomic alterations in follicular cell-derived thyroid cancers
Second primary differentiated thyroid carcinoma in adult cancer survivors: a SEER Database Analysis
Altered expression of autophagy-related molecules and β-catenin in different subtypes of thyroid cancer: co-localization in intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions
Wnt/β-catenin activation and TP53 mutations associate with distinct immune profiles in advanced thyroid cancer
Oncogenic mutations in the TP53 and PI-3 kinase/AKT pathway are independent predictors of survival for advanced thyroid cancer: analysis from the Molecular Screening and Therapeutics (MoST) program
Study of the C228T mutation of the TERT promoter in thyroid aspirative punctures of IV category of the Bethesda classification
TERT amplification a risk stratification marker in papillary thyroid carcinoma, significantly correlated with tumor recurrence and survival
Integrative proteogenomic characterization reveals therapeutic targets in poorly differentiated and anaplastic thyroid cancers
Folliculin (FLCN) in thyroid tumors: incidence, significance, and role as a driver gene and secondary alteration
Evaluating the prognostic potential of circulating cell-free DNA in advanced thyroid cancer
Tailored management of advanced thyroid cancer patients treated with Lenvatinib or Vandetanib: the role of a multimodal approach
Exploring the role of immunotherapy in the management of follicular cell-derived thyroid cancer
The link between bone osteocalcin and energy metabolism in a group of postmenopausal women
Prospects and challenges of immunotherapy for thyroid cancer
The role of Lenvatinib in different types of thyroid cancer
Real-world treatment outcomes and clinicopathologic and molecular determinants of response to first-line Lenvatinib in patients with advanced follicular cell-derived thyroid cancer
Transforming thyroid cancer management: the impact of neoadjuvant therapy
Neoadjuvant treatment in locally advanced thyroid cancer: a single institution experience
F]-FDG uptake as a marker of residual anaplastic and poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma following BRAF-targeted therapy
Pemetrexed-Carboplatin salvage therapy in advanced thyroid cancers
Adjuvant external beam radiotherapy reduces local recurrence in poorly differentiated thyroid cancer: a multicenter retrospective cohort study describing outcomes in the treatment of resectable poorly differentiated thyroid cancer
Characteristics and prognostic markers of aggressive subtypes of thyroid cancer: a retrospective study
NTRK fusion-positive thyroid carcinoma: from diagnosis to targeted therapy
miR-590-5p mediates mitochondrial respiration, proliferation, and apoptosis in thyroid carcinoma cells via fibroblast growth factor receptor substrate 2
Single-cell RNA sequencing reveals the heterogeneity in differentiation trajectory and tumor microenvironment leading to more aggressive phenotypes of papillary thyroid cancer in children and young adult patients
Identification of novel prognostic biomarkers for thyroid cancer by integrated transcriptome analysis of metastasis-associated genes
Turning tumor microenvironmental foes to friends: a new opportunity for thyroid cancer therapy and redifferentiation
FAM20C promotes papillary thyroid cancer proliferation and metastasis via epithelial-mesenchymal transition
Current landscape of hypoxia in thyroid cancer pathogenesis and treatment
Epigenomic modulators and thyroid hormone receptor β agonists: a new paradigm for tumor suppression in thyroid cancer
Epigenetic mechanisms in neuroendocrine neoplasms: is there a place for inhibitors of DNA binding proteins
Molecular imaging of neuroendocrine tumors: current applications and future trends
Novel insights in advanced thyroid carcinoma: from mechanisms to treatments: development of 3D organoid models to study aggressive thyroid cancers
Genome-wide transcriptome analysis and drug target discovery reveal key genes and pathways in thyroid cancer metastasis
DICER1 mutation-associated follicular thyroid tumor with bizarre and pleomorphic nuclei
The importance of association between sex steroids deficiency, reduction of bone mineral density and falling risk in men with implications in medical rehabilitation
Focal high-grade areas with a tumor-in-tumor pattern: another feature of pediatric DICER1-associated thyroid carcinoma
CD44 variant expression in follicular cell-derived thyroid cancers: implications for overcoming multidrug resistance
Allele frequency in thyroid cancer: mechanisms, challenges, and applications in cancer therapy
ITGA3-MET interaction promotes papillary thyroid cancer progression via ERK and PI3K/AKT pathways
Exploring the tumor suppressor role of RIN1 in familial thyroid carcinoma
HMGA2 overexpression in papillary thyroid cancer promotes thyroid cell dedifferentiation and invasion, and these effects are counteracted by Suramin
Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis and obesity
Bioinformatic analysis of serpina1 expression in papillary thyroid carcinoma and its potential association with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and breast cancer: coincidence or correlation
Thyroid carcinoma in patients with Graves’ disease: an institutional experience
Thyroid cancer phenotypes in relation to inflammation and autoimmunity