Olfactory–gustatory cross-modal integration: mechanisms of aroma-induced sweetness enhancement, sensory evaluation methodologies, neuroimaging evidence and advances in influencing factors
Graphical abstract
Highlights
The physiological basis, interactions, methods, and factors of taste–smell perception are summarised.
Numerous studies are cited, and aroma sweetening’s feasibility and potential are confirmed.
Bottom-up pathways, new methods, mood/oral factors, docking, dynamics, and compounds are added.
A detailed overview of sweet taste physiology is provided, with images clarifying perception.
Aroma sweetening potential is highlighted, and cell-based methods are proposed for verification.
Background
Excessive sugar intake induces health issues such as excess energy, obesity and cardiovascular diseases. Reducing sugar consumption has become a global consensus; however, achieving this without compromising flavour perception remains a major challenge. Previous studies have highlighted the potential risks associated with non-nutritive sweeteners, and novel measures for sugar reduction, such as modifying sweetener ratios and enzymatic conversion, are limited in scope. In-depth studies have revealed that aroma-induced sweetness enhancement is a promising alternative for reducing sugar consumption without compromising perceived sweetness, enabling a healthy way of enjoying sweet flavours.
Aim of review
By systematically sorting out current knowledge on the mechanism of action, evaluation approaches, and influencing factors of aroma-induced sweetness enhancement, and revealing the cross-modal interaction mechanism between aroma and taste, this study aims to provide a theoretical framework for advancing research on multisensory flavor perception. Furthermore, it underscores the potential of the interdisciplinary integration of neurosensory science and food science to inform the design of flavor optimization strategies for low-sugar products, thereby contributing to healthier dietary solutions for targeted populations.
Key scientific concepts of review
Herein, the physiological basis of taste and smell and their perceptual pathways are systematically reviewed, and the neural and psychological factors of olfactory–gustatory synergy are investigated. In addition, this review summarises the sensory evaluation methods and neuroimaging techniques to assess the sweetening effects of aroma. Moreover, it discusses various factors influencing aroma-induced sweetness enhancement, including the physical properties of food, eating environment, individual differences in consumers and oral processing. Aroma-based sweetening has great potential for sugar reduction without compromising sweetness, and future in-depth research requires interdisciplinary cooperation covering multiple dimensions such as molecular mechanisms, personalisation techniques, ingredient screening, stability optimisation, evaluation method innovation and health regulation adaptation.

Introduction
The tongue distinguishes five basic tastes: sweet, bitter, sour, salty and umami. Among them, Humans have a particular preference for sweetness, which is related to the sensory properties of food, individual genetics, dietary culture and other contextual variables and can further stimulate various multiple sensory organs to induce ingestive behaviours. Most sugars, as a source of sweetness, have been shown to offer the benefits of providing energy and inducing pleasurable sensations. However, numerous studies have indicated that overconsumption of foods containing added sugars is associated with health issues such as excess energy, dental caries, obesity, type II diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular diseases owing to individual metabolic differences and lifestyle-related factors including diet and lifestyle habits. Therefore, food scientists are dedicated to developing innovative alternative strategies to address public concerns about added sugar content and its associated health risks. However, due to the difficult-to-replicate sweetness profile of sugar and its crucial role in food structure, texture, flavour enhancement and product preservation, it remains highly challenging to reduce sugar content without compromising the organoleptic properties of foods. To mitigate these challenges sweetening substitutes—specifically non-nutritive sweeteners (e.g., aspartame, erythritol), have been developed. However, in-depth investigations have revealed that these sweeteners are associated with various safety risks. For instance, sucralose may alter blood glucose levels, induce metabolic syndrome and impair the absorption of therapeutic drugs, while aspartame and its metabolites can cause inflammation. Consequently, researchers have pioneered novel sugar-reduction strategies including natural sweetener substitution, optimised sweetener formulation, food matrix engineering, synergistic enzymatic and microbial bioconversion and microencapsulation-based delivery systems. Representative advancements are as follows: The first is regulating sweetener ratios, a strategy to reduce sugar content in beverages. Mahato et al. combined 56.27 ppm of stevia extract and 81.90 ppm of monk fruit extract, cutting the added sugar in chocolate milk by 50 % while enhancing the product’s overall sensory attributes. The second is 3D printing technology. Khemacheevakul et al. reported that 3D printers used to layer-print chocolate with varying sugar levels can reduce sugar by 19 % without compromising sweetness perception. Third is enzymatic-microbial synergy. In bread production, the loss of sweetness caused by reduced sucrose can be offset by the synergistic release of reducing sugars via enzymatic digestion and microbial metabolism. Studies have shown that combining 4.5 % sucrose, 4.5 % isomaltooligosaccharide, 20 % sourdough (containing Weissella cibaria), amyloglucosidase (0.05 g/100 g flour) and fructokinase (1 g/100 g flour) reduces sucrose by 50 % while maintaining a balance of sweetness, texture and flavour. The fourth is microencapsulation-based delivery technology. Microencapsulation of sweeteners such as acesulfame, aspartame, stevioside, neotame and saccharin reduces the dosage of high-intensity sweeteners, prolongs sweetness release and improves sweetener stability. However, these approaches limited to specific food matrices (liquid vs. solid) and struggle to achieving multisensory sweetness harmonisation and flavour fidelity. In recent years, several studies have demonstrated cross-modal perceptual interactions between aroma and taste, which can enhance or improve food flavour perception. Therefore, aroma-based sweetening is expected to be an effective sugar-reduction method that preserves perceived sweetness, enabling a healthy way to enjoying sweet flavours.
Olfaction and gustation are the two main drivers in flavour perception, and although gustatory and olfactory receptors are physiologically separate from each other, information from the gustatory and olfactory systems is processed and integrated by the brain to generate unique flavour perceptions. Specifically, aroma-based sweetening utilises aroma-induced sweetness enhancement (OISE), and scholars such as Biswas & Szocs have demonstrated this cross-modal compensatory effect, whereby a stimulus from one sensory modality (olfactory) compensates for (or satisfies) desires associated with another sensory modality (gustatory). Notably, the rich informational interaction between olfaction and taste is related to the type and concentration of the aroma compounds, human emotions, cognition, memory and other factors. This cross-modal interaction is key to sweet taste perception and highlights the importance of olfactory information in modulating the multisensory experience of sweet taste. It has now become a global consensus to reduce added sugar in food. Building on the physiological foundations of olfactory and gustatory senses, this review elucidates the mechanisms underlying sweetness perception, clarifies the material basis and mechanism of action of aroma-induced sweetness enhancement, summarizes methods for verifying the efficacy of aroma-mediated sweetness enhancement, and synthesizes the factors influencing aroma-induced sweetness—all with the aim of providing support for the regulation and optimization of flavour quality grounded in the theory of aroma-sweetness interactions.

Mechanism of aroma-induced sweetness enhancement

Taste system and taste perception
Taste perception can be divided into three dimensions, specifically quality, intensity, and affective value—which determine the acceptance and preference of food in humans. Taste receptors are G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family members in humans, this family belongs to the metabotropic glutamate and pheromone receptor subfamilies within GPCRs. The representative receptors of this family are T1R1 (umami-related receptor), T1R2 (sweet-related receptor), T1R3 (umami and sweet-related receptor), metabotropic glutamate receptor, and Ca2+ sensing receptor.
In 2001, Nelson et al. identified the T1R2/T1R3 heterodimer, localized in type II taste bud cells, as the key receptor in sweetness signalling pathways. Variations in its expression and distribution have been documented in studies across species, sexes, and geographical origins. In 2025, Zhang et al. reported the three-dimensional structure of the human sweet taste receptor and used cryo-electron microscopy to resolve its high-resolution structure in complex with sucralose and aspartame for the first time. Murine genetic studies have confirmed that the deletion of T1R2 and T1R3 genes attenuates gustatory nerve responses to sweet compounds, a finding that definitively establishes T1R2/T1R3 as the primary sweet taste receptor in mammals. Beyond the oral cavity, T1R2/T1R3 heterodimers are also expressed in the brain, gut, pancreas, heart, and bladder.
Structures and activation sites of selected activators of T1R2/T1R3 heterodimer.
Categories	Name	Chemical structure	Activating subunit types	Binding sites	Bibliography	 	Sugars	Glucose		T1R2	VFTM		 		Sucrose		T1R2/T1R3	VFTM		 	Sugar alcohols	Sorbitol		T1R2	VFTM		 		Xylitol		T1R2	VFTM		 	Artificial sweeteners	Aspartame		T1R2	VFTM		 		Neohesperidin dihydrochalcone		T1R3	TMD		 		Sucralose		T1R2	VFTM		 		Newtons		T1R2	VFTM		 		Thaumatin		T1R3	CRD
The sweet taste receptor structure comprises the Venus flytrap module (VFTM), the cysteine-rich domain (CRD), and the transmembrane domain. Its N-terminal extracellular domain (ATD) consists of VFTM and CRD. This extracellular terminal domain (ATD) VFTM and CRD. Different sweeteners activate different binding sites, triggering conformational changes and downstream signalling cascades, which, in turn, facilitate the generation and transmission of sweet taste signals. Table 1 summarises the activation sites of some sweetener molecules including sugars, sugar alcohols, artificial sweeteners, and sweet proteins.
Taste perception pathway.
Taste perception involves three processes: taste identification, signal transduction, and taste signal perception. Fig. 1 illustrates the three processes of sweetness perception.
Sweetness identification. Taste recognition begins with taste receptor cells (TRCs) in the taste bud. A taste bud comprises 50–150 taste cells, which can be classified into four categories based on cellular ultrastructure: dark cells (type I), light cells (type II), intermediate cells (type III) and basal cells (type IV). Type I cells are the most numerous and play a role in isolating individual taste cells, they are involved in salty flavour sensing owing to the presence of Na+ channels in the cell membrane. Type II cells express the T1R and T2R family of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) and respond to flavour molecules via the GPCR pathway, transmitting signals to the brain to form the three taste sensations (namely sweetness, bitterness and umami). Type III cells are acid-responsive cells, and type IV basal cells—commonly referred to as gustatory stem cells, can proliferate and differentiate into various gustatory cells. Among them, types II and III cells are the most important TRCs for taste recognition and signal transduction.
Sweet taste signal transduction. Taste transduction is a specific form of signalling via which TRCs encode information at the cellular level about chemicals (tastant molecules) present in the oral environment. There are two distinct but interdependent modes of sweetness signalling in taste cells: natural sugars (e.g., sucrose) that utilise the GPCR-Gs-cAMP pathway, and artificial sweeteners that utilise the GPCR-Gq-Gβγ-IP3 pathway.
Sucrose and other sugars bind to the sweet taste receptor and activate Gα, which, in turn, activates intracellular adenylate cyclase and generates a considerable amount of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). Increased concentration of cAMP, on the one hand, can open the cyclic nucleotide-gated ion channel, inducing the inward flow of extracellular Ca2+; on the other hand, it can activate protein kinase A (PKA), which phosphorylates the K+ channel at the base of the taste cells, thereby leading to the inhibition of K+ efflux and the depolarisation of the taste cell membrane, whereas Ca2+ influx is inhibited. Additionally, PKA phosphorylates K+ channels at the base of the taste cells, leading to ion channel closure, impaired K+ efflux, taste cell membrane depolarisation, subsequent Ca2+ influx, and neurotransmitter release.
Artificial sweeteners such as sodium cyclamate bind to sweet taste receptors, triggering the dissociation of the β- and γ-subunits from the activated α-subunit of the G protein. The Gβγ complex activates phospholipase C-β2 (PLCβ2), which hydrolyses phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) to generate diacylglycerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3). IP3 binds to inositol triphosphate receptor type 3 (IP3R3) on the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, inducing Ca2+ release from intracellular stores. Elevated cytosolic Ca2+ concentrations induce two downstream effects: (1) activation of transient receptor potential melastatin 4/5 (TRPM4/TRPM5) channels, leading to Na+ influx and membrane depolarisation; (2) membrane depolarisation and Ca2+ elevation, which synergistically promote adenosine triphosphate (ATP) release through calcium homeostasis modulator 1/3 (CALHM1/3) channels.
Taste perception in the brain. The gustatory perception pathways within the brain proceed as follows. (1) The facial (CN VII), glossopharyngeal (CN IX) and vagus (CN X) nerves transmit gustatory information from the tongue to the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) in the brainstem. (2) Taste signals processed by the NTS are projected to the parvicellular portion of the ventroposteromedial nucleus (VPMpc) of the thalamus. (3) These signals are subsequently relayed to the insular cortex (IC), which sends reciprocal feedback projections to the VPMpc to modulate gustatory processing. (4) Following identification and integration in the IC, taste signals are transmitted to the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and amygdala. OFC is a gustatory secondary cortex capable of integrating individual gustatory signals with other sensory modalities, and its activation correlates with the subjective pleasure of taste. OFC and anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) are higher-order gustatory cortices that collectively encode multiple sensory stimuli, process reward-related information, and mediate associative learning.

Olfactory system and olfactory perception
Olfactory perception pathway.
Aroma perception pathways include the orthonasal pathway and the postnasal pathway. The orthonasal pathway describes olfactory perception triggered when aroma molecules enter the nasal cavity directly, while the retronasal pathway involves aroma compounds being released and volatilised during oral food processing (i.e., chewing and swallowing); these compounds travel via the oropharyngeal pathway to the nasal olfactory epithelium, where they bind to olfactory receptors to elicit olfactory perception. It is worth noting that the gustatory system can only perceive the five basic tastes (sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and umami), whereas unique descriptions such as vanilla, coffee, cheese, and similar distinct flavour descriptors actually originate from olfactory perception. Thus, the common tendency to attribute retronasal aroma perception to taste is incorrect. Fig. 2 depicts the process of olfactory perception.
Olfactory information recognition. Scent molecules enter the nasal cavity via the orthonasal and retronasal pathways. Most of the aroma molecules are filtered externally by cilia located on the outermost mucous membranes of the olfactory region; and a small number of molecules reach the dorsum of the nose, where they contact the olfactory epithelium (OE), dissolve in the OE’s flowing mucus, and bind to receptors on olfactory sensory neurons (i.e., olfactory receptors)—ultimately generating chemical signals.
Olfactory information transduction. Olfactory receptors belong to GPCRs family. Scent molecules bind to olfactory receptors, inducing conformational changes in the olfactory receptors, which activate the G-protein subunit Gαolf and promote its dissociation from Gβγ. Gαolf further activates adenylyl cyclase type 3 (ACⅢ) on the membrane, catalysing the hydrolysis of large quantities of intracellular ATP to produce cAMP. Increased cAMP concentration opens the cyclic nucleotide-gated cation channels on the membrane of olfactory sensory nerve fibres, triggering the influx of Na+ and Ca2+. Meanwhile, increased intracellular Ca2+ concentration opens the Cl− channels, leading to the efflux of intracellular Cl−. The continuous influx of Na+ and Ca2+ raises the intracellular membrane potential and reduces the transmembrane potential difference. When the cell membrane depolarises to − 45 mV, it induces the generation of action potentials in neurons. Action potentials are conducted along the axons of olfactory sensory neurons, first reaching the olfactory glomeruli of the first-order neurons. Subsequently, these potentials converge from the output terminals of the olfactory glomeruli to the mitral cells of second-order neurons; thereafter, signals processed by both first- and second-order neurons are transmitted along the olfactory tract to the olfactory cortex.
Olfactory perception in the brain. The olfactory cortex is a forebrain region that receives input directly from the olfactory bulb (mitral/tufted cells) and can be divided into primary and secondary olfactory cortices. (1) Olfactory information undergoes initial processing in the olfactory bulb (OB), where spatial mapping is formed. Subsequently, OB projection neurons transmit this information via the lateral olfactory tract (LOT) to the piriform cortex (PC), periamygdalar cortex, entorhinal cortex, and olfactory tubercle—these regions collectively constitute the primary olfactory cortex, where basic feature encoding of olfactory information (e.g., the chemical structure and concentration of scent molecules) is achieved. (2) After initial processing, olfactory signals are directionally transmitted to various secondary olfactory cortices via axonal projections: ① the amygdala, which initiates initial emotional associations; ② the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus—specifically, the hippocampus associates olfactory signals with pre-existing memory networks and completes the encoding and storage linkage of olfactory memory; ③ the insular cortex, which regulates visceral physiological responses (e.g., pungent scents triggering sneezing or accelerated respiration). (3) Ultimately, information from the amygdala, hippocampus, and insular cortex is integrated in the orbitofrontal cortex, forming a comprehensive olfactory perception that encompasses “scent features + emotion + memory + behavioral tendency”. The complexity of odorants and individual variability contribute to the richness of olfactory perception. Currently, based on machine learning, research has begun to predict olfactory perception from molecular structures—i.e., to infer scent properties from molecular structures..
Furthermore, both olfactory receptors and gustatory receptors belong to the GPCR family: sweet taste receptors are classified under Class C of this family, and odorant receptors under Class A (also known as the rhodopsin-like receptor class). Their mechanisms of action involve responding to extracellular signal stimulation, inducing conformational changes in themselves, recruiting intracellular downstream effector proteins, and transducing extracellular signals into intracellular signals, thereby regulating a variety of physiological processes. Ligands that modulate GPCR function include environmental stimulants—particularly those relevant to olfactory/gustatory perception, such as odorants and tastants—as well as endogenous ones like small-molecule neurotransmitters, amino acids, polypeptides, hormones, and ions. Different stimuli trigger the secretion of different neurotransmitters. When taste buds are stimulated by sweet tastants, they can secrete adenosine triphosphate (ATP); ATP then stimulates an increase in the calcium ion (Ca2+) level in mature taste cells. Meanwhile, the Ca2+ signal generated by taste transduction further triggers ATP secretion, indicating that ATP acts as a positive feedback regulator within taste buds. For olfactory receptors, ATP is an indispensable substance for converting chemical signals into electrical signals in the odor perception pathway.
It has been reported that GPCRs possess neuromodulatory properties. The two pathway mechanisms and targets of Class C GPCRs are completely independent. Pathway 1 involves neurotransmitters (GABA/glutamate) leading to receptor heterodimerization, followed by the binding of auxiliary proteins, and ultimately regulating G − protein coupling. This pathway relies on the heterodimerization of specific subtypes of GABA_BR or mGluR, binds to auxiliary proteins such as KCTD, adjusts coupling preferences and desensitization, and thus influences synaptic inhibition or plasticity. Pathway 2 is triggered by neural signals, which cause receptor − regulatory protein interactions, resulting in prolonged coupling. Specifically, mGlyR binds to RGS7 − Gβ5. After activation by glycine, the GAP activity of RGS7 is inhibited, which delays the hydrolysis of Gα − GTP, independently regulating neuronal excitability and having no relation to dimerization. For Class A GPCRs, the two pathways differ in terms of regulatory dimensions and time − effectiveness. Pathway 1 is initiated by neurotransmitters (opioids/5-HT), leading to receptor phosphorylation, followed by endocytosis/degradation, and ultimately down − regulating coupling. This is a self − trafficking regulation of the receptor. For example, the endocytosis and recycling of MOR maintain coupling, while the degradation of DOR leads to long − term inhibition of coupling, all of which rely on receptor phosphorylation. Pathway 2 is triggered by neural signals, which cause cross − regulation and result in the inhibition of coupling. This is an indirect regulation between receptors. For instance, after the activation of GPR139, it recruits GRK to phosphorylate MOR, indirectly reducing its Gαi coupling, without relying on the activation of MOR by its own ligand.

Olfaction- gustatory synergy
Olfaction-gustatory synergy refers to the cross-modal perceptual interaction between retronasal olfaction and taste, which forms overlapping representations of “olfactory- gustatory attributes” in corresponding brain regions. Previous studies have indicated that olfactory receptors and taste receptors are function independently of one another. However, by utilizing transgenic mice and cultured human fungiform taste (HBO) cells, Malik utilised approaches including immunocytochemistry and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) experiments to demonstrate, for the first time, that functional olfactory receptors exist in cultured taste cells derived from mice and humans. Moreover, the olfactory receptors expressed in taste cells can recognise specific food-derived flavor compounds (e.g., eugenol, hexanoic acid, coumarin) and alter peripheral taste responses. This also suggests that the initial integration of taste and olfactory information may occur as early as within taste receptor cells, though the underlying mechanism requires further in-depth investigation.
The interactive mechanism of olfactory- gustatory perception.
Anatomically, olfactory and gustatory recognition, conduction processes, and neural pathways to the brain are independent of each other; however, ingestion demands multisensory coordination, ensuring that signals generated by different chemosensory systems are transmitted to the brain and integrated to yield a flavour perception experience. From a neurological perspective, fMRI studies have shown that the insula is not only the central hub for taste processing, but also is capable of being activated by aroma stimuli presented via the orthonasal or retronasal route. Animal studies have confirmed that the perception of retronasal scents (as opposed to orthonasal scents) depends on the involvement of the primary gustatory cortex, whereas orthonasal scents can be processed independently of the gustatory cortex. Furthermore, the activation region in the anteroventral insula elicited by sweet-related aromas (such as vanilla) overlaps with the activation region triggered by sucrose stimulation. Additionally, the response intensity of this region to food aromas (as opposed to non-food aromas) is positively correlated with participants' subjective ratings of the “sweetness” of the aromas, a finding that indicates the insula can specifically encode the taste attributes of aromas. The OFC, ACC and frontal operculum play advanced regulatory roles in taste-olfaction integration. Among these regions, the OFC is the main brain region that integrates gustatory, olfactory and trigeminal information, receives olfactory information from the PC and the VPMpc, transmits feedback to the gustatory cortex, its activation reflects the “degree of congruence” of taste-olfaction combinations; and it serves as a key brain region for emotional and value judgment after taste-olfaction integration (Fig. 3A). The ACC and frontal operculum exhibit superadditive activation under combined taste-olfaction stimulation (activation intensity higher than the sum of individual stimulations). Among them, the neural coupling strength between the frontal operculum and medial temporal lobe memory structures (e.g., entorhinal cortex) is significantly enhanced during flavor perception, a phenomenon that suggests the semantic memory system is involved in taste-olfaction integration to facilitate the formation of unified flavor perception. Additionally, the ACC may optimise the efficiency of taste-olfaction integration by modulating attention and cognitive resource allocation (Fig. 3B).
On the other hand, olfaction-taste integration depends on the mode of olfactory transmission and previous experience with taste/smell combinations. Typically, a particular scent is congruent with basic taste properties, for example, vanilla and strawberry aromas are associated with the perception of sweetness, and whereas bacon aromas are associated with the perception of saltiness. Smell–taste congruency is an associative memory formed over extended periods of eating. When humans taste foods associated with sweet flavours, the multiple senses collaborate and transmit information to the brain, at which point the cerebral cortex receives feed-forward signals from memories associated with sweet flavours and aromas and activates the ventral tegmental area, nucleus accumbens, medial prefrontal cortex, OFC, ACC, amygdala and IC. The accumulation of such events fosters the formation of long-term memory associated with sweet taste perception, which in turn further drives ingestive behaviour.

Verification of the sweetening effects of aroma

Static sensory analysis
Static sensory analysis is the instantaneous sensory evaluation conducted at a specific time point, which can be used to assess the properties and intensity of sweetness perception by controlling olfactory inputs. Static sensory analysis can be divided into quantitative descriptive analysis (QDA), check-all-that-apply (CATA) and rate-all-that-apply (RATA). QDA is based on a quantitative sensory scale to reveal the outcomes of cross-modal perceptual interactions between aroma and sweetness, as well as to characterise sweetening intensity. CATA is based on consumer preferences and gathers consumer evaluations of aroma–sweetness samples. Mulheron et al. used this method to evaluate the sweetness intensity of four solutions, specifically low-concentration sucrose (2.5 %w/w), low-concentration sucrose (2.5 %w/w) supplemented with vanilla aroma (1 mL/kg), high-concentration sucrose (7.5 %w/w), and high-concentration sucrose (7.5 %w/w) upplemented with vanilla aroma (1 mL/kg). The results showed the following order of sweetness intensity: high-concentration sucrose with vanilla aroma (13.8) > high-concentration sucrose (12.2) > low-concentration sucrose with vanilla aroma (6.1) > low-concentration sucrose. This indicates that vanilla aroma exerts a more pronounced cross-modal effect on sweetness under low sucrose concentration conditions. The RATA method builds on the CATA method to quantify the intensity of attributes matching aroma–sweetness samples. Ge et al. identified via the CATA method that the low-sugar beverage combinations with the highest consumer preference were 3.82 % sucrose + 0.45 % mango aroma and 3.82 % sucrose + 0.65 % mango aroma. These combinations can reduce sugar content while preserving sweetness intensity and satisfying consumer acceptability. Subsequently, the sweetness intensity of the two combinations was evaluated using the RATA method, yielding scores of 83.12 and 79.46, respectively—assessed on a 0–100 scale, with 100 representing the strongest sweetness. In addition, the above-mentioned process can be used to control olfactory input via nose clips to determine whether an olfactory–gustatory perceptual interaction has occurred. By controlling the presence or absence of olfactory input, Liu et al. demonstrated that aroma compounds such as furfural, phenylacetaldehyde, and 2,3-butanedione significantly enhanced the sweetness of sucrose solutions. Meanwhile, Zhou et al. confirmed that aroma compounds such as limonene, citronellal, and geraniol enhanced the sweetness value of sucrose solutions.
Using nose clips, that is without olfactory input, taste perception originates solely from the chemical interactions generated between tastant molecules and taste receptors. Alternatively, when not using nose clips, that is with olfactory input, aromaticous substances can bind to olfactory receptors and influence the intensity and attributes of taste perception.

Dynamic sensory analysis
Flavour perception is a dynamic process, so it is particularly important to study the changes in food flavour over time; dynamic sensory analysis can integrate the changes in sensory and emotional attributes across the temporal dimension. The evaluation methods of dynamic sensory analysis can be divided into temporal check-all-that-apply (TCATA), time-intensity (TI), and temporal dominance of sensation (TDS). TCATA characterizes the attributes of a sample at each time interval, thereby offering a more complete picture of the changes in sensory properties of a product over time. Ares et al. employed the TCATA method to evaluate the temporal sweetness characteristics and off-taste profiles of 16 sweeteners across a 60-second period. The evaluated parameters included sweetness onset speed, sweetness peak intensity, sweetness decay process, as well as differences in attribute perception frequency relative to sucrose. For instance, the sweetness intensity of aspartame increased rapidly between 0 and 5 s, with the sweetness peak occurring between 6 and 7 s; following peak attainment, the sweetness decay process persisted until the 60-second time point. The TI method determines the duration and intensity of a single stimulus (aroma or taste) based on temporal changes and whether this stimulus alters in the presence of another controllable stimulus. Dai et al. used the TI method to evaluate the sweetness perception of fructose solutions over a 50-second window. The overall sweetness perception showed a trend of first increasing and then decreasing: the sweetness reached its peak at 10 s, the perceived intensity decreased significantly after 15 s, and the perceived duration was 40 s. After adding ethyl propionate and (E,E)-2,4-hexadienal—two aromasants with sweet aromatic properties—the perceived duration of the fructose solution was extended to 50 s. The TDS method focuses on the changes in multiple sensory attributes over time and requires sensory raters to select the attribute descriptors that they believe to be dominant at different time intervals. Using TDS, Charles et al. found that 3-methylbutyl acetate (banana aroma) enhanced the intensity of sweetness perception in apples and that aroma-induced sweetness perception increased with time. Oliveira et al. used TI and TDS to demonstrate that adding vanilla- or strawberry-flavoured to yogurt containing 5.25 % sucrose achieved a duration of maximum sweetness intensity similar to that of yogurt with an ideal sucrose dosage (7 %) and that the sweetness attribute dominated.

Neuroimaging techniques
Schematic diagram of brain region structures and three neuroimaging techniques Note: C-2 is the brain response topography map of the subjects in different frequency bands of EEG; D-2 is the schematic diagram of brain region activation sites in the subjects' fMRI random effects analysis; E-2 represents the total average value of oxyhemoglobin (oxy-Hb) signal change curves of NaCl solutions with different concentrations (with/without a certain substance added), measured via cerebral functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS).
The human brain comprises billions of neurons. Each neuron can form numerous synapses, and our understanding remains limited regarding how this intricate network generates macroscopic brain signals that guide human behaviors. The prevailing view holds that complex neural activation patterns and networks govern human brain functions and associated behaviors and that neural activity within the brain typically induces electrical activity (a direct effect) alongside haemodynamic and metabolic responses (an indirect effect); these dual effects thus constitute fundamental basis of all non-invasive neuroimaging techniques. For investigating aroma-induced sweetness enhancement, the commonly used neuroimaging techniques can be broadly categorized into two types, based on the origin of the detected signal. The first category consists of imaging techniques that directly capture neural electrical activity by detecting electrical or magnetic fluctuations induced on the scalp, including electroencephalography (EEG), and the second category relies on haemodynamic (e.g., cerebral blood flow, cerebral volume) and metabolic (e.g., glucose and oxygen utilization) responses induced by neural activity including functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS). Fig. 4 is a schematic diagram of brain region structures and three neuroimaging techniques.

EEG
When olfactory and gustatory signals are transmitted to the brain, brain neurons generate weak electrical signals when transmitting information, and these signals are potential changes induced by ionic flow across neuronal membranes. When a substantial number of neurons synchronously activate, their potential fluctuations form detectable electrical signals on the scalp, and EEG uses electrodes embedded in an electroencephalographic cap to record neuronal discharge activity in the brain, thus collecting real-time processed data of the presented stimuli (e.g., taste or aroma). When a specific brain region performs a particular function, the brain waves in the corresponding frequency band are enhanced. Ultimately, the EEG (electroencephalogram) results are presented as fluctuations in the frequency of brain signals (Fig. 4C-1, 4C-2). There are significant differences in the corresponding frequency bands (α band, β band, γ band, θ band, δ band) under different stimulation patterns. Various studies have reported EEG results of sweet/sweet aroma stimulation. For example, non-nutritive sweeteners (erythritol, sucralose, stevioside) induce significantly stronger EEG activity in the δ (1–4 Hz) and α (8–13 Hz) bands than sucrose; additionally, brain activity in the γ band induced by sweet stimulation is stronger than that induced by umami stimulation. Maeda & Yoshimura investigated the effects of two aroma conditions on the perception of chocolate sweetness through EEG using chocolate and garlic pastes as the ‘matched aroma stimulus’ (chocolate paste) and the ‘unmatched aroma stimulus’ (garlic paste), respectively. The results indicate that garlic paste enhanced the EEG activity in the theta-frequency band. Wang et al. used EEG to determine notable differences in the theta band between the characteristic aroma components of clear white wine—ethyl octanoate (EO), ethyl acetate (EA), the EO-EA binary mixture—specifically between EO and EA, between EA and the EO-EA binary mixture, and between EO and the EO-EA binary mixture; and notable differences in the α band. This suggested that the EEG technique responded to the similarity and intensity of aromas and that brain activity in the α-band exhibited high olfactory sensitivity. Xia et al. proposed an EEG local–global fusion transformer network (EEG-LGFNet) model to objectively demonstrate the effects of sugar reduction and sweetening. The process involved using a mixture of sucrose and aroma to stimulate taste and retronasal olfaction, collecting EEG signals, preprocessing the signals, and using the EEG-LGFNet model to quantify human sensory sweetness, thereby characterising the OISE effect from a neural point of view. In addition, EEG plays an important role in assessing the effects of aromas on human health (e.g., brain state), guiding consumer purchasing decisions, and distinguishing similar aromas.

fMRI
fMRI is based on the blood oxygen level–dependent (BOLD) effect. When the human body is exposed to a certain stimulus, the corresponding brain region is in an active state and the microscopic pattern manifests as increased neuroelectrical activity increased energy and oxygen consumption. This results in a notable increase in blood supply and cerebral oxygen metabolic rate to that brain region: the process of energy generation rapidly depletes local oxygen reserves in the tissues surrounding capillaries, inducing vasodilation. Cerebral blood flow then increases, leading to oxygen supply that exceeds oxygen demand. Therefore, neuronal activation increases the proportion of oxygenated haemoglobin (Oxy-Hb) relative to deoxyhaemoglobin (Deoxy-Hb) in the region, and Oxy-Hb is antimagnetic, whereas Deoxy-Hb is paramagnetic—a difference in magnetic properties that induces a shortening of the transverse magnetization relaxation time (T2)—driven by reduced Deoxy-Hb levels—which in turn enhances the T2-weighted image signal. Conversely, in the absence of neuronal activation, Deoxy-Hb levels rise, weakening the T2-weighted image signal and reducing the BOLD signal (resulting in darker images). The detection process is illustrated in Fig. 4D-1 and 4D-2. To date, studies investigating olfactory-gustatory interactions utilising fMRI have identified brain regions within the flavor network, including the orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate cortex, anterior insula, frontal operculum, superior temporal cortex, central insula of the superior frontal cortex, amygdala, posterior insula, ventrolateral prefrontal cortex, entorhinal cortex, inferior frontal gyrus, as well as the postcentral gyrus and precentral gyrus. Khorisantono et al. used fMRI technology to clarify that taste and retronasal olfaction activate shared flavor-specific neural codes in the agranular and dysgranular regions of the insular cortex (rather than in the granular region or piriform cortex). Meanwhile, the “olfactory identity patterns” in the insula overlap with the patterns induced by their associated tastes. This provides a tentative neural basis for the phenomenon where “olfaction can induce taste perception in the absence of tastants”: specifically, taste perception arises because the taste cortex responds to olfactory stimuli in a manner consistent with its response to actual tastants. Small et al. used fMRI to assess brain responses to postnasally presented aromas (e.g., vanilla) paired with either congruent flavors (sweet) or incongruent flavors (savory), identifying the dorsal anterior insula, ventral anterior insula (vINS)/caudal OFC, ACC, frontal operculum, and posterior parietal cortex.

fNIRS
Oxy-Hb and Deoxy-Hb exhibit effective scattering of near-infrared (NIR) light. fNIRS is based on this principle and measures changes in regional haemoglobin concentration—changes associated with neuronal activity, by continuously monitoring the attenuation of NIR light as it passes from the illuminator through the cerebral cortex to the detector (Fig. 4E-1, 4E-2). Furthermore, fNIRS can monitor large brain regions and indirectly infer neuronal activity patterns in local tissue clusters from regional haemoglobin concentration change. By placing multiple illuminators and detectors on a subject’s head, fNIRS can monitor the activity of a wider range of brain regions and indirectly infer the pattern of neuronal activity and its changes in a localised group of tissues through its concentration distribution characteristics. Currently, there are few studies on this technique in aroma-induced sweetness enhancement. Onuma et al. used fNIRS combined with the TI method and found that the addition of MSG or soy sauce aroma enhanced salty taste perception. fNIRS measurements indicated that the addition of MSG or soy sauce aroma in NaCl solution enhanced the haemodynamic responses in temporal brain regions (e.g., the frontal pole), but did not affect the parotid salivary gland responses. fNIRS technology has also been applied to other cross-modal perceptual interactions. In 2025, Jezierska et al. reported fNIRS technology in taste–visual cross-modal perception, showing that different concentrations of water or coffee, as observed via fNIRS consistently elicited haemodynamic responses in the visual cortex. This suggests that gustatory stimuli also affect vision, filling the gap in previous studies in which vision was shown to affect taste perception. Compared with fMRI, fNIRS has lower cost and higher mobility and is widely used in real-world environments. In addition, in food research, fNIRS plays an important role in specific domains, including consumer preferences and decision-making processes.

Aroma sweetening mechanism research methods
In the field of gustation, positive allosteric modulators (PAMs) such as SE-1, SE-2, and SE-3 have been developed targeting sweet taste receptors. These modulators are characterized by lacking inherent taste activity; instead, they enhance sweet taste perception by altering the conformation of sweet taste receptors to boost their activity. The process of investigating their molecular mechanism includes three key steps: constructing chimeric receptors to verify the existence of interactions between the modulators and the receptors, creating mutants to identify the binding regions, and performing molecular modeling to clarify the receptor-ligand interactions. Taking SE-2 and SE-3 as examples, researchers localised the binding sites of SE-2 and SE-3 to the venus flytrap (VFT) domain of T1R2 by constructing human-rat sweet-umami chimeric receptors. Furthermore, site-directed mutagenesis experiments revealed that mutations of 7 amino acid residues, including S40A, Y103A, and D142A, affected the activity of sucrose/sucralose but did not affect the activity of the enhancers. In contrast, mutations of 3 amino acid residues (K65A, L279A, and D307A) completely abolished the activity of the enhancers, while the activity of sucrose/sucralose remained largely unaffected. Molecular docking studies have shown that sucrose/sucralose can interact with different amino acids in the VFT domain of T1R2. Specifically, all hydroxyl groups of sucrose/sucralose form hydrogen bonds with adjacent hydrophilic residues such as aspartic acid 142 (D142) and glutamic acid 302 (E302); in contrast, the chlorine atoms in sucralose form hydrophobic interactions with tyrosine 103 (Y103) and proline 277 (P277). SE-3, however, binds to a site adjacent to the binding site of the sweeteners. In the closed conformation formed by the binding of sucrose and SE-3, SE-3 interacts with lysine 65 (K65), leucine 279 (L279), aspartic acid 278 (D278), and aspartic acid 307 (D307). This interaction enhances the stability of the closed conformation of the VFT domain, thereby increasing the activity of the receptor.
Exploring the mechanism of aroma-induced sweetness enhancement using molecular docking technology (A: interaction between sucrose and amino acid residues of the sweet taste receptor; B: the addition of aroma molecules can enhance the interaction force of the system).
Previous studies have shown that the VFT region on T1R2 in the heterodimer structure of the sweet taste receptor T1R2/T1R3 is the binding site for sucrose and the sweet taste receptor. Based on the mechanism by which sweetness enhancers improve sweet taste perception, and using sucrose solution as the matrix, we have utilised molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulation (MDS) to clarify the interaction mechanism among aroma substances, sucrose, and sweet taste receptors. As the three-dimensional structural information of the sweet taste receptor protein (T1R2/T1R3) has been resolved, molecular docking is the most commonly used method to predict the ligand’s mode of action at the receptor’s binding site. It uses computational approaches to simulate and evaluate the protein–ligand binding affinity and interactions. The interaction mechanism can be clarified by the key information provided by molecular docking technology about the binding mode, binding site and affinity between the receptor and the ligand (Fig. 5). MDS is a computer simulation of the dynamic behaviour of a system at the atomic level, which can evaluate the dynamic interactions between a receptor and a ligand, determine their stability and dynamics and elucidate the conformational and energetic changes, as well as the dynamics of the interaction forces between the receptor and the ligand.
Compared with molecular docking, MDS enables the assessment of system properties over a specific time period. Various scholars have used both these techniques to explore the mechanisms of aroma-based sweetening. The main mechanism is that the added aroma substances can affect the formation of hydrophobic interactions and hydrogen bonds in the T1R2/T1R3-sucrose system, thereby reducing the binding free energy of the system and enhancing its stability. Xiao et al. have conducted different studies using these two techniques, such as evaluating the impact of adding 11 aroma compounds (including α-pinene and 1-decanol) on the sucrose-T1R2/T1R3 binary system, as well as on aroma substance-OR1A1 system and aroma substance-OR52D1 system. The molecular docking results indicate that the T1R2/T1R3-sucrose binding energy was − 5.9 kcal/mol, and the binding energies of β-pinene, n-tetradecanol and decanal were lower than − 5.9 kcal/mol, indicating that the presence of the three aroma compounds strengthened the binding of sucrose to the receptor, resulting in a sweetening effect, and that hydrophobic interactions between the ligand and the receptor confirmed that the binding sites of LYS65 and LEU279 are key binding sites for aroma substances that enhance sweetness perception. Meanwhile, trans-2-decenal exhibited the highest binding energies to olfactory receptors (OR1A1 and OR52D1), which indicates a relatively low affinity, indicating that it inhibits the sweetness perception of sucrose. Moreover, molecular dynamics simulations confirmed that the incorporation of trans-2-decenal caused significant conformational changes in the binary system at 300–400 ns and 800–900 ns. Another study demonstrated the binding mechanism between 13 aromatic compounds (such as isoamyl acetate, isobutyl butyrate, and dihydro-β-ionone) and the T1R2/T1R3-sucrose complex. Molecular docking studies showed that in the presence of sucrose, aroma substances interact with specific amino acid residues on sweet taste receptors through hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions; furthermore, most compounds with strong binding ability to sweet taste receptors exhibit excellent sweetness-enhancing effects. Molecular dynamics studies revealed that dihydro-β-ionone forms hydrophobic interactions with amino acids such as glutamic acid (GLU63), lysine (LYS65), and aspartic acid (ASP278) in T1R2. Meanwhile, sucrose forms hydrophobic interactions with valine (VAL444) and alanine (ALA) in T1R2, and hydrogen bonds with amino acids, including arginine (ARG172) and histidine (HIS189). Dai showed that the binding energy range of aroma substances (such as ethyl acetate, ethyl propionate, methylheptenone, and geranylacetone)-fructose-T1R2/T1R3 in watermelon juice is −5.61 to −5.282 kcal/mol, and the main interaction forces in the ternary system are hydrogen bonds and hydrophobic interactions.

Elements that affect aroma sweetening
Factors affecting sweetness perception.
Currently, research in the field of aroma-induced sweetness enhancement is advancing continuously, and a relatively comprehensive research system has been established. Meanwhile, there are various factors that influence sweet taste perception. We have summarised the reported influencing factors and categorized them into three categories—food physical properties, eating environment, and consumer individual differences—based on human eating behavior as follows (Fig. 6).

Physical properties of foods

Fragrance type and intensity
Some psychophysical indicators, such as aroma-induced sweetness enhancement, depend on the congruency of the aroma–taste mixture. The sweetening effects of aroma compounds with a ‘sweet’ aroma, such as ethyl butyrate, citral, benzaldehyde, maltol, furanol, isoamyl acetate, ethyl caproate, geraniol and β-ionone, have been demonstrated in sensory experiments. However, not all aroma compounds that follow the congruency principle can result in sweetness enhancement. For instance, vanillin and furazone can attenuate the sweetness value of glucose mixtures under certain conditions. In addition, aromas that do not follow the congruency principle can also enhance sweetness perception. In a recent study, aromas with sour properties enhanced sweetness perception: 2-methylbutyric acid and 3-methylbutyric acid significantly increased the sweetness of a 5 % sucrose solution; low concentrations of acetic, propionic, and butyric acid slightly enhanced sweetness; and caproic and caprylic acids enhanced sweetness but reduced pleasantness. Moreover, the optimal substrate concentration is an important factor affecting the sweetening effect. Butyl 3-methylbutyrate significantly increased the sweetness intensity of 0–30 g/L sucrose solutions but not that of 70 g/L sucrose solutions. Trans-2-hexenal enhances the sweetness effect of 2 g/100 mL, 2.5 g/100 mL and 3 g/100 mL sucrose solutions but cannot enhance the sweetness at 1 g/100 mL and 1.5 g/100 mL concentrations; however, methyl 2-methylbutyrate significantly improves the sweetness of sucrose solutions at 1 g/100 mL, 1.5 g/100 mL and 2 g/100 mL concentrations but does not affect that of 2.5 g/100 mL and 3 g/100 mL solutions.

Colour
Humans use visual cues to identify and evaluate the quality and flavour of food. Various laboratory studies have shown that increasing the colour intensity of food causes laboratory participants to rate food flavours as more intense. Based on various psychophysical studies, Clydesdale et al. reported that the addition of food colouring can contribute up to 10 % to perceived sweetness. Spence et al. explored the effects of six colour variants—colourless, yellow, red, green, blue and purple—on the sweetness of sucrose solutions of the same concentration, with sensory evaluations from 53 female participants (aged 17–20) revealing that the order of sweetness was purple = colourless > blue > green > red > yellow, which aligns with the findings of Maga et al.. The reason the sweetness of colourless solutions does not follow the pattern of darker solutions being sweeter than lighter ones is likely that foods are perceived to exhibit the strongest flavour in its natural state. In addition, differences in ethnicity, age, culture, and diet may influence the association between food colour and flavour.

Texture
Food matrix components (proteins, fats/oils, carbohydrates and minerals) influence the timing of aroma release into the nasal cavity, e.g. fat-rich emulsion systems significantly inhibit the release of aromas such as limonene, 2-heptanone, ethyl butyrate and ethyl caproate, whereas carbohydrates such as sucrose promote the release of aromas from chewing gums. Mosca et al. compared the sweetness of layered samples with inhomogeneous sucrose distribution to samples with homogeneous sucrose distribution using samples with the same total sucrose concentration (10 %) and similar mechanical and rheological properties and found that inhomogeneous samples with a notable gradient of sucrose concentration between layers were sweeter than homogeneous samples and that inhomogeneous distribution of sucrose allowed a 20 % reduction in sucrose content but did not reduce the sweetness intensity. Another study revealed that the sweetness enhancement induced by inhomogeneous sucrose distribution does not depend on the texture of the gel matrix (soft, brittle and hard); however, the breakdown of the matrix during oral processing affects the timing of sweetness perception. In this case, soft gels were the sweetest, and hard gels were the least sweet because soft gels required less time to reach their maximum sweetness intensity. Aisala et al. enhanced the perceived sweetness of a low-sugar rye cake by adding aroma compounds (maltol, vanilla, and strawberry aromas) topically to the cake.
Moreover, factors such as temperature and packaging can also considerably influence sweetness perception. For instance, results of the sweetness–temperature interaction indicate that cold solutions are less sweet than warm solutions. Arboleda & Arce-Lopera used stepwise multiple linear analyses to confirm that when the height of a beverage bottle decreases (increases), the beverage in the bottle is perceived as sweeter (less sweet) and that increasing the visual weight of an image on the lower portion of the bottle’s packaging increases consumers’ perception of the attributes associated with sweetness.

Eating environment
Several studies have shown that auditory, visual and tactile senses can also influence flavour perception.
Campinho et al. explored participants’ sweetness perception of passion fruit mousse across three environments (quiet, sweet music, and sour music) by selecting two musical compositions—consistent with sweetness and sourness, respectively—alongside a quiet control. The results indicate that musical congruency significantly affected sourness perception; however, sweet music did not enhance the dessert’s sweetness but instead reduced sourness intensity. The authors discussed potential reasons for this outcome: the distinct symbolic connotations of the selected sour music subtly triggering specific sourness-related mental associations; sound and taste stimuli jointly influencing consumers’ underlying mood; pronounced unpleasant sensations from sour music significantly reinforcing similar unpleasant flavor perceptions in the dessert; the presence of a notable cross-modal sensory transference effect; and the dessert’s visual color cue (passion fruit mousse is bright yellow, a color commonly associated with sourness) .
Piqueras-Fiszman et al. investigated the effects of plate colour (black, white) and shape on the taste intensity, sweetness, quality and liking of identical strawberry mousse dessert. The results indicate that plate colour had more significant effects on people’s perceptions of the food compared with plate shape and that people perceived strawberry mousse as stronger (30 % higher) and sweeter (20 % higher) and, therefore, expressed greater liking for it when it was served on a white plate. Meanwhile, Fairhurst et al. cut beetroot into pyramidal and hemispherical shapes, which were correspondingly placed on angular and round plates. They found that the same beetroot samples were perceived as less sweet when the beetroot was in an angular shape and placed on an angular plate, whereas when it was in a round shape and placed on a round plate, they were rated as sweeter. Velasco et al. reported that rounded shapes seem to be associated with only sweet flavours, whereas angular shapes may correspond to sour, bitter or savoury flavours.
In 2021, a study investigated the influence of tactile stimuli on sweetness perception. The researchers served the same iced tea beverage in three different material cups (soft, rough and plastic) for the experimenters to taste, and the results indicate that the iced tea samples in the soft-textured cups were perceived to be sweeter than those in rough-textured cups (with the same sucrose concentration). This was similar to the results of previous studies by Riofrío-Grijalva et al., which indicated a certain correspondence between specific textures and basic tastes. For instance, descriptive terms such as ‘smooth’ and ‘velvety’ were used to depict the tactile stimuli associated with sweetness, whereas ‘rough’ and ‘hard’ were used to describe the stimuli related to bitterness.

Consumer individual differences

Weight
Proserpio et al. demonstrated that obese and normal-weight subjects produce different cross-modal interactions, with obese participants having a poorer ability to correctly identify taste qualities but a more pronounced perception of aroma-induced sweetness enhancement. Aveline et al. explored the differences in aroma-induced taste enhancement between the obese and normal-weight populations. The results indicate that OITE occurred in both populations; however, the obese participants exhibited the OITE phenomenon more frequently (12 times) than the normal-weight subjects (nine times). In addition, 83 % of the obese participants perceived apple juice with vanillin added as sweeter than the same apple juice solution without the aromas, and 37 % perceived apple juice with vanillin added as sweeter than that with a 33 % higher concentration of sugar, whereas only 6 % in the normal-weight group did so. This could be attributed to stronger aroma–taste associations and a greater ability to perceive and respond to external food stimuli (e.g., all sensory cues from the five senses) in obese individuals, i.e. the brain of obese individuals relies on aroma and taste perceptions after repeated exposure to aromas and flavouring agents, and the memory of food allows one to recall the taste object from a single perception (specifically aroma).

Moodiness
With the deepening of research, an increasing number of studies have shown a type of correlation between mood states and sweet taste perception. Heath et al. and Ileri-Gurel et al. respectively investigated the effects of two mood states—low anxiety and high stress—on sweet taste perception. The results indicate that the subjects’ taste thresholds for sweet and bitter flavours were significantly lower at low anxiety levels, and the subjects’ taste thresholds for sweet and salty flavours were significantly lower at high stress levels. The contradictory results of the two studies may be attributed to differences in anxiety and stress levels, individual experiences, and the involvement of distinct neurotransmitters. For instance, Noel & Dando reported that fans perceived greater sweetness in ice cream when they were satisfied with the hockey game and perceived greater sourness when they were dissatisfied. Wang & Spence reported that pleasant visual stimuli (e.g., smiling faces) enhanced the perception of sweetness, and unpleasant visual stimuli (e.g., crying faces) enhanced the perception of sourness. Zushi et al. tested 87 subjects who watched horror films, documentaries and comedy films under the perception of sweet, salty, sour, and bitter flavours of juice mixtures and found that the sweetness ratings of the horror film group were significantly lower than those of the other two groups.
In addition, factors such as gender and age significantly influence consumers’ perception of sweetness and aroma perception. For instance, females outperform males in terms of aroma detection, recognition, memory, and rating, and older consumers are less able to assess the intensity of taste or flavour attributes compared with younger consumers.

Oral processing
Oral processing, the first step in food digestion, involves multiple changes in food properties and physiological responses. It also encompasses various sensory experiences such as taste, smell, touch, pain and temperature. When sensory information is integrated within the brain, it forms our perception of food taste, flavour and overall eating experience. Studies have shown that oral parameters such as oral mucosa, chewing frequency, salivary characteristics and oral microbiology during oral processing can have notable effects on aroma release and perception.
Esteban-Fernãndez et al. demonstrated that adsorption of β-ionone, ethyl caproate and linalool by the oral mucosa can influence aroma release and perception. High-frequency chewing increases food fragmentation and contact area, which prompts the release of more aroma compounds, and when the chewing time is long, the aroma substances retained in the oral cavity are prolonged and the intensity of aroma perception is higher. Chewing is accompanied by saliva production, which primarily consists of water, salts and proteins but contains microorganisms, cellular debris and food residues. Saliva adsorbed onto the oral mucosa controls the transport of flavour molecules to receptors and enzymatic modification-related metabolic activities, and proteins in saliva contribute to flavour perception by interacting with or metabolising flavour compounds. Recent studies have shown that salivary bubbles also influence postnasal perception of aromas (when chewing gum as a model food for mint flavour delivery, results indicate is used as a model food for mint flavour delivery, results show that salivary bubble collapse promotes menthol release). There are inter-individual differences in salivary properties affecting aroma release. For instance, a notable increase in the release of 2-methylpropionaldehyde, 2-methylbutyraldehyde and 3-methylbutyraldehyde was observed when salivary α-amylase activity was high, whereas saliva from obese individuals inhibited the release of volatile compounds, such as esters, aldehydes and acids, from wines, compared to normal-weight individuals.
Meanwhile, the role of specific microorganisms in the oral microbiota can also influence flavor perception. On the one hand, the metabolic activities of oral microorganisms can promote the release of aroma compounds. For instance, during oral processing, microorganisms such as Prevotella, Streptococcus, Veillonella, and Haemophilus secrete β-glucosidase. This enzyme is capable of enzymatically hydrolyzing glycosidic aroma precursors in food, leading to the cleavage of glycosidic bonds. Consequently, non-volatile glycosides are converted into aromatic volatiles (e.g., terpenes, aromatic derivatives, or alcohols), which enhances retronasal olfaction. On the other hand, oral microorganisms may affect the olfactory system. For example, François et al. found, using electro-olfactography, that oral microorganisms induce thinning of the olfactory cilia layer, a significant reduction in cell renewal, and changes in response kinetics in germ-free mice. Additionally, Fluitman et al. observed that the abundance of Streptococcus salivarius in the saliva of elderly individuals with impaired olfactory recognition ability is relatively low. Xi et al. clarified the complex interactions among saliva, oral microbiota, and the brain during aroma release and perception by introducing the oral-microbiota-brain axis (OMBA) model. Specifically, saliva and oral mucosa can regulate the release and perception of aroma and provide a microenvironment for the growth of oral microbiota; in turn, the microbiota affects the secretion and composition of saliva as well as the integrity of the oral mucosa, thereby influencing aroma release and perception. An imbalance in the oral microbiota may disrupt the olfactory system, which can lead to neurological disorders related to aroma perception. Additionally, the brain can regulate saliva secretion and maintain oral mucosal health, consequently affecting the balance of the oral microbiota as well as the release and perception of aroma. Three mechanisms by which the oral microbiota modulates host chemosensory perception have been reported. First, the metabolites generated by microbial enzymes can initiate or regulate the activation of the host’s chemoreceptors. Second, the bacterial metabolism of exogenous molecules contributes to the termination of exogenous molecule perception. Third, the microbiota can influence the host’s chemical senses by altering the density of receptors. This provides a research direction for subsequent studies on the cross-modal perceptual role of aroma–taste in the context of oral processing.

Summary and outlook
Monomer aroma compounds and mixed aroma species that have been reported to enhance the perception of sweetness.
Although research on the mechanism and efficacy of aroma-induced sweetness enhancement has established a relatively comprehensive system—encompassing the extraction and identification of aroma compounds, the verification of sweetness-enhancing effects via sensory evaluation or neuroimaging techniques, and the investigation of sweetness-enhancing mechanisms using molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulations—certain limitations still exist. For example, in terms of the extraction and identification of aroma compounds, there is no unified standard for describing the aroma properties of these compounds. Additionally, the application of techniques such as gas chromatography–olfactometry (GC-O) and gas chromatography/olfactometry-associated taste (GC/O-AT) involves significant subjectivity. In the verification of sweetness-enhancing effects, sensory evaluation is often the sole assessment method, which is relatively subjective due to large individual differences. Objective evaluation tools such as sweetness analyzers and electronic tongues could be introduced to address this issue. Regarding the stability of volatile aroma compounds, they are unstable. Further research is needed in aspects such as: whether their volatility during addition impacts their sweetness − enhancing efficacy; whether aroma compounds can enhance the sweetness of solution matrices other than sucrose; and whether the components of solution matrices affect the sweetness − enhancing effect of aroma compounds (for example, if there is competitive binding between other substances and aroma compounds). In terms of mechanism research, relying solely on molecular docking technology has certain limitations, as it is merely a simulation tool. Meanwhile, scientists are continuously deciphering the actual structure of taste receptors; therefore, the application of molecular docking technology should keep pace with advances in the elucidation of the actual structure of taste receptors. In recent years, under the influence of policy guidance, increased health awareness, and advancements in scientific research, the global trend of sugar reduction is obvious. Sugar reduction without compromising sweetness is one of the core challenges to be tackled by the food industry, and in this context, aroma sweetening technology demonstrates great potential. This review elucidates the physiological basis of gustatory and olfactory perception, the neural synergy of gustatory-olfactory cross-modal perceptual interactions, and provides physiological evidence for aroma sweetening. In addition, a series of common validation methods for aroma sweetening effects, including sensory analysis techniques and neuroimaging techniques, are listed, which can provide some references for subsequent studies. Due to space limitations, explanations regarding the extraction of sweetness-enhancing the aroma properties of such substances and the methodologies for clarifying the aroma properties of aroma substances have not been included. Meanwhile, due to the complexity of food matrices, individual differences in consumers and oral processing, which can lead to some differences in aroma sweetening results, the establishment of the aroma sweetening research system needs to be more detailed and rigorous. Aroma-based sweetening is a safer and more environmentally friendly approach than sweeteners with potential safety concerns. Fig. 7 summarises the types of aroma compounds that have sweetening potential under specific conditions. However, some issues still need to be noted. First, when used as a sweetener, it must comply with food additive regulations. Second, compliant aroma substances may still have adverse effects. For instance, prolonged exposure to 2,3-butanedione and 2,3-pentanedione may lead to occlusive bronchitis; fruity esters such as ethyl acetate may cause skin damage at concentrations of >50 to 400 ppm and fatigue, respiratory irritation and respiratory distress at concentrations of >1000 ppm; and vanillin and ethyl-vanillin at concentrations of >10,000 ppm damage the liver, kidneys and spleen of rats. Therefore, relevant authorities need to regulate the source, production and application of aromatic sweeteners, considering their dosage range, toxicity and impact on the environment.
Aroma substances such as amyl butyrate, ethyl caproate, methyl butyrate, furfural, benzaldehyde, phenylacetaldehyde and dimethyl sulfide have been screened to enhance the perception of sweetness; however, the molecular mechanisms underlying their actions and the mechanisms of cross-modal integration remain unclear. Techniques including homology modelling, molecular docking and molecular dynamics simulation serve as effective approaches for investigating these mechanisms and represent future development directions in this field.
Various studies have reported the differences in the perception of sweetening aroma in different cultural backgrounds. Therefore, a personalised matching model can be established based on analyses using big data analytics platforms to dynamically adjust the concentration and content of aroma substances with sweetening effects in food products according to consumer preferences.
Current research focuses only on the aroma components of a few fruits such as sweet orange; therefore, the sweetening potential of other natural sources warrants in-depth exploration.
Existing studies are mostly based on sensory evaluation to verify the sweetening effect, and it is essential to establish objective quantitative indicators and evaluation systems based on sweetness analyzers and electronic tongues, as well as to develop a cellular model of for sweetness sensing and a corresponding methodology based on calcium ion imaging technology.
Whether long-term intake of aroma substances with sweetening effects impacts human health needs to be verified through a combination of animal models and clinical studies.
Given that aroma substances are susceptible to volatilization or degradation during food processing and long-term storage, targeted technologies or formulations (e.g., encapsulation, stabilisers) must be developed to preserve their stability. For instance, the application of hydrocolloids to delay the release of aroma and flavour molecules serves as an effective strategy for developing foods with desirable mouthfeel and flavour release profiles.
Henceforth, the deepening of aroma-based sweetening research requires interdisciplinary cooperation, spanning multiple dimensions such as molecular mechanisms, personalised technologies, ingredient screening, stability optimisation, evaluation method innovation and health regulation adaptation. The following future research directions are summarised for reference:

Ethic Statement
Not applicable.

Funding
This work was supported by the Youth Innovation Program of Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences/Central Public-interest Scientific Institution Basal Research Fund (Y2024QC31/1610232024004) and basic research program of China National Tobacco Corporation (110202403009).

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Genetic preference for sweet taste in mothers associates with mother-child preference and intake
The Development of Sweet taste: from Biology to Hedonics
Sugar Substitutes: their Energy Values, Bulk Characteristics, and potential Health Benefits
The Association between Dietary Macronutrient Intake and the Prevalence of the Metabolic Syndrome
Sugars, Obesity, and Cardiovascular Disease: results from recent Randomized Control Trials
Trajectories of sugar consumption and dental caries in early childhood
The Role of Sugar and Fat in Sugar-Snap Cookies: Structural and Textural Properties
The Influence of Fat, Sugar and Non-Fat Milk Solids on selected taste, Flavor and Texture Parameters of a Vanilla Ice-Cream
High Concentrations of Aspartame Induce Pro-Angiogenic Effects in Ovo and Cytotoxic Effects in HT-29 Human Colorectal Carcinoma Cells
The Artificial Sweetener Erythritol and Cardiovascular Event risk
Revisited: Assessing the In Vivo Data on Low/No-Calorie Sweeteners and the Gut Microbiota
Revisiting the Safety of Aspartame
Optimisation of Natural Sweeteners for Sugar Reduction in Chocolate Flavoured Milk and their Impact on Sensory Attributes
Temporal Sensory Perceptions of Sugar-Reduced 3D Printed Chocolates
Enzymatic and Microbial Conversions to Achieve Sugar Reduction in Bread
Multisensory perception: the Building of Flavor Representations
Odor/Taste Integration and the perception of Flavor
What can Cognitive Psychology and Sensory Evaluation Learn from each other?
The Smell of healthy choices: Cross-Modal Sensory Compensation Effects of Ambient Scent on Food Purchases
Individual differences in Sweetness ratings and Cross-Modal Aroma-taste Interactions
Cross-Modal Interactions as a strategy for Sugar Reduction in Products Targeted at Children: Case Study with Vanilla Milk Desserts
Smelling Sensations: Olfactory Crossmodal Correspondences
Dissociation of Neural Representation of Intensity and Affective Valuation in Human Gustation
Human receptors for sweet and umami taste
A metabotropic glutamate receptor variant functions as a taste receptor
Taste transductions in taste receptor cells: basic tastes and moreover
Mammalian sweet taste receptors
The structure of human sweetness
The receptors for mammalian sweet and umami taste
Vasoactive intestinal peptide-null mice demonstrate enhanced sweet taste preference, dysglycemia, and reduced taste bud leptin receptor expression
Abstract P514: the role of sweet and umami taste receptors in the heart
The anatomy of mammalian sweet taste receptors
Distinct contributions of T1R2 and T1R3 taste receptor subunits to the detection of sweet stimuli
Atomistic mechanisms underlying the activation of the G protein-coupled sweet receptor heterodimer by sugar alcohol recognition
Different functional roles of T1R subunits in the heteromeric taste receptors
The binding site for neohesperidin dihydrochalcone at the human sweet taste receptor
The cysteine-rich region of T1R3 determines responses to intensely sweet proteins
Common sense about taste: from mammals to insects
The Cell Biology of taste
New Insights into the Signal Transmission from taste Cells to Gustatory Nerve Fibers
Recent advances in Molecular Mechanisms of taste Signaling and Modifying
TRPM4 and TRPM5 are both Required for Normal Signaling in taste Receptor Cells
Taste Buds: Cells, Signals and Synapses
The Trigeminal System Mediates Chemical Irritation in taste Buds
T2Rs Function as Bitter taste Receptors
The Human TAS2R16 Receptor Mediates Bitter taste responses to β-Glucopyranosides
A Family of Candidate taste Receptors in Human and Mouse
The Molecular Receptive Ranges of Human TAS2R Bitter taste Receptors
Computational Model of taste Pathways: a Biomimetic Algorithm for Electronic Tongue based on Nerve Conduction Mechanism
Representation of pleasant and aversive taste in the human brain
Visual-gustatory interaction: orbitofrontal and insular cortices mediate the effect of high-calorie visual food cues on taste pleasantness
Distinct Representations of Olfactory Information in Different Cortical Centres
TRPM5, a Taste-Signaling Transient Receptor potential Ion-Channel, is a Ubiquitous Signaling Component in Chemosensory Cells
Olfactory receptors and the mechanism of odor perception
ANO2 is the Cilial Calcium-Activated Chloride Channel that May Mediate Olfactory Amplification
Cortical Processing of Odor Objects
Single Olfactory Sensory Neurons simultaneously Integrate the Components of an Odour Mixture
Olfactory signals from the main olfactory bulb converge with taste information from the chorda tympani nerve in the agranular insular cortex of rats
An intrinsic association between olfactory identification and spatial memory in humans
Predicting Human Olfactory perception from Chemical Features of Odor Molecules
Pred-O3, a Web Server to Predict Molecules, Olfactory Receptors and Odor Relationships
Strategies to discover unexpected targets for drugs active at G protein-coupled receptors
The Role of Pannexin 1 Hemichannels in ATP Release and Cell-Cell Communication in Mouse taste Buds
Calcium Signaling Mediated by P2Y Receptors in Mouse taste Cells
Functional Expression of Ionotropic Purinergic Receptors on Mouse taste Bud Cells
Native GABA(B) Receptors are Heteromultimers with a Family of Auxiliary Subunits
Structural Basis for KCTD-Mediated Rapid Desensitization of GABAB Signalling
Distinct Beta-Arrestin Coupling and Intracellular trafficking of Metabotropic Glutamate Receptor Homo- and Heterodimers
Selective Actions of Novel Allosteric Modulators Reveal Functional Heteromers of Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors in the CNS
GPR158/179 Regulate G Protein Signaling by Controlling Localization and activity of the RGS7 Complexes
Cryo-EM Structure of Human GPR158 Receptor coupled to the RGS7-Gβ5 Signaling complex
Orphan Receptor GPR158 Serves as a Metabotropic Glycine Receptor: mGlyR
Modulation of Postendocytic sorting of G Protein-coupled Receptors
Functional Divergence of Delta and Mu Opioid Receptor Organization in CNS Pain Circuits
5-HT2A Receptor-Dependent Phosphorylation of mGlu2 Receptor at Serine 843 Promotes mGlu2 Receptor-Operated Gi/o Signaling
Endocytic trafficking Determines Cellular Tolerance of Presynaptic Opioid Signaling
Genetic Behavioral Screen Identifies an Orphan Anti-Opioid System
The Orphan Receptor GPR139 Signals via Gq/11 to Oppose Opioid Effects
Mammalian taste Cells Express Functional Olfactory Receptors
Flavor is in the Brain
Experience-Dependent Neural Integration of taste and Smell in the Human Brain
fMRI Activation in Response to Odorants Orally Delivered in Aqueous Solutions
Interoceptive accuracy and its impact on neuronal responses to olfactory stimulation in the insular cortex
Retronasal Odor perception Requires taste Cortex, but Orthonasal does not
The Insular taste Cortex Contributes to Odor Quality Coding
Superadditive Opercular Activation to Food Flavor is Mediated by Enhanced Temporal and Limbic Coupling
Influence of Orthonasal delivery of Sweet Volatiles on the perception of Fruitiness in the Mouth
Enhancing Sweetness perception with Vanilla Extract: strategy for developing Low-Sugar Food Formulations for the elderly
Research Progress in Saltiness perception and Salty Substitutes
Odour-Induced Umami – Olfactory Contribution to Umami taste in Seaweed Extracts (Dashi) by Sensory Interactions
Quantifying the Sweetness Intensity and Impact of Aroma in Honey from four Floral sources
The effect of Mango Aroma in Low-Sugar Beverage: a Sensory Study on Odor Induced Sweetness Enhancement
Key Aroma-active Compounds in Brown Sugar and their Influence on Sweetness
Identification of Characteristic Compounds of Sweet Orange Oil and their Sweetening Effects on the Sucrose solution with Sweetness Meter, Sensory Analysis, Electronic Tongue, and Molecular Dynamics simulation
Research Progress on the effect of the Interaction between Odor and taste on Food Flavor perception
Comparison of two TCATA Variants for Dynamic Sensory Characterization of Food Products
Comparison of TCATA and TDS for Dynamic Sensory Characterization of Food Products
Intensity/Time Relationships in Sweetness: evidence for a Queue Hypothesis in taste Chemoreception
Revealing Volatile Odor Compounds in Watermelon juice to Enhance Fructose Sweetness perception: Sensory Evaluation and Molecular Docking Techniques
Temporal Dominance of Sensations (TDS): a New Deal for Temporal Sensory Analysis
Dynamic and Static Sensory Methods to Study the Role of Aroma on taste and Texture: a Multisensory Approach to Apple perception
Use of Strawberry and Vanilla Natural Flavors for Sugar Reduction: a Dynamic Sensory Study with Yogurt
The Human Brain in Numbers: a Linearly Scaled-up Primate Brain
Concurrent fNIRS and EEG for brain function investigation: a systematic
Concealed, Unobtrusive Ear-Centered EEG Acquisition: cEEGrids for Transparent EEG
EEG-Based Analysis of Neural responses to Sweeteners: Effects of Type and Concentration
Impact of five basic tastes perception on Neurophysiological Response: results from Brain activity
Enhancement of Electroencephalogram activity in the Theta-Band Range during Unmatched Olfactory-taste Stimulation
Study on Interaction of Aromatic Substances and Correlation between Electroencephalogram Correlates of Odor perception in Light Flavor Baijiu
Advancing Research on Odor-Induced Sweetness Enhancement: a EEG Local-Global Fusion Transformer Network for Sweetness Quantification combined with EEG Technology
Beyond Aromas: Exploring the Development and potential applications of Electroencephalography in Olfactory Research—From General Scents to Food Flavor Science Frontiers
Overview of Functional magnetic Resonance Imaging
Brain magnetic Resonance Imaging with Contrast Dependent on Blood Oxygenation
Khorisantono PA, Veldhuizen MG, Seubert J. Tastes and Retronasal Odours Evoke a Shared Flavour-Specific Neural Code in the Human Insula. bioRxiv 2025; 10.1101/2025.01.06.631354.
“Taste-Smell Confusions” and the Duality of the Olfactory sense
Enhancing fNIRS Analysis using EEG Rhythmic Signatures: an EEG-Informed fNIRS Analysis Study
Enhancement of Saltiness perception by Monosodium Glutamate taste and Soy Sauce Odor: a Near-Infrared Spectroscopy Study
Gustatory-Visual Interaction in Human Brain Cortex: fNIRS Study
The present and Future use of Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS) for Cognitive Neuroscience
The Application of Mobile fNIRS in Marketing Research—Detecting the “First-Choice-Brand” effect
Impact of Tea and Coffee Consumption on Cognitive Performance: an fNIRS and EDA Study
Molecular Mechanism for the Umami taste Synergism
The Discovery and Mechanism of Sweet taste Enhancers
Molecular Docking: Shifting Paradigms in Drug Discovery
Molecular Docking: challenges, advances and its use in Drug Discovery Perspective
Molecular Dynamics Simulations and Novel Drug Discovery
Molecular Dynamics Simulations: advances and applications
Effect and Mechanism of Green and Aldehyde Aroma Compounds from Sweet Orange on Sucrose Sweetness perception
Study on the Sweetening Mechanism of Aroma Compounds in Yangshan Peach using Sensory Analysis, Molecular Docking, and Molecular Dynamics simulation Techniques
The Role of Congruency and Pleasantness in Odor-Induced taste Enhancement
The Merging of the Senses: Integration of Subthreshold taste and Smell
Combinatory Effects of Texture and Aroma Modification on taste perception of Model Gels
Effect of Brewing Conditions on Phytochemicals and Sensory Profiles of Black Tea Infusions: a Primary Study on the Effects of Geraniol and β-Ionone on taste perception of Black Tea Infusions
Subthreshold Olfactory Stimulation can Enhance Sweetness
Sensory Studies with Sucrose-Maltol Mixtures
Study on the Interaction between Sweet Aroma Components and Sweetness in Food using Artificial Sensory, Electronic Tongue, and σ-τ Method
Validation of a Stimulation Protocol Suited to the Investigation of Odor-taste Interactions with fMRI
Mechanism of Sweetening effect of 2-Methylbutyric Acid and other 9 Acids from Sweet Orange Investigated by Sensory Evaluation, Electronic Tongue, and Molecular simulation
Characterization of the Aroma-active Compounds in Banana (Musa AAA Red Green) and their Contributions to the Enhancement of Sweetness perception
Five Representative Esters and Aldehydes from Fruits can Enhance Sweet perception
Psychophysical Relationships between Perceived Sweetness and Color in Cherry-Flavored Beverages
Influence of Colour Intensity on the perception of Colour and Sweetness in Various Fruit-Flavoured Yoghurts
Does Food Color Influence taste and Flavor perception in Humans?
The effect of Color on Thirst Quenching, Sweetness, Acceptability and Flavor Intensity in Fruit Punch Flavored Beverages
The Influence of Color on taste perception
Influence of Color on taste Thresholds
Effects of Color and Odor on Judgments of Sweetness among Children and adults
In-Mouth Aroma compound Release during Cheese Consumption: Relationship with Food Bolus Formation
Effects of Xanthan and Sugar on the Release of Aroma Compounds in Model solution
Enhancement of Sweetness Intensity in Gels by Inhomogeneous distribution of Sucrose
Effect of Gel Texture and Sucrose Spatial distribution on Sweetness perception
Aisala H, Rantala J, Vanhatalo S, Nikinmaa M, Pennanen K, et al. Augmentation of Perceived Sweetness in Sugar Reduced Cakes by Local Odor Display. ICMI '20 Companion 2021;322–327. 10.1145/3395035.3425650.
Perception of Sweetness: the Effects of Concentration and Temperature
The Perceived Sweetness and Price of Bottled Drinks’ Silhouettes
The Influence of Music on the perception of taste
Sweet and Sour: Music and taste Associations
Extrinsic Auditory Contributions to Food perception & Consumer Behaviour: an Interdisciplinary Review
Is it the Plate or is it the Food? Assessing the Influence of the Color (Black or White) and Shape of the Plate on the perception of the Food Placed on it
Bouba-Kiki in the Plate: Combining Crossmodal Correspondences to Change Flavour Experience
Hedonic Mediation of the Crossmodal Correspondence between taste and Shape
Using Tactile Stimuli to Enhance Sweet perception in Iced Tea Samples
Relationship between Tactile Stimuli and basic tastes: CATA with Consumers with Visual Disability
Odor-Taste-Texture Interactions as a Promising Strategy to Tackle Adolescent Overweight
Influence of Obesity on Saltiness and Sweetness Intensity Enhancement by Odors
Obese individuals have Higher Preference and Sensitivity to Odor of Chocolate
Changes in Odor Sweetness Resulting from Implicit Learning of a Simultaneous Odor-Sweetness Association: an example of Learned Synesthesia
Human taste Thresholds are Modulated by Serotonin and Noradrenaline
Effect of Acute stress on taste perception: In Relation with Baseline anxiety Level and Body Weight
The effect of Emotional State on taste perception
“A Sweet Smile”: the Modulatory Role of Emotion in how Extrinsic Factors Influence taste Evaluation
Fear Reduces Perceived Sweetness: changes in the perception of taste due to Emotional State
The Investigation of Gender-Related Sensitivity differences in Food perception
Age-Related changes in Sweetness perception: Exploring the Role of Cross-Modal Interactions
Food-Oral Processing: Current Progress, Future Directions, and challenges
Intra-Oral Adsorption and Release of Aroma Compounds following In-Mouth Wine Exposure
The Effects of both Chewing Rate and Chewing Duration on Temporal Flavor perception
How a b c MS, Jones JR, Morgenstern MP, Gray-Stuart E, Bronlund JE, et al. Modelling the Role of Oral Processing on In Vivo Aroma Release of White Rice: Conceptual Model and Experimental Validation. LWT 2021; 141: 110918. Doi: 10.1016/j.lwt.2021.110918.
Higher Masticatory Performance and Higher Number of Chewing strokes increase Retronasal Aroma
Saliva as Research Material: Biochemical, Physicochemical and Practical Aspects
Saliva and Flavor perception: Perspectives
Saliva Bubbles: how Saliva Foam Impacts Aroma Release and Retronasal perception during Oral Processing
Influence of Mastication and Saliva on Aroma Release in a Model Mouth System
Saliva from Obese individuals Suppresses the Release of Aroma Compounds from Wine
Ability of Human Oral Microbiota to produce Wine Odorant Aglycones from Odourless Grape Glycosidic Aroma Precursors
Bioconversion of Glycosidic Precursors from Sour Guava (Psidium friedrichsthalianum Nied.) Fruit by the Oral Microbiota into Odor-active Volatile Compounds
Olfactory Epithelium changes in Germfree mice
Associations of the Oral Microbiota and Candida with taste, Smell, Appetite and Undernutrition in older adults
The coming Future: the Role of the Oral-Microbiota-Brain Axis in Aroma Release and perception
Factors contributing to Interindividual Variation in Retronasal Odor perception from Aroma Glycosides: the Role of Odorant Sensory Detection Threshold, Oral Microbiota, and Hydrolysis in Saliva
Inflammation and taste Disorders: Mechanisms in taste Buds
Selecting Odorant Compounds to Enhance Sweet Flavor perception by Gas Chromatography/Olfactometry-Associated taste (GC/O-AT)
Enhancing Odor Analysis with Gas Chromatography–Olfactometry (GC-O): recent Breakthroughs and challenges
Preparation, Characterization and Properties of Linalool and Acyclic Cucurbit[n]urils Inclusion Complexes
Tea Aroma Retention strategies using Tea Polysaccharide Conjugates: Insights from the Yellowing Process
Case Report: Flavoring-Related Lung Disease in a Coffee Roasting and packaging Facility Worker with Unique Lung Histopathology Compared with previously Described cases of Obliterative Bronchiolitis
Policy, Toxicology and Physicochemical Considerations on the Inhalation of High Concentrations of Food Flavour
Cross-Modal effect of Vanilla Aroma on Sweetness of Different Sweeteners among chinese and danish Consumers
Elucidation of the Sweetening Mechanism of Sweet Orange Fruit Aroma Compounds on Sucrose solution using Sensory Evaluation, Electronic Tongue, Molecular Docking, and Molecular Dynamics simulation
Food Hydrocolloids: Application as Functional Ingredients to Control Lipid Digestion and Bioavailability

Supplementary data
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2025.09.043.