Botanical Antifeedants: An Alternative Approach to Pest Control
Simple Summary
Pests cause damage to 10–30% of agricultural production annually. To prevent this, we use plant protection products, which are mostly of synthetic origin and carry certain risks and whose use, from today’s modern point of view, is not sustainable. Plants have evolved to possess a number of mechanisms over the course of evolution that allow them to reduce damage, to some extent, from both abiotic and biotic stressors, including phytophagous insects. One of the interesting mechanisms of plant defence is the synthesis of secondary metabolites that can, among other things, inhibit food intake—a phenomenon we call antifeedance. Secondary metabolites can act on pests directly by being toxic, or by having repellent and antifeedant effects. Our review focuses on these antifeedants. By comparing the effectiveness of antifeedants from the published available research, we concluded that the most effective and promising sources of antifeedants are the following plants: Angelica archangelica, Caesalpinia bonduc, Grindelia camporum, Inula auriculata, Lavandula luisieri, Mentha pulegium, Piper hispidinervum, and Vitis vinifera.
Abstract
Plant protection against phytophagous pests still largely relies on the application of synthetic insecticides, which can lead to environmental and health risks that are further exacerbated by the development of resistant pest populations. These are the driving forces behind the current trend of research and the development of new ecological insecticides. The mode of action does not have to rely exclusively on acute or chronic toxicity. Another promising approach is the use of plant antifeedants, which can significantly reduce the food intake of phytophagous insects. However, the information on antifeedant substances has not yet been sufficiently evaluated. The aim of this review was to find the most promising plants that provide potent extracts, essential oils (EOs), or isolated compounds with antifeedant properties. The selection was based on a comparison of effective concentrations or doses. Effective extracts were obtained from 85 plant species belonging to 35 families and the EOs came from 38 aromatic plant species from 11 families. Based on the results, Angelica archangelica, Caesalpinia bonduc, Grindelia camporum, Inula auriculata, Lavandula luisieri, Mentha pulegium, Piper hispidinervum, and Vitis vinifera were selected as promising plants with antifeedant potential. These plants are potent antifeedants, and at the same time provide sufficient biomass for industrial use in the development and production of botanical antifeedants.

1. Introduction
Plants are exposed to adverse conditions throughout their lives that cause them stress. Stress can be of abiotic (drought, radiation, etc.) and biotic (pests, pathogens, etc.) origin. Stress factors reduce photosynthesis and plant growth, seed production can also be affected, and the final consequence of persistent stress is the death of the entire plant. Over the course of evolution, plants have had to develop various protective mechanisms to guard their important organs from pathogens and pests. Besides morphological changes, e.g., in the form of a thicker epidermis or dense trichomes, plants have developed numerous metabolic pathways that help them synthesize protective secondary metabolites.
These metabolites, including terpenoids, phenols, alkaloids, cyanogenic glycosides, glucosinolates, chinons, amines, non-protein amino acids, organic acids, polyacetylenes, and peptides, may negatively affect the metabolism, neural transmission, development, and reproduction of phytophagous insects. Green plants in particular stand out for their ability to synthesize such a wide range of secondary metabolites; even a cursory literature review documents over 100,000 compounds that may affect various molecular targets at a specific time, and often synergistically. Thus, some plant species can be described as “green chemical factories”.
However, phytophagous insects still cause annual losses estimated at 10–30%; in some cases, the yield losses can even be fatal. Although the damage caused by phytophagous insects can be partially prevented by using various farming innovations (such as frequent crop rotation or the use of mixed cultures) or plant breeding (such as growing available resistant varieties), plant protection against pests is still based on the application of insecticides. Annually, approximately 2 million tonnes of pesticides are used worldwide, with insecticides accounting for just under 30%. The frequent application of synthetic insecticides may cause certain environmental and health risks. In addition, the development of resistant pest populations is a worldwide problem at present. These and other problems have become the driving force for scientific teams to seek new active substances for insecticides, with different action mechanisms that also pose minimum or no environmental and health risks. Using secondary plant metabolites in plant protection is one of the suitable alternatives. There is a logical presumption that natural secondary metabolites will degrade rapidly in agroecosystems and, at the same time, be safe for non-target organisms, including humans.
At present, a number of botanical insecticides are on the market, usually based on plant metabolites that cause either acute (e.g., based on essential oils, extracts from Chrysanthemum cinerariifolium) and chronic (e.g., extracts from Azadirachta indica and Pongamia pinnata) toxicity.
However, secondary plant metabolites need not cause only direct insect mortality. There are numerous allomones that belong among plant metabolites. These substances do not primarily cause pest mortality, but they repel or deter insects from feeding, so that the pest will not alight on the plant, as it assesses the plant as unsuitable for feeding for itself or its offspring.
While repellent substances are currently used in the form of commercial insect repellents, particularly against noxious insects and important disease vectors such as mosquitoes and ticks, knowledge about antifeedant substances that discourage phytophagous insects from feeding is still insufficient. It is assumed that antifeedants can significantly reduce plant damage from phytophagous pests and may thus be suitable candidates for the development of “green” plant protection products, yet comprehensive information on promising antifeedants is still lacking.

2. Antifeedance Phenomenon
Antifeedants act at low concentrations and are perceived by specialized receptors. Each compound that an insect tastes, i.e., each tastant, may elicit a unique spatiotemporal neural representation. For simplification, tastants have been divided, similarly to human taste buds, by the category of substances they respond to, i.e., sweet, bitter, sour, and salty, with umami added later.
Sweetness is associated most importantly with sugars, but also sugar alcohols, which are important for some Lepidoptera and other insects. Sweetness is an important factor, just as water content (hypoosmolarity), fatty acid content, CO2, and other substances are important perceptions that help insects decide whether the food is suitable for them or their offspring, and thus, whether it is appropriate to lay eggs on such plants.
Insect neurons, tastants, and responses to tastants are sometimes classified as appetitive, phagostimulatory or attractant versus aversive, or antifeedant deterrent or suppressant. In feeding, appetitive behaviour includes biting or a proboscis extension response (PER) and ingestion. PER is the extension of retracted or folded up mouthparts in apparent preparation for contacting food and feeding, often in response to the stimulation of a body part other than the part of the mouth that will do the feeding, e.g., stimulation of the antennae, tarsi or labial palps. PER has been used to test taste in various flies, lepidopterans, bees, and ants. Aversive behaviour includes avoidance and the inhibition of PER or biting.
Whether a compound is appetitive or aversive may differ even among closely related species and within species. Many aversive, primarily bitter, compounds such as alkaloids are produced by plants as repellents and antifeedants against herbivores. Subsequently, however, insect specialists have evolved and coevolved to feed on precisely these plants. They have then begun to use plant-produced repellent or antifeedant substances as a means of identifying suitability for food or the laying of eggs. It is estimated, for example, that 75% of butterflies in the temperate zone and 80% in the tropic zone are food specialists (monophagous or oligophagous). Thanks to this specialization and neuroreceptor system, insects can find plants that they consider qualitatively favourable food. On the other hand, searching for plants based on a specific taste and scent poses an opportunity for plant protection, assuming that we use secondary metabolites that provoke in the pest a repellent, antiovipository, or antifeedant response. If sufficiently long persistence of such effects is achieved, plant yield damage can be prevented in a targeted fashion.
According to Koul, there are several main groups of antifeedants. These include monoterpenes, diterpenes, coumarins, flavonoids, limonoids, and others, which have different mechanisms of action. All groups are more or less united by the fact that their effectiveness is structure related. For example, azadirachtin or salanin (limonoids) have many functional groups, and their antifeedant effect depends, among other things, on their arrangement in the molecule. Others, such as clerodane diterpenoids, occur in various isomeric forms, which essentially determine whether they will be effective or not. For coumarins (angelicin), for example, substitution of the furan ring means loss of antifeedant activity. Therefore, there is a huge variability in the effectiveness of individual substances, which are also species-specific. On the other hand, some terpenes and alkaloids have been found to be extremely effective feeding inhibitors for a number of insects, and the most potent antifeedants include azadirachtin, warburganal, strychnine, isopimpinelline, and piperenone.
Neurons associated with antifeedant receptors, which inhibit insect feeding (feeding deterring effect);
Neurons causing the halting or slowing down of further feeding (feeding suppressing effect);
Blocking of function of receptors stimulating herbivore feeding or binding directly to their normal feeding stimuli, such as sugars and amino acids. An example of this mechanism is azadirachtin, which reduces the sensitivity of cells sensitive to sugar in herbivorous insects, thus causing the insects to incorrectly assess the nutritional suitability of treated plants.
As part of antifeedant efficacy, substances can affect the following factors:
“False” antifeedants are another possible type of mechanism. They are compounds that affect all the taste sensilla non-specifically (e.g., by means of immediate and general cell toxicity); therefore, they are not considered true antifeedants but rather an accompanying response to neurotoxic substances. They include some EOs and pyretroids.
Nevertheless, from the practical point of view, the mechanism of the effect is not as important, as it can be determined using electrophysical methods, as knowledge of doses or concentrations of extracts or their active substances that deliver an antifeedant effect that prevents a significant reduction in crop yield.

3. Antifeedant Efficacy Assessment Methods and Criteria
This review describes the antifeedant activity of plant extracts, plant essential oils, and isolated compounds on 30 (16 in the article and a further 14 in the Supplementary Tables) economically important insect species. All insects listed have chewing mouthparts and the selected life stage always feeds on above-ground parts of the plant (in most cases strictly or partly folivorous, exception is the granivorous larvae of Pectinophora gossypiella). The inhibition of food intake by antifeedants may thus be a new mechanism to prevent plant damage and thus eliminate economically significant damages.
As mentioned above, the antifeedant response can be studied using electrophysical methods, focused predominantly on measuring the neuronal response, e.g., of B2 sensilla in caterpillars. From the practical point of view, it is much more convenient to use standard methods of treated and untreated leaf discs. These methods are faster, technically less demanding, and can provide more information about the importance of antifeedant efficacy in practice, and if applied in a standard way, the results of different studies can be compared.
These tests evaluate the amount of contaminated food received by insects in a given time period compared to the untreated control. This allows for the calculation of the so-called Feeding Deterrent Index (FDI), which provides information on the percentage reduction in contaminated food intake (T) compared to untreated food (C): FDI (%) = ((C − T)/(C + T)) × 100.
A choice test that utilizes the principle of insects’ ability to naturally choose food with suitable nutritional potential and not burdened with hazardous compounds. To a certain extent, insects are able to enzymatically inactivate some indigestible or poisonous substances. However, this inactivation requires energy. Additionally, some substances may inhibit their food utilization ability, and thus plants without such substances are more convenient for the insects. Nevertheless, in the absence of choice, they are able to feed on food contaminated with growth-inhibiting substances. The choice test thus answers the question of whether a substance can discourage the individuals from food intake, and the results show whether the individuals class such substances as inappropriate for feeding or whether, on the contrary, food contaminated with these substances becomes more attractive for them.
A non-choice test is more rigorous and provides more input for potential use in practice. If no food other than contaminated food is presented to the larvae, they are either able to feed with a time delay compared to untreated control or the treated food is unacceptable. Generally, it can be hypothesized that if the FDI is below 90%, the given substances will probably only reduce the rate of food intake, but pose no insurmountable barrier to food intake. However, an FDI value above 90% indicates that the tested compound may actually be a true antifeedant substance, as it can significantly inhibit the response of (1) olfactory receptor cells, (2) taste receptor cells, (3) oral mechanoreceptors, and/or (4) a post-ingestion response mechanism.
There are two basic types of tests:
To prevent error due to uneven insect appetites, it is important to let the target insects starve for several hours (2–5 h) before commencing the experiments. It is advisable to place leaf discs in the most commonly used Petri dishes of an adequate size so that they do not touch each other, and with a spacing of at least 2–3 cm. It is best to place 3–5 larvae or adults of the target insect species in the centre of the arena. The experiment should ideally end when more than 50% (ideally up to 90%) of the control discs have been eaten. The experiment should be performed with a sufficient number of repetitions (at least 4–5) to ensure that the findings are consistent.

4. Available Literature Assessment Methods
Among other things, the present overview aimed to make a critical assessment of the results related to the antifeedant efficacy of plant extracts, Eos, and isolated substances against pests damaging plants by feeding on their leaves (defoliators). Since we intended to obtain information that would be as objective as possible and provide evidence of the primary antifeedant effects of plant secondary metabolites on a reduction in feeding, we set the following criteria for selecting appropriate publications: the use of standard choice or non-choice tests on leaf discs and known effective dose or concentration or, if the application of a single concentration had an antifeedant index above 70%, the FDI (%) was calculated using the standard formula ((C − T)/(C + T)) × 100. Publications in the WoS and Scopus databases (accessed in November 2024) were searched using the following keywords: „topic“ was set up as „antifeedant“, with exclusion of terms such as the following: anorexia, ant, aphid, aphids, aspergillus, bemisia, cellulose, coli, copper, culex, cytotoxic, diptera, fate, field, freshwater, fungal, fungi, fungus, genes, grain, hare, human, leafhopper, liver, locust, marine, metarhizium, meeting, mite, nanotechnology, oblonga, planthoppers, psyllid, quantitative, review, rhyzopertha, sea, sensory, snail, storage, stored, symposium, synthesis, termite, thrips, tribolium, and warehouse.

5. Promising Plant Antifeedant Substances
We identified 2803 publications in total, out of which 1280 were concerned with phyllophagous pests. Nevertheless, after meticulous study, only 286 publications matched the above criteria.
Effective extracts were obtained from 85 plant species (Table S1), belonging to 35 families. Nevertheless, more than 50% of the plants belonged only to the families Asteraceae, Fabaceae, Lamiaceae, Meliaceae, and Rutaceae (Figure 1). Because each paper used different insect species and developmental stages, different methods of application to the surface of leaf discs, or different times of evaluation of antifeedant efficacy, etc., no single viewpoint or choice of criterion is ideal. On this basis, we have chosen EC50 and ED50 as the least misleading criteria. These values provide at least a basic idea of the antifeedant potential of the evaluated substances.
ED50—effective dose—is a statistically derived average dose (µg of compounds/extracts at 1 cm2 of the treated leaf) at which, in the case of antifeedance (as opposed to mortality), a 50% reduction in food intake compared to an untreated control is expected to be caused. EC50—effective concentration—is the same parameter as ED50, with the difference that it is not a dose per leaf area, but a concentration of the substance/extract in the solvent (organic solvent, water, etc.), usually expressed as µg ml−1, percent, or ppm.
If the estimated EC50 or ED50 values are taken as the main criterion, then we can highlight the chloroform extract from Clausena anisate, which had the lowest EC50 estimate (140 µg mL−1). It was tested in choice tests on larvae of the polyphagous pest Helicoverpa armigera. Furthermore, the alkaloid extracts of aerial parts of Senecio kingii against polyphagous larvae of Spodoptera littoralis, with an estimated ED50 of 0.09 μg cm−2, and Vitis vinifera shoots extracts against oligophagous adults of Leptinotarsa decemlineata, with an estimated ED50 of 0.08 μg cm−2 (Table 1), were tested.
The majority of substances identified in the extracts were coumarins, flavonoids, terpenoids, phenols, and quinones. Other promising extracts that showed ED50 ˂ 1 µg cm−2 were obtained from Vitis vinifera, Senecio kingii, Grindelia camporum, Inula auriculata, Angelica archangelica, Echium wildpretii subsp. wildpretii, and Senecio fistulosus. Their antifeedant efficacy was tested both on the oligophagous Leptinotarsa decemlineata and the polyphagous Spodoptera littoralis (Table 1). Very good efficacy has also been demonstrated by extracts obtained from Azadirachta indica, Melia volkensii, Pyrethrum corymbosum, Teucrium hircanicum, Xeranthemum cylindraceum, and Persea indica (ED50 was determined at 1–10 µg cm−2). Although complete analyses of all these most effective extracts were not conducted, the following majority substances were identified in some of them: eremophilane-type sesquiterpenes of the furanoeremophilane, as well as furanocoumarins (bergapten, imperatorin, and phellopterin), limonoids (e.g., azadirachtin), and other terpenoids (Table 1).
A total of 38 aromatic plant species belonging to 11 families yielded EOs with promising antifeedant effects (Table S2). More than 50% of these plant species, however, belonged to only three families: Asteraceae, Lamiaceae, and Rutaceae (Figure 2).
The most effective EOs had ED50 ˂ 10 µg cm−2. Those EOs were obtained from Acorus calamus (majority compound—asarone), which was tested against Peridroma saucia. Other promising EOs were tested against larvae of Spodoptera littoralis or S. littura. Those EOs were obtained from Angelica archangelica (majority compounds—β-phellandrene, sabinene, α-pinene, and α-phellandrene), Lavandula luisieri (majority compounds—3-Oxo-cadinol, 2,3,4,4-Tetramethyl-5-methylidenecyclopent-2-en-1-one, and Hydroxymethyl-2,3,4,4-tetramethylcyclopent-2-en-1-one), Mentha pulegium (majority compounds—pulegone, 1,3,4-trimethyl-3-cyclohexene-1-carboxaldehyde, and piperitenone), Artemisia nakaii (majority compounds—Feropodin, (+)-camphor, 1,8-cineole, and rishitin), Piper hispidinervum (majority compounds—safrole and terpinolene) and Piper sanctifelicis, which was tested against Leptinotarsa decemlineata (majority compounds—δ-3-carene, limonene, p-cymene, β-pinene, and nerolidol) (Table 2).
More than 100 isolated compounds and their derivatives were tested for antifeedant efficacy against several species of important phytophagous pests (Table S3). Pure compounds often showed stronger efficacy compared to extracts or EOs. Several isolated plant substances (floral diterpenoids, homopterocarpin, anhydrocinnzeylanine, cinnzeylanine, silphinene, pulegone, thujone, ursane type triterpenoid, aconitine, and xanthotoxin) even had an estimated ED50 ˂ 1 µg cm−2. Some other substances had ED50 values of 1–10 µg cm−2 (compound 1—latex diterpenoids, piperine, ursane type triterpenoid, rocaglamide, volkensin, grayanane diterpenoids, uvedalin, toosedanin, 6-methylflavone, pinocembrin, polygodial, ligudicin A, piperitenone epoxide, α-pinene, dehydrofukinone, germacrone, neo-clerodane diterpenoids, β-ocimene, derivatives of eugenol, and thymol) (Table 3).
The tables list the 30 species of insects tested. The majority of these are representatives of the order Lepidoptera (22 species), including 5 oligophagous species (Cnaphalocrocis medinalis, Pectinophora gossypiella, Pieris brassicae, P. rapae, and Plutella xylostella) and 17 polyphagous species (Achaea janata, Crocidolomia pavonana, Helicoverpa armigera, Hyphantria cunea, Lymantria dispar, Mamestra brassicae, M. configurata, Ostrinia furnacalis, O. nubilalis, Peridroma saucia, Spilosoma obliqua, Spodoptera exempta, S. frugiperda, S. littoralis, S. litura S. exigua, and Trichopulsia ni).
Furthermore, seven representatives of the order Coleoptera were represented, of which the larvae of three species are oligophagous (Diabrotica barberi, Epilachna paenulata, and Leptinotarsa decemlineata) and four are polyphagous (Diabrotica undecimpunctata, D. virgifera, Epicauta atomaria, and Epilachna varivestis).
The order Hymenoptera was represented by one oligophagous species (Caliroa cerasi) (listed only in the Supplementary Tables).
The best effect on oligophagous Lepidoptera larvae was observed with the extract of Panax ginseng (EC50 for P. xylostella estimated at 2740 μg mL−1) and the essential oil from Citrus aurantifolia (ED50 for P. xylostella estimated at 68.93 μg cm−2). The most promising compounds were isolated from Pieris japonica (flower diterpenoids; ED50 for P. brassicae estimated at 0.028 μg cm−2), Croton jatrophoides (dumnin and dumsenin; EC50 for P. gossypiella estimated at ≤2 μg mL−1), Rhododendron molie extract (rhodojaponin III; EC50 for P. rapae estimated at 1.16 μg mL−1), and, from an unspecified plant, the derivatives of eugenol and thymol (EC50 for P. xylostella estimated at 3.3 μg mL−1).
The best effect on polyphagous lepidopteran larvae was observed with extracts of Angelica archangelica (ED50 for S. littoralis estimated at 0.64 μg cm−2), Senecio fistulosus (ED50 for S. littoralis estimated at 0.64 μg cm−2), and Clausena anisata (EC50 for H. armigera estimated at 140 μg mL−1). A significant antifeedant effect for these pests was observed with the essential oil from Acorus calamus (ED50 for P. saucia estimated at 2.5 μg cm−2), Artemisia nakaii (ED50 for S. litura estimated at 3.76 μg cm−2), and Mentha pulegium (ED50 for S. littoralis estimated at 1.3 μg cm−2). The most promising compounds were isolated from Eupatorium adenophorum (sesquiterpenoids—compound 2 and 3; ED50 for H. armigera estimated at 2.5 and 3.0 μg cm−2), Senecio adenotrichius (compound 1—dehydrofukinone; ED50 for S. litoralis estimated at 1.6 μg cm−2), and Euphorbia paralias (ursane type triterpenoid—compound 21 (uvaol); ED50 for S. litoralis estimated at 3.3 μg cm−2).
The highest antifeedant effect on the oligophagous coleopteran larvae was shown by the extract of Angelica archangelica (ED50 for L. decemlineata larvae estimated at 0.6 μg cm−2) and Echium wildpretii (ED50 for L. decemlineata (unspecified stadium) estimated at 0.4 μg cm−2). The most promising essential oil for these pests is Piper hispidinervum EO (ED50 for L. decemlineata (unspecified stadium) estimated at 0.4 μg cm−2) and the most promising isolated compounds are from Euphorbia paralias (ursane type triterpenoid—compound 21 (uvaol); ED50 for L. decemlineata adults estimated at 0.42 μg cm−2), Persea indica (cinnzeylanone; ED50 for L. decemlineata adults estimated at 0.08 μg cm−2), and from the unspecified plant seskviterpene silphinene (ED50 for L. decemlineata adults estimated at 0.15 μg cm−2).
The best effect on polyphagous coleopteran larvae was observed with extracts of Melia volkensii (ED50 for E. varivestis adults estimated at 2.3 μg cm−2) and the alkaloid aconitine from an unspecified plant (ED50 for D. virgifera adults estimated at 0.27 μg cm−2).
The results of our study show that a number of plants contain secondary metabolites that demonstrate promising antifeedant efficacy against many important pests (e.g., Leptinotarsa decemlineata, Spodoptera littoralis, S. litura, Trichopulsia ni, Helicoverpa armigera, Plutella xylostella, Pieris rapae, and Ostrinia nubilalis, etc.). In terms of the practical implementation of the research results in terms of new products with antifeedant activity, those extracts that show antifeedant efficacy in the lowest possible concentrations or doses can be regarded as especially promising. Our paper has identified numerous extracts with estimates of ED50 < 10 µg cm−2, which in the standard application of 10 µL application liquid per cm2, corresponds to a concentration below 0.1%; it can therefore be assumed that a concentration 2–3 times higher will, in the majority of cases, cause maximum inhibition of feeding in the pests (Tables S1–S3). Another prerequisite for the practical implementation of antifeedants is the safety of the applied substances for both the environment and non-target organisms, including humans. This safety can be primarily estimated, e.g., based on ethnobotanical experience of using selected plants in the food industry or on the known safety of the contained substances. In spite of that, however, it will be necessary to perform appropriate biological testing, particularly for the effects of the selected extracts on non-target organisms.
Another prerequisite for the selection of extracts suitable for the development of insect antifeedants is the availability and easy cultivation of plants that can provide sufficient amounts of biomass suitable for the extraction of active substances. In our paper, we selected the following highly effective plants: Caesalpinia bonduc, Vitis vinifera, Senecio kingii, Grindelia camporum, Inula auriculata, Angelica archangelica, Echium wildpretii subsp. wildpretii, and Senecio fistulosus. Among them, C. bonduc, V. vinifera, G. camporum, I. auriculata, and A. archangelica can be chosen as highly promising plants because they are frequently grown as medicinal or cultural crops and can provide the biomass suitable for the extraction of active substances. Likewise, EOs from Angelica archangelica, Lavandula luisieri, Mentha pulegium, and Piper hispidinervum can be suitable for the development of new products with antifeedant activity. Nevertheless, from a practical point of view, the stability of active substances in the environment is no less important, enabling persistent effects. From this perspective, plant extracts appear more promising than EOs, which show considerable instability. Nevertheless, in this case, the solution might consist of protecting the molecules and releasing them gradually, using the appropriate encapsulation methods. However, tests that demonstrate the persistence of the antifeedant effect over time are lacking.

6. Future Research Challenges
Currently, studies on antifeedance are among the most frequently used auxiliary biological tests in the study of the chronic toxicity of plant metabolites. The chronic mortality of insects can occur over time due to low food intake and subsequent low conversion to weight gain. Therefore, the study of antifeedance is very important. As can be seen from the results of this work, there are many plants that contain substances with high antifeedant potential. These substances can be useful in plant protection. The mortality of such pests can be a secondary effect.
Although we managed to select promising plants based on the comparison of effective concentrations or doses, we must admit that comparing results across authors is fraught with a certain amount of error. This error results mainly from the heterogeneity of the methods used by different authors. At the same time, it is important to emphasize that these tests are often short-term and do not indicate the persistence of the effect. Systematic research dealing with the phenomenon of antifeedance is still lacking.
Primary tests. The aim of primary tests is to select plants that contain substances with antifeedant potential. Within these tests, it is therefore necessary to unify the methods and use the generally accepted method of no-choice tests on leaf discs, because it most closely simulates the likely efficacy in agricultural practice. For calculating the FDI and estimating effective concentrations or doses, it is important to use the above formula to ensure better comparability of results. Only standardized methods and procedures that are statistically valid can provide results that can be compared between different laboratories.
Expand knowledge about the efficacy of extracts. Another set of research goals is undoubtedly follow-up tests to the “Primary tests”, which should aim to find out other important information about the effectiveness of selected antifeedants. a) For extracts and EOs, it is important to find out which substances or their combinations cause the antifeedant effect, which is important information from the point of view of standardization of extracts as active substances of potential plant protection products. b) Study of the effect of extracts and active substances on non-target organisms, which is important information for estimating their environmental safety. c) Study of the persistence of the effect and synergetic relationships of the majority substances with regard to a possible increase in effectiveness or extension of the persistence period.
Implementation of results, i.e., transfer of results from laboratory experiments to agricultural practice. It is important that scientific knowledge is put into practice in the form of plant protection preparations. a) It is therefore important to systematically investigate formulation methods that will extend the period of effectiveness (e.g., encapsulation methods, etc.). b) It is important to verify the effects under conditions simulating the real ones, that is, the translation of knowledge into practice by applying formulated products in container and field trials and comparing their efficacy with other insecticides, especially on the yield characteristics of treated crops.
These are the potential challenges for future research, which refer to the aim of implementing these results into agronomical practice:
Field experiments are few in number compared to the abundance of laboratory studies. Laboratory studies are relatively straightforward and tend to produce significant results that can be easily published, while field studies are more difficult to conduct, much more variable, and often show poor efficacy of the test substance compared to established plant protection products.

7. Conclusions
Based on the comparison of effective concentrations or doses of extracts/essences and substances, we selected some plants that contain highly promising secondary metabolites. Among them, there are extracts from Caesalpinia bonduc, Vitis vinifera, Grindelia camporum, Inula auriculata, and Angelica archangelica, and EOs used as antifeedants can be obtained from the aromatic plants Angelica archangelica, Lavandula luisieri, Mentha pulegium, and Piper hispidinervum. Thus, these plant species can be the subject of further research and a potential source of active ingredients for new plant protection products with antifeedant activity.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: . Table S1: Antifeedant efficacy of plant extracts (full version with FDI > 70%); Insect: L = larvae (instar) and A = adults; The concentration is given in μg mL−1 for liquids, or in μg cm−2 for the dose of active ingredient calculated on a given leaf surface area, the resulting value also corresponds to this: EC50 for liquids or ED50 for solids. Table S2: Antifeedant efficacy of plant essential oils (full version with FDI > 70%); Insect: L = larvae (instar) and A = adults; The concentration is given in μg mL−1 for liquids, or in μg cm−2 for the dose of active ingredient calculated on a given leaf surface area, the resulting value also corresponds to this: EC50 for liquids or ED50 for solids. Table S3: Antifeedant efficacy of isolated compounds (full version with FDI > 70%); Insect: L = larvae (instar) and A = adults; The concentration is given in μg mL−1 for liquids, or in μg cm−2 for the dose of active ingredient calculated on a given leaf surface area, the resulting value also corresponds to this: EC50 for liquids or ED50 for solids.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, R.P.; methodology, R.P.; formal analysis, R.P.; investigation, K.K. and M.N.; resources, K.K.; writing—original draft preparation, R.P.; writing—review and editing, K.K., M.N. and R.P.; visualization, M.N.; supervision, R.P.; project administration, R.P.; funding acquisition, R.P. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Data Availability Statement
There are no additional data, as all data are presented in the paper or Supplementary Materials.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
Plant responses to drought, acclimation, and stress tolerance
Regulatory network of gene expression in the drought and cold stress responses
Gustation in insects: Taste qualities and types of evidence used to show taste function of specific body parts
Evolution of secondary metabolites from an ecological and molecular phylogenetic perspective
Modes of action of herbal medicines and plant secondary metabolites
Acute toxicity and synergistic and antagonistic effects of the aromatic compounds of some essential oils against Culex quinquefasciatus Say larvae
Worldwide pesticide usage and its impacts on ecosystem
Pesticide risk assessment in European agriculture: Distribution patterns, ban-substitution effects and regulatory implications
Mode of inheritance for pesticide resistance, importance and prevalence: A review
Biopesticides as a promising alternative to synthetic pesticides: A case for microbial pesticides, phytopesticides, and nanobiopesticides
History, presence and perspective of using plant extracts as commercial botanical insecticides and farm products for protection against insects—A review
Spatiotemporal coding of individual chemicals by the gustatory system
The sensilla of Aedes and Anopheles mosquitoes and their importance in repellency
Application of ethnobotanical repellents and acaricides in prevention, control and management of livestock ticks: A review
Plant-derived products in crop protection: Effects of various application methods on pests and diseases
Essential oil antifeedants against armyworms: Promises and challenges
Biological aspects of antifeedants
An experimental study of the tarsal chemoreceptors of two nymphalid butterflies
Peripheral coding of taste
Gustation across the class Insecta: Body locations
Function and central projections of gustatory receptor neurons on the antenna of the noctuid moth Spodoptera littoralis
BmGr10 is a putative functional gustatory receptor in the myo-inositol neuron in the epipharyngeal sensillum
Cross-habituation to deterrents correlates with desensitisation of the corresponding deterrent neuron in the larva of the black cutworm, Agrotis ipsilon
Feeding response to select monosaccharides, sugar alcohols, and artificial sweeteners relative to sucrose in adult house flies, Musca domestica (Diptera: Muscidae)
Responsiveness to sugar solutions in the moth Agrotis ipsilon: Parameters affecting proboscis extension
Bumblebees are able to perceive amino acids via chemotactile antennal stimulation
Proboscis behavioral response of four honey bee Apis species towards different concentrations of sucrose, glucose, and fructose
Associative learning in ants: Conditioning of the maxilla-labium extension response in Camponotus aethiops
Plant metabolites drive different responses in caterpillars of two closely related Helicoverpa species
Acetic acid activates distinct taste pathways in Drosophila to elicit opposing, state-dependent feeding responses
Role of glucosinolates in insect-plant relationships and multitrophic interactions
Learning-based oviposition constancy in insects
Development and evaluation of emulsifiable concentrate formulation containing Sophora alopecuroides L. extract for the novel management of Asian citrus psyllid
Achillea millefolium essential oil and chitosan nanocapsules with enhanced activity against Tetranychus urticae
Potent limonoid insect antifeedant from Melia azedarach
Olfactory receptors on the maxillary palps of small ermine moth larvae: Evolutionary history of benzaldehyde sensitivity
Insecticidal and antifeedant bioactivity of neem oils and their relationship to azadirachtin content
Larvicidal, ovicidal and antifeedant activity of crude cashew nutshell liquid against fall armyworm, Spodoptera frugiperda (J.E. smith), (lepidoptera, Noctuidae)
Effects of crude seed extracts of Annona atemoya and Annona squamosal L. against the cabbage looper, Trichoplusia ni in the laboratory and greenhouse
Antifeedant and insecticidal activity of plant extracts against Spodoptera litura (Fab.) and Lipaphis erysimi
Antifeedant activity of plant extracts on Leptinotarsa decemlineata Say. and Spodoptera littoralis Bois. larvae
Insecticidal effect of furanocoumarins from fruits of Angelica archangelica L. against larvae Spodoptera littoralis Boisd
Evaluation of bioactivity of some plant species against Spodoptera litura Fabricius (Noctuidae: Lepidoptera)
Ginsenosides from the stems and leaves of Panax ginseng show antifeedant activity against Plutella xylostella (Linnaeus)
Insect antifeedant components of Senecio fistulosus var
Sesquiterpenes, flavonoids, shikimic acid derivatives and pyrrolizidine alkaloids from Senecio kingii Hook
Antifeedant activity of fatty acid esters and phytosterols from Echium wildpretii
Toxicity and antifeedant activity of Caesalpinia bonduc (L.) Roxb. (Caesalpiniaceae) extracts and fractions against the cotton bollworm Helicoverpa armigera Hub. (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)
Antifeedant activity and phytochemical investigation of Millettia pachycarpa extracts against Tobacco Leaf Eating Caterpillar, Spodoptera litura (Fabricius) (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)
Sustainable Production of Insecticidal Compounds from Persea indica
Comparative growth inhibitory and antifeedant effects of plant extracts and pure allelochemicals on four phytophagous insect species
Identification, isolation and characterization of the antifeedant constituent of Clausena anisata against Helicoverpa armigera (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)
Toxic effects of Solanum xanthocarpum Sch &Wendle against Helicoverpa armigera (Hub.), Culex quinquefasciatus (Say.) and Eisenia fetida (Savigny, 1826)
A potential use of vine-shoot wastes: The antioxidant, antifeedant andphytotoxic activities of their aqueous extracts
Asarones from Acorus calamus L. oil. Their effect on feeding behavior and dietary utilization Peridroma saucia
Insecticidal terpenes from the essential oils of Artemisia nakaii and their inhibitory effects on acetylcholinesterase
Comparative chemistry and insect antifeedant effects of conventional (Clevenger and Soxhlet) and supercritical extracts (CO2) of two Lavandula luisieri populations
Valorization of essential oils from Moroccan aromatic plants
Biocidal effects of Piper hispidinervum (Piperaceae) essential oil and synergism among its main components
Volatile composition and biocidal (antifeedant and phytotoxic) activity of the essential oils of four Piperaceae species from Choco-Colombia
Management of the diamondback moth via citrus oil
Insecticidal activity of sesquiterpene lactones and monoterpenoidfrom the fruits of Carpesium abrotanoides
Defensive sesquiterpenoids from leaves of Eupatorium adenophorum
Response of Epilachna paenulata to two flavonoids, pinocembrin and quercetin, in a comparative study
Insect antifeedant benzofurans from Pericallis species
Insect antifeedant and ixodicidal compounds from Senecio adenotrichius
silphinene derivatives: Their effects and modes of action on Colorado potato beetle
Chemical defense of yacón (Smallanthus sonchifolius) leaves against phytophagous insects: Insect antifeedants from yacón leaf trichomes
Antifeedant activity of Gloriosa superba Linn. tuber extracts against Spodoptera litura (Fabricius)
Toxicity and developmental effect of cucurbitacin E from Citrullus colocynthis L. (Cucurbitales: Cucurbitaceae) against Spodoptera litura Fab. and a non-target earthworm Eisenia fetida Savigny
Insecticidal activity of deoxypodophyllotoxin, isolated from Juniperus sabina L., and related lignans against larvae of Pieris rapae L.
New antifeedant grayanane diterpenoids from the flowers of Pieris formosa
Neopierisoids A and B, two new chlorinated 3,4-seco-grayanane diterpenoids with antifeedant activity from flowers of Pieris japonica
Diterpenoid alkaloids from Aconitum leucostomum and their antifeedant activity
Laboratory and field evaluations of rhodojaponin-III against the imported cabbage worm Pieris rapae (L.) (Lepidoptera: Pieridae)
Insect antifeedants from tropical plants: Structures of dumnin and dumsenin
Musidunin and musiduol, insect antifeedants from Croton jatrophoides
Triterpene-based plant defenses
Insect antifeedants, pterocarpans and pterocarpol, in heartwood of Pterocarpus macrocarpus Kruz
Insecticidal and antifeedant activities of clerodane diterpenoids isolated from the Indian bhant tree, Clerodendron infortunatum, against the cotton bollworm, Helicoverpa armigera
Sesquiterpene lactones from Artemisia absinthium. Biotransformation and rearrangement of the insect antifeedant 3α-hydroxypelenolide
Selective insect antifeedant and toxic action of ryanoid diterpenes
Activity of rocaglamide, an insecticidal natural product, against the variegated cutworm, Peridroma saucia (lepidoptera: Noctuidae)
Antifeedant and insecticidal properties of azadirachtin to the European Corn Borer, Ostrinia nubilalis
A new limonoid insect antifeedant from the fruit of Melia volkensii
Antifeedant and growth inhibitory effects of the limonoid toosendanin and Melia toosendan extracts on the variegated cutworm, Peridroma saucia (Lep., Noctuidae)
Piperine analogs in a hydrophobic fraction from Piper ribersoides (Piperaceae) and its insect antifeedant activity
Structure- and species-dependent insecticidal effects of neo-Clerodane diterpenes
Bioactivity of formulas containing essential oils from the family Myrtaceae for the management of deltamethrin-resistant Plutella xylostella (L.) (Lepidoptera: Plutellidae)
The botanical eurycomanone is a potent growth regulator of the diamondback moth
Antifeedant effect of polygodial and drimenol derivatives against Spodoptera frugiperda and Epilachna paenulata and quantitative structure-activity analysis
Bioactivities of caffeic acid methyl ester (methyl-(E)-3-(3,4-dihydroxyphenyl)prop-2-enoate): A hydroxycinnamic acid derivative from Solanum melongena L. fruits
Antifeedant effects of some novel terpenoids on chrysomelidae beetles: Comparisons with alkaloids on an alkaloid-adapted and nonadapted species
Novel insecticides from alkylated and acylated derivatives of thymol and eugenol for the control of Plutella xylostella (Lepidoptera: Plutellidae)
Valorization of essential oils from two populations (wild and commercial) of Geranium macrorrhizum L.
Biocidal compounds from Mentha sp. essential oils and their structure–activity relationships
Laurus novocanariensis essential oil: Seasonal variation and valorization
New knowledge for yield, composition and insecticidal activity of essential oils obtained from the aerial parts or seeds of fennel (Foeniculum vulgare Mill.)
Adsorption of essential oil components of Xylopia aethiopica (Annonaceae) by kaolin from Wak, Adamawa province (Cameroon)
Encapsulation of essential oils for the development of biosourced pesticides with controlled release: A review
Growth inhibitory effect of extracts from Reynoutria sp plants against Spodoptera littoralis larvae
Antifeedant and toxic activity of Adhatoda vasica leaf extract against Spodoptera littoralis (Lep., Noctuidae)
Antifeedant activity of a novel 6-(4,7-hydroxy-heptyl) quinone® from the leaves of the milkweed Pergularia daemia on the cotton bollworm Helicoverpa armigera (Hub.) and the tobacco armyworm Spodoptera litura (Fab.)
Use of Ageratina adenophora (Spreng.) essential oil as insecticidal and antifeedant agents against diamondback moth, Plutella xylostella (L.)
Bioactivity of Ageratum conyzoides (L.) (Asteraceae) on feeding and oviposition behaviour of diamondback moth Plutella xylostella (L.) (Lepidoptera: Plutellidae)
Antifeedant activity toward larvae of Pieris rapae crucivora of aromatic carbonyl compounds related to capillin isolated from Artemisia capillaris
Antifeedant activity toward larvae of Pieris rapae crucivora of phenolethers related to methyleugenol isolated from Artemisia capillaris
Antifeedant and contact repellent activity of thyme, tarragon, marigold and lavender crude extracts against Epicauta atomaria (Coleoptera: Meloidae)
Feeding perturbation and toxic activity of five Chrysanthemum species crude extracts against Spodoptera littoralis (Boisduval) (Lepidoptera; Noctuidae)
Repellent, antifeedant and toxic effects of plants-extracts against Spodoptera frugiperda larvae (fall armyworm)
Feeding deterrence towards Helicoverpa armigera by Tithonia diversifolia tagitinin C-enriched extract
Antifeedant activity of some Sri Lankan plants
The active compounds composition and antifeedant activity of leaf extract of two cultivar Carica papaya L. on Spodoptera litura F. larvae
Short Communication: Larvicidal and antifeedant activities of Kalanchoe daigremontiana against Plutella xylostella larvae
Bioefficacy of crude extracts of Aglaia species (Meliaceae) and some active fractions against lepidopteran larvae
Effects of neem oil on feeding behaviour and development of the pear sawfly, Caliroa cerasi
Effect of Trichilia americana extract on feeding behavior of asian armyworm, Spodoptera litura
Feeding and oviposition deterrence of Murraya paniculata, Piper nigrum and Moringa oleifera extracts against Spodoptera litura (F)
Simaroubaceae and Picramniaceae as potential sources of botanical pesticides
Antifeedant activity and biochemical responses in Spodoptera exigua Hübner (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) infesting broccoli, Brassica oleracea var. alboglabra exposed to Piper ribesioides Wall extracts and allelochemicals
Insecticidal potential of a Consolida ajacis extract and its major compound (ethyl linoleate) against the diamondback moth, Plutella xylostella
Isolation of triterpenoids from Catunaregam spinosa
Antifeedant, larvicidal and pupicidal activities of Atalantia monophylla (L.) Correa against Helicoverpa armigera Hubner (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)
Antifeedant properties of fractionation Lantana camara leaf extract on cabbage caterpillars (Crocidolomia pavonana Fabricius) larvae
Lippia alba—A potential bioresource for the management of Spodoptera frugiperda (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)
Antifeedant and growth inhibitory effects of extracts and drimanes of Drimys winteri stem bark against Spodoptera littoralis (Lep., Noctuidae)
Chemical composition and bioactivities of thirteen non-host plant essential oils against Plutella xylostella L. (Lepidoptera: Plutellidae)
Chemical composition and biological effects of essential oils from Artemisia absinthium L. cultivated under different environmental conditions
Chemical composition and pesticide activity of essential oils from Artemisia annua L. harvested in the rainy and winter seasons
Chemical composition and biological activities of Artemisia pedemontana subsp
Nematicidal and insecticidal activity of essential oils from Artemisia scoparia and Centratherum punctatum and their mixtures
Essential oil composition, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, insect antifeedant and sprout suppressant activity in essential oil from aerial parts of Cotinus coggygria Scop
Biocidal Potential and chemical composition of industrial essential oils from Hyssopus officinalis, Lavandula × intermedia var. Super, and Santolina chamaecyparissus
Chemical and biological profiles of Lavandula luisieri essential oils from western Iberia Peninsula populations
Effect of chemical complexity of essential oils on feeding deterrence in larvae of the cabbage looper
Chemical composition, biological activities and in silico evaluation of essential oils from the aerial, and root parts of Nepeta hindostana (B. Heyne ex Roth)-Haines grown in North India
Larvicidal and antifeedant activity of some plant-derived compounds to Lymantria dispar L. (Lepidoptera: Limantriidae)
Bio-insecticidal nanoemulsions of essential oil and lipid-soluble fractions of Pogostemon cablin
The effects of extracts obtained by supercritical fluid extraction and traditional extraction techniques on larvae Leptinotarsa decemlineata SAY
Acaricidal and insect antifeedant effects of essential oils from selected aromatic plants and their main components
Seasonal variation in the essential oil composition and biological activities of Thymus linearis Benth. collected from the Kumaun region of Uttarakhand, India
Chemical composition, insecticidal and biochemical effects of Melaleuca alternifolia essential oil on the Helicoverpa armigera
Comparative study of volatile composition and biological activities of essential oil from Colombian Piper marginatum Jacq
Gustatory habituation to essential oil induces reduced feeding deterrence and neuronal desensitization in Spodoptera litura
Anti-insect properties of the essential oil of lemon grass, Cymbopogen citratus against the lesser cotton leafworm Spodoptera exigua (Hbn)
Insecticidal activities of essential oils from different plants against the cabbage worm, Crocidolomia pavonana Fabricius (Lepidoptera: Crambidae)
Insect growth inhibition, antifeedant and antifungal activity of compounds isolated/ derived from Zingiber officinale Roscoe (ginger) rhizomes
Antifeedant and oviposition-deterring activity of total ginsenosides against Pieris rapae
Antifeedant and ovicidal activities of ginsenosides against Asian corn borer, Ostrinia furnacalis (Guenee)
Sesquiterpenoids from Artemisia vestita and their antifeedant and antifungal activities
Antifeedant activity of cucurbitacins from Iberis amara against larvae of Pieris rapae
Synthesis and insect antifeedant activity of aurones against Spodoptera litura larvae
Cytotoxic antifeedant from Dionaea muscipula Ellis: A defensive mechanism of carnivorous plants against predators
Bioactive tigliane diterpenoids from the latex of Euphorbia fischeriana
Antifeedant and larvicidal activities of Rhein isolated from the flowers of Cassia fistula L.
Effect of Glyceollin, a soybean phytoalexin, on feeding by three phytophagous beetles (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae and Chrysomelidae): Dose versus response
Antifeedant activities of secondary metabolites from Hyssopus cuspidatus against Plutella xylostella
Glandular trichomes of Leucosceptrum canum harbor defensive sesterterpenoids
Insect antifeedant activity of flavones and chromones against Spodoptera litura
Antifeedant activity of neo-clerodane diterpenoids from Teucrium arduini
Natural and hemisynthetic neoclerodane diterpenoids from Scutellaria and their antifeedant activity
Effects of ajugarins and related neoclerodane diterpenoids on feeding behaviour of Leptinotarsa decemlineata and Spodoptera exigua larvae
Limonoids from Aphanamixis polystachya and their antifeedant activity
Efficacy of neem limonoids on Cnaphalocrocis medinalis (Guenée) (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae) the rice leaffolder
Behavioural and sensory responses to some neem compounds by Pieris brassicae larvae
Toxicity of the limonoid allelochemical cedrelone to noctuid larvae
Limonoids from Swietenia macrophylla and S. aubrevilleana
Diterpenoid alkaloids from Aconitum leucostomum and their antifeedant activity
Diterpenoid alkaloids from the roots of Aconitum rockii and their antifeedant activity
Diterpenoid alkaloids from two Aconitum species with antifeedant activity against Spodoptera exigua
The antifeedant, insecticidal and insect growth inhibitory activities of triterpenoid saponins from Clematis aethusifolia Turcz against Plutella xylostella (L.)
Antifeeding activity of isoquinoline alkaloids identified in Coptis japonica roots against Hyphantria cunea (Lepidoptera: Arctiidae) and Agelastica coerulea (Coleoptera: Galerucinae)
Diterpenoid alkaloids from Delphinium naviculare var. lasiocarpum with their antifeedant activity on Spodoptera exigua
Triterpenoid saponins with antifeedant activities from stem bark of Catunaregam spinosa (Rubiaceae) against Plutella xylostella (Plutellidae)
Antifeedant activity of an anthraquinone aldehyde in Galium aparine L. against Spodoptera litura F
Bioefficacy of the triterpenoid friedelin against Helicoverpa armigera (Hub.) and Spodoptera litura (Fab.) (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)
Antifeedant mechanism of Dodonaea viscosa saponin A isolated from the seeds of Dodonaea viscosa
Screening for feeding deterrent and insect growth regulatory activity of triterpenic saponins from Diploknema butyracea and Sapindus mukorossi
Antifeedant activity of ursolic acid isolated from Duboisia myoporoides
Stilbenes from grapevine root: A promising natural insecticide against Leptinotarsa decemlineata
Advances in the identification and agrochemical importance of sesquiterpenoids from Bulnesia sarmientoi essential oil
Antifeedant and Larvicidal Effects of Some phenolic components of essential oils lasp lines of introduction against Spodoptera littoralis (Boisd.)
Antifeedant and toxic effects of drimanes on Colorado potato beetle larvae
Antifeedant comparisons of gaba/ glycinergic antagonists for diabroticite leaf beetles (coleoptera: Chrysomelidae)
Insecticidal, antifeedant and oviposition deterrent effects of the essential oil and individual compounds from leaves of Chloroxylon swietenia DC
Bioinsecticidal effect of the flavonoids pinocembrin and quercetin against Spodoptera frugiperda
Bioactivity of two major constituents isolated from the essential oil of Artemisia judaica L.
Synthesis and insect antifeedant activity of plumbagin derivatives with the amino acid moiety
Bioactivity of semisynthetic eugenol derivatives against Spodoptera frugiperda (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae) larvae infesting maize in Colombia
Toxicity, antifeedant and physiological effects of trans-anethole against Hyphantria cunea Drury (Lep: Arctiidae)
The extracts that met the efficacy criteria (minimum 70% FDI) came from 85 plant species and 35 families. However, the vast majority came from five families—Asteraceae, Fabaceae, Lamiaceae, Meliaceae, and Rutaceae.
Essential oils with an FDI of at least 70% came from a total of 38 plant species and 11 families. The majority of these plants belonged to three families—Asteraceae, Lamiaceae, and Rutaceae.
Plant extracts showing significant antifeedant effect; selection based on effective concentrations or doses. Insect: L = larvae (instar) and A = adults. The concentration is given in µg mL−1 for liquids, or in µg cm−2 for the dose of active ingredient calculated on a given leaf surface area. The resulting value also corresponds to this: EC50 for liquids or ED50 for solids.
Family/Plant	Type	Majority Compounds with Antifeedant Effect	Insect (Instar)	Test	EC50 (μg mL−1)	ED50 (μg cm−2)	References	 	Anacardiaceae								 	Anacardium occidentale L.	Cashew nutshell liquid	Phenolic compounds	Spodoptera frugiperda—L4	no choice	3400			 	Annonaceae								 	Annona squamosa L.	Crude seed methanol extracts 	Sesquiterpenes, monoterpenes	Trichoplusia ni—L3	choice	2300			 	Polyalthia longifolia (Sonn.) Thwaites	Methanol extract	Terpenes	Spodoptera litura—L3	no choice	1080			 	Apiaceae								 	Angelica archangelica L.	Methanol extracts	Unspecified	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—L4	no choice		0.6		 	Angelica archangelica L.	Seeds benzene extract	Bergapten, imperatorin, phellopterin	Spodoptera littoralis—L3	no choice		0.31		 	Angelica archangelica L.	Seeds acetone extract	Bergapten, imperatorin, phellopterin	Spodoptera littoralis—L3	no choice		0.65		 	Angelica archangelica L.	Seeds methanol extract	Bergapten, imperatorin, phellopterin	Spodoptera littoralis—L3	no choice		0.54		 	Apocynaceae								 	Tylophora indica (Burm. f.) Merr.	Ethanolic extract	Unspecified	Spodoptera litura—L4		8300			 	Araliaceae 								 	Panax ginseng C. A. Meyer	Stems and leaves extract—ginsenosides	Ginsenosides	Plutella xylostella—L2	choice	2740			 	Asteraceae								 	Grindelia camporum Hook. & Arn.	Methanol extracts	Unspecified	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—L4	no choice		0.2		 	Inula auriculata Boiss. & Balansa	Methanol extracts	Unspecified	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—L4	no choice		0.2		 	Pyrethrum corymbosum (L.) Scop.	Methanol extracts	Unspecified	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—L4	no choice		3		 	Senecio fistulosus Poepp. ex DC	Furanoeremophilane	Eremophilane-typesesquiterpenes of the furanoeremophilane and eremophilanolidesesquiterpenes	Spodoptera littoralis—L6			0.64		 	Senecio kingii Hook.f.	Aerial parts alkaloidal extracts	Eremophilanolidess, shikimic acid derivatives, flavonoids	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		0.09		 	Xeranthemum cylindraceum Sibth. & Sm.	Methanol extracts	Unspecified	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—L4	no choice		8		 	Boraginaceae								 	Echium wildpretii H. Pearson ex Hook. f. subsp. wildpretii	Fraction 2 from ethanol extract: hexane/ethyl acetate, 90: 10 v/v); steroidal fraction—compound 3	Fatty acid esters, phytosterols	Leptinotarsa decemlineata (unspecified stadium)	choice		0.4		 	Fabaceae								 	Caesalpinia bonduc (L.) Roxb.	Chloroform extract—fraction 3	Coumarins, flavonoids, terpenoids, phenols, quinones	Helicoverpa armigera—L3	no choice	357.13			 	Millettia pachycarpa (Benth.)	Fresh leaves methanol extract -> dichlormethane -> fraction 2	Triterpenoid (lupeol)	Spodoptera litura—L3	no choice	227.13			 	Lamiaceae 								 	Teucrium hircanicum L.	Methanol extracts	Unspecified	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—L4	no choice		6		 	Lauraceae 								 	Persea indica (L.) Spreng.	Stem extract	Ryanoids	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	no choice		8.5		 	Meliaceae								 	Melia volkensii Gürke	Refined seed extract	Terpenoids	Epilachna varivestis—A	choice		2.3		 	Rutaceae								 	Clausena anisata (Willd.) Hook.f. ex Benth.	Chloroform root extracts	Osthol (coumarin derivate)	Helicoverpa armigera—L5	choice	140			 	Clausena anisata (Willd.) Hook.f. ex Benth.	Petroleum ether root extracts	Osthol (coumarin derivate)	Helicoverpa armigera—L5	choice	160			 	Solanaceae 								 	Solanum xanthocarpum Schrad. & Wendl.	Chloroform extract, fraction 4	Terpenoids, flavonoid, quinone	Helicoverpa armigera—L3	no choice	378.3			 	Vitaceae								 	Vitis vinifera L.	Vine-shoot wastes: Conventional Solid–Liquid Extraction 60 min	Flavanols	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—A	choice		0.08
Plant essential oils showing significant antifeedant effect; selection based on effective concentrations or doses. Insect: L = larvae (instar) and A = adults. The concentration is given in µg mL−1 for liquids, or in µg cm−2 for the dose of active ingredient calculated on a given leaf surface area. The resulting value also corresponds to this: EC50 for liquids or ED50 for solids.
Family/Plant	Parts	Majority Compounds with Antifeedant Effect	Insect (Instar)	Test	EC50 (μg mL−1)	ED50 (μg cm−2)	References	 	Acoraceae								 	Acorus calamus L.	Rhizomes—cis-asarone	Cis-asarone, trans-asarone	Peridroma saucia—L4	choice		2.5		 	Apiaceae								 	Angelica archangelica L.	Seeds	β-Phellandrene, sabinene, α-pinene, α-phellandrene	Spodoptera littoralis—L3	no choice		7.12		 	Asteraceae								 	Artemisia nakaii Pamp.	Aerial parts	Feropodin, (+)-camphor, 1,8-cineole, rishitin	Spodoptera litura—L3	choice		3.76 ± 0.73 		 	Lamiaceae								 	Lavandula luisieri (Rozeira)—cultivated pop.	Flowering parts	3-Oxo-cadinol, 2,3,4,4-Tetramethyl-5-methylidenecyclopent-2-en-1-one, Hydroxymethyl-2,3,4,4-tetramethylcyclopent-2-en-1-one	Spodoptera littoralis—L6			10.23		 	Mentha pulegium Mill.	Leaves and flowers	Pulegone, 1,3,4-trimethyl-3-cyclohexene-1-carboxaldehyde, piperitenone	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		1.3 (0.4, 4.1) 		 	Piperaceae								 	Piper hispidinervum C.DC.	Fresh leaves and twigs	Safrole, terpinolene	Leptinotarsa decemlineata	choice		0.4		 	Piper hispidinervum C.DC.	Fresh leaves and twigs	Safrole	Spodoptera littoralis—L	choice		3.1		 	Piper sanctifelicis Trel.	Leaves	δ-3-carene, limonene, p-cymene, β-pinene, nerolidol	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		4.5 (4.3–4.7)		 	Rutaceae								 	Citrus aurantifolia (L.) Swingle	Commercial EOs and limonene	γ-Muurolene, o-cymene, bornyl acetate, α-bisabolol	Plutella xylostella—L3—deltamethrin susceptible strain	choice		68.93
Isolated compounds showing significant antifeedant effect; selection based on effective concentrations or doses. Insect: L = larvae (instar) and A = adults. The concentration is given in µg mL−1 for liquids, or in µg cm−2 for the dose of active ingredient calculated on a given leaf surface area. The resulting value also corresponds to this: EC50 for liquids or ED50 for solids.
Plant	Type	Insect (Instar)	Test	EC50 (μg mL−1)	ED50 (μg cm−2)	References	 	Asteraceae							 	Carpesium abrotanoides L.	Air-dried fruits—compound 1	Plutella xylostella—L3	choice	19.8			 	Eupatorium adenophorum Spreng	Sesquiterpenoids, compound 2 and 3 	Helicoverpa armigera—L2	choice 		 2.5 and 3.0 		 	Flourensia oolepis S.F. Blake	Aerial parts—flavonoid pinocembrin	Epilachna paenulata—L3	choice		10		 	Pericallis spp.	3-ethoxy-hydroxy-tremetone; (-)-eupachinin A	Spodoptera litoralis—L6	choice	130			 	Senecio adenotrichius DC.	Compound 1—dehydrofukinone	Spodoptera litoralis—L6	unspecified		1.6		 	Senecio palmensis C. Sm.	11β, 5α-dihydroxysilphinen-3-one	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—L4	no choice 		11.3		 	Smallanthus sonchifolius (Poepp. & Endl.) H. Rob	Uvedalin	Spodoptera litura—L3	choice		8		 	Colchicaceae 							 	Gloriosa superba L.	Chloroform tuber extract—GST4	Spodoptera litura—L3	no choice	26			 	Cucurbitaceae							 	Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad.	Cucurbitacin E—fruits (fraction III)	Spodoptera litura—L5	choice	24.1			 	Cupressaceae 							 	Juniperus sabina L.	Petroleum ether extract—deoxypodophyllotoxin (1)	Pieris rapae—L5		60 (48 h)			 	Ericaceae							 	Pieris formosa (Wallich) D. Don	Grayanane diterpenoids—10	Spodoptera exigua	choice modified 		6.58		 	Pieris japonica (Thunb.) D. Don ex G. Don	Neopierisoid B—isolated from flowers	Pieris brassicae—L3	choice		5.33		 	Pieris japonica (Thunb.) D. Don ex G. Don	Flower diterpenoids—C10	Pieris brassicae—L3	choice		0.03		 	Rhododendron molle (Blume) G. Don	Rhodojaponin III—grayanoid diterpene from flowers 	Pieris rapae—L3 	no choice	1.16			 	Rhododendron molle (Blume) G. Don	Rhodojaponin III—grayanoid diterpene from flowers 	Pieris rapae—L5	no choice	15.85			 	Euphorbiaceae							 	Croton jatrophoides Pax.	Limonoids dumnin, dumsenin	Pectinophora gossypiella—L2 Spodoptera frugiperda—L2	choice	 ≤2			 	Croton jatrophoides Pax.	Limonoids from methanol extract—Musidunin 	Pectinophora gossypiella—L2 	choice	3			 	Croton jatrophoides Pax.	Limonoids from methanol extract—Musiduol	Pectinophora gossypiella—L2 	choice	4			 	Croton jatrophoides Pax.	Limonoids from methanol extract—Musiduol	Spodoptera frugiperda—L2	choice	2			 	Euphorbia paralias L.	Ursane type triterpenoid—compound 21 (uvaol)	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—A 	choice		0.2		 	Euphorbia paralias L.	Ursane type triterpenoid—compound 21 (uvaol)	Spodoptera litoralis—L6	choice		3.3		 	Fabaceae							 	Caesalpinia bonduc (L.) Roxb.	Chloroform extract	Helicoverpa armigera—L3	no choice	1.08			 	Pterocarpus macrocarpus Kurz	Homopterocarpin	Spodoptera litura—L3	choice		0.04		 	Lamiaceae							 	Clerodendrum infortunatum L.	Clerodane diterpenoids—compound 1	Helicoverpa armigera—L3	choice	6			 	Lauraceae							 	Persea indica (L.) Spreng.	Anhydrocinnzeylanine	Spodoptera littoralis—L5	choice		0.09		 	Persea indica (L.) Spreng.	Anhydrocinnzeylanine	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—A	choice		0.94		 	Persea indica (L.) Spreng.	Cinnzeylanine	Spodoptera litoralis—L5	choice		0.004		 	Persea indica (L.) Spreng.		Leptinotarsa decemlineata—A	choice		0.08		 	Cinnzeylanone	 	Meliaceae							 	Aglaia odorata Lour.	Rocaglamide from dried twigs	Peridroma saucia—L4	choice		3.45		 	Azadirachta indica A. Juss.	Azadirachtin	Ostrinia nubilalis—L1 and L3	no choice	3.5 and 24			 	Melia volkensii Gürke	Volkensin	Spodoptera frugiperda—L3	choice		3.5		 	Melia volkensii Gürke	Xanthotoxin 99%	Trichopulsia ni—L3	choice		0.9		 	Melia toosendan Siebold & Zucc.	Toosedanin—limonoid isolated from bark	Peridroma saucia—L4	choice		8.04		 	Piperaceae							 	Piper ribesioides Wall.	Piperine 	Spodoptera litura—L3	choice		3.1		 	Plantaginaceae 							 	Linaria saxatilis (L.) Chaz.	Neo-clerodane diterpenoids, compound 2	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—A	choice/no choice		10.5/8.5 		 	Linaria saxatilis (L.) Chaz.	Neo-clerodane diterpenoids, compound 6	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—A	choice/no choice		 12.8/7.7 		 	Linaria saxatilis (L.) Chaz.	Neo-clerodane diterpenoids, compound 8	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—A	choice		6.4		 	Rutaceae							 	Citrus aurantiifolia (Christm.) Swingle	Limonene	Plutella xylostella—L3—deltamethrin susceptible strain	choice	4.44			 	Citrus aurantiifolia (Christm.) Swingle	Limonene	Plutella xylostella—L3—deltamethrin resistant strain	choice	17.83			 	Simaroubaceae							 	Eurycoma longifolia Jack	Eurycomanone	Plutella xylostella—L3	choice	14.2			 	Winteraceae							 	Drimys winteri J.R. Forster et G. Forster 	Polygodial	Spodoptera frugiperda—L3	choice		5.59		 	Unspecified							 		α-Pinene	Spodoptera litura—L3	no choice		1.13 uL cm−2		 		Aconitine	Diabrotica virgifera—A	choice		0.27		 		Dehydrofukinone (SO)	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		1.68		 		Derivatives of eugenol and thymol (6) 	Plutella xylostella—L3	choice	4.29			 		Derivatives of eugenol and thymol (8)	Plutella xylostella—L3	choice	3.3			 		Derivatives of eugenol and thymol (10) 	Plutella xylostella—L3	choice	6.52			 		Derivatives of eugenol and thymol (thymol)	Plutella xylostella—L3	choice	6.38			 		Germacrone (SO)	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		1.9 (0.1–3.6) 		 		Piperitenone epoxide	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		0.18 (0.01, 3.0) 		 		Pulegone	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		0.2		 		Pulegone	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		0.25		 		Silphinene	Leptinotarsa decemlineata—A	choice		0.15		 		Thujone	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		0.2		 		11α-Epoxy-eremophil-9-en-8-one (ligudicin A)1	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		0.08 (0.04–0.18) 		 		(E)-β-Ocimene	Spodoptera littoralis—L6	choice		10.6 (7.1, 15.9)