The Causes and Consequences of miR-503 Dysregulation and Its Impact on Cardiovascular Disease and Cancer
microRNAs (miRs) are short, non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression by mRNA degradation or translational repression. Accumulated studies have demonstrated that miRs participate in various biological processes including cell differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis, metabolism and development, and the dysregulation of miRs expression are involved in different human diseases, such as neurological, cardiovascular disease and cancer. microRNA-503 (miR-503), one member of miR-16 family, has been studied widely in cardiovascular disease and cancer. In this review, we summarize and discuss the studies of miR-503 in vitro and in vivo, and how miR-503 regulates gene expression from different aspects of pathological processes of diseases, including carcinogenesis, angiogenesis, tissue fibrosis and oxidative stress; We will also discuss the mechanisms of dysregulation of miR-503, and whether miR-503 could be applied as a diagnostic marker or therapeutic target in cardiovascular disease or cancer.

Introduction
microRNAs (miRs) are small non-coding RNAs with 19-23 nucleotides (nt) in length that modulate target genes through mRNA degradation or translational repression. miRs biogenesis includes canonical and non-canonical pathways, and has been summarized in several reviews. miR genes are transcribed by RNA polymerase II to generate primary miR transcripts (pri-miRs), which is cleaved by RNase III endonuclease Drosha to produce about 60–70 nt stem loop intermediate, termed miR precursor, or the pre-miR. The pre-miR is transported by Ran-GTP and export receptor Exportin-5 from nucleus to the cytoplasm. In canonical pathway of miRs genesis, pre-miR is processed by another RNase III endonuclease, Dicer, to produce miR:miR duplex comprising the mature miR strand and its complementarystrand. The mature miR is loaded into the cytoplasmic RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) where it binds to the 3′-untranslated region (UTR) of target mRNAs with complementary sites, resulting in mRNA degradation or its translational repression.
miRs are implicated in various biological processes, including cell differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis, metabolism, and development, and in pathological situations like hypoxic cellular injury and repairing. Over 1/3 of human protein–coding genes are modulated by miRs. Growing evidence has demonstrated that numerous miRs are dysregulated in human diseases. Some miRs are upregulated, such as miR-25 in heart failure, miR-133a in acute myocardial infarction, miR-155-5p in chronic kidney disease and nocturnal hypertension are enhanced, while some miRs are downregulated in other diseases, such as miR-320a in arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy, both miR-133 and miR-1 in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, miR-107 in Alzheimer’s disease, and miR-503-5p in non-small cell lung cancer are reduced. Therefore, therapies that inhibit miR function or restore its function have been developed for human diseases.
microRNA-503 (miR-503) is an intragenic miR located on the chromosomal location Xq26.3 and clustered with miR-424 in human. It belongs to the miR-16 family, and was first identified in human retinoblastoma tissues by microRNA microarray analysis. The other members of miR-16 family are miR-15a, miR-15b, miR-16, miR-195, miR-424 and miR-497, miR-16 family have similarity in their individual seed sequences. According to gene nomenclature, in human, there are two different mature miR-503, one is hsa-miR-503-5p, derived from 5′ends of pre-miR-503, the other is hsa-miR-503-3p, derived from 3′ends of pre-miR-503, both are excised from the same precursor microRNA, and thus, miR-503 rather than miR-503-5p is usually used. Although these “5p” and “3p” miRs are originated from a single primary transcript, they have different sequences and mRNA targets, therefore, they have different, even converse roles in biological function. Accumulated evidence has also shown that miR-503 modulates various biological processes, and the dysregulation of miR-503 is associated with human diseases. In this review, we will mainly focus on describing the roles of miR-503 in human diseases, especially cardiovascular disease and cancer, from different aspects of physiological or pathological processes, including cell differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis, carcinogenesis, angiogenesis, tissue fibrosis and oxidative stress.

Physiological Roles of miR-503 in Regulating Cell Differentiation
The relationship between cell proliferation and cell differentiation is complicated, and the imbalance of cell proliferation and differentiation can result in a variety of diseases such as cancer. MiR-424/-503 was found to a polycistronic microRNA cluster, the loci of them were separated by 383 bases on the genome. In the differentiation of monoblasts into monocytes, overexpression of either miR-424 or miR-503 can induce cell cycle arrest at G1 phase by targeting an anti-differentiative miR-9 and several regulators of cell cycle, therefore, both miR-424 and miR-503 can partially promote monocytic differentiation and inhibit cell proliferation at G1 phase in the cell cycle. Consistent with this, induction of G1 phase cell cycle arrest, which is mainly caused by the suppression of cyclin-dependent-kinase 2 (cdk2), is a critical step during myogenesis. miR-424 and miR-503 were induced in the differentiation of myoblasts into myotubes and promotedcdk2 inhibition by downregulating Cdc25A. Cdc25A, a phosphatase that is the target gene of both miR-424 and miR-503, can get rid of the inhibitory phosphorylation on cdk2, and thus promote cell cycle progress. In another study, miR-322/-503 cluster was found to be abundantly expressed in the earliest mice cardiac progenitor cells, it induced cardiac and skeletal muscle cell differentiation but inhibited neural lineages, which is likely mediated by targeting the RNA-binding protein CUG-binding protein Elav-like family member 1. Taken together, miR-503 is a regulator in cell differentiation.

miR-503 Expression Level and Its Molecular Targets During Cell Proliferation and Apoptosis
miRs have been demonstrated to regulate cell proliferation and apoptosis. Here, studies of miR-503 in regulating cell proliferation or apoptosis in vitro are summarized and listed in Table 1.
Roles of miR-503 in cells and its targets.
miRs	Cell types	Identified targets	References	 	miR-503-5p	Human aortic SMCs	INSR		 	miR-503-5p	ECSCs	Cyclin D1, Bcl-2, VEGFA and ROCK1		 	miR-503-5p	EPCs	Apelin		 	miR-503-5p	BMDCs	Bcl-2		 	miR-503-3p	Lung cancer cells	p21		 	miR-503-5p	Podocytes	E2F3		 	miR-503-5p	HMEC	Apelin-12
In human aortic smooth muscle cells (SMCs), treatment with platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) reduced miR-503 expression level significantly in a dose and time-dependent manner, while overexpression of miR-503 inhibited SMCs proliferation and migration induced by PDGF, miR-503 played this role by downregulating its target insulin receptor. Carotid artery stenosis (CAS) is a kind of atherosclerotic vascular disease, and the abnormal cell proliferation of vascular SMCs is related with the occurrence of CAS. reported that plasma level of miR-503 in asymptomatic patients with CAS was lower compared with that in healthy individuals, and they also demonstrated that overexpression of miR-503 in vascular SMCs in vitro inhibited cell proliferation, and miR-503 inhibitor counteracted this effect. It is concluded that miR-503 can be a potential diagnostic marker for CAS and that miR-503 overexpression may improve CAS by inhibition of cell proliferation of vascular SMCs. However, reported that long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) MALAT1 (metastasis-associated lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1) expression level was reduced in atherosclerotic vessels of symptomatic patients, and that transplantation of MALAT1-deficient bone marrow cells in apolipoprotein E-deficient (Apoe−/−) mice promoted atherosclerosis in vivo, the MALAT1 targets including miR-503 in Apoe−/− Malat1−/− bone marrow cells were increased. In animal model of atherosclerosis, miR-503 was also increased in aortic roots of Apoe−/− Malat1−/− mice, and inhibition of miR-503 in vitro in bone marrow mononuclear cells from Apoe−/− Malat1−/−mice reduced cell adhesion to endothelial cells pre-stimulated by tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). However, whether overexpression or inhibition of miR-503 can alleviate atherosclerosis needs further studies in vivo.
In human endometriotic cyst stromal cells (ECSCs), the expression level of miR-503 was downregulated due to DNA hypermethylation, and miR-503 overexpression in ECSCs resulted in inhibition of cell proliferation, induction of cell apoptosis and reduction of extracellular matrix (ECM) contractility by suppressing its targets cyclinD1, B-cell lymphoma/leukemia-2 (Bcl-2), Ras homology A (RhoA), Rho-associated coiled-coil-forming protein kinase (ROCK1), ROCK2 and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGFA). In murine bone marrow-derived dentritic cells (BMDCs), some miRs including miR-503, miR-21, miR-155, miR-146a, miR-142, miR-22 and miR-16-1 were elevated when BMDCs were cocultured with tumor cells, and miR-503 downregulated the expression level of its target Bcl-2 at transcript and protein levels, leading to BMDCs apoptosis, while inhibition of miR-503 prolonged BMDCs lifespan, and thus may improve antitumor response in BMDCs.
Under hypoxia condition, the role of miR-503 is inconsistent in different cell types. For instance, Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) are a kind of blood cells which have the characteristics of vascular regeneration. In mouse bone marrow derived EPCs, miR-503 was downregulated under hypoxia condition, and its overexpression inhibited cell proliferation, migration and angiogenesis of EPCs via regulating its target Apelin, which is encoded by APLN gene. APLN gene encodes preproapelin, then preproapelin is cleaved to several apelin peptides including apelin-36, -17, -12, and -13. However, in bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells, reported that miR-503 was upregulated following 6 h of hypoxia stimulation, inhibition of miR-503 aggravated mesenchymal stem cells apoptosis.
In non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, demonstrated that overexpression of miR-503-3p suppressed cell proliferation and induced cell apoptosis via downregulating its target p21. p21 is one of cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor proteins (CDKIs) which include Ink4 family and KIP family. However, reported that long non-coding RNA SNHG20 promoted cell proliferation of NSCLC cell lines partly by downregulating p21 expression. reported that carboxylated multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) treatment inhibited cell proliferation and induced p21 protein overexpression in cells without detectable DNA damage and apoptosis, and the upregulated p21 protein inhibited the function of cyclin D/cdk4,6 complex, then inactivated retinoblastoma (Rb) phosphorylation leading to cell cycle arrest at G1/S phase. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts p21 −/− cells, MWCNTs treatment didn’t induce cell cycle arrest at G1/S phase. From Sun Y et al.’s study, it is inferred that the downregulation of p21 mediated by miR-503-3p in NSCLC cell lines can inhibit cell proliferation and promote cell apoptosis. However, Chen ZY et al.’s study indicated that the downregulation of p21 mediated by SNHG20 in NSCLC cell lines promoted cell proliferation. While Zhang Y et al.’s study inferred that upregulation of p21 can inhibit cell proliferation. Thus, p21 has a dual role in cell proliferation and apoptosis, and this dual role depends on its cellular localization, and p21 regulation of cell proliferation and apoptosis has been extensively reviewed elsewhere. The inconsistent role of p21 mediated by miR-503-3p or SNHG20 in NSCLC cell lines may be due to the different cell lines used. However, the inconsistency from these studies needs to be investigated further.
In podocytes, high glucose (HG) treatment increased miR-503 expression level in a time and dose-dependent manner and decreased E2F transcription factor 3 (E2F3) expression level. miR-503 overexpression increased podocytes apoptosis, while its inhibition improved renal function in rats of Diabetes mellitus via targeting E2F3. In human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1), HG treatment also increased miR-503 expression level markedly, but decreased the expression of Apelin-12, which was proven to be a miR-503 target by luciferase assay. miR-503 inhibited Apelin-12 expression, while it up-regulated the phosphorylation of JNK and p38MAPK. In contrast, inhibition of miR-503 alleviated oxidative stress, inflammation and apoptosis induced by HG in HMEC-1 cells. The expression level of miR-503 induced by HG in both types of cells is consistent, and the increase of miR-503 contributes to cell apoptosis under HG condition.

Roles of miR-503 in Carcinogenesis
Accumulated evidence has shown that miR-503 is implicated in carcinogenesis and angiogenesis. Uncontrolled angiogenesis contributes to tumor growth and invasiveness. miR-503 expression is dysregulated in tumor or cancer. In this section, we summarize the related findings of miR-503 in cancer and list in Table 2. The role of miR-503 in angiogenesis will be discussed in the next section.
The expression level and targets of miR-503 in cancer.
miRs	Cancer types	Upregulated↑/downregulated↓	Identified targets	References	 	miR-503-5p	HCC	↓	FGF2, VEGFA		 	miR-503-5p	HCC	↓	Cyclin D3, E2F3		 	miR-503-5p	NSCLC	↓	PI3K p85, IKK-β		 	miR-424/-503	Breast cancer	NA	Smad7, Smurf2		 	miR-503-5p	Breast cancer	↓	IGF-1R		 	miR-503-5p	Breast cancer	↓	CCND1		 	miR-503-3p	Breast cancer	↑	Smad2, E-cadherin		 	miR-503-5p	CC	↓	AKT2		 	miR-503-5p	Prostate cancer	↓	ZNF217		 	miR-503-5p	GBM	↓	IGF-1R		 	miR-503-5p	GBM	↑	PDCD4		 	miR-503-5p	CRC	↓	E2F3		 	miR-503-5p	CRC	↑	CaSR		 	miR-503-5p	GC	↓	HMGA2		 	miR-503-5p	Osteosarcoma	↓	IGF-1R		 	miR-503-5p	ESCC	↑	PRKACA		 	miR-503-5p	Retinoblastoma	↑	PTPN12
NA, Not applicable.
PI3K/Akt signaling pathway plays an important role in cell growth and cell survival. Phosphionositide 3-kinaes (PI3Ks) consists of catalytic subunits and regulatory subunits, and PI3Kp85 is one of the regulatory subunits. In human NSCLC, miR-503 expression level was downregulated in lung cancer tissues compared with adjacent non-cancerous tissues, while its overexpression impeded tumor growth, metastasis and cell proliferation in a xenografted mice model, and in NSCLC cell lines. Both PI3Kp85 and IKK-β were proven as direct targets of miR-503 by luciferase assay. IκB kinase β (IKK-β) has been shown to link inflammation to cancer, and deletion of IKK-β can reduce colitis-associated tumor incidence and attenuate tumor growth. In NSCLC, miR-503 might act as a tumor suppressor by downregulating its targets PI3K p85 and IKK-β.
In human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) tumor, two studies have consistently reported that miR-503 expression level was downregulated in tumor tissues compared with matched adjacent normal tissues, and miR-503 was also downregulated in HCC cell lines compared with normal liver cell line L02, its down-regulation may be due to epigenetically modulation of the promoter of miR-503. The down-regulation of miR-503 was correlated with the low survival rate of HCC patients. Overexpression of miR-503 impeded tumor growth and angiogenesis in a hepatoma xenograft mouse model. In vitro, miR-503 overexpression repressed human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) capillary tube formation, HCC cell proliferation and colony formation, and induced cell cycle arrest at G1 phase in HCC cells through inhibiting its targets, fibroblast growth factor-b (FGF2), VEGFA, cyclin D3 and E2F3.
In breast cancer, the reports about miR-503 expression level from different cancer stages are inconsistent. found that miR-424/-503 cluster was significantly higher in breast cancer tissues from patients with metastasis than that without metastasis. Smad7 and Smurf2 are inhibitory factors of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), and the targets of miR-424/-503 cluster. Overexpression of this cluster suppressed Smad7 and Smurf2 expression and activated TGF-β signaling, promoting breast cancer cells metastasis in nude mice, while inhibition of miR-424/-503 cluster in breast cancer cells attenuated metastasis in nude mice and improved host survival, suggesting that miR-424/-503 cluster act as “onco-miR” in breast cancer. However, in another two studies, miR-503 in cancer tissues or cells was shown to be reduced remarkably compared to adjacent non-cancerous tissues and non-malignant breast epithelial cells. Moreover, miR-503 was lower in T2-T4 stage of breast cancer than that in T1 stage. Overexpression of miR-503 impeded breast cancer cell proliferation and invasion through inhibiting its target genes Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R) and CCND1 (encoding cyclin D1). IGF-1R belongs to IGF receptor family, and IGF-1R signaling pathway participates in tumor growth and metastasis. Therefore, the inconsistence of miR-503 expression level in different stages of breast cancer needs more evidences, the effects of its overexpression or inhibition in breast cancer on metastasis deserve further investigation.
In breast cancer, miR-503-3p expression level was found to be higher in cancer tissues and plasma of patients compared with adjacent normal tissues and plasma of healthy subjects, and the high level of miR-503-3p was correlated with breast cancer metastasis. Smad2 and E-cadherin were proven as miR-503-3p targets by luciferase assay, and the mRNA levels of both Smad2 and E-cadherin were lower in cancer tissues of patients compared with adjacent normal tissues, and it has been demonstrated in vitro that miR-503-3p promotes Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and tumor metastasis by downregulation of Smad2 and E-cadherin. Tumor metastasis is a complicated process, it contains EMT and Mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET). E-cadherin is one of EMT markers, and loss of this protein promotes metastasis. Smads family are intracellular effectors of the TGF-beta superfamily, and Smad2 is one member of Receptor Activated Smads family.
In cervical cancer (CC), the expression level of miR-503 in cancer tissues of patients was downregulated compared with adjacent normal tissues, and overexpression of miR-503 in CC cell lines inhibited cell proliferation and colony formation by targeting AKT2, while miR-503 inhibitor reversed these effects. The mRNA expression level of AKT2 is higher in cancer tissues than that in adjacent normal tissues, and it was proven as miR-503 target by luciferase assay. AKT2 is one isoform of AKT (also called protein kinase B), and activation of AKT promotes cell proliferation and survival. Thus, miR-503 may act as a tumor suppressor in CC. In prostate cancer, miR-503 expression level was also downregulated in cancer tissues of patients compared with adjacent normal tissues, its down-regulation was associated with invasive features and poor prognosis in prostate cancer patients. GATA binding protein 3 (GATA3) is a zinc-binding transcription factor, it is found to bind the promoter of miR-503 and activate miR-503 transcription, however, GATA3 expression was also decreased remarkably in prostate cancer tissues. Zinc finger protein 217 (ZNF217) was proven as miR-503 target, it is demonstrated that GATA3/miR-503 axis suppressed the progression of prostate cancer by inhibiting ZNF217 expression.
In human glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), found that miR-503 expression level was reduced markedly in GBM tissues and cells compared with human normal brain tissues from patients with cerebral trauma, its overexpression in GBM cells impeded cell proliferation, migration and tumor invasion, and increased cell apoptosis. They further demonstrated that miR-503 acted as tumor suppressor in GBM partially by downregulating its target IGF-1R and interfering with PI3K/AKT pathway. However, found that the expression level of miR-503 was elevated in glioblastoma tissues or cancer cells compared to normal human brain tissue and normal human astrocytes separately. And they showed that overexpression of miR-503 in glioblastoma cells increased cell proliferation, and reduced cell apoptosis by targeting PDCD4 (programmed cell death 4). By contrast, inhibition of miR-503 impeded cell proliferation. PDCD4 is known as one tumor suppressor gene which inhibits cell proliferation, tumor angiogenesis and induces apoptosis. compared miR-503 expression level in cancer cells with that in normal brain tissues and found that miR-503 was downregulated, did not describe clearly from where the normal human brain tissue was obtained. Thus, the inconsistent expression level of miR-503 between these two studies may be due to the source of control samples. Also, the function of miR-503 in glioblastoma between both studies is inconsistent, this needs to be investigated further.
In colorectal cancer (CRC), the role of miR-503 is also inconsistent. reported that miR-503 expression level was reduced remarkably in cancer tissues or cells compared with adjacent normal tissues and normal colonic cell line separately, its overexpression in CRC cells suppressed cell proliferation and increased cell apoptosis rate by targeting E2F3. Whereas in Noguchi et al.’s study, in normal mucosa, colorectal adenoma and cancer tissues, the expression level of miR-503 was increased in sequence from adenoma to carcinoma, higher miR-503 expression in patients was related with large tumor size, tumor invasion and metastasis, and inhibition of miR-503 in CRC cells suppressed cell proliferation, invasion and migration, which is suggestive that miR503 acted as an “onco-miR” in CRC by downregulation of calcium-sensing receptor (CaSR) expression. CaSR is a G protein-coupled receptor and functions as a tumor suppressor in colon cancer. Therefore, the expression level and function of miR-503 in CRC is inconsistent. In Noguchi et al.’s study, the control samples were from healthy volunteers, while in Chang et al.’s study, the control samples were from adjacent normal tissues of cancer patients, this may explain the inconsistence of miR-503 expression. Nonetheless, the function of miR-503 in CRC deserves further investigation.
In other gastrointestinal cancer, such as gastric cancer (GC) and esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), the miR-503 expression level is converse. miR-503 expression decreased remarkably in tissues of GC, but highly expressed in tissues of ESCC, as compared with individual adjacent non-cancerous tissues, while it was lower in tissues of ESCC with metastasis than that without metastasis. In GC, overexpression of miR-503 impeded cell proliferation, invasion and colony formation in vitro and tumor growth in vivo by suppressing target gene HMGA2 (encoding High-mobility group AT-hook 2) and WNT/β-catenin signaling pathway. Ectopic expression of miR-503 in ESCC cells also impeded cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis by inducing cellular autophagy in vitro and in vivo. Protein kinase cAMP-activated catalytic subunit alpha (PRKACA) was proven as miR-503 target gene by luciferase assay, and it is suggested that miR-503 induced autophagy in ESCC cells via the protein kinase A (PKA)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway.
In osteosarcoma, miR-503 expression level was reduced in tumor tissues compared with matched adjacent normal tissues, and it was lower in specimens from patients of T3-T4 stage than that of T1-T2 stage. In vitro, miR-503 was also lower in osteosarcoma cells than that in normal osteoblasts cells, and overexpression of miR-503 suppressed the proliferation and invasion of osteosarcoma U2OS cells, thus, it acted as a tumor suppressor in osteosarcoma via inhibiting its target, IGF-1R. However, in retinoblastoma (RB), miR-503 was greatly expressed in RB tissues, and acted as an “onco-miR” by targeting PTPN12.
Taken together, miR-503 expression level varies in different types of cancer. However, except for the inconsistent results of colorectal cancer and glioblastoma multiforme, miR-503 has been found to be downregulated in most of cancer types, but upregulated in few cancer types, such as retinoblastoma, ESCC and adrenocortical carcinoma. miR-503 can act as “onco-miR” or tumor suppressor in different types of cancer. The expression level and targets of miR-503 in cancer are listed in Table 2.

Roles of miR-503 in Angiogenesis
Numerous miRNAs, such as miR-92a, miR-29b, and miR-21, are demonstrated to regulate angiogenesis, and have the characteristics of anti- or pro-angiogenesis. The miR-16 family in angiogenesis and diabetes has been reviewed elsewhere. In this section, we focus on studies of miR-503 in angiogenesis.
The role of miR-503 in angiogenesis has been demonstrated in vitro and in vivo. In EPCs, miR-503 suppressed angiogenesis by targeting Apelin. In Diabetes mellitus, miR-503 expression level was significantly higher in ischemic muscles and plasma from patients with limb ischemia than normal control, and it is also higher in the plasma of diabetic patients with ischemic stroke than that in non-diabetic patients with stroke or in control individuals. Overexpression of miR-503 suppressed endothelial cells proliferation, migration and network formation by suppression of its targets, cdc25A (cell division cycle 25 A) and CCNE1 (cyclin E1) under normal culture condition. In diabetic mice with limb ischemia, antagonizing miR-503 improved angiogenesis and blood flow recovery by upregulating cdc25A and CCNE1. Furthermore, it was found that p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75 NTR) activated NF-κB to bind the promoter of miR-503 and activated its expression in endothelial cells exposed to high glucose. p75NTR is a multifunctional membrane receptor of nerve growth factor.The microparticles carrying miR-503 were shed from diabetic endothelial cells and transferred into recipient pericytes, where miR-503 inhibited pericyte migration and proliferation by targeting EFNB2 (encoding Ephrin-B2) and VEGFA, and subsequently increased vascular permeability and blocked angiogenesis in post-ischemic limb muscles of diabetic mice.
In hepatocellular carcinomas, miR-503 inhibited tumor angiogenesis by down-regulation of FGF2 and VEGFA. The VEGF family and FGF superfamily are regulators in angiogenesis, VEGF (also known as VEGFA) is a predominant regulator in the process of angiogenesis, which stimulates angiogenesis via VEGF receptor-2, thus, blockers of VEGF is widely used as an anti-angiogenic agent. In glioma cells, overexpression of miR-503 reduced both LRIG2 (Leucine-rich repeats and immunoglobulin-like domains protein 2) and VEGFA expression levels, and suppressed angiogenesis in cocultured human cerebral microvascular endothelial cell line D3 (HCMEC/D3), while miR-503 inhibitor promoted angiogenesis in cocultured HCMEC/D3. LRIG2 was proven as miR-503 target by luciferase assay, knockdown of LRIG2 reduced VEGFA expression level along with the condition of miR-503 inhibitor, therefore, miR-503 regulated angiogenesis in glioma by reducing LRIG2 expression followed by downregulation of VEGFA expression. LRIG2 belongs to the leucine-rich repeats and immunoglobulin-like domains family and regulates epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway, and downregulation of LRIG2 suppressed angiogenesis in glioma. In pulmonary arterial hypertension, both hsa-miR-424 and hsa-miR-503 were decreased in pulmonary artery endothelial cells derived from patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension, and overexpression of both miRs in animal models of pulmonary hypertension can alleviate pulmonary hypertension by downregulation of FGF2 and FGF receptor (FGFR1).
In chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), miR-503 was decreased in lung fibroblasts from COPD patients, VEGF released by lung fibroblasts from patients with COPD were higher compared with that from patients without COPD, it is inferred that miR-503 may regulate fibroblast-mediated vascular homeostasis in COPD via VEGF signaling, given that VEGF plays an important role in regulating vascular homeostasis in various pathological conditions. In another clinical trial, patients with coronary artery disease (CAD) were divided into good coronary collateral circulation (CCC) formation group and poor CCC formation group, and the level of miR-503 in the plasma from good CCC or poor CCC group was lower compared with that from control subjects, and miR-503 was negatively correlated with CCC formation and VEGFA. This indicates that miR-503 might suppress CCC formation, and the downregulation of miR-503 in CAD patients may be a compensatory effect of protection.
Overall, the role of miR-503 in angiogenesis is consistent in different studies, and it shows the characteristic of anti-angiogenesis.

Roles of miR-503 in Tissue Fibrosis
Fibrosis can a significant pathological state in many organs, such as heart, lung, kidney and liver, and may result in the distortions of organ structure and organ dysfunction. Pro-fibrotic mediator TGF-β and its signaling pathways play an important role in the process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tissue fibrosis. Multiple miRs are involved in fibrosis, for instance, miR-21 stimulated the development of lung fibrosis, while miR-101 inhibited cardiac fibrosis after myocardial infarction (MI). Several studies reported that miR-503 was implicated in fibrosis, in this section, we list the alterations of miR-503 in fibrosis and discuss how miR-503 regulates fibrosis in lung or heart.
Cardiac fibrosis can lead to contractile dysfunction and cardiac arrhythmia. In mouse heart tissues of cardiac fibrosis induced by transverse aortic constriction (TAC) and mouse neonatal cardiac fibroblasts (CFs) cultured with Angiotensin II, miR-503 expression level was upregulated, its overexpression in neonatal CFs increased cell proliferation and collagen production mediated by Angiotensin II, while pretreatment with Apelin-13 and co-transfection of miR-503 in neonatal CFs resulted in inhibition of TGF-β and connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) expression and collagen production, Apelin-13 treatment alone decreased cell proliferation and collagen production, and reduced TGF-β and CTGF expression levels in neonatal CFs mediated by Angiotensin II. Apelin-13 was identified as target of miR-503 by luciferase assay, and antagomiR-503 treatment in TAC mice improved cardiac function and suppressed both TGF-β and CTGF expression, therefore, miR-503 has the property of promoting cardiac fibrosis in TAC mouse model. In contrary, in mouse model of pulmonary fibrosis induced by silica, miR-503 was reduced in fibrotic lung tissue and cells exposed to silica compared with control, but long non-coding RNA MALAT1 was upregulated, and MALAT1 regulated miR-503 expression by competitively binding to miR-503. Snail is a transcription factor and recognized as inducer of EMT. PI3K p85 was also proven as miR-503 target, and the activation of PI3Kp85/Akt/mTOR/Snail pathway facilitated the development of EMT and pulmonary fibrosis, overexpression of miR-503 has been shown to inhibit silica-induced pulmonary fibrosis by inactivating that pathway.
From those studies, it is inferred that miR-503 attenuates pulmonary fibrosis, while it promotes cardiac fibrosis, thus the findings regarding the function of miR-503 in fibrosis is contradictory, which may be due to differences in the process of pulmonary fibrosis and cardiac fibrosis. EMT plays an critical role in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis, some epithelial cells in the lung can be transformed to fibroblasts by EMT. It is notable that there are no epithelial cells in the heart tissue, however, endothelial-to mesenchymal transition (EndMT) can be induced in the heart after MI, and EndMT becomes the source of myofibroblasts and promotes the production of fibroblastic content.The molecular mechanism whereby miRs regulate tissue fibrosis formation is complicated and needs further study.

Roles of miR-503 in Oxidative Stress
Oxidative stress occurs when excessive generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) exceeds antioxidant defense systems. ROS include superoxide anion (O2 −), hydroxyl radicals (.OH), peroxynitrite anion (ONOO−) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), they can cause oxidative damage to the lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids of cells. To remove ROS, cells use intrinsic antioxidant defense systems, including antioxidative enzymes and antioxidants, such as superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx), and glutathione, to protect against the injurious effects of excessive ROS. Hyperglycemia, hypoxia, ischemia or ischemia/reperfusion (I/R), all induce oxidative stress.
Multiple miRs have been shown to be involved in the development of oxidative stress, this topic has been reviewed elsewhere, and the miRs that have been reported to regulate antioxidant system are listed in the latest review. Some miRs can aggravate oxidative stress, whereas others have the opposite roles. For instance, the application of miR-223-3p inhibitor can alleviate hypoxia-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis, while miR-377 inhibitor can alleviate renal I/R-induced oxidative stress and inflammation. Both miR-27a and miR-140-5p can exacerbate oxidative damage by down-regulation of the target Nrf2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2). Nrf2 is an important transcription factor which binds to the antioxidant response element (ARE), and regulates key genes involved in oxidative stress, such as SOD, CAT, heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) and glutamate-cysteine ligase modifier subunit (GCLM), while Nrf2 expression is also regulated by its inhibitory protein called Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) and plays a critical role in promoting endogenous antioxidant capacity to combat ischemia-reperfusion injury induced oxidative stress and organ or tissue injuries. By contrast, miR-7 can target Keap1 and activate Nrf2 pathway, therefore, it can relieve oxidative stress and exert cytoprotective effects by regulating the Nrf2 pathway. Several studies have reported that miR-503 is involved in oxidative stress. In this section, we summarize and analyze the mechanisms of miR-503 in oxidative stress.
Myocardial I/R injury can lead to oxidative stress in both the experimental settings of myocardial I/R and in patients undergoing open heart surgeries under cardiopulmonary bypass. reported that miR-503 was downregulated in the isolated rat hearts subjected to 30 min of left anterior descending coronary artery ligation followed by 120 min of reperfusion, and ischemic postconditioning attenuated the downregulation of miR-503. However, the exact role of miR-503 in oxidative stress induced by I/R has not been explored yet. In diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM), miR-503 was increased significantly in the rat heart tissues but decreased by Phase II enzyme inducer (CPDT) treatment. Nrf2 was proven as miR-503 target by luciferase assay, it was decreased in DCM but increased by CPDT treatment. It is suggested by that CPDT can alleviate oxidative stress in DCM through miR-503/Nrf2/ARE signaling pathway, while the authors did not simultaneously detect the oxidative stress markers in the presence of either the miR-503 mimic or an inhibitor of miR-503 in diabetic rats, nor in cultured cardiomyocytes exposed to high glucose mimicking the situation of diabetes. In human microvascular endothelial cells, miR-503 inhibitor alleviated HG-induced oxidative stress by the inactivation of JNK and p38 MAPK phosphorylation, suggesting that miR-503 has the property of pro-oxidative stress.
In spontaneous hypertension and stroke rat model, the miR-503 expression level was increased significantly in brains of Spontaneously Hypertensive Stroke Prone rats (SHRSP) upon high-salt diet, but reduced in brains of Spontaneously Hypertensive Stroke Resistant Rats (SHRSR). The peroxidation end products carbonylated total proteins were also increased markedly in brains of high-salt-fed SHRSP, but not in high-salt-fed SHRSR. In contrast, the mRNA and protein expression levels of uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) were decreased significantly in brains of SHRSP upon high-salt diet, but not in brains of SHRSR. And overexpression of miR-503 in endothelial cells in vitro decreased UCP2 expression and increased cell mortality. It is indicated that the downregulation of UCP2 expression regulated by miR-503 increases oxidative stress and stroke occurrence in high-salt-fed SHRSR. UCP2 is a mitochondrial membrane protein and wildly expressed among organs, and overexpression of UCP2 protected against endothelial dysfunction of vessels through reducing ROS production followed by increasing nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability. Another study reported that miR-503 expression level in plasma of patients with moderate and severe ischemic stroke was highest compared to patients with minor stroke and control individuals. It is also demonstrated that overexpression of miR-503 increased cell apoptosis and ROS production, but reduced NO generation in vivo and in intro, while inhibition of miR503 alleviated apoptosis, oxidative stress, and increased NO generation by activation of PI3K/AKT/eNOS pathway, and it is indicated that plasma miR-53 may be an attractively diagnostic marker or therapeutic target for ischemic stroke.
To summarize, the mechanisms of miR-503 in oxidative stress is not well understood especially in I/R injury or diabetes, it is worthy of further investigation.

The Mechanisms of Abnormal miR-503 Expression in Cardiovascular Disease or Cancer
Studies have shown that miR-503 is expressed abnormally in human diseases, such as diabetes, pulmonary arterial hypertension, coronary artery disease, ischemic stroke and cancer, and have explored the roles of miR-503 in diseases by overexpressing or inhibiting miR-503 in vivo and in vitro. The potential mechanism of miR-503 in regulating cardiovascular disease is shown in Figure 1. However, the mechanisms of its abnormal expression in diseases are little known.
The potential mechanism of miR-503 in regulating cardiovascular disease. Cardiovascular disease induces the abnormal expression of miR-503. The dysregulation of miR-503 may contribute to various pathologies, e.g., angiogenesis, cardiac fibrosis and oxidative stress, and it would subsequently aggravate the severity of cardiovascular disease. The following targets, FGF2, FGFR1, VEGFA, TGF-β, CTGF, Nrf2, and PI3K/Akt may be involved in the pathological processes of cardiovascular disease regulated by miR-503.
DNA methylation in the promoters of miRs or histone modifications have been evaluated for the dysregulation of miRs. The mechanisms governing miR-503 down-regulation or its activation have been explored in few studies. On the one hand, several studies have reported the reasons of miR-503 downregulation. and have shown that the downregulation of miR-503 in HCC tissues or human endometriotic cyst stromal cells may be due to DNA hypermethylation near the promoter of miR-503. reported that lncRNA MALAT1 bound to miR-503 directly as a sponge and downregulated miR-503 expression in silica-induced pulmonary fibrosis. In patients with acute MI and in rat model of myocardial I/R injury, MALAT1 was increased in peripheral blood cells or myocardial tissues. Our unpublished data and Varga et al.’s data showed that miR-503 expression level was downregulated in myocardial tissues following I/R injury. However, it is yet to be determined whether or not the downregulation of miR-503 in myocardial I/R injury may be due to the upregulation of MALAT1 or DNA methylation. On the other hand, the mechanism governing the activation of miR-503 expression has also been explored. Kim et al., demonstrated that overexpression of APLN (apelin) induced miR-424/503 expression by regulation of miR-424/503 promoter in pulmonary artery endothelial cells. showed that miR-503 expression was activated by GATA3 binding to its promoter. showed that NF-κB was activated by p75 neurotrophin receptor (p75 NTR) and bond to the promoter of miR-503, leading to miR-503 transcription in endothelial cells. Taken together, the mechanisms of miR-503 dysregulation are diverse and complicated in different pathological conditions. Further investigation of abnormal miR-503 expression is needed for discovering good therapeutic targets.

Conclusion and Future directions
miR-503 is extensively studied in cancer, and most studies reported that miR-503 acted as a tumor suppressor, while a few studies showed miR-503 may function as an “onco-miR”. Whether overexpression or inhibition of miR-503 in vivo can suppress tumor growth depends on cancer types, and preclinical studies are still needed to address the impact of miR-503 on the development of cancer. In the aspects of tissue fibrosis or oxidative stress, there are few studies of miR-503 and the mechanisms are little known. Cardiac fibrosis can occur following by MI, but it is unclear whether the role of miR-503 in TAC or MI induced cardiac fibrosis is similar. Oxidative stress is one of risk factors in myocardial I/R injury, the role of miR-503 in regulating oxidative stress in myocardial I/R injury is still unknown. To explore miR-503 as therapeutic target or diagnostic marker, further investigation can be focused on the role of miR-503 in tissue fibrosis or oxidative stress, and the dysregulation of miR-503 in cardiovascular disease, especially myocardial I/R injury deserves further investigation.

Author Contributions
YH conceived the idea of the review. YH, YC, PP, XR, and ZX wrote and edited the review. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

Funding
This work is supported by the General Research Fund (17158616), and Health and Medical Research Fund (05161826).

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

References
Circular noncoding RNAs as potential therapies and circulating biomarkers for cardiovascular diseases
Experimental myocardial infarction triggers canonical Wnt signaling and endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition
MicroRNA-133 controls cardiac hypertrophy
Strand-specific miR-28-5p and miR-28-3p have distinct effects in colorectal cancer cells
The relationship between plasma free 15-F2t-isoprostane concentration and early postoperative cardiac depression following warm heart surgery
MicroRNAs: genomics, biogenesis, mechanism, and function
miR-503 inhibits platelet-derived growth factor-induced human aortic vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation and migration through targeting the insulin receptor
MicroRNA-92a controls angiogenesis and functional recovery of ischemic tissues in mice
Bantam encodes a developmentally regulated microRNA that controls cell proliferation and regulates the proapoptotic gene hid in Drosophila
Decoding telomere protein Rap1: its telomeric and nontelomeric functions and potential implications in diabetic cardiomyopathy
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway
MicroRNA-503 and the extended microRNA-16 family in angiogenesis
p75(NTR)-dependent activation of NF-κB regulates microRNA-503 transcription and pericyte-endothelial crosstalk in diabetes after limb ischaemia
Deregulation of microRNA-503 contributes to diabetes mellitus-induced impairment of endothelial function and reparative angiogenesis after limb ischemia
MicroRNAs in the regulation of cellular redox status and its implications in myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury
miR-503 inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells by targeting E2F3
MicroRNAs modulate hematopoietic lineage differentiation
miR-503/Apelin-12 mediates high glucose-induced microvascular endothelial cells injury via JNK and p38MAPK signaling pathway
Long non-coding RNA SNHG20 promotes non-small cell lung cancer cell proliferation and migration by epigenetically silencing of P21 expression
Differential microRNA profiling in a cellular hypoxia reoxygenation model upon posthypoxic propofol treatment reveals alterations in autophagy signaling network
MicroRNA-503 serves an oncogenic role in retinoblastoma progression by directly targeting PTPN12
Inhibition of miR-25 improves cardiac contractility in the failing heart
MicroRNAs make big impression in disease after disease
Hematopoietic deficiency of the long noncoding RNA MALAT1 promotes atherosclerosis and plaque inflammation
Propofol through upregulating caveolin-3 attenuates post-hypoxic mitochondrial damage and cell death in H9C2 cardiomyocytes during hyperglycemia
Glucose depletion activates mmu-miR-466h-5p expression through oxidative stress and inhibition of histone deacetylation
Atherosclerotic vascular disease conference: executive summary: atherosclerotic vascular disease conference proceeding for healthcare professionals from a special writing group of the American Heart Association
The relationship of plasma miR-503 and coronary collateral circulation in patients with coronary artery disease
Oxidant signals and oxidative stress
Induction of microRNAs, mir-155, mir-222, mir-424 and mir-503, promotes monocytic differentiation through combinatorial regulation
Phosphoinositide kinases
miR‐503 expression is downregulated in cervical cancer and suppresses tumor growth by targeting AKT2
Diabetes blocks the cardioprotective effects of sevoflurane postconditioning by impairing Nrf2/Brg1/HO-1 signaling
Allopurinol attenuates left ventricular dysfunction in rats with early stages of streptozotocin-induced diabetes
MiR-181c-5p exacerbates hypoxia/reoxygenation-induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis via targeting PTPN4
Current status and challenges of NRF2 as a potential therapeutic target for diabetic cardiomyopathy
A brain-specific microRNA regulates dendritic spine development
Myocardial reperfusion injury and oxidative stress: therapeutic opportunities
IKKbeta links inflammation and tumorigenesis in a mouse model of colitis-associated cancer
miRBase: microRNA sequences, targets and gene nomenclature
miRBase: tools for microRNA genomics
TGF-â1-induced miR-503 controls cell growth and apoptosis by targeting PDCD4 in glioblastoma cells
Effect of indole‐3‐carbinol on ethanol‐induced liver injury and acetaldehyde‐stimulated hepatic stellate cells activation using precision‐cut rat liver slices
Lipoxin A4 preconditioning attenuates intestinal ischemia reperfusion injury through keap1/nrf2 pathway in a lipoxin A4 receptor independent manner
The role of Smad signaling cascades in cardiac fibrosis
EMT and tumor metastasis
Mechanical stretch induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition in alveolar epithelia via hyaluronan activation of innate immunity
miR-503, a microRNA epigenetically repressed in endometriosis, induces apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest and inhibits cell proliferation, angiogenesis, and contractility of human ovarian endometriotic stromal cells
Synergy of isoflurane preconditioning and propofol postconditioning reduces myocardial reperfusion injury in patients
GATA3-driven expression of miR-503 inhibits prostate cancer progression by repressing ZNF217 expression
LNA-mediated microRNA silencing in non-human primates
An endothelial apelin-FGF link mediated by miR-424 and miR-503 is disrupted in pulmonary arterial hypertension
Reduced microRNA-503 expression augments lung fibroblast VEGF production in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
MicroRNA-7 activates Nrf2 pathway by targeting Keap1 expression
The basics of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
Recent advances in endothelial progenitor cells toward their use in clinical translation
Cell survival responses to environmental stresses via the Keap1-Nrf2-ARE pathway
Alveolar epithelial cell mesenchymal transition develops in vivo during pulmonary fibrosis and is regulated by the extracellular matrix
Plasma microRNA-155-5p is increased among patients with chronic kidney disease and nocturnal hypertension
The multifaceted p21 (Cip1/Waf1/CDKN1A) in cell differentiation, migration and cancer therapy
The tumour suppressor Pdcd4: recent advances in the elucidation of function and regulation
Hyperglycemia-induced oxidative stress abrogates remifentanil preconditioning-mediated cardioprotection in diabetic rats by impairing caveolin-3-modulated PI3K/akt and JAK2/STAT3 signaling
Conserved seed pairing, often flanked by adenosines, indicates that thousands of human genes are MicroRNA targets
Adiponectin ameliorates hyperglycemia-induced cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction by concomitantly activating Nrf2 and Brg1
Mechanism and therapies of oxidative stress-mediated cell death in ischemia reperfusion injury
MiR-503 suppresses cell proliferation and invasion of gastric cancer by targeting HMGA2 and inactivating WNT signaling pathway
MiRNA-29b suppresses tumor growth through simultaneously inhibiting angiogenesis and tumorigenesis by targeting Akt3
Metastatic heterogeneity of breast cancer cells is associated with expression of a heterogeneous TGFβ-activating miR424-503 gene cluster
miR-21 mediates fibrogenic activation of pulmonary fibroblasts and lung fibrosis
Bosentan affects 15-F2t-isoprostane adverse effects on postischemic rat hearts
Transgenic overexpression of GTP cyclohydrolase 1 in cardiomyocytes ameliorates post-infarction cardiac remodeling
STAT3-regulated exosomal miR-21 promotes angiogenesis and is involved in neoplastic processes of transformed human bronchial epithelial cells
Vascular endothelial growth factor regulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase phosphorylation is involved in isoflurane cardiac preconditioning
Mechanistic study of mtROS-JNK-SOD2 signaling in bupivacaine-induced neuron oxidative stress
The protective effect of miR-377 inhibitor against renal ischemia-reperfusion injury through inhibition of inflammation and oxidative stress via a VEGF-dependent mechanism in mice
The mechanism of CaMK2α-MCU-mitochondrial oxidative stress in bupivacaine-induced neurotoxicity
MiR-503 inhibited cell proliferation of human breast cancer cells by suppressing CCND1 expression
Allopurinol reduces oxidative stress and activates Nrf2/p62 to attenuate diabetic cardiomyopathy in rats
Oxidative stress and microRNAs in vascular diseases
Non-coding RNAs in human disease
p21cip1/waf1 coordinates autophagy, proliferation and apoptosis in response to metabolic stress
The emerging functions of UCP2 in health, disease, and therapeutics
miR-503 is involved in the protective effect of phase II enzyme inducer (CPDT) in diabetic cardiomyopathy via Nrf2/ARE signaling pathway
Multiple tumor-associated microRNAs modulate the survival and longevity of dendritic cells by targeting YWHAZ and Bcl2 signaling pathways
Identification of microRNAs involved in hypoxia- and serum deprivation-induced apoptosis in mesenchymal stem cells
From oxidative stress damage to pathways, networks, and autophagy via microRNAs
miRNA-503 promotes tumor progression and is associated with early recurrence and poor prognosis in human colorectal cancer
Overview of MicroRNA biogenesis, mechanisms of actions, and circulation
PI3K-Akt pathway: its functions and alterations in human cancer
The role of microRNA deregulation in the pathogenesis of adrenocortical carcinoma
MicroRNA-101 inhibited postinfarct cardiac fibrosis and improved left ventricular compliance via the FBJ osteosarcoma oncogene/transforming growth factor-β1 pathway
Molecular mechanisms and clinical applications of angiogenesis
Diabetes and mitochondrial function: role of hyperglycemia and oxidative stress
Reduced brain UCP2 expression mediated by microRNA-503 contributes to increased stroke susceptibility in the high-salt fed stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rat
Coordinating cell proliferation and differentiation: antagonism between cell cycle regulators and cell type-specific gene expression
MiR-322/424 and -503 are induced during muscle differentiation and promote cell cycle quiescence and differentiation by down-regulation of Cdc25A
Can MiR-503 be used as a marker in diabetic patients with ischemic stroke?
miR-322/-503 cluster is expressed in the earliest cardiac progenitor cells and drives cardiomyocyte specification
The LRIG family: enigmatic regulators of growth factor receptor signaling
Role of calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) in tumorigenesis
MiR-320a as a potential novel circulating biomarker of arrhythmogenic cardioMyopathy
miR-503 inhibits proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis of glioma by acting on VEGFA through targeting LRIG2
miR-503-3p induces apoptosis of lung cancer cells by regulating p21 and CDK4 expression
LncRNA MALAT1 knockdown alleviates myocardial apoptosis in rats with myocardial ischemia-reperfusion through activating PI3K/AKT signaling pathway
Absence of miR-223-3p ameliorates hypoxia-induced injury through repressing cardiomyocyte apoptosis and oxidative stress by targeting KLF15
Uncoupling protein-2 protects endothelial function in diet-induced obese mice
Targeting the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) signaling pathway for cancer therapy
Effect of N-acetylcysteine on the early expression of inflammatory markers in the retina and plasma of diabetic rats
MicroRNAs associated with ischemia-reperfusion injury and cardioprotection by ischemic pre- and postconditioning: protectomiRs
Long noncoding RNAs in patients with acute myocardial infarction
Plasma microRNA-133a is a new marker for both acute myocardial infarction and underlying coronary artery stenosis
The expression of microRNA miR-107 decreases early in Alzheimer’s disease and may accelerate disease progression through regulation of beta-site amyloid precursor protein-cleaving enzyme 1
MicroRNA-503 suppresses cell proliferation and invasion in osteosarcoma via targeting insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor
Therapeutic targets for the treatment of cardiac fibrosis and cancer: focusing on TGF-β signaling
Regulation of cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor proteins during neonatal cerebella development
MiR-503 suppresses hypoxia-induced proliferation, migration and angiogenesis of endothelial progenitor cells by targeting Apelin
miR-503 suppresses the proliferation and metastasis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma by triggering autophagy via PKA/mTOR signaling
The role of apelin in cardiovascular diseases, obesity and cancer
Propofol enhances ischemic tolerance of middle-aged rat hearts: effects on 15-F(2t)-isoprostane formation and tissue antioxidant capacity
Dose-dependent protection of cardiac function by propofol during ischemia and early reperfusion in rats: effects on 15-F2t-isoprostane formation
N-acetylcysteine attenuates PKCbeta2 overexpression and myocardial hypertrophy in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats
Large-dose propofol during cardiopulmonary bypass decreases biochemical markers of myocardial injury in coronary surgery patients: a comparison with isoflurane
MicroRNA-503 inhibits the G1/S transition by downregulating cyclin D3 and E2F3 in hepatocellular carcinoma
microRNA-503 contribute to pancreatic β cell dysfunction by targeting the mTOR pathway in gestational diabetes mellitus
MicroRNA-503 inhibits the proliferation and invasion of breast cancer cells via targeting insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor
MiR-503 modulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in silica-induced pulmonary fibrosis by targeting PI3K p85 and is sponged by lncRNA MALAT1
MicroRNA‑503‑5p improves carotid artery stenosis by inhibiting the proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells
Downregulation of LRIG2 expression inhibits angiogenesis of glioma via EGFR/VEGF-A pathway
Small GTPase RAB6 deficiency promotes alveolar progenitor cell renewal and attenuates PM2.5-induced lung injury and fibrosis
Decoding the oxidative stress hypothesis in diabetic embryopathy through proapoptotic kinase signaling
MiR-503 targets PI3K p85 and IKK-β and suppresses progression of non-small cell lung cancer
Dexmedetomidine pretreatment attenuates kidney injury and oxidative stress during orthotopic autologous liver transplantation in rats
MicroRNA-503 contributes to podocyte injury via targeting E2F3 in diabetic nephropathy
miR-185 mediates lung epithelial cell death after oxidative stress
Implication of MicroRNA503 in brain endothelial cell function and ischemic stroke
MicroRNA-503 acts as a tumor suppressor in glioblastoma for multiple antitumor effects by targeting IGF-1R
Cell cycle regulation by carboxylated multiwalled carbon nanotubes through p53-independent induction of p21 under the control of the BMP signaling pathway
Identification of miRNAs associated with tumorigenesis of retinoblastoma by miRNA microarray analysis
MicroRNA-140-5p aggravates doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity by promoting myocardial oxidative stress via targeting Nrf2 and Sirt2
Oxidative stress-induced miR-27a targets the redox gene nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 in diabetic embryopathy
miR-503-3p promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition in breast cancer by directly targeting SMAD2 and E-cadherin
15-F2t-isoprostane exacerbates myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury of isolated rat hearts
MicroRNA-503 targets FGF2 and VEGFA and inhibits tumor angiogenesis and growth
MicroRNA-503 promotes angiotensin II-induced cardiac fibrosis by targeting Apelin-13

Glossary
ARE
antioxidant response element
Bcl-2
B-cell lymphoma/leukemia-2
CTGF
connective tissue growth factor
CAD
coronary artery disease
CAS
Carotid artery stenosis
CC
cervical cancer
CCC
coronary collateral circulation
BMDCs
bone marrow-derived dendritic cells
cdc25A
cell division cycle 25 A
COPD
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CRC
colorectal cancer
cdk2
cyclin-dependent-kinase 2
DCM
diabetic cardiomyopathy
ESCC
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
EMT
epithelial-mesenchymal transition
EPCs
epithelial-mesenchymal transition
ECSCs
endothelial progenitor cells
E2F3
E2F transcription factor 3
FGF2
fibroblast growth factor-b
FGFR1
FGF receptor
GBM
glioblastoma multiforme
GC
gastric cancer
HG
high glucose
HMEC
human microvascular endothelial cells
HCC
hepatocellular carcinomas
IGF-1R
Insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor
I/R
Ischemia/Reperfusion
LRIG2
Leucine-rich repeats and immunoglobulin-like domains protein 2
miRs
microRNAs
MI
myocardial infarction
nt
nucleotides
NSCLC
non-small cell lung cancer
ROS
reactive oxygen species
SMCs
smooth muscle cells
TGF-β
transforming growth factor beta
TAC
transverse aortic constriction
UCP2
uncoupling protein 2
VEGFA
vascular endothelial growth factor A