Ten tips on the work-up and management of CKD patients with nephrolithiasis
ABSTRACT
Historically, the management of patients with nephrolithiasis has been primarily delivered by urologists. In recent decades nephrologists have had an increasing role in caring for these patients not only in advanced stages of chronic kidney disease (CKD) but also in the diagnosis and management of underlying systemic disease, and metabolic and genetic risk factors. Globally the burden of kidney stone disease has been increasing, with metabolic disorders strongly associated with nephrolithiasis and stone-promoting urinary risk factors, including hypercalciuria, hyperoxaluria and hypocitraturia. At a healthcare level, kidney stones account for a relatively large number of emergency department visits, while individually the impact of kidney stones and the fear of recurrence often result in loss of work and high levels of psychological distress, in addition to an increased CKD risk. Kidney stones in the context of CKD of unknown cause can be the signature of an inherited disorder such as Dent disease, primary hyperoxaluria or adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency (among others). Diagnosing these diseases is imperative in the current age of new treatments (e.g. small interfering RNA therapies), to avoid further deterioration of kidney function and disease recurrence post-transplantation. We outline 10 practical tips to guide clinicians in the diagnostic evaluation and management of nephrolithiasis in CKD.

INTRODUCTION
Population studies have indicated that recurrent kidney stone episodes can contribute to an increased likelihood of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and end-stage kidney disease (ESKD); it is clear that recurrent symptomatic nephrolithiasis is likely to be far more influential for risk of ESKD than a one-off stone episode. Nephrolithiasis-related injury may be mediated through the consequences of urinary obstruction and intervention (repeated shock wave lithotripsy), or inflammation and tubular damage (activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome), therefore stone type and associated comorbidities also influence the ESKD risk. Paradoxically, with dropping estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR) the risk of stones actually decreases, likely due to more dilute urine, lower calcium excretion and calcium oxalate/calcium phosphate supersaturation.
Globally, nephrolithiasis has a growing prevalence frequently quoted at 10%, which may be partly explained by increased access to advanced diagnostic imaging; with contribution from associated risk factors such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, high salt intake, high intake of animal protein and/or sugary drinks and global warming.
Risk factors for symptomatic kidney stone recurrence include younger age, male gender, family history of stones, obesity, pregnancy, rarer stone compositions, higher radiographic kidney stone burden, number of past symptomatic episodes and fewer years since the last kidney stone episode. The risk of recurrence is highest early after each episode, but decreases over time.
Kidney stones that result from rare genetic diseases (for example primary hyperoxalurias, Dent disease) can lead to ESKD even in childhood. Historically, struvite stones secondary to infection and associated with obstructive uropathy were more likely to contribute to ESKD in dialysis populations. However, this proportion is declining due to improved interventions; the most recent cohort study of dialysis patients showed that 1.1% of subjects started dialysis due to nephrolithiasis, but with decreasing incidence in the last 10–15 years. It is imperative is to recognize that nephrolithiasis is often part of systemic metabolic disease; diabetes mellitus, obesity, hypertension and metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) are associated with kidney stones. We should not miss the opportunity of presentation with kidney stone disease to diagnose and treat these metabolic disorders in order to reduce future rates of CKD. There is also an increasingly important role for multidisciplinary teams, involving nephology, urology, radiology and clinical biochemistry, in the diagnosis and management of nephrolithiasis.

TIP 1: DO TAKE A DETAILED HISTORY
There is no substitute for taking a detailed history to delineate the risk of recurrence, underlying anatomical, metabolic or genetic disorder, and ascertainment of risk factors.
The frequency of stones, the age of the first stone episode, family history of stones, occurrence of infection and surgical interventions, and whether the episodes are bilateral can give clues as to the likelihood of an underlying metabolic disorder. Patients with a history of gastrointestinal disease and/or malabsorption (gastric bypass, inflammatory bowel disease, cystic fibrosis, pancreatitis) have increased risk of calcium oxalate stones (secondary hyperoxaluria). Primary hyperparathyroidism should always be excluded, particularly in postmenopausal women and those who have had previous neck irradiation, taken lithium or have a family history of multiple endocrine neoplasia. Sjögren’s syndrome is also associated with distal tubular acidosis (dRTA) which can result in calcium phosphate stones.
Intake of certain drugs can also predispose to nephrolithiasis by either direct crystallization and precipitation (aztanavir, indinavir, acyclovir, sulfadiazine, methotrexate, triamterene) or by causing alterations in urinary pH (topiramate, acetazolamide, zonisamide).
For all patients, careful questioning about dietary habits is important; high salt, high protein, high sugar, high oxalate (spinach, nuts, chocolate) and low calcium diets can all contribute to nephrolithiasis risk. It is useful to ask about processed foods, sugary drinks and changes in behaviour; there are cases of oxalate nephropathy caused by juicing diets rich in oxalate-containing fruit and vegetables or obsessive eating habits as a result of neurological or psychiatric illness.
Occupational factors can also play a role: if access to water and/or bathrooms is limited (stereotypically pilots and taxi drivers), those working rotating night shifts or outside in warmer climates, and even astronauts are at higher risk!

TIP 2: ANALYSE THE STONE
The analysis of calculi gives vital information to influence treatment, although it is often forgotten. It is worthwhile asking patients to save and bring to clinic stones obtained during extraction procedures or with the use of a urine strainer. Reliable analysis of stone composition is via Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy or X-ray diffraction. The stone composition can guide initial management and, in some cases, identify rarer diseases.
Calcium-containing stones are by far the most common, calcium oxalate in particular (Fig. 1). These can be due to hypercalciuria, hyperoxaluria and hypocitraturia. Calcium phosphate stones should result in consideration of underlying renal tubular acidosis or primary hyperparathyroidism.
Uric acid stones are more likely to form in acidic urine, and in volume depletion. Over-consumption of purines, endogenous over-production or increased purine metabolism in the context of myeloproliferative disorders or chemotherapy are risk factors for uric acid stones.
Struvite stones are associated with infection caused by ammonia-producing bacteria (e.g. Klebsiella, Proteus). Bladder dysfunction and the presence of an ileal conduit increase the risk of struvite stones.
Ammonia-containing stones are uncommon and only seen in malabsorption, malnutrition, eating disorders and chronic urinary tract infection (struvite). Silica stones are even rarer and almost always related to antacid use (magnesium trisilicate).

TIP 3: PERFORM METABOLIC EVALUATION OF THE URINE
Stone formation is caused by crystal formation resulting from an imbalance between crystallization inhibitors (citrate, magnesium, uromodulin, pyrophosphate) and promoters (oxalate, calcium, phosphate, urate, cystine). Supersaturation occurs when the solution concentration of a compound is higher than its solubility. Studies show higher supersaturation levels in stone-formers and this can be used to measure risk of nephrolithiasis and the effect of therapeutic interventions. Table 1 summarizes key urinary risk factors and associated conditions to guide targeted investigation.
Urinary risk factors with corresponding disease process, clinical context or lifestyle risk factor.
Urinary risk factor	Associated diseases/circumstances	 	Hypercalciuria	High sodium diet	 		Hyperparathyroidism	 		Excessive vitamin D	 		Sarcoidosis	 		High animal protein consumption	 		Genetic conditions, e.g. Dent disease, Bartter syndrome	 	Hyperoxaluria	Secondary hyperoxaluria (e.g. secondary to malabsorptive states)	 		Primary hyperoxaluria	 		Excessive vitamin C intake	 		Obesity	 	Hypocitraturia	Metabolic acidosis	 		Hypokalaemia	 		High animal protein consumption	 		Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (topiramate, acetazolamide, zonisamide)	 	pH >7	dRTA	 		Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (topiramate, acetazolamide, zonisamide)	 	Hyperuricosuria	Metabolic syndrome	 	Low urine volume	Extrarenal losses	 		Occupational factors
Diagnostic hints of selected stone-related diseases.
Diagnosis	Hint	Specific management	 	Cystinuria	Cysteine stones, frequent stone episodes at an early age	Conservative ± tiopronin	 	Primary hyperoxaluria	CKD of unknown cause ± stones including stones at an early age, extra-renal manifestations of oxalosis	Vitamin B6/lumasiran/nedosiran	 	APRT deficiency	CKD of unknown cause ± stones, radiolucent stones	Allopurinol	 	Sjögren’s/autoimmune disease	Sicca syndrome, musculoskeletal pains, dRTA features	Immunosuppression	 	Distal RTA	Calcium phosphate stones, nephrocalcinosis, hearing loss	Urinary alkalinization	 	Dent–Lowe	Nephrocalcinosis, CKD, ocular symptoms in Lowe syndrome	Supportive	 	FHHNC	Hypomagnesaemia, hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis, CKD	Magnesium and thiazides
FHHNC, familial hypomagnesemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis.
Therapeutic recommendations as per urinary risk factor.
Urinary abnormality	Therapeutic recommendations	 	Hypercalciuria	• Calcium intake of 1000–1200 mg/day	 		• Thiazide diuretica (hydrochlorothiazide, chlorthalidone or indapamide)	 	Hyperoxaluria	• Calcium intake of 1000–1200 mg/day, avoid high-dose vitamin C	 		• Urinary alkalinization	 		• If PH1 confirmed—consider pyridoxine and siRNA therapy; in enteric/secondary hyperoxaluria consider control of the underlying disease	 	Hypocitraturia	• Urinary alkalinization	 	Hyperuricosuria	Urinary alkalinization	 		• Allopurinol if dietary and alkali treatment fails	 	Hypomagnesuria (investigate for gastric losses)	Magnesium supplementation at 200–400 mg/day	 	Cystinuria	• 1st line—urinary alkalinization	 		• 2nd line—tiopronin	 	Low urine pH	Urinary alkalinization
aThiazide diuretics are inexpensive and relatively well tolerated; they have long been used to lower calcium excretion and protect bone density. The largest trial to date NOSTONE (Hydrochlorothiazide for Kidney Stone Recurrence Prevention) aiming to evaluate treatment with a thiazide to prevent stone recurrence examined groups taking three different doses of hydrochlorothiazide versus placebo with a median follow-up duration of 2.9 years. All groups were given up-to-date dietary recommendations in contrast to previous randomized trials assessing thiazides of which many were done in the context of low calcium diets. Prior meta-analyses suggest that perhaps a longer duration of treatment of ≥36 months, higher dose or combination with citrate therapy might be beneficial, which is perhaps why thiazides continue to appear on many guidelines and are still widely used. A more recent meta-analysis restricted to double-blinded, placebo-controlled trials examining thiazide monotherapy showed that three of the four studies found no benefit for thiazide treatment. The NOSTONE trial also demonstrated a higher rate of adverse events in the hydrochlorothiazide treatment group, including new diagnoses of diabetes mellitus. A crossover trial comparing the effect of longer acting thiazides (indapamide or chlorthalidone) versus hydrochlorothiazide on urinary supersaturation ratios of calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate is currently ongoing, which will elucidate further if there is a role of thiazides in stone prevention. But until further evidence emerges, thiazide prescription should involve shared decision-making, considering individual stone recurrence risk, comorbidities (particularly diabetes risk) and patient preferences.
Assessment of stone promoters and inhibitors is via 24-h urine collection. Patients should be advised to eat and drink as they normally would and perform two 24-h urine collections to account for daily variability in the values. The following parameters are important to measure: total volume, calcium, oxalate, citrate, uric acid, sodium, potassium, phosphate, magnesium, pH and creatinine.
Urine microscopy can diagnose some rare diseases that may be underdiagnosed, for example adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) deficiency which has dihydroxyadenine crystals. Cystinuria has stereotypical hexagonal crystals.
In advanced CKD (stages 4–5), caution is needed when interpreting 24-h urine collection results, because reduced nephron mass fundamentally alters urinary excretion patterns. While studies show increased protective factors against stone formation with lower urinary calcium and uric acid but also reduced citrate excretion, the net effect appears to be reduced supersaturation of calcium oxalate and phosphate with no effect on the supersaturation of uric acid, therefore these patients may benefit more from treatment targeting hypocitraturia.
Guidelines recommend metabolic evaluation in recurrent and high risk stone formers (i.e. young age at onset, bilateral stones, positive family history, solitary kidney, CKD). These guidelines are supported by research showing that metabolic evaluation is cost effective in recurrent stone formers, particularly in view of the economic burden of emergency presentations, loss of work days and the relatively high psychological burden surrounding fear of stone recurrence. Furthermore, there is evidence that there is better compliance with dietary and lifestyle modifications when the recommendations are data-driven. Finally, interpretation of results should always consider CKD stage and dietary habits at the time of collection.

TIP 4: DO FIND FRIENDLY RADIOLOGISTS AND UROLOGISTS AND CONSIDER SURVEILLANCE AND/OR PROPHYLACTIC INTERVENTION
The European urological guidelines recommend ultrasound as an initial investigation in asymptomatic, pregnant and paediatric patients. Non-contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) is the gold standard for detecting kidney stones. CT imaging can identify stones as small as 1 mm, including radiolucent uric acid stones. The widespread adoption of low-dose CT protocols has significantly reduced radiation exposure, while maintaining excellent diagnostic accuracy; in fact, the increased incidence of nephrolithiasis can be explained in part by these advances in diagnostic imaging. Non-contrast CT images can elucidate the stone size, density, distance from the skin and surrounding anatomical structures, and should be used to help decide on the treatment modality.
A multidisciplinary approach is needed when considering intervention for nephrolithiasis. Several centres hold joint clinics to manage stone removal (urology) and prevention of stone recurrence (nephrology).
For symptomatic stones, a conservative approach can be considered for stones <10 mm without adverse features [signs of infection, obstruction, acute kidney injury (AKI), anatomical anomalies]. Otherwise, the stone size, composition, location and the urinary tract anatomy must be evaluated to guide the choice of surgical intervention. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy is generally used for bigger and more complex stones. Alternatively, shockwave lithotripsy (SWL) and ureteroscopy and laser lithotripsy (URS) can be used for stones <20 mm). SWL is used preferentially for smaller renal stones and proximal ureteral stones, but overall URS is the most commonly performed procedure.
Whilst asymptomatic nephrolithiasis does not usually necessitate intervention, there are cases where prophylactic intervention should be considered: obstructing stones, stones in single functioning kidneys and in kidney impairment/CKD. Most studies support that larger stones are predictive of progression. The size and site of the stone, patient choice, occupation and access to healthcare should be considered. Most guidelines agree that active surveillance for non-obstructing, asymptomatic stones is reasonable: typically with ultrasound or low-dose CT at 6–12 monthly intervals. A surgical opinion is also helpful when evaluating abnormal anatomy as a risk factor for stone formation and considering any potential intervention for this.

TIP 5: DO NOT IGNORE THE CONTEXT—PART OF A METABOLIC SYNDROME?
Measure calcium and parathyroid hormone. Primary hyperparathyroidism is found in 3%–5% of patients with kidney stones. Notably, post-menopausal women are at increased risk. It is a simple and inexpensive test that can exclude a treatable cause of nephrolithiasis.
Mounting epidemiological studies and improved understanding of the pathogenesis of nephrolithiasis reframes common kidney stone episodes (calcium and uric acid stones) as a chronic metabolic condition associated with diabetes mellitus, obesity, hypertension, metabolic-associated steatotic liver disease and cardiovascular disease. Nephrolithiasis and cardiovascular disease (CVD) share common risk factors (diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidaemia and smoking). Evidence of oxidative stress-induced endothelial dysfunction which is thought to be the earliest sign of CVD has also been found in stone formers. It is hypothesized that the mild metabolic acidosis found in stone formers with CVD may lead to increased bone turnover and vascular calcification. Studies have shown that the more features of metabolic syndrome present; the risk of calcium oxalate crystallization is increased and multiple studies have demonstrated lower urinary pH and higher urine oxalate concentrations in groups with metabolic syndrome.
As such, presentation with kidney stones is a golden opportunity to assess for metabolic syndromes and associated modifiable risk factors, and to start management that may reduce the risk of recurrent kidney stones and potential longer-term consequences of metabolic syndromes such as cardiovascular disease and CKD. This reinforces the role of nephrologists in cardiovascular risk management in stone-formers.
A recent phase 2 clinical trial of empagliflozin in known nondiabetic kidney stone formers showed clearly reduced supersaturation ratios of calcium phosphate and uric acid, thus indicating a future role for sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors in stone prevention, even in non-diabetics.

TIP 6: DIG DEEPER IN CASES OF NEPHROCALCINOSIS
Recurrent nephrolithiasis and evidence of nephrocalcinosis or CKD, particularly under 40 years old or a positive family history, should trigger more extensive evaluation for an underlying metabolic disease. Inherited conditions can be confirmed with genetic testing where available. In some cases, the specific treatment can change the course of the disease with a confirmed diagnosis [for example primary hyperoxaluria type 1 (PH1) and APRT deficiency]. Table 2 displays a few hints to prompt consideration of a selection of these rarer diagnoses.
Nephrocalcinosis is often an incidental radiological diagnosis; on CT imaging it appears as diffuse, hyperdense areas within the medullary pyramids. CT is the most sensitive imaging modality for diagnosis of nephrocalcinosis; the highest specificity is a combination of ultrasound and CT as there is sometimes discordance between the two modalities. Investigations following a diagnosis of nephrocalcinosis should aim to identify an underlying cause. Most cases are related to an underlying hypercalciuria secondary to either extrarenal causes resulting in increased calcium load or due to impaired renal calcium handling. Two of the leading causes are hyperparathyroidism and dRTA, therefore initial assessment should include a serum parathyroid hormone, serum bicarbonate and urine pH. The course of nephrocalcinosis is usually insidious; however, a minority of patients report chronic pain, although evidence linking nephrocalcinosis with pain is limited. The clinical course of nephrocalcinosis is variable, ranging from incidental radiological findings with preserved renal function to progressive CKD.
Medical treatment is aimed at the underlying disease process (if identified) and reducing hypercalciuria, even though the evidence for this is scarce. Surgical management should be aimed at managing stones or obstruction rather than attempting to surgically treat submucosal calcifications. An important unanswered question is why nephrocalcinosis is associated with progressive kidney impairment in some cases but not others. The four causes known to lead to progressive CKD are primary hyperoxaluria, familial hypomagnesaemia with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis, Dent disease and Lowe syndrome.

TIP 7: DO CONSIDER GENETIC TESTING
A positive family history is found in 30%–60% of kidney stone formers with twin studies showing a heritability of at least 45%. The most common inherited kidney stone disorder is cystinuria. Initial estimates of monogenic diseases representing 30% of paediatric and 11% of adult cases of nephrolithiasis were probably slightly inflated due to the bias of tertiary centre testing in recurrent stone formers. Two recent relatively unselected cohorts showed a Mendelian diagnosis in 3%–6.8% via targeted next-generation sequencing (tNGS) or whole-exome panel testing. Additionally a prevalence of pathogenic and likely pathogenic variants were found in 8% of the kidney stone cases versus 2% in a control group of non-stone-formers.
International guidelines advocate for genetic testing together with metabolic evaluation in high-risk groups. Factors that increase the pre-test probability include earlier age of initial presentation, bilateral stones, CKD and frequent recurrence. Interestingly, many of the genes affected in both monogenic disease and those associated with ‘risk alleles’ localize to tubular processes (renal solute transporters, tight junction proteins and chloride channels), which means identifying pathogenic variants that are consistent with the biochemical phenotype can refine treatment recommendations to reduce stone recurrence. Genetic testing is yet more vital in the era of new therapeutics for diseases such as siRNA therapies for primary hyperoxaluria which can radically alter the course of a devastating disease. If possible, results should be interpreted with genetic counselling support as part of an integrated, multidisciplinary clinic to guide management.

TIP 8: DO NOT SKIMP ON THE DIET AND LIFESTYLE COUNSELLING
Stone recurrence rates can be reduced with effective lifestyle and dietary modifications, if possible, involve dietetic colleagues who are expert in counselling patients. Several of the recommendations below are relevant across multiple stone types; and potentially beneficial for underlying metabolic disorders such as diabetes and hypertension.
A fluid intake target (ideally of water) is generally quoted at ≥2.5 L/day. Adjustments should be made for body weight and underlying diagnosis (cystinuria for example has a recommended fluid intake of 3–4 L/day); in advanced CKD the recommendation would of course change as per fluid status assessment.
Maintain calcium intake: a dietary intake of 1000–1200 mg per day is advised. Prospective observational studies have demonstrated reduced nephrolithiasis risk with higher dietary calcium along with some randomized controlled trial (RCT) data. It may feel paradoxical, but lower dietary calcium means a reduced ability to bind dietary oxalate in the gut which leads to increased intestinal oxalate absorption and subsequent rise in urinary excretion. In the setting of CKD, lower serum calcium is associated with CKD progression. Conversely, in advanced CKD there are concerns about calcium deposition in extra skeletal soft tissue and arterial calcification in those with a positive calcium balance. However, renal calcium excretion declines substantially early in CKD, thus voiding concerns about potential over-treatment with calcium supplementation in this group.
Reduce salt: diets high in sodium chloride are also associated with hypercalciuria so salt intake should be limited to <6 g/day (equivalent to <2.3 g of sodium/day).
Reduce oxalate intake: recommended in hyperoxaluria. Values of even >25 mg/day are associated with higher stone risk. Common oxalate-rich foods include spinach, rhubarb, nuts especially almonds, beets and dark chocolate. A list of the oxalate content of common foodstuffs is available online via the Harvard School of Public Health (compiled by Dr John Knight)—patients find this very helpful.
Reduce non-dairy animal protein intake: this is helpful in those with uric acid stones, calcium stones and an acidic urinary pH (which facilitates calcium and uric acid stone formation). Avoidance of purine rich food is advised, particularly in those with raised serum uric acid. Limiting protein is thought to reduce the overall acid load to the tubules so can also be effective for people with cystinuria and dRTA.
Increased fruit and vegetable consumption/Mediterranean diet is thought to be particularly beneficial in hypocitraturia.

TIP 9: DO CONSIDER PROPHYLACTIC MEDICATIONS WITH SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN ADVANCED CKD
It must be stressed that any supplements or medications should be started in combination with or after a failed trial of dietary and lifestyle interventions. Table 3 displays therapeutic recommendations according to urinary risk factor. Potassium citrate is used preferentially for urinary alkalinization given the potential additive effect of extra potassium and because sodium-based alkali preparations increase urinary calcium excretion. Alternatives are magnesium citrate or potassium bicarbonate. Sodium bicarbonate can also be used, most often in dRTA. In the context of advancing CKD, switching to magnesium citrate and/or sodium bicarbonate may be more desirable; the usual increase in urine calcium seen with sodium-based alkalis is mitigated given the urinary excretion of calcium is reduced in CKD.

TIP 10: DO THINK ABOUT SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS IN TRANSPLANT PLANNING
ESKD resulting from kidney stone disease leads to similar transplant outcomes compared with other causes of ESKD, with an added survival advantage over other dialysis patients.
Kidney transplantation outcomes are excellent and recurrence-free in many inherited disorders (Dent/Lowe, primary Fanconi syndrome, dRTA, Bartter syndrome, cystinuria, cystinosis). The treatment of the underlying disease should continue in some diseases, for example cystinosis (cysteamine) to avoid extra-renal sequelae; or to avoid recurrent disease in APRT deficiency (allopurinol) and in PH1 (siRNA therapy in the case of single organ kidney transplant). Both primary hyperoxaluria and APRT deficiency are likely to be under-diagnosed according to the relevant carrier frequencies; in adults they are often diagnosed when there is already marked renal impairment or even on post-transplant biopsies. This highlights again that these rarer diseases should not be discounted in cases of CKD of unknown cause and genetic testing should be considered. Recognition of inherited stone disorders pre-transplant allows for targeted therapy and improved graft outcomes.
Data on graft nephrolithiasis are relatively scarce. The prevalence of post-transplant nephrolithiasis for all patients is estimated at 1%–2%. Surveillance may be more important in the post-transplant scenario as the denervation of the graft kidney and ureter reduces the likelihood of symptomatic colic. More frequent routine imaging in post-transplant care results in increased incidental stone detection. Given that the risks of AKI, obstruction and infection are clearly far higher, intervention may be favoured in asymptomatic graft nephrolithiasis versus in native kidneys. Although both URS and SWL are still used for large stones in transplant kidneys; anterograde approaches and open surgery may be used more frequently than in native kidneys. The data that are currently available do not show that allograft nephrolithiasis negatively impacts graft survival. The biggest risk factor for stones in the transplanted kidney is a history of nephrolithiasis pre-transplant. Nevertheless, metabolic testing of the stone and urine is advisable as in native nephrolithiasis.
Kidney donors who have an asymptomatic or previously treated kidney stone should still be considered; the use of these donors does not seem to significantly impact graft outcomes. Stone removal pre-op or ex vivo prior to implantation have both been shown to be safe. However, an in-depth work-up and a case-by-case assessment should be made for any potential donors who have had more than one stone or symptomatic episode.
Approximate relative stone compositions based on several large cohorts of stone analysis.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
No new data were generated or analysed in support of this research.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The author has received speaking fees for internal staff training talks for Alnylam pharmaceuticals and Archimed Life sciences.

REFERENCES
Kidney stones and kidney function loss: a cohort study
Risk of ESRD and mortality in kidney and bladder stone formers
Chronic kidney disease in kidney stone formers
Nephrolithiasis as a risk factor of chronic kidney disease: a meta-analysis of cohort studies with 4,770,691 participants
NALP3-mediated inflammation is a principal cause of progressive renal failure in oxalate nephropathy
Association between kidney stones and CKD: a bidirectional mendelian randomization study
Prevalence of kidney stones in the USA: the National Health and Nutrition Evaluation Survey
Determining the true burden of kidney stone disease
Predictors of symptomatic kidney stone recurrence after the first and subsequent episodes
Kidney failure from kidney stones: an ANZDATA study
Nephrolithiasis: a red flag for cardiovascular risk
Urinary stone disease: advancing knowledge, patient care, and population health
Diabetic kidney stone formers excrete more oxalate and have lower urine pH than nondiabetic stone formers
Diabetic severity and risk of kidney stone disease
Pathophysiology and management of hyperoxaluria and oxalate nephropathy: a review
Renal involvement in primary Sjögren’s syndrome
Green smoothie cleanse” causing acute oxalate nephropathy
Hyperoxaluric acute kidney injury and frontotemporal dementia
Occupational kidney stones
Association of rotating night-shift work with kidney stone risk in the nurses’ health studies: FR-PO241
Kidney stone analysis: “Give me your stone, I will tell you who you are!”
Urinary tract infections: epidemiology, mechanisms of infection and treatment options
Randall’s plaque and calcium oxalate stone formation: role for immunity and inflammation
Relative supersaturation of 24-hour urine and likelihood of kidney stones
Association of chronic kidney disease stage with 24-hour urine values among patients with nephrolithiasis
EAU guidelines on diagnosis and conservative management of urolithiasis
Medical management of kidney stones: AUA guideline
Cost-effectiveness of medical management strategies for nephrolithiasis
What patients with kidney stones believe about their condition
EAU guidelines on interventional treatment for urolithiasis
Surgical management of stones: American Urological Association/Endourological Society Guideline, part I
Asymptomatic renal stones—to treat or not to treat
Metabolic syndrome and the risk of calcium stones
Empagliflozin in nondiabetic individuals with calcium and uric acid kidney stones: a randomized phase 2 trial
A critical appraisal of the radiological evaluation of nephrocalcinosis
Genetic, pathophysiological, and clinical aspects of nephrocalcinosis
What is nephrocalcinosis?
Family history and risk of kidney stones
Maternal family history of urolithiasis is associated with earlier age of onset of stone disease
Systematic assessment of monogenic. etiology in adult-onset kidney stone formers undergoing urological intervention–evidence for genetic pretest probability
Prevalence and characteristics of genetic disease in adult kidney stone formers
European Association of Urology guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of urolithiasis
Genetics of kidney stone disease—polygenic meets monogenic
Lumasiran for advanced primary hyperoxaluria type 1: phase 3 ILLUMINATE-C Trial
Nedosiran safety and efficacy in PH1: interim analysis of PHYOX3
Urinary volume, water and recurrences in idiopathic calcium nephrolithiasis: a 5-year randomized prospective study
Comparison of two diets for the prevention of recurrent stones in idiopathic hypercalciuria
Lower serum calcium is independently associated with CKD progression
Mediterranean diet adherence and risk of incident kidney stones
Hydrochlorothiazide and prevention of kidney-stone recurrence
Use of thiazide diuretics for the prevention of recurrent kidney calculi: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Medical management to prevent recurrent nephrolithiasis in adults: a systematic review for an American College of Physicians Clinical Guideline
The suggested dosage and course of thiazide diuretics on preventing recurrent urolithiasis: an upstate meta-analysis
Thiazides for kidney stone recurrence prevention
Phenotype and genotype characterization of adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency
Primary hyperoxaluria type 1, a too often missed diagnosis and potentially treatable cause of end-stage renal disease in adults: results of the Dutch cohort
Management of de novo nephrolithiasis after kidney transplantation: a comprehensive review from the European Renal Association CKD-MBD working group
Kidney allograft stone after kidney transplantation and its association with graft survival
Ex vivo surgical removal versus conservative management of small asymptomatic kidney stones in living donors and long-term kidney transplant outcomes