Rat shoulder contracture models: Techniques, evaluation, pathophysiology, and applications in developing treatment interventions
Studies on the pathophysiology of shoulder contracture and development of interventions have greatly benefited from the use of animal models. This narrative review comprehensively analyzes research on established rat model of shoulder contracture and new treatment approaches. This review evaluated existing literature on the available techniques for inducing contracture models, assessed these models, conducted pathological analyses, and explored their application in developing new treatment interventions. Our review highlights the usefulness of different rat shoulder contracture models, including external immobilization, internal immobilization, and intra-articular injection models, each with varying levels of success. Pathological analyses have demonstrated similarities to the human condition. The effective models have been instrumental in developing new treatment interventions, including recombinant human relaxin-2, platelet-rich plasma, collagenase clostridium histolyticum, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ agonists. Therefore, rat shoulder contracture models serve as valuable tools for researchers to establish an effective animal model foundation for investigating the etiology and potential treatment.

Introduction
Shoulder contracture, specifically, adhesive capsulitis, is a common condition characterized by fibrosis, inflammation, and capsular contractures of the shoulder. The term “adhesive capsulitis” was originally coined by Julius S. Neviaser in 1945 to describe this pathological condition. Shoulder contractures are classified as primary or secondary contractures. Primary shoulder contractures occur spontaneously without any recognized underlying causes or associated factors. In contrast, secondary shoulder contractures develop as a consequence of trauma, surgery, or post-operative immobilization. Patients with shoulder contracture experience discomfort, pain, and limited range of motion (ROM). The condition is characterized by progressive fibrosis, inflammation, neoangiogenesis, and neoinnervation of the shoulder capsule. Despite ongoing research efforts, the exact underlying causes and mechanisms of shoulder contracture remain unclear.
Patients with shoulder contracture can benefit from physiotherapy, including stretching, mobility exercises, physical manipulation, and medications (such as, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and steroid injections). In addition, hydrodilatation and surgical interventions including, manipulation under anesthesia or arthroscopic capsular release, are effective. However, novel treatment interventions are necessary to address the diverse needs of patients with shoulder contracture.
To elucidate the underlying mechanisms of shoulder contracture and develop novel therapeutic interventions, developing animal contracture models is essential. Given their anatomical similarities to humans, rats have been extensively used for developing shoulder contracture and rotator cuff repair models. Various techniques have been used to establish rat shoulder contracture models. This narrative review summarizes research on these models and recommends new treatment interventions based on the cumulative findings.

Shoulder contracture models
Currently, three commonly used rat contracture models are available: the external immobilization (EX-IM), internal immobilization (IN-IM), and intra-articular injection (IA-IN) models.
External immobilization model: molding the plaster around the shoulder and the chest.
Fig. 1
Different shoulder contracture models.
Table 1
Contracture Model	Method	Advantage	Disadvantage	 		EX-IM model	Immobilizing the rats shoulder in adduction and internal rotation by molding a plaster cast around the shoulder and chest area for a period of 4–6 weeks.	Simple, non-invasive, and no skin incision.	The limb position various, the plaster cast easily loosens over time, needs frequent remolding	 		IN-IM model	Fixing the outer edge of the scapula to the humerus by plastic plates or polyester sutures for about 8 weeks.	Easy reproducibility	Surgical invasion and skin incision	 		IA-IN model 	Injecting adenovirus-TGF-β1 into the rat shoulder capsule	Easy reproducibility	Unclear safety and efficacy
EX-IM model: external immobilization model; IN-IM model: internal immobilization model; IA-IN model: intra-articular injection model.
The EX-IM model is a popular, non-invasive option. In particular, plaster-based EX-IM has been widely used. This method involves placing the rat's shoulder in adduction and internal rotation, followed by molding a plaster cast around the shoulder and chest areas. This cast is typically left in place for 4–6 weeks (Fig. 1; Table 1). The advantage of this model is that it is simple to implement, noninvasive, does not require incisions, and preserves the integrity of the shoulder joint. Therefore, we selected the EX-IM model (Fig. 1). However, variation in limb positioning between animals during immobilization and the loosening of plaster cast over time necessitating frequent remolding are major limitations.
Internal immobilization model: fixation of the scapular border and the humerus with braided polyester sutures.
Fig. 2
The IN-IM model is another widely used shoulder contracture model developed by Kanno et al.. Two plastic plates and flexible wires were used to fix the outer edge of the scapula to the humerus to immobilize the shoulder. Subsequent modifications by Villa-Camacho et al. involved the use of two polyester sutures to tighten the humeral shaft and medial border of the scapula (Fig. 2; Table 1). Internal extra articular fixation was performed for approximately 8 weeks to immobilize the glenohumeral joints. Although this model offers easy reproducibility, it requires surgical intervention to establish internal fixation.
A recent study described another method for inducing shoulder contracture in rats via intra-articular injection (IA-IN). Specifically, ultrasound guidance was used to inject adenovirus-TGF-β1 into the rat shoulder capsule, resulting in the successful development of a primary shoulder contracture model. However, the safety and efficacy of this model remain unexplored.
Each model has its own advantages and disadvantages, and the selection of the model is based on the specific research goals.

Evaluation of shoulder contracture models
To assess the effectiveness of the shoulder contracture model, radiographs of the shoulder joint at the maximum passive rotation or abduction ROM are obtained, and a 10-g constant torque is applied to the humerus after detaching the shaft of the shoulder girdle from the trunk. The ROM of abduction in the EX-IM model group was significantly lower than that in the control group, with a significant reduction in the measured mean abduction and rotation ROM in the group.
A device customized for measuring angle and stiffness in vivo has been reported in the literature. For instance, Villa-Camacho et al. utilized a sensor system consisting of a rotating axle, an arm clamp, and an orientation sensor with three degrees of freedom in addition to a reaction torque sensor to enable ROM and torque measurement. The IN-IM group exhibited a significant decrease in the total ROM compared to baseline, with residual ROM limitations persisting for weeks after immobilization. Stiffness, measured as the area under the curve of the angle torque, increased after immobilization. Chen measured the stiffness of the rat shoulder joint using a customized torque measurement device that passively rotated the joint in both external and internal directions. The kinematic test revealed that, compared with the group, the adenovirus-TGF-β1-induced IA-IN model group required more torque at equivalent rotation angles.
Radiographic assessment is an efficient method for measuring ROM without using specialized equipments. However, a customized device with a sensor assembly is more accurate; therefore, preferred by many researchers. Although magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasound are widely used to evaluate shoulder contracture in clinical practice, their application in the rat shoulder contracture model is limited. Future studies should explore the feasibility of these imaging modalities to enhance evaluation accuracy.

Histologic and pathophysiologic evaluations
Functional evaluation and pathology changes in different shoulder contracture models.
Table 2
Studies	Contracture Models	Follow Ups (weeks)	Functional Evaluation	Histologic Changes	 	Kanno et al., 2010 	IN-IM modelImmobilized with two plastic plates, screws and flexible wires	8	RadiographsThe abduction and rotation angle decreased	H&E staining: The length of the synovial intima shortened, synovial fold disappeared and the axillary pouch was occluded by thick subsynovial tissueIHC staining for type III collagen: the synovium, particularly the deep synovial subintimal area stained positively	 	Liu et al., 2011 	EX-IM modelImmobilized with plasters	4	NA	H&E staining: the hyperplastic synovium of the anterior capsule and adhesion of the subscaplular bursa.IHC staining for type III collagen and the picrosirius red staining: distributed at the synovium, subsynovium and extensively to the spatium intermusculareEnzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA): capsular content of type I and type III collagen increased	 	Villa-Camacho JC et al.,2015 	IN-IM modelImmobilized with two No. 2-0 braided polyester sutures	8	Customized deviceRotational ROM decreased, rotational torque increased and joint stiffness increased	NA	 	Kim et al., 2016 	EX-IM modelImmobilized with plasters	6	RadiographsAbduction angle decreased	H&E staining: the synovial fold and subsynovial fat tissue disappeared, capsular thickened, and capsular adherence to bony cortex in the axillary recessMasson's trichrome staining: fibrosis was observed in the axillary recess	 	Okajima et al., 2018 	IN-IM modelImmobilized with two braided polyester sutures	8	Customized deviceA 63 % decrease in total rotational ROM; restriction (18 % of total ROM) was still apparent at 8 weeks of follow-up; an increase of 13.3 Nmm in total torque	H&E staining: capsular adhesions in the inferior aspect of the glenohumeral joint; the surrounding tissue appears to be denser;IHC staining for fibronectin: capsular thickness increased	 	Cho et al., 2019 	EX-IM modelImmobilized with plasters	3	RadiographsThe abduction angle decreased after 1 week and 3 weeks immobilization	H&E staining: the synovial fold decreaed and subsynovial fat tissue disappeared, and capsular thickened in the axillary recessIHC analysis for IL-6, MMP-2, and MMP-9: the expression of all increased	 	Blessing et al., 2019 	IN-IM modelImmobilized with No. 2–0 Ethibond polyester suture	8	Customized deviceRotational ROM decreased and rotational torque increased	H&E staining: lacked the separation between the capsule and the articular surface in the most inferior aspect of the glenohumeral joint and showed evidence of capsular adhesionsIHC analysis for fibronectin: fibrotic tissue increased and capsular tissue thickened	 	Karahan et al.,2020 	EX-IM modelImmobilized with plasters	3	RadiographsAbduction angles decreased	H&E staining: the synovial fold, and sub-synovial fat tissue disappeared, lymphoplasmacytoid cells infiltrated.	 	Feusi et al.,2022 	IN-IM modelImmobilized with a 2-0 Fiber Wire	8	NA	H&E staining: hyperemia, atrophy of the synovial epithelium, flattened synovial folds, and fibrosis of the sub-synovium as well as hyperemia, angiogenesis, fibrosis, and edema in the fibrous capsule	 	Chen et al.,2021 	IA-IN modelAdenovirus TGF‐β1 was injected by ultrasound guided into the capsule of shoulder joint	5	Customized deviceThe rotational torque of the rat shoulder joint increased	H&E staining: proliferation of fibrocytes and inflammatory cells, neovascularization, and fiber structure disorderIHC analysis: vimentin and α‐SMA's expression increased	 	Taguchi et al., 2021 	EX-IM modelImmobilized with plasters	6	NA	Angiography: abnormal shoulder stainingH&E staining: decrease in the synovial fold and the subsynovial fat tissue, infiltration of inflammatory cells, proliferation of the synovial lining cells, and fibrosis of the joint capsule	 	R. Kirsch et al., 2022 	IN-IM modelImmobilized with No. 2–0 Ethibond polyester suture	8	Customized deviceRotational ROM decreased and rotational torque increased	H&E staining: decreased synovial space, thickened synovial membrane, and fibrotic adhesionsMasson's trichrome staining: fibrotic tissue presented in the axillary pouch and synovial membrane
EX-IM model: external immobilization model; IN-IM model: internal immobilization model; IA-IN model: intra-articular injection model; H&E:Hematoxylin-Eosin; IHC: immunohistochemistry; ELISA: enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; NA: not evaluated.
To assess the degree of adhesion via histological evaluation, hematoxylin–eosin (H&E) or Masson's trichrome staining was used to examine the synovium and capsule mostly in the axillary pouch. Kanno observed that the rat shoulder contracture model exhibited a shortened intraarticular synovial intima between the attachment site on the humeral neck and the inferior margin of the glenoid, with disappearance of the synovial fold, and the axillary pouch was covered by thick subsynovial tissue. Kim et al. reported a decrease in subsynovial fat tissue and the synovial fold of the axillary recess, with capsule thickening and adherence to the bony cortex. Fibrosis in immobilized shoulders was detected using Masson's trichrome stain. Okajima et al. reported fibrotic adhesion in the inferior glenohumeral joint (axillary pouch), with the surrounding tissue appearing denser, resulting in a tighter capsule with less joint space in the IN-IM group. Feusi observed flattening of the synovial folds in the posterior synovial membrane. Liu revealed adhesion of the subscapsular bursa to the hyperplastic synovium in the anterior capsule in the immobilization group. Chen identified proliferation of the inflammatory cells and fibrocytes, neovascularization, and disruption of the fiber structure in the adenovirus-TGF-β1-induced IA-IN model group (Table 2).
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining has been routinely used to analyze the distribution of collagen and matrix proteins. IHC findings revealed increased expression of type III collagen in the synovium, particularly in the deep synovial subintimal area and spatium intermusculare, in the immobilization group. Furthermore, IHC analysis revealed positive staining for Interleukin 6 (IL-6), Matrix Metallopeptidase 2 (MMP-2) and MMP-9, and sections stained for fibronectin in the IN-IM group showed increased capsular thickness (Table 2).
Taguchi reported abnormal staining on digital subtraction and thoracoacromial artery angiography in the immobilized shoulder joint.
Normal (A) and contracture (B) shoulder joint: the synovial fold of the axillary recess and the subsynovial fat tissue decreased; the fibrotic capsule thickened and adhered to the bony cortex with a decreased joint space in the contracture model.
Fig. 3
In summary, the rat shoulder contracture models exhibited characteristic pathological changes, including a reduction in the length of the intra-articular synovial intima, synovial fold, and subsynovial fat tissue of the axillary recess and a thickened capsule that adhered to the bony cortex, resulting in decreased joint space (Fig. 3). IHC staining revealed an increased distribution of collagen and matrix proteins, whereas angiography indicated abnormal artery staining. These pathological variations are consistent with those observed in human shoulder contractures. However, mechanical studies on this topic are scarce.

New treatment interventions in rat shoulder contracture models
Local delivery of recombinant human relaxin-2 (RLX) has been suggested as a promising biotherapeutic approach for alleviating shoulder contractures. RLX is a naturally occurring anti-fibrotic peptide hormone that induces growth and is upregulated during childbirth to increase tissue laxity. In several animal models of fibrotic diseases, including those of pulmonary, cardiac, and hepatic fibrosis, RLX inhibits fibrogenesis and collagen upregulation through multiple mechanisms. In vitro studies have demonstrated that recombinant RLX downregulates type I collagen and α-smooth muscle actin production in human fibroblast-like synoviocytes. Multiple intra-articular injections of RLX in the IN-IM rat model significantly improved the ROM of the immobilized shoulder, reduced fibrotic adhesions, and restored joint space, as revealed by histological assessment. Furthermore, to overcome pharmacokinetic barriers, sustained-release RLX microparticles were designed, and a single injection of RLX-2-loaded microparticles successfully restored limited ROM and joint architecture in an IN-IM rat model. In addition, RLX receptor expression has been confirmed in human synovial joints, suggesting that local delivery of recombinant RLX may be a promising clinical approach to alleviate shoulder contracture associated with adhesive capsulitis.
Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) has emerged as a promising therapeutic option for shoulder contracture. PRP is a bioactive blood component rich in growth factors, which may influence tissue remodeling and stimulate healing. In addition, the clinical application of PRP for adhesive capsulitis has been documented. In an IN-IM rat model, intra-articular PRP injections demonstrated a reduction in posterior synovial membrane inflammation, without adverse effects.
Additionally, collagenase clostridium histolyticum (CCH), an enzymatic injection consisting of two synergistic collagenases, for treating Dupuytren's disease and Peyronie's disease has demonstrated substantial efficacy. Clinical extra-articular CCH injections for shoulder contractures are safe and effective. In rat models of shoulder contracture, subacromial injection of CCH improved the abduction ROM and decreased shoulder joint fibrosis. These studies support the potential therapeutic role of CCH in shoulder contracture.
Furthermore, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPAR-γ) activation is a key mechanism for anti-inflammatory and anti-fibrotic effects, which also plays a role in the downregulation of physiological and pathological extracellular matrix reconstruction in connective tissues. In vitro studies have demonstrated that PPAR-γ agonists can inhibit fibrosis induced by TGF-β1 in human skin fibroblasts. Additionally, in the intra-articular adenovirus-TGF-β1 injection shoulder contracture model, PPAR-γ agonists demonstrated positive therapeutic effects by inhibiting inflammation, reducing matrix protein production, and remodeling fibrous tissue structure. These findings suggest that PPAR-γ agonists could be a promising candidate for the treatment of shoulder contracture.
Finally, transcatheter arterial embolization has shown promise in shoulder contracture rat models by improving speed and ROM and reducing the number of blood vessels and inflammatory changes. However, further research is needed to fully understand its mechanisms.
Novel therapies such as recombinant RLX, PRP, CCH, PPAR-γ agonists, transcatheter arterial embolization, and other cutting-edge therapies offer novel potential therapeutic approaches for shoulder contracture in rat models. However, translating these findings into effective clinical therapies will require substantial time and rigorous investigation.

Conclusions
Three rat shoulder contracture models, EX-IM, IN-IM, and IA-IN, were investigated. Radiography and custom-designed devices with sensor assemblies are commonly used to evaluate shoulder contracture. Histological assessment of the synovial and subsynovial fat tissues and the capsule of the axillary recess indicated fibrosis in the shoulder contracture model. Novel treatment strategies, such as RLX, PRP, and CCH, developed using rat shoulder contracture models, offer new potential approaches for the management of shoulder contracture. However, the translation and application of laboratory findings in clinical practice are often time-consuming and warrant further research. With in-depth research on the pathophysiology of shoulder contracture, future studies should focus on establishing more precise animal models for different stages of shoulder contracture onset. Furthermore, it is necessary to investigate novel and efficient treatments for the various phases of shoulder contracture.

Data availability statement
All data have been either provided or are otherwise publicly available, and the data will be made available on request.

Funding
The review was supported by the  (), the Foundation of  ().

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Xiangnan Yuan: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Data curation, Conceptualization. Shengwen Feng: Formal analysis, Data curation. Wanan Xiao: Formal analysis, Data curation. Jianjun Li: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Supervision, Methodology, Investigation. Yu He: Investigation, Formal analysis. Fenghua Zhou: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Supervision, Methodology. Xueyong Liu: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: a study of the path- ological findings in periarthritis of the shoulder
A shared genetic architecture between adhesive capsulitis and Dupuytren disease
The effect of myofibroblasts and corticosteroid injections in adhesive capsulitis
The serum from patients with secondary frozen shoulder following rotator cuff repair induces shoulder capsule fibrosis and promotes macrophage polarization and fibroblast activation
Analgesic effect of extracorporeal shock wave treatment combined with fascial manipulation theory for adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: a retrospective study
Frozen shoulder
Exercise therapy is effective for improvement in range of motion, function, and pain in patients with frozen shoulder: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Which method for frozen shoulder mobilization: manual posterior capsule stretching or scapular mobilization?
Comparison of Spencer muscle energy technique and Passive stretching in adhesive capsulitis: a single blind randomized control trial
Effectiveness of sustained stretching of the inferior capsule in the management of a frozen shoulder
Comparing the effectiveness of kaltenborn mobilization with thermotherapy versus kaltenborn mobilization alone in patients with frozen shoulder [adhesive capsulitis]: a randomized control trial
Early clinical outcomes of manipulation under anesthesia for refractory adhesive capsulitis: comparison with arthroscopic capsular release
In shoulder adhesive capsulitis, ultrasound-guided anterior hydrodilatation in rotator interval is more effective than posterior approach: a randomized controlled study
Arthroscopic capsular release and continuous upper arm brachial block in frozen shoulder - a midterm outcome analysis
Frozen shoulder
Animal models for rotator cuff repair
Evaluation of animal models and methods for assessing shoulder function after rotator cuff tear: a systematic review
Role of matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9 in the development of frozen shoulder: human data and experimental analysis in a rat contracture model
Can collagenase Be used in the treatment of adhesive capsulitis?
Characterization of a frozen shoulder model using immobilization in rats
Changes of histology and capsular collagen in a rat shoulder immobilization model
A rat model of frozen shoulder demonstrating the effect of transcatheter arterial embolization on angiography, histopathology, and physical activity
Development of a shoulder contracture model in rats
Intraarticular injection of relaxin-2 alleviates shoulder arthrofibrosis
Platelet-rich plasma as a potential prophylactic measure against frozen shoulder in an in vivo shoulder contracture model
Minimally invasive, sustained-release relaxin-2 microparticles reverse arthrofibrosis
Rat model of adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder
In vivo kinetic evaluation of an adhesive capsulitis model in rats
Pathological changes of frozen shoulder in rat model and the therapeutic effect of PPAR-γ agonist
Anti-fibrotic actions of relaxin
Relaxin inhibits the cardiac myofibroblast NLRP3 inflammasome as part of its anti-fibrotic actions via the angiotensin type 2 and ATP (P2X7) receptors
Protection from cigarette smoke-induced lung dysfunction and damage by H2 relaxin (serelaxin)
Human relaxin-2 attenuates hepatic steatosis and fibrosis in mice with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
Serelaxin alleviates cardiac fibrosis through inhibiting endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition via RXFP1
Inconsistent platelet-rich plasma product from devices cleared by the US FDA: a retrospective review of clinic data
Comparison of functional outcome between intra-articular injection of corticosteroid versus platelet-rich plasma in frozen shoulder: a randomized controlled trial
Injectable collagenase clostridium histolyticum for Dupuytren's contracture
Three-year recurrence of Dupuytren's contracture after needle fasciotomy or collagenase injection: a randomized controlled trial
Clostridium histolyticum (AA4500) for the treatment of adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder: a randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled study for the safety and efficacy of collagenase - single site report
Atorvastatin prevents advanced glycation end products (AGEs)-induced cardiac fibrosis via activating peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ)
Enhanced 3T3-L1 differentiation into adipocytes by pioglitazone pharmacological activation of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-γ)