Personal approach for cancer treatment: A meta-analysis of Phase II clinical trials
Background
To date, no meta-analysis has studied the general outcomes of personalized cancer drug therapy with a focus on current targeted, immunotherapy, and multi-agent phase II clinical trials.
Objective
We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to provide a comprehensive overview of outcomes in patients undergoing personalized genomics-based versus non-personalized treatment in oncology.
Data source
We searched for publications in PubMed, dedicated to specific cancer drug treatment and phase II clinical trials, and published from 2010 to 2021. The search dates were from 20.10.23 to 20.11.23. The final data check was on 20.12.23.
Selection criteria
Studies of chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and targeted therapy were included. Only trials, including adults (more than 18 y.o.) were selected. The personalization was evaluated based on genetic markers and study design.
Data collection and analysis
The study was performed following PRISMA guidelines. Two reviewers worked independently to select studies and arms, and one checked the results. Three reviewers extracted the data, and another reviewer independently checked it. The proportional meta-analysis, random-effects model, and meta-regression were employed to evaluate the effects of genomics-based personalization and other study design parameters (randomization, multi-central protocol, pre-treatment, therapy type, number of patients per arm, and journal impact factor) on the treatment outcomes. Mann-Whitney was employed to compare survival medians, p < 0.05.
Results
We evaluated 50 studies, having 81 arms and 6536 patients. Response Rate (RR) and 1-year Progression-Free Survival (PFS) were significantly higher in personalized arms (p = 0.009 and p = 0.011). Medians of PFS and Overall Survival (OS) were also higher in personalized arms (p = 0.018 and p = 0.032). Proportional meta-analysis and meta-regression detected a significant positive association between personalized treatment and RR (p = 0.037). The same results were obtained for 1-year PFS and OS rates (p = 0.043 and p = 0.022). Previous drug treatment, type of therapy (targeted therapy/immunotherapy/cytotoxic chemotherapy), study design, and journal impact factor did not affect RR, PFS, and OS. Personalization only affected the treatment outcomes.
Conclusion
This study discovered the benefits of a personal approach to cancer treatment using genomic data. The personalized approach improved cancer outcomes and offers promising therapeutic potential for the further development of cancer treatment.
Registration
PROSPERO record ID CRD42024504021

Introduction
Precision medicine continues to revolutionize oncology by personalizing treatment strategies, based on the genetic and molecular characteristics of the tumor and patient. Advances in technology, such as next-generation sequencing and data analysis, are contributing to the increasing implementation of precision medicine in clinical practice. By identifying specific genome data, and genetic mutations, and guided by other patient characteristics precision medicine allows for more effective treatments with fewer side effects. In the long term, precision medicine approaches demonstrate the potential to reduce healthcare costs and increase understanding of disease mechanisms.
One of the successes in precision oncology is trastuzumab deruxtecan, targeting HER2-positive breast cancer with remarkable specificity and efficacy. This targeted therapy demonstrates the transformative potential of precision medicine in selecting treatment regimens for specific patient populations. PARP inhibitors that suppress poly-ADP ribose polymerase (PARP) are increasingly used in patients with inherited BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations in various cancers, including colorectal, breast, and ovarian cancers. The study of biomarkers is integral to the diagnosis. For example, detecting IDH1/IDH2 mutation and MGMT promoter methylation status is essential for diagnosis, treatment selection, and determining prognosis in glioma patients. In melanoma, personalized therapy has shown significant efficacy in patients with BRAF V600E mutations, resulting in better response rates and survival outcomes. Personalized therapy in colorectal cancer includes the use of targeted therapies such as cetuximab and panitumumab for patients with RAS mutations. The application of personalized therapy in leukemia involves targeted treatments like imatinib for patients with the BCR-ABL fusion gene.
The successful application of precision medicine in clinical oncology presents various challenges. One of them is the limited availability of targeted drugs for the treatment of patients with certain genetic mutations in low-income countries. The widespread practice of precision medicine is hampered by problems such as the interpretation of molecular data in the absence of standardized guidelines for the implementation of precision medicine in clinical practice. This is why more rigorous evidence of patient benefit from precision medicine approaches is necessary. Although there is much evidence of the benefits of precision approaches within certain diseases, the evidence for the benefits of precision approaches in clinical oncology is not fully evaluated. Most studies focus on the outcomes of personalization for certain cancer treatments with specific drugs. At the same time, the global impact of treatment personalization is not highlighted in the literature.
Precision therapy in clinical oncology is a cutting-edge approach that has shown promising results in recent studies. Despite its relevance, a limited number of meta-analyses focus on this topic in the current literature. The last wide meta-analysis (Schwaederle M. et al 2015) dedicated to the impact of a personal approach in cancer drug treatment, included only studies from 2010–2012.
Our meta-analysis aims to provide a comprehensive overview of outcomes in cancer patients undergoing personalized genomics-based therapy versus patients with non-personalized treatment. By synthesizing data from a plethora of studies, we aimed to offer a detailed evaluation of the efficacy of precision therapy in cancer care. Our objective was to compare response rates (RR), overall survival (OS), and progression-free survival (PFS) between personalized and non-personalized studies.

Methods
The meta-analysis and systematic review, including the data searches, study selection, data extraction, and categorization with further statistical analysis were performed in accordance with PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis) guidelines. The study protocol was registered in PROSPERO (International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews, https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO), record ID CRD42024504021.

Search strategy
We searched for publications in PubMed (https://PubMed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), the search dates were from 20.10.23 to 20.11.23. The searches were based on MeSH terms, article title, and publication type: ((“Clinical Trials, Phase II as Topic”[Mesh] AND cancer*[tiab])) NOT (review*[pt] OR Meta-analysis[pt] OR Systematic review[pt]), publication dates from 2010 to 2021, “studies in humans” was selected as an additional filter. The searches were re-run before the final analysis. The final data check was on 20.12.23.

Eligibility criteria and study selection strategy
We included studies dedicated to specific cancer drug treatments and phase II clinical trials. Studies of chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and multi-agent trials, including various treatments, were selected. Only trials, including adults (more than 18 y.o.) were selected.
Non-inclusion/Exclusion criteria were study design different from the phase II clinical trial, participants under 18 and more than 85 y.o., absence of any specific cancer drug treatment, and no detailed information on patient inclusion parameters. Studies without optimal endpoints such as response rate (RR), progression-free survival (PFS), or overall survival (OS) were excluded. Incomplete statistical analysis was also an exclusion criterion. We included only articles with English full text. Unpublished studies were not included. Any type of reviews and case reports were also excluded.
The personalization was evaluated based on genetic markers, available additional information about the studied parameters, and the design of the trial. We considered only studies based on genomic patient data as personalized genomics-based, while other studies were considered non-personalized. During the selection, we evaluated each study arm independently. If it was impossible to evaluate the personalization, the studies or its arm was excluded. If personal and non-personal approaches were simultaneously detected in the same arm, the arm was excluded.

Assessment of study quality
The included study quality was independently assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool, the results are presented in S2 Table and the online repository (https://www.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10966214). Each arm was considered having the same risk of bias as its study. The assessment was conducted by two investigators independently.

Data extraction and categorization
After the searches were completed, two reviewers worked independently to select studies and arms, applying the eligibility criteria, and one reviewer checked the results of their work after the selection. Before the first step of the selection was finally done, the researchers were blinded to each other’s decisions. All disagreements between individual judgments were resolved in argument discussion with the moderation of the principal investigator. The decisions were recorded in Excel. The studying parameters were the number of patients, previous treatment, study design (randomization, single or multi-central protocol), type of therapy (chemotherapy/immunotherapy/targeted therapy), journal impact factor, and the outcome endpoints, such as response rate, overall and progression-free survival rates (medians, total survival rates, and time of the observation).
In the next step, three reviewers collected the data, and one reviewer checked the results. The missing data was requested from the investigators. If the missing data were not received, only available data was included. If there were no crucial parameters for study quality check, design, and inclusion parameters were unclear, the study was excluded. Each case of missing data was discussed by reviewers. After an independent evaluation, we selected studies dedicated to personalized treatment and studies for the comparison group, without personalization. If a personal approach was used in the study in the comparison group, and standard treatment was used in the control group, the arms were evaluated in different groups.

Data synthesis and statistics
We synthesized all the study parameters, including the number of patients, previous treatment, study design, therapy type (chemotherapy/immunotherapy/targeted therapy), journal impact factor, response rate, and 1-year and medians OS and PFS. The 1-year survival rates were calculated from survival median and observation time or total survival rates and observation time. We considered multi-agent therapy as targeted or immune-oncological treatment if those were appointed in combination with other treatments.
We performed proportional meta-analysis using the RStudio program, utilizing the R programming language and packages “meta”, “metafor,” and “tidyverse”. We calculated relative risks using the Der Simonian-Laird algorithm. Heterogeneity was evaluated based on the τ2-statistic and I2 Higgins-Thompson statistic. τ2 confidence intervals were calculated with the Jackson method. We compared the effects using the Chi-square test for categorical variables and employed the t-test or Mann-Whitney test based on the type of distribution (normal or non-normal) for continuous variables (RR, OS, and PFS), with a significance level set at p < 0.05. The distribution normality was tested with the Shapiro-Wilk test, α = 0.05. Taking into account the heterogeneity, we utilized the random-effects model. We conducted meta-regression to assess the impact of the personal approach implementation and other parameters at p < 0.05, 95%. CIs and p-values were estimated with the Knapp-Hartung method. Each subgroup included a minimum of 10 studies.
The risk of bias was evaluated with the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) approach to assess the validity of the evidence of RR, OS, and PFS analysis (S3 Table). The analysis included the study of inconsistencies in results, trial design, risk of bias, indirectness of evidence, and publication bias. Two investigators conducted the assessment independently.

Results
Initially, we selected 803 studies, based on Phase II clinical trial results for the analysis (Fig 1). 451 trials did not meet the inclusion criteria after title and abstract evaluation. In the result of the full-text analysis, 295 studies were fully excluded, and 7 studies were partly excluded: 18 unsuitable arms were removed from the final dataset. Thus, we selected 50 studies, having 81 arms, and a total patient number of 6536. In 35 arms (43.2%), including 2275 patients (34.8%) the treatment was personalized with a genomics-based approach, and in 46 arms (56.8%), including 4261 patients was non-personalized (65.2%). The parameters distribution is presented in Table 1. 6 arms (7.4%) had high risk of bias, 20 (24.7%) – moderate, and 55 (67.9%) – low (S2 Table).
Arms and parameters, N(%).
StatisticsParameters	All arms evaluation (n = 81)	P-value	Non-personal (n = 46)	Personal (n = 35)	P-value	 	Randomization	52 (64.2)	0.011*	22 (47.8)	22 (62.9)	0.368	 	Multi-central protocol	14 (17.3)	3.89*10−8*	8 (17.4)	6 (17.1)	0.521	 	Pre-treated	36 (44.4)	0.317	18 (39.1)	16 (45.7)	0.292	 	Targeted/Immunotherapy	26 (32.1)	1.456*10−8*	16 (34.8)	13 (37.1)	0.768	 	Chemotherapy	55 (67.9)	30 (65.2)	22 (62.9)	 	Number of patients per arm > 40	60 (74.1)	1.406*10−6*	23 (50)	26 (74.3)	0.585	 	Journal 5 year IF > 10	24 (29.6)	2.457*10−4*	12 (26)	10 (28.6)	0.326
*Significant difference, chi-square test, p < 0.05. Targeted and immunotherapeutic (including multi-agent) arms were compared to arms, where only cytotoxic chemotherapy was appointed. Non-personal and personal arms were compared with each other (subgroup analysis).
Workflow of study selection (PRISMA data extraction diagram).
We compared the effects of personal genomics-based and non-personal approaches in cancer drug treatment. RR and 1-year PFS were significantly higher in personalized arms, p = 0.009 and p = 0.011 (Table 2). In the case of a 1-year OS, there was no significant difference between personalized and non-personalized arms.
Effects and parameters analysis.
Parameters Groups and Statistics	RR	1-year PFS rates	1-year OS rates	PFS median	OS median	 	Personalized	Me	30.1%	41.3%	100%	26.59	9.9	 	Q1	17%	30.2%	48.8%	11.92	7.25	 	Q3	45.6%	56.7%	100%	41.04	13.6	 	Non-personalized	Me	12.1%	27.9%	69.4%	16.65	6.7	 	Q1	9.4%	19%	39.3%	10.43	4.8	 	Q3	17.3%	38.8%	89.2%	21.15	9.69	 	M-W test Personalized vs Non-personalized, p-value	0.009*	0.011*	0.058	0.018*	0.032*	 	Randomized	Me	43%	32.5%	80.4%	19.15	7.8	 	Q1	28.9%	27.9%	50.8%	12.5	6.69	 	Q3	45.6%	44.4%	100%	27.15	10.65	 	Non-randomized	Me	43%	34.2%	72.9%	17.5	8.35	 	Q1	28.9%	24.6%	44.3%	10.62	6.15	 	Q3	45.6%	49.4%	100%	33.54	11.57	 	M-W test Randomized vs Non-randomized, p-value	0.746	0.887	0.983	0.817	0.889	 	Single-central protocol	Me	42.3%	34.2%	80.4%	19.3	8	 	Q1	29.7%	27.8%	52.5%	12.8	6.69	 	Q3	51.2%	47.5%	100%	30.75	11.35	 	Multi-central protocol	Me	34%	27.5%	48.1%	11.55	6.9	 	Q1	30%	22.5%	42.5%	10.2	5.5	 	Q3	38.8%	33.8%	97.3%	26.13	9.66	 	M-W test Single-central vs Multi-central, p-value	0.279	0.207	0.401	0.33	0.502	 	Pre-treated	Me	31%	34.2%	62.9%	15.10	8.6	 	Q1	26.6%	17.9%	33.6%	8.08	4.55	 	Q3	39.4%	41.7%	100%	27.63	10.23	 	Treatment naïve	Me	44.3%	31.7%	84.1%	19.79	7.65	 	Q1	35.5%	27.9%	57.3%	13.93	6.7	 	Q3	51.2%	79.2%	100%	38.3	18.75	 	M-W test Pre-treated vs Treatment naïve, p-value	0.037*	0.274	0.077	0.36	0.059	 	Targeted/Immuno-therapy	Me	39.2%	38.9%	98.5%	25.35	9.34	 	Q1	30%	29.5%	47.8%	11.46	7.08	 	Q3	44.6%	55.9%	100%	37.2	13.43	 	Chemotherapy	Me	38%	32.5%	75.6%	18.57	7.95	 	Q1	28.9%	22%	42.5%	11.09	5.38	 	Q3	68%	49.4%	100%	28.95	11.57	 	M-W test Targeted/Immunotherapy vs Chemotherapy, p-value	0.52	0.532	0.261	0.67	0.301	 	Number of patients per arm > 40	Me	37%	30.6%	73.7%	17.23	7.4	 	Q1	29.8%	24.1%	46.1%	11.07	5.95	 	Q3	44.9%	42%	100%	25.49	10.05	 	Number of patients per arm ≤ 40	Me	43%	35.8%	80.8%	19.39	9	 	Q1	31%	29.4%	54.4%	13.05	7.1	 	Q3	50%	96.4%	100%	38.6	26.75	 	M-W test Number of patients per arm, p-value	0.655	0.123	0.42	0.096	0.306	 	Journal 5 year IF > 10	Me	34%	34.2%	71.8%	17.23	8.2	 	Q1	25.3%	16.9%	41%	9.84	4.05	 	Q3	46.8%	41.3%	100%	25.48	9.91	 	Journal 5 year IF ≤ 10	Me	43%	31.7%	80.4%	19.15	7.7	 	Q1	32%	27.8%	47.5%	11.55	6.69	 	Q3	45.6%	55%	100%	33.95	12.42	 	M-W test Journal 5 year IF, p-value	0.235	0.363	0.321	0.313	0.33
*Significant difference, the Mann-Whitney (M-W) test, p < 0.05.
The between-study heterogeneity variance was quite high for RR, PFS, and OS (Fig 2). The τ2 and Higgins-Thomson statistics were estimated as τ2 = 0.028 [0.023; 0.066] with I2 = 88.7% [85.6%; 91.1%] for RR, τ2 = 0.091 [0.074; 0.176] with I2 = 96.7% [96.2%; 97.1%] for PFS and τ2 = 0.15 [0.101; 0.22] with I2 = 97.8% [97.6%; 98.1%] for OS. High heterogeneity rates may be associated with different response absolute metrics of outcomes for various cancers, disease stages and treatments.
Results of meta-regression.
a) RRs; b) 1-year PFS; c) 1-year OS. The plot shows the results of proportional meta-analysis and meta-regression. Meta-regression was performed between qualifying parameters and the size-effects of outcome metrics. Regression estimates and CIs are presented at the forest plots. Regression z-test p-values are presented in the right columns.
Proportional meta-analysis and meta-regression detected a significant association between personal genomics-based cancer drug treatment and RR. RRs were significantly higher in personalized arms (Fig 2a, Table 2), p = 0.037. The same results were obtained for 1-year PFS and OS rates (Fig 2b, 2c), p = 0.043 and 0.022. In the case of PFS, we detected significantly worse outcomes in pre-treated patients. For example, the results of the second and later line of treatment, p = 0.027, may be associated with metastatic cancer and advanced disease stages. Lower PFS was associated with a lower number of patients per arm, p = 0.024. This finding may be based on limitations of the study, due to high heterogeneity rates and diverse sampling approaches in different studies. However, such results were not obtained for OS and RR. We conducted multivariable meta-regression for these PFS significant parameters. In the result, the main PFS prognostic factor was the previous treatment (Table 3).
1-year PFS multivariable meta-regression.
Statistics Parameters	Regression estimate	P-value	 	Pre-treated	−0.163	0.048*	 	Number of patients per arm > 40	−0.157	0.074	 	Genomic markers	0.124	0.135
Only parameters, significant in univariable analysis were included. * Significant difference, p < 0.05.
The same results were obtained in PFS and OS medians analysis. We evaluated the median difference between personal and non-personal groups. Median PFS was significantly higher in personalized studies, p = 0.015, similar to OS, p = 0.032. Meta-regression is a more powerful method; however, it could not be employed for meta-analysis of the difference of medians without additional information or control groups in the studies.

Subgroup analysis
We conducted a subgroup analysis in personalized and non-personalized studies. There was no difference in studying parameters between personalized and non-personalized studies (Table 1). Therefore, the inclusion of genomic markers is suggested as the main factor improving RR, OS, and PFS in the result of cancer drug treatment, based on phase II clinical trials. Study design (randomization and multi-central protocol), previous treatment, number of patients per arm, and journal IF did not affect the endpoints. Type of the therapy (targeted or immunotherapy and chemotherapy) also did not affect the results.

Discussion
We performed a meta-analysis of studies, based on phase II clinical trials and evaluated the main cancer treatment outcome metrics (RR, PFS, and OS). Personalization of cancer treatment, based on genomic data, improved the outcomes. The results were obtained with proportional meta-analysis and meta-regression and confirmed by non-parametric statistics.
RR, 1-year, and medians of PFS and OS were significantly higher in studies, where the patients were selected on a genomics-based approach. Implementation of this approach improves the outcomes of any type of cancer drug treatment: cytotoxic chemotherapy, targeted therapy, and immunotherapy. The study design, journal IF, and number of patients per arm did not affect the outcomes. The results indicate the homogeneity of the studies and suggest a high strength of association between genomics-based personalization and better outcomes. 1-year survival rates indicate survivability on a certain observation time. The median survival rates indicate the general level considering study observation time, based on specific characteristics of diverse cancers. Median meta-analysis without additional data is less accurate and powerful in comparison to proportional meta-analysis, therefore we compared medians only with the Mann-Witney test. We obtained significant differences between personalized and non-personalized studies that may indicate the strong importance of genomic tests for effective treatment strategy selection.
Schwaederle M. et al (2015) performed a similar meta-analysis of the effectiveness of a personal approach to cancer drug treatment. The authors based their investigation on 2010–2012 data and received significantly better RR, PFS, and OS in the case of personalized studies. Only single-agent studies were analyzed, and personalization was considered from the general point of view. Next-generation sequencing, other biomarker tests, and a complex personal approach for patient selection were evaluated to distinguish personalized and non-personalized studies. We performed a narrower search with more specific terms in PubMed but included multi-agent and immunotherapy arms. Immunotherapy is a crucial part of the treatment of various cancers, and a multi-agent approach is common in modern treatment strategies. The searches included studies based on phase II clinical trial results, reporting trial protocol, and retrospective, based on subsequent evaluation of the trial data. We studied genomic agents as the type of personalization and included data obtained in 2012–2021, therefore our findings confirm the results from previous publications for other arm types which was the novelty of the approach. Based on the previous experience, we confirmed the results and extended the research topic following newer cancer drug treatment standards.
Targeted therapy and immunotherapy mechanisms are developed against specific tumor phenotypes, associated with certain mutations. At the same time, these types of therapy may be appointed without previous genetic tests, which leads to worse outcomes. Cytotoxic chemotherapy is a system anti-cancer treatment, which is mostly not connected with specific tumor genotypes. However, it is possible to suggest better outcomes of this treatment with previously evaluated genomic data. According to our results, prescriptions, based on genomic data, improve all types of cancer drug treatment outcomes. Sometimes there is no option in clinical practice guidelines to change the treatment strategy considering genetic mutations. It is possible to suggest genome profiling as a crucial part of diagnostics in all cases, where it is possible. This suggestion was described in a plethora of previous reviews and original articles; the development of pharmacogenomic databases was discussed to be able to help in the development of a personal approach for cancer drug treatment that improves the general outcomes. Our meta-analysis aimed to approve the suggestion from an evidence-based point of view.
Nowadays next-generation sequencing and other genomic technologies are included in standards of cancer diagnosis. The rate of non-personalized therapy in published clinical trials decreased during the last decades from 95% to 34%. Importantly, we first detected that non-personalized treatment (including targeted therapy, immunotherapy, chemotherapy, and multi-agent) led to worse 1-year outcomes.
IF was evaluated as an additional parameter to assess study variability and quality. The non-significant results of the meta-regression and subgroup analysis suggest comparable RR, OS, and PFS outcomes across studies published in both high-impact and other journals. These findings indicate that the ability of genomics-based personalization to improve treatment outcomes is consistently reported, regardless of journal impact.
The lack of consensus regarding the optimal implementation of precision therapy underscores the significance of conducting a meta-analysis in this domain. Further research endeavors in this realm hold the potential to diminish skepticism and apprehension surrounding the adoption of precision medicine modalities. Many medical professionals and researchers harbor uncertainties concerning the advantages of precision medicine in improving clinical outcomes, especially considering the augmented costs associated with individualized therapy. Precision medicine demonstrates the capacity to refine various healthcare strategies leading to more economically efficient treatment protocols, better treatment outcomes, and heightened quality of life for cancer patients. Appreciating the repercussions of personalized treatment strategies can facilitate a more rigorous approach to clinical decision-making and foster advancements in patient outcomes. Our study uncovers global evidence for the positive impact of genomics-based personalization and provides the ability to disseminate the general benefits of a precision approach for cancer treatment which is important for personal oncology development. Our results facilitate wider implementation of targeted and immuno-oncological drugs in the modern world including developing and low-income countries, where these treatments remain poorly accessible to patients.

Study novelty and limitations
This study presents a novel analysis of outcomes of a precision approach for cancer drug treatment selection. We did not find any similar studies since 2015, so the previous results were updated and upgraded, considering larger and novel publication dates from 2010 to 2021. The extended period allowed us to evaluate actual targeted, immunotherapy, and multi-agent (considered targeted/immunotherapy) phase II clinical trials. We first simultaneously include in the analysis targeted, immuno-oncological, chemotherapeutic, and multi-agent studies, uncovering the evidence for the effectiveness of genomics-based cancer treatment personalization. The novelty of the study also includes the implementation of a proportional meta-analysis for 1-year OS and PFS evaluation.
This study describes a global trend, based on meta-analysis of specific studies. We included 50 diverse studies, having 81 arms, so for more detailed results, various articles should be evaluated based on cancer type, specific therapies, employed genomic technologies, and studied mutations. Only Phase II clinical trial data collected from the PubMed database is a limitation of the study. The studies varied in genomic markers and demonstrated a high level of heterogeneity across RR, OS, and PFS. Oncological diseases are quite heterogeneous in general; RR, OS, and PFS depend on cancer type, disease stage, and treatment. Future analysis may include Phase III clinical trials, collected from various databases with an extended subgroup analysis and an assessment of cost-effectiveness and quality-of-life outcomes. Evaluation of calculated 1-year survival rates did not allow to employ diverse meta-analysis models in one study. Based on genomic data, we approved personalization as an effective way for precision oncology development and to improve cancer treatment outcomes.
In conclusion, we performed a novel meta-analysis of current Phase II clinical trial results, extracted from various studies. Our results approving the effectiveness of the precision approach for cancer drug treatment selection are important for cancer healthcare development and personalization. Further prospective multi-central clinical trials are in demand to provide additional robust evidence for each type of cancer.

Supporting information

References
Characterization of cancer genomic heterogeneity by next-generation sequencing advances precision medicine in cancer treatment
Molecular profiling for precision cancer therapies
Delivering precision oncology to patients with cancer
Precision Medicine from a Public Health Perspective
Review of precision cancer medicine: Evolution of the treatment paradigm
Trastuzumab uptake in HER2-positive breast cancer patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies
BRCA mutations: is everything said?
PARP inhibitors: Synthetic lethality in the clinic
Targeting IDH1/IDH2 mutations in gliomas
BRAF Heterogeneity in Melanoma
Personalized Adjuvant Treatment of Colon Cancer
Imatinib in chronic myeloid leukemia: an overview
Addressing the affordability gap of novel cancer treatments in developing countries
ESMO study on the availability and accessibility of biomolecular technologies in oncology in Europe
Strategies to Address the Clinical Practice Gaps Affecting the Implementation of Personalized Medicine in Cancer Care
Precision medicine
Precision medicine
Precision cancer medicine: Concepts, current practice, and future developments
Precision Oncology-The Quest for Evidence
Precision oncology: a clinical and patient perspective
Impact of Precision Medicine in Diverse Cancers: A Meta-Analysis of Phase II Clinical Trials
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Preferred reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic test accuracy studies (PRISMA-DTA): explanation, elaboration, and checklist
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses of individual participant data: the PRISMA-IPD Statement
The Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in randomised trials
Combining multiple imputation and meta-analysis with individual participant data
Conducting proportional meta-analysis in different types of systematic reviews: a guide for synthesisers of evidence
Meta-analysis in clinical trials
Empirical comparisons of heterogeneity magnitudes of the risk difference, relative risk, and odds ratio
Meta-analyses: what is heterogeneity?
Quantifying heterogeneity in a meta-analysis
Confidence intervals for the between-study variance in random-effects meta-analysis using generalised heterogeneity statistics: should we use unequal tails?
Random-effects meta-analysis: the number of studies matters
Meta-Regression.
Understanding heterogeneity in meta-analysis: the role of meta-regression
Completeness of case ascertainment and survival time error in English cancer registries: impact on 1-year survival estimates
Combination strategies to maximize the benefits of cancer immunotherapy
Cancer immunotherapy: the beginning of the end of cancer?
Targeted therapy in cancer
Cytotoxic and targeted therapy for hereditary cancers
Why does cytotoxic chemotherapy cure only some cancers?
Molecular profiling for precision cancer therapies
Pharmacogenomics
Cancer Treatment in the Genomic Era
Cost Effectiveness of Pharmacogenetic Testing for Drugs with Clinical Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium (CPIC) Guidelines: A Systematic Review
Impact of Precision Medicine in Diverse Cancers: A Meta-Analysis of Phase II Clinical Trials
Enabling Precision Oncology Through Precision Diagnostics
10.1371/journal.pone.0332599.r001

Author response to Decision Letter 0

Transfer Alert
This paper was transferred from another journal. As a result, its full editorial history (including decision letters, peer reviews and author responses) may not be present.
15 Oct 2024
10.1371/journal.pone.0332599.r002

Decision Letter 0
Miyoshi
Norikatsu
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
23 Jan 2025
-->PONE-D-24-46559-->-->Personal Approach for Cancer Treatment: a Meta-Analysis of Phase II Clinical Trials-->-->PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Potievskiy,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Mar 09 2025 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org . When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:-->
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
-->If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols . Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols .
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Norikatsu Miyoshi, M.D., Ph.D., F.A.C.S., F.A.S.C.R.S.,
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. As required by our policy on Data Availability, please ensure your manuscript or supplementary information includes the following:
A numbered table of all studies identified in the literature search, including those that were excluded from the analyses.
For every excluded study, the table should list the reason(s) for exclusion.
If any of the included studies are unpublished, include a link (URL) to the primary source or detailed information about how the content can be accessed.
A table of all data extracted from the primary research sources for the systematic review and/or meta-analysis. The table must include the following information for each study:
Name of data extractors and date of data extraction
Confirmation that the study was eligible to be included in the review.
All data extracted from each study for the reported systematic review and/or meta-analysis that would be needed to replicate your analyses.
If data or supporting information were obtained from another source (e.g. correspondence with the author of the original research article), please provide the source of data and dates on which the data/information were obtained by your research group.
If applicable for your analysis, a table showing the completed risk of bias and quality/certainty assessments for each study or outcome.  Please ensure this is provided for each domain or parameter assessed. For example, if you used the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for randomized trials, provide answers to each of the signalling questions for each study. If you used GRADE to assess certainty of evidence, provide judgements about each of the quality of evidence factor. This should be provided for each outcome.
An explanation of how missing data were handled.
This information can be included in the main text, supplementary information, or relevant data repository. Please note that providing these underlying data is a requirement for publication in this journal, and if these data are not provided your manuscript might be rejected.
3. Please include captions for your Supporting Information files at the end of your manuscript, and update any in-text citations to match accordingly. Please see our Supporting Information guidelines for more information: http://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/supporting-information.
4. Please review your reference list to ensure that it is complete and correct. If you have cited papers that have been retracted, please include the rationale for doing so in the manuscript text, or remove these references and replace them with relevant current references. Any changes to the reference list should be mentioned in the rebuttal letter that accompanies your revised manuscript. If you need to cite a retracted article, indicate the article’s retracted status in the References list and also include a citation and full reference for the retraction notice.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
-->Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented. -->
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
-->2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously? -->
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: I Don't Know
**********
-->3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.-->
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
-->4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.-->
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
-->5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)-->
Reviewer #1: The manuscript provides a comprehensive and well-structured analysis of the impact of personalized genomics-based cancer treatments compared to non-personalized approaches. The combination of a systematic review and meta-analysis, grounded in PRISMA guidelines, enhances the robustness and transparency of the findings. The data-driven approach, including proportional meta-analysis and meta-regression, supports the study's conclusions about the significant benefits of personalized therapy in improving key clinical outcomes such as response rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival.
The inclusion of 46 studies spanning 81 arms and over 6,500 patients demonstrates the extensive effort to capture a wide range of clinical trials and provides a strong foundation for the conclusions drawn. The significant positive results, particularly the association of personalized treatment with improved response rates and survival metrics, are timely and relevant for advancing oncology research and clinical practice.
Moreover, the meticulous methodology, including independent data extraction and cross-checking by multiple reviewers, adds credibility to the results. The article highlights the promise of genomics-based approaches for tailoring cancer therapies, underscoring their potential for enhancing patient outcomes.
Minor Revisions Suggested
Clarify the methodology regarding the selection criteria for included studies, particularly how studies with mixed treatment types were handled.
Expand on the limitations of the study, especially concerning the heterogeneity of included trials and the potential variability in genetic markers across studies.
Consider a brief discussion on the implications of journal impact factor, even if found non-significant, as this adds context to the study design evaluation.
Include additional details on the statistical tests used (e.g., assumptions for the Mann-Whitney test) to ensure reproducibility.
In summary, this work makes a valuable contribution to the field of oncology by providing compelling evidence for the clinical benefits of personalization in cancer treatment. Upon addressing the minor revisions suggested, I strongly recommend its acceptance for publication, as it will likely inspire further research and have a meaningful impact on both clinical and research communities.
Reviewer #2: This study presents a meta-analysis of Phase II clinical trials, showing that genomics-based personalized cancer treatments significantly enhance response rates, progression-free survival, and overall survival compared to non-personalized therapies. To make the article more informative, we suggest addressing the following points:
First, the study reports considerable heterogeneity across key outcomes (RR, PFS, OS). Conducting subgroup analyses (e.g., by cancer type, treatment modality, or geographical region) and sensitivity analyses could help identify and address potential sources of heterogeneity.
Second, the data collection is restricted to PubMed, which may lead to the exclusion of relevant studies. Expanding the search to include additional databases, such as EMBASE or Cochrane Library, would ensure a more comprehensive literature review.
Lastly, as the analysis focuses exclusively on Phase II trials, the clinical applicability of the findings may be limited. Including Phase III trial data or real-world evidence, along with an assessment of cost-effectiveness and quality-of-life outcomes, could significantly enhance the practical relevance and impact of the study's conclusions.
**********
-->6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean? ). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy .-->
Reviewer #1: Yes:  Mohamed ABDELKARIM
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/ . PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org . Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.-->
10.1371/journal.pone.0332599.r003

Author response to Decision Letter 1
5 Apr 2025
We thank the reviewers and the editor for the crucial comments that will improve our manuscript.
The supplements were revised and corrected following the journal’s data availability policy. We added additional information on the Risk of bias evaluation and provided the reasons for exclusion for all the selected trials. We also added supportive information on the data extraction process (names of the reviewers and date of extraction). The dataset and the information on excluded and included studies were revised and corrected following the journal's requirements (S4 Dataset, S5 File https://www.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10966214). The results of the certainty of evidence assessment (GRADE approach) are provided in S3 Table, and the method description is included on p.7.
Please find below our detailed responses to each point raised by reviewers.
Responses to Reviewer 1.
Reviewer 1 commented: “Clarify the methodology regarding the selection criteria for included studies, particularly how studies with mixed treatment types were handled”.
Response: We added additional information in the Methodology section to clarify the selection criteria, especially for mixed studies: The corrections were made in the 1st paragraphs of the “Eligibility Criteria and Study Selection Strategy” section on p.5 (“Studies of chemotherapy, immunotherapy, targeted therapy, and multi-agent trials, including various treatments, were selected.”) and the “Data Synthesis and Statistics” section on p.7 (“We considered multi-agent therapy as targeted or immune-oncological treatment if those were appointed in combination with other treatments.”).
Reviewer 1 suggested: “Expand on the limitations of the study, especially concerning the heterogeneity of included trials and the potential variability in genetic markers across studies”.
Response: The study limitations section was extended with a focus on study heterogeneity on page 15 (Only phase II clinical trial data collected from the PubMed database is a limitation of the study. The studies varied in genomic markers and demonstrated a high level of heterogeneity across RR, OS, and PFS. Oncological diseases are quite heterogeneous in general; RR, OS, and PFS depend on cancer type, disease stage, and treatment. Future analysis may include Phase III clinical trials, collected from various databases with an extended subgroup analysis and an assessment of cost-effectiveness and quality-of-life outcomes.”).
Reviewer 1: “Consider a brief discussion on the implications of journal impact factor, even if found non-significant, as this adds context to the study design evaluation”.
Response: We included a discussion on the implications of the journal impact factor on page 14 (IF was evaluated as an additional parameter to assess study variability and quality. The non-significant results of the meta-regression and subgroup analysis suggest comparable RR, OS, and PFS outcomes across studies published in both high-impact and other journals. These findings indicate that the ability of genomics-based personalization to improve treatment outcomes is consistently reported, regardless of journal impact.”.
Reviewer 1 commented: “Include additional details on the statistical tests used (e.g., assumptions for the Mann-Whitney test) to ensure reproducibility”.
Response: We added additional information on the statistical tests and clarified the conditions for their use on page 7 (“We compared the effects using the Chi-square test for categorical variables and employed the t-test or Mann-Whitney test based on the type of distribution (normal or non-normal) for continuous variables (RR, OS, and PFS), with a significance level set at p<0.05.”).
Responses to Reviewer 2
Reviewer 2 commented: “First, the study reports considerable heterogeneity across key outcomes (RR, PFS, OS). Conducting subgroup analyses (e.g., by cancer type, treatment modality, or geographical region) and sensitivity analyses could help identify and address potential sources of heterogeneity.”
Response: We agreed that high heterogeneity is a limitation of the study and included several sentences to highlight it in the 2nd paragraph of page 15 (“The studies varied in genomic markers and demonstrated a high level of heterogeneity across RR, OS, and PFS.”). Thank you for the suggestion that potential reasons for such results may be associated with various cancer types and treatments. Oncological diseases are quite heterogeneous in general; RR, OS, and PFS depend on cancer type, disease stage, and treatment. We described this topic in the discussion section, extending the limitations on page 15 (“Oncological diseases are quite heterogeneous in general; RR, OS, and PFS depend on cancer type, disease stage, and treatment.”). We also enhanced the explanation of heterogeneity on page 10 (“High heterogeneity rates may be associated with different response absolute metrics of outcomes for various cancers, disease stages, and treatments.”).
Reviewer 2 commented: “Second, the data collection is restricted to PubMed, which may lead to the exclusion of relevant studies. Expanding the search to include additional databases, such as EMBASE or Cochrane Library, would ensure a more comprehensive literature review.”
Response: We underlined such study limitations as PubMed and Phase II clinical trial restricted data search on page 15 (“Only Phase II clinical trial data collected from the PubMed database is a limitation of the study.”).
Reviewer 2 commented: “Lastly, as the analysis focuses exclusively on Phase II trials, the clinical applicability of the findings may be limited. Including Phase III trial data or real-world evidence, along with an assessment of cost-effectiveness and quality-of-life outcomes, could significantly enhance the practical relevance and impact of the study's conclusions”.
Response: We agree that the recommendations provided will make the study more informative and impactful, however, it will require reorganization of the manuscript after full re-analysis in accordance with the PRISMA workflow. This manuscript is the first step in genomics-based personalization analysis, and our current research includes the extended analysis suggested by the reviewer. A consideration of future research was included in the revised version of the manuscript on page 15 (“Future analysis may include Phase III clinical trials, collected from various databases with an extended subgroup analysis and an assessment of cost-effectiveness and quality-of-life outcomes.”).
10.1371/journal.pone.0332599.r004

Decision Letter 1
Rath
Satyajeet
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
2 Sep 2025
Personal Approach for Cancer Treatment: a Meta-Analysis of Phase II Clinical Trials
PONE-D-24-46559R1
Dear Dr. Potievskiy,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager®  and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. For questions related to billing, please contact billing support .
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Satyajeet Rath
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments:
Thank you for making the desired corrections. We are happy to inform you that the article have been accepted for publication.
10.1371/journal.pone.0332599.r005

Acceptance letter
Rath
Satyajeet
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License , which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
PONE-D-24-46559R1
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Potievskiy,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
You will receive further instructions from the production team, including instructions on how to review your proof when it is ready. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few days to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
You will receive an invoice from PLOS for your publication fee after your manuscript has reached the completed accept phase. If you receive an email requesting payment before acceptance or for any other service, this may be a phishing scheme. Learn how to identify phishing emails and protect your accounts at https://explore.plos.org/phishing.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Dr. Satyajeet Rath
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE