A Systematic Analysis of Published Indian Case Reports of Whole Guidewire Loss During Central Venous Catheterization: Causes, Detection and Management Strategies
Background:
Guidewire loss during central venous catheterization (CVC) can lead to significant life-threatening complications. This systematic analysis reviews the published cases of guidewire loss during CVC in India, highlighting the causes, detection methods, and management strategies.
Methods:
We searched multiple online databases, including PubMed, BMJ Case Reports, the Cochrane Database, Clinical Key, and Google Scholar, for studies published from inception to December 31, 2023. We found 18 published case studies comprising 19 cases reported from various regions in India. These studies included a diverse patient population ranging from pediatric to elderly individuals with varying clinical conditions such as cardiopulmonary diseases, infections, and trauma. The review focused on the reasons for guidewire loss, the methods of detection, removal techniques, and the involvement of specialized medical teams in managing these cases.
Results:
The most common reasons for guidewire loss were post-dilatation. Issues like lack of operator supervision, overburden, inadvertent patient movement, inattention during placement, and nonadherence to procedural guidelines were the main causes. Assistants often detected guidewire loss immediately post-procedure while cross-checking the sterile tray. All lost guidewires can be successfully retrieved. Endovascular snaring was the most commonly used and least invasive technique.
Conclusion:
Guidewire loss during CVC is a less-reported complication in the Indian scenario. This review depicts causes like inadequate supervision and overburden and underscores the importance of thorough training, strict procedural protocols, and multidisciplinary collaboration to curtail this preventable complication.

INTRODUCTION
The loss of the guidewire during central venous catheterization (CVC) is a rare yet significant preventable catastrophic event. Guidewire loss leads to serious complications, including vascular injury, thrombosis, arrhythmias, and, in extreme cases, mortality. A study analyzing England’s National Health Service data from 2004 to 2015 reported an average of two such incidents per month, with 88% of these procedures performed by trainee doctors. However, the actual incidence of such cases may be underreported due to medicolegal concerns, fear of professional disrepute, and lack of standardized reporting mechanisms.
With an extensive literature search, a single review of 76 global cases was found published 12 years ago. Unlike international settings, Indian patient demographics are completely different. Indian hospitals—ranging from tertiary centres to resource-limited facilities—may have differing incidence rates of guidewire retention due to variations in supervision, procedural volume, and documentation practices, the variability in healthcare infrastructure, differences in training and procedural practices, potential underreporting due to medicolegal concerns, and distinct from international settings. Additionally, potential disparities in post-procedural follow-up, lack of standardized protocols, and robust reporting systems can impact the detection and management of this complication. So, it is essential to understand the causes, detection, removal techniques, and consequences of guidewire loss in Indian settings. Our review of paramount importance aims to systematically analyze documented cases of guidewire loss during CVC in India. This research is a crucial step toward enhancing patient safety in our healthcare system by highlighting patterns, improving clinical awareness, and emphasizing the importance of early diagnosis and management to mitigate complications.

OBJECTIVE
To analyze patients’ demographic and clinical characteristics experiencing guidewire loss during CVC.
To identify and categorize the common causes of guidewire loss during CVC procedures.
To assess the detection methods and timeframes for identifying guidewire loss.
To examine the management strategies, including removal techniques and specialized medical teams involved in guidewire retrieval.
To evaluate the clinical outcomes and success rates associated with guidewire loss cases.

METHODS

Search strategy and study selection
A comprehensive search for original case studies and case series was performed using the following MeSH terms and keywords: “guidewire,” OR “Seldinger’s wire,” AND “central venous catheter,” OR “central catheter,” AND “loss guidewire” OR “missing guidewire.” Two independent authors (TG, BG) searched multiple online databases, including PubMed, BMJ Case Reports, the Cochrane Database, ClinicalKey, and Google Scholar, for studies published from inception to December 31, 2023 [Supplementary File 1].
Search strategy
Databases	Date of search	Number of papers	 	PubMed	#1 ("Central Venous Catheters"[MeSH Terms] OR "Catheterization"[MeSH Terms] OR "central line"[Title/Abstract] OR "CVC placement"[Title/Abstract] OR "central venous access"[Title/Abstract]) #2 ("Guidewire loss"[Title/Abstract] OR "retained guidewire"[Title/Abstract] OR "lost guidewire"[Title/Abstract] OR "guidewire retention"[Title/Abstract] OR "foreign body"[MeSH Terms] OR "device migration"[Title/Abstract]) #3 ("Complications"[Title/Abstract] OR "clinical outcomes"[Title/Abstract] OR "morbidity"[Title/Abstract] OR "mortality"[Title/Abstract] OR "adverse events"[Title/Abstract]) #4 ("Management"[Title/Abstract] OR "retrieval techniques"[Title/Abstract] OR "removal strategies"[Title/Abstract] OR "surgical intervention"[Title/Abstract]) #5 #1 AND #2 #6 #5 AND (#3 OR #4)	December 2024	12,038	 	Cochrane	"guidewire" OR "Seldinger’s wire" AND "central venous catheter" OR "central catheter" AND "loss guidewire" OR "missing guidewire"	December 2025	0	 	BMJ Case reports	guidewire OR "Seldinger’s wire" AND "central venous catheter" OR "central catheter" AND "loss guidewire" OR "missing guidewire"	December 2024	140	 	Clinical key	guidewire OR "Seldinger’s wire" AND "central venous catheter" OR "central catheter" AND "loss guidewire" OR "missing guidewire"	December 2024	314	 	Google Scholar	("Central Venous Catheterization" OR "central line" OR "CVC placement" OR "central venous access") AND ("guidewire loss" OR "retained guidewire" OR "lost guidewire" OR "guidewire retention" OR "device migration") AND ("complications" OR "clinical outcomes" OR "adverse events" OR "morbidity" OR "mortality")	December 2024	455
The inclusion criteria required that the selected case studies must report incidents of missing guidewires during CVC, be conducted in India, and be published in English. Studies describing guidewire loss in peripheral or arterial catheterization were excluded. Duplicate records were excluded, particularly those that lacked essential patient details or failed to clearly outline the reasons for guidewire loss.
Any disagreements between the two authors regarding the extracted data were resolved through consultation with a third author (SS). A data extraction form was used to gather key information from the included case studies, with the following headings: author name, year of study, age and gender, indication and site, cause of guidewire loss, supervision, time of detection, and retrieval technique used.

Search outcome
In the initial stage, 12,947 articles were identified from various databases. After removing 256 duplicate records, 12,660 studies were excluded based on screening titles and abstracts. They are abstract only, non-Indian cases, non-CVC canulation-related cases, and nonintact guidewire loss cases. In the second stage, 16 full-text case studies were excluded as they did not report the type of central venous catheter (CVC) used or complications following insertion. Additionally, three articles were identified from the reference lists of included studies. Ultimately, a consensus was reached among the authors, resulting in the selection of 18 case studies comprising 19 cases for the systematic analysis. The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses are summarized in Figure 1.
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram of study selection

RESULTS
Timing (year) of reporting: Our search indicated that the incidence of complete guidewire loss in the central vein was common in the Indian scenario too. Although no case was reported before 2000, there was an abrupt rise in the reporting of such incidents since then. We found that 12 (60%) of 18 studies were after 2013 [Table 1].
Basic case information
Author name & year	Age and gender	Diagnosis	City and setting	Insertion site	Lodge site	 	Batra et al.	60/F	Postop nephrolithotomy	New Delhi/ICU	RIJV	Non-J tip at RIJV	 	Sridhar	27/F	OT for MVR	Kolkata/CCL	RIJV	SVC to IVC	 	Narendra and Baghavan	13/M	Poly trauma	Haryana/OT	RIJV	RFV	 	Kumar et al.	64/F	Viral Encephalitis	Ahmedabad/OT	RSCV	Right external iliac vein	 	Wadehra et al.	65/M	Intracranial tuberculoma	New Delhi/CCL	RFV	IVC	 	Kute et al.	40/F	ESRD	Ahmedabad/NR	LFV	Left internal iliac vein	 	Ghatak et al.	40/F	Severe acute pancreatitis with RD	Lucknow/ICU	RSCV	RSCV	 	Ghatak et al.	60/F	RD hemodynamic instability	Lucknow/ICU	RIJV	Right ventricle	 	Umesh et al.	58/M	Emergency laparotomy for gangrenous bowel	Manipal/ICU	RIJV	RIJV	 	Srivastav et al.	60/F	Intestinal obstruction with heart disease	Mumbai/OT	RIJV	Right iliac vein	 	Parikh et al.	64/M	COPD, DM, HTN	Ahmedabad/OT	LIJV	Left internal iliac vein	 	Pokharel et al.	NK	NR	Vellore/CCL	RIJV	IVC	 	Singh et al.	67/M	Ludwig angina, anterior chest wall	Mumbai/CCL	RFV	IVC	 	Gupta and Nagpal	54/M	CRF with CAD	Faridkot/OT	RSCV	RSCV-IVC	 	Amit et al.	11/M	Traumatic tetanus	Bhopal/OT	RFV	RIJV	 	Tomar et al.	79/F	COPD type 2 respiratory failure	New Delhi/CCL	RIJV	Right femoral vein	 	Yadava	40/F	Tricuspid and ASD repair	Bhopal/Cardiac postop ward	LIJV	LIJV to IVC	 	Dubey	6 months/M	Pneumonia	Patna/ICU	RFV	RSCV	 	Kannaujia et al.	69/M	Retroperitoneal sarcoma	Lucknow/OT	RIJV	RIJV
NR=Not reported, ICU=Intensive care unit, RIJV=Right internal jugular vein. RFV=Right femoral vein, LFV=Left femoral vein. CCL=Cardiac Cath Lab, RD=Respiratory distress. OT=Operation theatre. ESRD=End-stage renal disease. COPD=Chronic obstructive airway disease. ASD=Atrial septal defect
Demographics: This systematic review consists of 18 studies comprising 19 cases reported from various cities in India, covering a wide range of ages, gender distributions, and medical conditions [Table 1]. Of these 19 cases, nine were female and nine were male. One study did not report gender. The patients included ranged in age from 6 months to 79 years. Age distribution showed a clear representation of pediatric and adult populations, with the highest concentration of cases in adults aged 40–70 years, suggesting a predominance of catheter-related procedures in adult populations. Notably, there was a significant inclusion of elderly patients in critical care settings. The study found that guidewire loss was more common in adult patients undergoing emergency procedures.
Study locations: The study locations included New Delhi, Lucknow, Ahmedabad, Bhopal, Manipal, Kolkata, Haryana, Mumbai, Vellore, Patna, and Faridkot [Table 1].
Indications for CVC: Primary indications for CVC placement included intraoperative management (anticipating significant fluid shifts and blood loss) and emergency conditions such as hemodynamic instability, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, burn resuscitation, and shock. In some cases, indications were semi-elective, such as dialysis for chronic renal failure or plasmapheresis.
Patient’s clinical condition: The clinical conditions and diagnoses varied widely across the studies, demonstrating the broad applicability of CVC in managing diverse pathologies. The most commonly reported diagnoses included [Table 1]:
Cardiopulmonary conditions such as COPD and heart disease
Infectious and inflammatory diseases, including intracranial tuberculoma, severe acute pancreatitis with respiratory distress, and traumatic tetanus
Traumatic injuries and polytrauma, such as polytrauma cases and retroperitoneal sarcoma
Surgical conditions like nephrolithotomy and emergency laparotomy for gangrenous bowel
These diagnoses were often associated with complex, life-threatening conditions requiring immediate intervention, emphasizing the critical nature of catheter placement in these cases.
Vein used: Most studies (n = 10) reported using the right internal jugular vein (RIJV) as the insertion site for CVC, often preferred in settings requiring rapid access, such as those with respiratory failure, hemodynamic instability, or emergency surgeries. The placement of CVC varied across studies [Table 1]:
RIJV: Most common site, used in around 50% of cases
Left internal jugular vein (LIJV)
Right femoral vein (RFV)
Left femoral vein (LFV).
Other commonly used insertion sites included the right subclavian vein (RSCV) for long placement in viral encephalitis and cardiac conditions, and the LIJV used for COPD and tricuspid/ASD repair.
The location where the catheter was lodged varied depending on the clinical requirements and patient conditions. The most common lodging sites included [Table 1]:
Inferior vena cava (IVC): for long-term access or critical hemodynamic issues
Right ventricle: for respiratory failure and hemodynamic instability
Right external iliac vein: in cases of intestinal obstruction with heart disease
Left internal iliac vein: used in end-stage renal disease cases.
Who is placing the CVC: In most of the cases, trainee anesthetists (1st, 2nd, and 3rd year), in two of the cases surgical and neurosurgery residents, and one case emergency physician, performed the CVC insertions [Table 2].
Guidewire loss reason, supervision, and detection method
Author name & year	Who was placing?	Reason for guidewire loss	Time of detection	Detection method	Supervised or not	 	Batra et al.	Trainee anesthetist	Post-dilatation guidewire pushed into IJV	Immediately	Chest X-ray	Yes	 	Sridhar	Anesthetist	Hasten the OT procedure	Post-operatively	Chest X-ray	No	 	Narendra and Baghavan	Intensivist	Inadvertently pushed in during dilatation	Immediately	Chest X-ray	No	 	Kumar et al.	NR probably anesthetist	Inadvertently pushed in while threading catheter	Immediately	Chest X-ray	No	 	Wadehra et al.	Neurosurgery resident first year	Inadvertent movement of a drowsy patient	Immediately	Chest X-ray	No	 	Kute et al.	NR probably nephro resident	Done in another center, so can’t comment	Late (time NR)	Abdomen X-ray	NR Probably No	 	Ghatak et al.	NR. CVC is placed outside the reporting hospital	Done in another center, so can’t comment	Second day in ICU	Chest X-ray	NR. Probably No. No notes available	 	Ghatak et al.	1 year experienced physician	Arrhythmia distracts attention	Immediately	Chest X-ray	No	 	Umesh et al.	Trainee anesthesiologist	Distracted by sudden hypotension	11 h after insertion	X-ray after 3 h	Yes	 	Srivastav et al.	First-year surgical resident	Unaware of the guidewire loss	Immediately	Abdominal X-ray	No	 	Parikh et al.	Second-year anesthesia resident	Busy night shift	Immediately	Abdominal X-ray	No	 	Pokharel et al.	NR	Non-adherence to standard guidelines	Few hours later	Routine chest X-ray	No	 	Singh et al.	Second-year surgical resident	Patient moved inadvertently	Immediately	Abdominal X-ray	No	 	Gupta and Nagpal	Emergency resident doctor	Patient moved inadvertently	Immediately	Chest X-ray	No	 	Amit et al.	Second-year anesthesia resident	Guidewire inadvertently pushed further into the vein	Immediately	X-ray and USG	Yes	 	Tomar et al.	Anesthesia resident (first year)	Busy attending a serious emergency	After chest X-ray	Chest X-ray	No	 	Yadava	Third-year anesthesia resident	While exchanging the CVC with the same guidewire	After chest X-ray	Chest X-ray	No	 	Dubey	NR. CVC is placed outside the reporting hospital	Done in another center, so can’t comment: Inexperience or unmindful	Chest X-ray	Chest X-ray	NR Probably No. No notes available	 	Kannaujia et al.	Anesthetist	NR probably distracted or unmindful	Immediately	Intraoperative fluoroscopy	NR probably Yes as OT settings
USG=Ultrasound, NR=Not reported
Reasons for guidewire loss: Table 2 summarizes the reasons for guidewire loss documented in 11 studies. Common causes included:
Post-dilatation issues, where the guidewire was inadvertently pushed into the internal jugular vein (IJV).
Inadvertent movement by the patient, either due to drowsiness or involuntary actions.
Inattention or distraction, especially during arrhythmia episodes.
Failure to remove the guidewire after catheter insertion.
Nonadherence to standard guidelines and procedural lapses.

Time of detection
The time of detection for guidewire loss varied across studies. Most were detected immediately after insertion or within a short timeframe. Immediate detection was reported in 11 studies, often after issues like post-dilatation or patient movement. Delayed (up to 24 h) detection was reported in six cases, with two cases not specifying the detection time [Table 2].

Detection methods
In most cases where CVC was placed in the operation theatre (OT) and intensive care unit (ICU), assistants/co-workers checked the absence of guidewire in the sterile tray post-procedure and alerted immediately.
The most common detection method was chest X-ray, used in 12 studies. Other methods included abdominal X-rays, ultrasound, and intraoperative fluoroscopy [Table 2].
Supervision: 12 out of 19 cases (around 60%) were unsupervised as per our review. Three of the rest of the cases did not comment on that as they are placed elsewhere.
Among the reviewed cases, loss of the guidewire most frequently occurred due to inadequate supervision and nonadherence to standard protocols [Table 2].
Removal techniques: The methods for removing lost guidewires included [Table 3]:
Removal techniques and outcome
Author name & year	Removal techniques	Removed by	Outcome	 	Batra et al.	IJ venotomy	CVTS team	Successful removal	 	Sridhar	Snare catheter through right femoral vein	Cardiology team	Successful removal	 	Narendra and Baghavan	Femoral venotomy	Surgical team	Successful removal	 	Kumar et al.	Femoral venotomy	Surgical team	Successful removal	 	Wadehra et al.	Gooseneck snare percutaneously under fluoroscopic guidance	Intervention team	Successful removal	 	Kute et al.	Head-up position, femoral catheter removal, guidewire grasped	Nephrologist team	Successful removal	 	Ghatak et al.	Guidewire felt while pulling out CVC	Intensivist team	Successful removal	 	Ghatak et al.	Cut central lumen of catheter, removed with artery forceps	Intensivist team	Successful removal	 	Umesh et al.	Distal lumen clamped, guidewire removed with aseptic precaution	Intensivist team	Successful removal	 	Srivastav et al.	Surgically removed from right external iliac vein	Vascular surgeon	Successful removal	 	Parikh et al.	Gooseneck snare femoral percutaneously under fluoroscopic guidance	Intervention team	Successful removal	 	Pokharel et al.	Angiographic snaring through femoral vein	Intervention cardiologist	Successful removal	 	Singh et al.	Snare under fluoroscopic guidance	Intervention cardiologist	Successful removal	 	Gupta and Nagpal	Surgically removed by venectomy of right subclavian vein	Surgical team	Successful removal	 	Amit et al.	Surgically removed by venectomy of right internal jugular vein	Pediatric surgery team	Successful removal	 	Tomar et al.	Use of a snare under fluoroscopy from the femoral vein	Intervention cardiologist	Successful removal	 	Yadava	Proximal part of the guidewire was retrieved nonsurgically by grasping CVC	Anesthesiology team	Successful retrieval and removal	 	Dubey	Retrieved surgically	Surgical team	Successful removal	 	Kannaujia et al.	Pulled out catheter, clamped sequentially with artery forceps	Anesthesiology team in the presence of CVTS and intervention radiology	Successful removal
CVC=Central venous catheter, CTVS=Cardiothoracic vascular surgery
Surgical removal: Performed with assistance from a vascular team.
Endovascular techniques: Using a dormia basket or snare.
Simple removal methods: With CVC or through venotomy.
Specialized medical teams involved: Table 3 summarizes the medical teams responsible for the removal. These included:
Surgical teams: Involved in six studies.
Intervention teams: Using snaring techniques in three studies.
Intensivists: In three studies.
Paediatric surgery team: Involved in two pediatric cases.
Anesthesiology teams: In two cases.
Outcomes: All cases of guidewire loss were successfully managed and removed [Table 3]. The successful outcomes can be attributed to early detection, multidisciplinary intervention, and the involvement of specialized teams in complex or high-risk cases. Interestingly, all successfully managed cases are often reported. This observation highlights the need for standardized training programs, strict adherence to protocols, and increased awareness regarding guidewire loss to minimize its occurrence.

DISCUSSION

Reporting
Our report showed that there was a boom in reporting such guidewire loss cases in Indian scenarios. Actually, in 2013, the World Health Organization (WHO) attempted to promote the reporting of adverse events for global learning rather than blaming individuals. More journals are accepting those case reports, and they are highly cited too. But still, such adverse events are mostly underreported due to the fear of law-related charges and allegations of incompetence. Based on our review, it is difficult to comment on the incidence/prevalence of lost guidewire cases in India. Still, our report is the first of its kind to compile such Indian cases.
The technique used: This systematic review case study revealed that the Seldinger technique is unanimously used for CVC insertion. The operator first puts a “J”-tipped guidewire in the central vein through a wide-bore introducer needle. After removing the needle and fixing the guidewire, the operator dilates the tract using a dilator over the guidewire. The operator slides CVC over that guidewire after manually fixing its non-“J” end. In the end, the guidewire is pulled out of the central port of the CVC. Aspiration of free-flowing venous blood from all the ports of CVC denotes completion of the insertion procedure. Advanced skill is required for a successful procedure. Failure to fix the non-“J” end of the guidewire during CVC sliding or during tract dilation causes guidewire loss. It was also reported that 18 cm was deemed to be the upper limit of insertion of the guidewire. In adults, regardless of the access site, it can reduce guidewire loss while placing a CVC.

Settings and diagnosis of the patients
We found that all the cases of CVC were placed in ICU or OT settings where provision of supervision was possible. Additionally, we look for the clinical context, such as coagulopathies or critically ill patients requiring urgent central venous access for a better assessment of potential complications, management strategies, and patient outcomes, thereby enhancing the applicability of findings to real-world clinical practice.

Possible causes and predisposing factors
Our review pointed out the three most important factors. They are operator-related, like inattention, distractions, exhaustion after long shifts, inexperience, and fatigue; patient-related, like the sudden movement of disoriented patients; and system issues like long duty hours with multiple sick patients around. Invariably, all the studies reported the above reasons leading to the unfortunate consequence of guidewire mishaps. The most dangerous feedback from our study was that most of the cases of insertion were not supervised.

Guidewire loss detection
In many of the reported cases, guidewire loss was detected immediately, either by an operator or by assistants when they checked the procedure tray and alerted for the missing guidewire. A poor venous backflow and increased resistance to saline flush through the central lumen of the CVC must raise suspicions of a lost guidewire. In this stage, guidewire can be seen/felt in the central lumen or can be visible through venous ultrasonography or fluoroscopy in the OT. The delayed detection techniques were mostly chest X-rays taken post-procedure or unrelated postoperative abdominal X-rays inadvertently.
Misdiagnosis: Nevertheless, radiological detection of retained guidewires is not always straightforward, particularly in the ICU setting, where radiographs may be cluttered with other medical devices such as electrocardiography cables, drains, and other lines. In such cases, guidewires may go unnoticed or may be misdiagnosed as pacemaker cables. Misdiagnosis can often be attributed to a combination of operator inexperience and exhaustion, factors which may impair the ability to recognize foreign objects amidst complex imaging. It is not uncommon for retained guidewires to be overlooked, especially in high-stress, high-patient-load environments where fatigue and distraction are prevalent. Such lapses highlight the critical need for a thorough review of radiographs, particularly in post-procedural settings, to ensure early detection and intervention.

Consequences of guidewire loss: complications and its management
All our cases had the most fortunate scenarios where the guidewires remained in the central venous system as asymptomatic foreign bodies and got detected and removed easily. However, internationally more severe complications were reported, including thrombosis, embolism, and migration of the guidewire to the IVC. These complications can result in significant health risks such as septic thrombophlebitis, endocarditis, femoral vein thrombosis, and, in some cases, life-threatening issues like abdominal vascular injury, arrhythmias, cardiac and vascular damage, pulmonary artery embolism, and cardiac tamponade.
Complications not directly related to the complete loss of the guidewire include vessel injury, fracture, fragmentation, or the wire becoming entangled in previously inserted intravascular devices like an inferior vena cava filter.

Retrieval techniques
If detected early during cannulation, clamping of the main lumen and retrieval of CVC along with guidewire assembly was possible in several of our reported cases without intervention radiology and surgical intervention.
But if there was a delay in diagnosis, the majority of cases received the administration of heparin therapy before percutaneous removal of the retained guidewire, aiming to prevent catheter-induced thromboembolism. The early and intact retrieval of the retained guidewire can often be accomplished percutaneously, with the help of interventional radiological methods and specialized instruments such as snares, biopsy forceps, dormia baskets, and tip-deflecting wires.
The most commonly utilized method is the snare technique, especially the Amplatz Gooseneck Nitinol Snare (Ev3 Inc., Plymouth, MN). In some instances, the guidewire is retrieved along with the vascular sheath of the CVC. The snare technique has emerged as a preferred method for retrieving lost guidewires during CVC procedures due to its high success rate and minimally invasive nature. This approach involves using a snare device, such as the Amplatz Gooseneck Nitinol Snare, which is advanced through the vasculature to ensnare and extract the misplaced guidewire. The effectiveness of the snare technique is attributed to its ability to securely capture foreign bodies within the vascular system, facilitating their safe removal without the need for open surgery. Studies have demonstrated that when the snare technique is employed promptly after detecting a lost guidewire, the likelihood of successful retrieval is significantly increased. However, if initial snaring attempts fail, the probability of success with alternative methods diminishes, underscoring the importance of early intervention with this technique. Additionally, the snare technique’s versatility allows for its application in various anatomical locations and situations, including retrieving guidewires that have migrated to challenging positions. Its minimally invasive nature also reduces patient recovery time and associated procedural risks compared to surgical interventions. However, newer methods, such as the endovascular forceps and dormia baskets, carry a higher risk of endovascular trauma and require careful application.
In situations where endovascular therapy is not feasible, surgical removal becomes the preferred choice. Frequently, the guidewire is retrieved through surgical venotomy after unsuccessful attempts at percutaneous extraction. A risk–benefit analysis should be performed in high-risk individuals where the potential complications of guidewire removal are significant. In some cases, leaving the foreign body in situ may be a viable option if the risks of removal outweigh the benefits.

Comparative analysis of removal techniques with international study
Technique selection: The choice of retrieval method depends on factors like the guidewire’s location, duration of retention, available resources, and expertise. In our cases, the clamp technique is effective for immediate retrieval when the guidewire’s position is favorable, surgical, or endovascular methods are necessitated for migrated or long-retained guidewires. All our cases’ guidewires could be removed intact successfully.
Use of heparin in delay and surgical removal: Our cases used unfractionated heparin in patients needing intervention to decrease thrombosis chance due to retained catheter. It is not mentioned in the international study.

Preventive measures
One study advised one pragmatic technique to prevent guidewire loss during CVC, especially for the inexperienced, unsupervised Indian operators. They recommended holding the outer non-“J” end of the guidewire with a mosquito forceps or small artery forceps during dilatation and sliding the CVC into the vein. A summary of all suggested preventive measures is summarized in Supplementary File 2
Clinical practice changes in India: With the high patient load and resource constraints, India may need the listed preventive measures and the technique described for safety. Implementing standardized protocols, enhancing operator training, and fostering a culture of safety are essential steps to mitigate such incidents. Internationally, quality improvement initiatives, such as structured educational programs and modified CVC kits with reminder systems, have effectively reduced guidewire retention rates.
Another area of challenge is incident reporting due to medicolegal concerns in India and proposed solutions such as anonymous reporting systems and training on legal aspects for healthcare professionals.
Simulation-based training: Simulation-based training has also been shown to improve clinician confidence and proficiency in CVC insertion, thereby reducing the likelihood of guidewire retention. Adapting and integrating these strategies into the Indian healthcare context could significantly enhance patient safety and reduce the incidence of such preventable complications.
Comparison with international data: The incidence and characteristics of complete guidewire loss during CVC in India exhibit both parallels and distinctions when compared to international data. Both the data are comparable in view of demographics, indications of CVC, the most common central vein, CVC placements, and timing of detection. The review also echoed our inferences on supervision and high workload. The areas of dissimilarities were given as follows.
Timing of reporting: In India, no cases of guidewire loss were reported before 2000, with a notable increase in reports after 2013, accounting for 60% of the cases in our review. Similarly, international literature indicates a rising trend in reported incidents after 2005.
Life-threatening complications: An international study presented some retained guidewire-related serious life-threatening problems, but in our Indian study, we have not confronted any such life-threatening issues, and all the patients were safely discharged.
Retrieval techniques: In all of our cases, guidewire removal can be done intact, unlike the international study, where one guidewire removal was not possible even by the surgical team in view of life-threatening arrhythmia.
Factors influencing dissimilarities were as follows:
Heightened awareness and protocolized approach: These cases surge may be attributed to heightened awareness, improved reporting mechanisms, and the widespread adoption of ultrasound and routine chest X-ray, while CVC procedures in India have seen global awareness.
Reporting of success stories: Meagre reporting of life-threatening cases and publication of success stories in a journal as a case report from the Indian setup can be a reason. Differences in reporting mechanisms and medicolegal implications may influence the documented incidence rates. Underreporting due to legal concerns is a recognized problem.

Limitations
Regarding the limitations of the evidence included in the systematic review, we recognize several important factors:
Heterogeneity of study designs: The included studies varied in design, methodology, and population characteristics, which could impact the generalizability of our findings.
Database registry: This review was not registered in PROSPERO or any similar database. We acknowledge this limitation and recommend protocol registration for future systematic reviews to enhance transparency and reduce the risk of reporting bias.
Limited sample sizes: Many studies had small sample sizes, which may affect the statistical power and reliability of the results.
Potential publication bias: There may be an overrepresentation of positive results in the literature, as studies with negative outcomes are less likely to be published.
Risk of bias in included studies: Given that all included studies were either individual case reports or case series, formal risk of bias assessment using standardized tools such as RoB 2 (for randomized studies) or ROBINS-I (for nonrandomized studies) was not feasible. We acknowledge this as a limitation. Additionally, the potential for recall bias influencing the reporting of procedural details within these case studies and case series is recognized.
Missing Data: The absence of certain details, such as specific methods or measurements, can affect the precision of the results. For example, missing data on detection methods or removal techniques can reduce the ability to assess consistency and comparability across studies. Despite these gaps, we made every effort to synthesize the available data accurately and transparently.

CONCLUSIONS
The successful placement of a CVC demands significant training, supervision, and advanced skills. Although rare, the loss of the complete guidewire is a dangerous and preventable complication, often leading to delayed diagnosis and secondary complications, and may attract lawsuits. The primary contributing factors to such incidents include human error (inattentiveness and ignorance) and diagnostic failure, which are prevalent challenges in daily medical practice.
Given its potential severity, prompt recognition and management are crucial. Percutaneous removal should be prioritized as the first approach in handling intravascular foreign bodies and performed immediately once the diagnosis is established. Early intervention is key to minimizing the risk of serious complications and ensuring patient safety.

Author’s contribution
All authors have agreed on the final version and meet at least one of the following criteria (recommended by the ICMJE).
Conceptualization: TG. Data curation: TG, BG. KH Visualization: TG, SS. Writing-original draft: TG, BG, SS. Writing: review and editing: BG, BN. All authors have read and agreed on the final version of the manuscript.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest

SUPPLEMENTARY FILE 2: PREVENTIVE MEASURES FOR GUIDEWIRE LOSS DURING CENTRAL LINE PLACEMENT
Pre-procedure:
Inspect the guidewire for integrity: Carefully check the guidewire for any visible faults, kinks, or weaknesses before insertion. A damaged wire should be replaced immediately.
Handle the guidewire with caution: Treat the guidewire as a delicate and breakable instrument to minimize the risk of loss or breakage during the procedure.
Special caution in high-risk patients: Be particularly cautious when performing CVC in patients predisposed to thrombosis or those with a history of previous central venous access in the same vein.
Minimize distractions: Ensure the environment is quiet and free of distractions to allow the operator to focus. Turn off pagers and mobile phones, or hand them over to a colleague, to prevent interruptions during the procedure.
Mark the insertion depth: Place a landmark on the guidewire to indicate the maximum permissible insertion depth. This serves as a reminder to stop advancing the wire at the appropriate distance, calculated based on anatomy (e.g., distance from skin puncture site to cavo-atrial junction, as noted by Andrew et al.).
Guidewire design improvements: Consider using guidewires with coiled distal ends to reduce the risk of accidental slipping through the needle or dilator. The coil should be malleable enough to allow smooth passage of the needle, catheter, and dilator.
Tighter fit between wire and dilator: Use an introducer catheter kit with a tighter fit between the wire and dilator to create a friction hold, reducing the chance of the guidewire slipping.
During Procedure:
Address resistance promptly: If resistance is encountered during wire insertion, immediately remove the wire and inspect for damage. Reposition the introducer so that resistance is eliminated before continuing.
Inspect the wire after multiple manipulations: If multiple attempts are required, reinspect the wire for any potential damage and replace it if necessary.
Proper catheter placement: Ensure the catheter is passed over the guidewire into the vein. The wire should remain visible at the proximal end before advancing the catheter.
Railroad technique: Use the “railroad” technique for catheter insertion, where the catheter is guided over the wire without pushing both the catheter and the wire simultaneously into the vein.
Secure the wire at all times: Keep a firm grip on the guide wire throughout the procedure to prevent it from slipping.
Use appropriate instruments: Employ mosquito forceps or small artery forceps to secure the non-“J” end of the guide wire during dilator manipulation or catheter advancement.
Post-procedure:
Confirm guidewire removal: Ensure that the guidewire is properly removed from the patient at the conclusion of the procedure. Double-check for any part of the wire left in the body.
Post-procedure imaging: A post-insertion X-ray should be immediately performed to confirm proper catheter placement and guidewire removal. Ensure that the X-ray is reviewed by the operator, as subsequent readers may miss any residual guidewire.
Implement a “safety check” process: Institute a standard “safety check” following central venous cannulation, where the operator confirms the guidewire is completely removed and the catheter is correctly placed.
Post-procedure time-out: At the end of the procedure, conduct a “time-out” to verify that the guide wire has been removed. The operator should call out loudly, “The guide wire is out of the patient,” which is then confirmed by the bedside nurse. This action should be documented in the patient’s medical or electronic records.

REFERENCES
Central venous catheter guidewire retention: lessons from England’s never event database
Missed central venous guide wires: A systematic analysis of published case reports
Unusual complication of internal jugular vein cannulation
A Forgotten Guidewire
Guidewire embolism during subclavian vein catheterization by Seldinger technique
Lost guide wire during central venous cannulation and its surgical retrieval
Guide wire loss during central venous cannulation
Loss of dialysis catheter guidewire: How to prevent?
Accidental guidewire loss during central venous catheterization: A report of two life-threatening cases
Difficulty in the diagnosis of a retained guidewire within the central venous catheter
Loss of guide wire: A lesson learnt review of literature
A case of guidewire embolism during central venous catheterization: Better safe than sorry!
Retained guide wire during central venous catheterization
Unusual but completely avoidable complication during central venous catheterization
Retention of guidewire: A rare but avoidable complication of central venous catheterization
Missed guide wire in inferior vena cava after central venous cannulation
Timely recognition and nonsurgical retrieval of a lost guidewire during central venous catheter placement
Yet another lost guide wire
Retrieval of the lost guidewire immediately after central line insertion by the “clamp technique” – The preponderancy of a procedural checklist and prevention of catastrophe
WHO efforts to promote reporting of adverse events and global learning
Catheter replacement of the needle in percutaneous arteriography; a new technique
How much guidewire is too much? Direct measurement of the distance from subclavian and internal jugular vein access sites to the superior vena cava-atrial junction during central venous catheter placement
Retained guidewire following the use of the straight end of Seldinger guidewire for hemodialysis catheterization
14-year follow-up of central embolization by a guide wire
Editor’s Choice -- European Society for Vascular Surgery (ESVS) 2025 clinical practice guidelines on the management of vascular trauma
Endovascular removal of entrapped central venous catheter guide wire
Outcome-based simulation training for ultrasound-guided central venous catheter placement: Clinical impact on preventing mechanical complications
Preventing medico-legal issues in clinical practice
Evaluating the effects of comprehensive simulation on central venous catheterization training: A comparative observational study
Missing the guidewire: An avoidable complication
RoBANS 2: A revised risk of bias assessment tool for nonrandomized studies of interventions