From discovery through emergency use to the present: Safety evaluation of the COVID-19 mRNA-1273 (Moderna) vaccine
ABSTRACT
The COVID-19 pandemic created an urgent need to develop preventive vaccines to blunt the impact of the greatest global health crisis in a century. Two vaccines, both employing mRNA technology, were developed from bench to bedside in under one year – a milestone considered nearly impossible. This paper examines the evolving safety profile of mRNA-1273, from development under Operation Warp Speed through Emergency Use Authorization, and subsequent deployment at nearly unprecedented scale. Vaccine safety was characterized during clinical development and refined through well-established safety monitoring systems (e.g. Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System [VAERS]), as well as newly introduced systems such as V-Safe. Key safety findings, such as myocarditis, are reviewed as well as safety findings in special populations. The complementary contributions of public, private, and academic sectors highlight how collaboration and rigorous monitoring supported timely and comprehensive safety assessment of a new vaccine in the extraordinary setting of a global pandemic.

Introduction
In the aftermath of more than an estimated 1,230,000 cumulative deaths in the United States (through August 15, 2025) directly attributable to COVID-19, representing the greatest global pandemic since the Great Influenza of 1918, public health measures taken to protect the public, including masking, social distancing, remote schooling, and lockdowns, have become the target of sustained public debate. The development and broad use of COVID-19 vaccines, with mandated use in some cases, have drawn particular scrutiny, with some questioning the safety of vaccines that were developed, evaluated, and authorized rapidly and introduced at a nearly unprecedented scale. This paper reviews the evolution of our understanding of COVID-19 vaccine safety, particularly focused on the Moderna mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (also known as mRNA-1273). Measures taken to monitor its safety profile during development through Emergency Use Authorization (December 2020) in the US are described, including post-authorization safety work to identify, evaluate, and address safety concerns. Where appropriate, other vaccines are mentioned, as many studies pooled data from the Moderna and Pfizer-BioNTech mRNA COVID-19 vaccines for analysis. The manuscript primarily focuses upon US data, not only to manage the scope of a lengthy manuscript, but also because mRNA-1273 has been extensively used in the US and the infrastructure for monitoring vaccine safety was considered especially robust. Meetings of the Advisory Committee for Immunization Practices (ACIP), which is coordinated by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and provides recommendations for vaccine use, documented the safety topics considered the most relevant for public health.
Although the precise origin of SARS-CoV-2 remains disputed, it is clear that the first cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown etiology was publicly reported from Western China in late 2019. Within 1 week, these cases were attributed to a novel coronavirus, following isolation of the virus from an infected patient. Within 3 weeks of the first identified Chinese case, a traveler from Wuhan became the first reported US case of SARS-CoV-2 infection. On January 31, 2020, the US declared a public health emergency, citing the novelty of the virus, absence of prior human immunity, disease severity, evidence of efficient and sustained person-to-person transmission, and concerns raised by other recent novel coronavirus outbreaks, including Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV; 37% case fatality rate [CFR]) and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV; >8000 cases and 10% CFR). The US decision paralleled the World Health Organization (WHO) declaration of COVID-19, caused by SARS-CoV-2, as a public health emergency of international concern.
By 2020, it had become apparent that the virus was highly transmissible and associated with CFRs as high as 14.9% in high-risk groups (e.g. older adults, those with comorbidities). The rapid increase in severe cases requiring intensive medical treatment also raised concern about the capacity of the US healthcare system to prevent disease transmission and health care system overload (“flattening the curves”). During this period, treatment options were limited and mostly empirical. In the absence of safe and efficacious treatments to treat COVID-19, development of a preventive vaccine quickly emerged as an urgent global priority. By October 2020, nearly 200 candidate vaccines were in development, employing a wide range of platforms, from novel to well-established, and human studies were underway for more than 40 different candidate vaccines.

Development of COVID-19 vaccines: Operation Warp Speed and oversight of vaccine safety
In May 2020, in response to the public health impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and its effect on the US economy, the federal government launched Operation Warp Speed (OWS), an initiative to accelerate development, evaluation, and manufacturing of COVID-19 vaccines. OWS provided funding and operational support for vaccine development with the goal of supporting authorization and large scale distribution within an unprecedented time frame (>300 million doses by January 2021). OWS was designed to accelerate development by integrating the respective strengths of the federal, academic, and industry sectors. Along with AstraZeneca, Janssen, Sanofi/GSK, and Novavax, Moderna was one of five recipients of OWS funding for research and development.
Despite substantial uncertainties, vaccine development under OWS proceeded rapidly. Early in the pandemic, fundamental questions remained regarding SARS-CoV-2 virology and vaccine development, including antigen selection, the potential for viral mutation and escape, correlates of protection, and the durability of natural immunity. There were theoretical safety concerns, including potential for vaccine-enhanced disease, i.e. the possibility that vaccination in persons previously infected with SARS-CoV-2 might result in severe COVID-19). Nevertheless, OWS enabled the development and full safety and efficacy evaluation of two candidate vaccines from preclinical research to Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) within 9 months, compared with the typical vaccine timeline to formal licensure of 5–10 y, while maintaining appropriate regulatory and clinical trial oversight mechanisms.
OWS achieved its objective through coordinated federal, academic, and industry efforts within a regulatory framework that incorporated transparent and rigorous clinical trial safety oversight. This framework also integrated other complementary federal efforts (harmonization of clinical trial protocols, coordination of research sites [permitting multiple large-scale trials to proceed noncompetitively] and concurrent evaluation of multiple vaccine candidates under a centralized data and safety monitoring board [DSMB]). The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) utilized the existing EUA framework while issuing specific COVID-19 vaccine guidance and providing regular opportunities to interact with sponsors to address emerging scientific and regulatory questions. The trials also included protocol-specified safety assessments and ongoing DSMB review of accumulating safety and efficacy data. Pivotal phase III trials adhered to contemporary safety standards, including a requirement that at least 3,000 vaccine participants would need to be followed up for a median of at least 60 d after their final dose. The follow-up period was selected based on the historical observation that most immune-mediated vaccine adverse events (AEs) typically occur within this period. The FDA was steadfast in adhering to its regulatory requirements, maintaining them despite external pressure to relax standards to expedite vaccine approval. Ongoing safety and efficacy data were reviewed frequently by the DSMB, often at biweekly intervals.
Additional factors supporting efficient vaccine development included rolling regulatory reviews and some temporal overlap of clinical studies, whereby successive clinical studies were initiated before the formal completion of earlier phase studies, accomplishing this without compromising data quality (e.g. before all the administrative details of a preceding study had been completed and submitted). Finally, OWS accelerated availability of commercial quantities of vaccine by assuming the financial risk of funding manufacturing capacity much earlier than usual, again doing so under strict quality oversight. The government also funded construction of dedicated manufacturing sites, well before manufacturers would normally commit resources for such investment.
mRNA-1273 mechanism of action in an antigen-presenting cell.
It shows the process starting with the vaccine entering a cell through endocytosis. The mRNA is translated into a spike protein by ribosomes. The spike protein is then processed into peptides by the proteasome. These peptides are presented on the cell surface by MHC class I molecules, activating cytotoxic T cells (CD8 positive). Another pathway shows the spike protein being presented by MHC class II molecules, activating T helper cells (CD4 positive) and driving B cell-mediated antibody responses. The text includes 'MHC-II mediated presentation of antigen activates CD4 positive helper T cells, driving B cell-mediated antibody responses' and 'ENDOGENOUS (MHC-I mediated) presentation of intracellular antigens induces cytotoxic response via MHC-I CD8 positive T cell activation'. The diagram also shows B cells being activated by membrane-bound spike protein. The cytoplasm and endoplasmic reticulum are labeled.
Diagram of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine mechanism for cell entry, protein translation, antigen presentation, and T-cell / B-cell engagement and activation.
Development, clinical evaluation, and safety oversight of mRNA-1273 through Emergency Use Authorization. The genetic sequence of SARS-CoV-2 was shared by Chinese researchers on January 11, 2020. Compared with strategies for development of vaccines that were licensed at that time, mRNA technology offers certain advantages for rapid antigen design. Based on prior collaboration developing a MERS-CoV mRNA vaccine, the National Institutes of Health and Moderna were able to finalize antigen design within 2 d following publication of the SARS-CoV-2 genome. A decade of experience optimizing the mRNA platform and manufacturing processes for use in nine investigational vaccines permitted rapid preparation of clinically representative material for the COVID-19 candidate vaccine (mRNA-1273), an mRNA-LNP vaccine encoding a prefusion-stabilized spike protein (Figure 1). The prototype vaccine was then tested in nonclinical models to assess immunogenicity, protective efficacy (through a challenge study), toxicity, biodistribution kinetics, and to consider the potential for vaccine-enhanced disease (which had been raised as a possible safety concern for all COVID-19 vaccines).
Based upon initial data accruing from the nonclinical models, first-in-human studies began in March 2020 in accordance with existing FDA guidance. To accelerate efficient vaccine development, the FDA provided flexibility in conducting nonclinical studies, based on sufficient established knowledge (safety, toxicology, biodistribution, developmental and reproductive toxicology [DART], immunogenicity, and animal challenge) about the respective platform-based technology. Thus, the timing of the initiation of clinical studies was not as strictly tied to completion of nonclinical studies and certain studies were conducted in parallel. The phase I dose-ranging safety and immunogenicity study of the Moderna investigational vaccine, mRNA-1273, evaluated two intramuscular doses of 25, 100, or 250 µg administered 28 d apart (15 participants/group). At 57 d following the first dose (i.e. 4 weeks after the second dose), the most common solicited AEs were chills, headache, myalgia, and injection site pain. Systemic AEs occurred more commonly after the second dose, especially at the highest dose. No serious AEs (SAEs) were identified through 6 months of follow-up. This cohort was followed up and as of 119 d following dosing, no new AEs considered by the investigator to be attributable to vaccine exposure had occurred, nor had any SAEs occurred.
Based on phase I study findings, the phase II study (initiated May 2020) evaluated the safety, reactogenicity, and immunogenicity of 50 µg vs 100 µg vs placebo in 600 participants, stratified by two age cohorts (aged 18 to <55 and ≥55 y), who were randomly assigned in an observer-blinded manner to a two-dose regimen, 28 d apart. The safety findings of this study (follow-up 4 weeks after the second dose) were similar to those of the phase I results: local and systemic reactogenicity were common and generally dose related; they were typically of short (up to 2–3 d) duration; and grade 3 reactions (i.e. typically preventing daily activities and often requiring medical intervention) were rare.
Immunogenicity results together with these safety findings led to the initiation of the randomized, observer-blinded, placebo-controlled phase 3 pivotal trial on July 27, 2020, which evaluated two doses of mRNA-1273 100 µg administered 28 d apart. Participants were age-stratified (aged 18 to <65, ≥65 y) and included persons with underlying comorbidities (to support generalizability). Solicited AEs were assessed through 7 d after each dose, unsolicited AEs for 28 d, SAEs and AEs of special interest (AESIs) for up to 24 months. In accordance with FDA requirements, the trial enrolled at least 30,000 participants, which is typical for a phase III vaccine trial, enabling a thorough evaluation of both efficacy and safety. The primary endpoint was >50% efficacy against virologically confirmed, symptomatic COVID-19 occurring at least 14 d following dose 2 (with lower bound of the two-sided 95% confidence interval [CI] >30%). Per FDA requirements for safety monitoring, a minimum of 3,000 vaccine participants were to be followed for a median of at least 60 d after their final dose. The FDA Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee (VRBPAC) EUA review (December 17, 2020) evaluated the safety data set (vaccine recipients who received at least one dose) collected through November 25, 2020, by which time 53.8% of the 15,184 (8,170) participants who received dose 2 of the vaccine had been followed for at least 60 d.
On December 17, 2020, the VRBPAC reviewed the EUA submission package for mRNA-1273, including the phase 3 study (Coronavirus Efficacy study, AKA COVE), which demonstrated 94.1% efficacy (95% CI: 89.3%–96.8%) among >30,000 participants representative of the general population in preventing symptomatic COVID-19 illness (defined as new onset of clinical symptoms consistent with COVID-19 plus laboratory confirmation of SARS-CoV-2 infection) with onset starting 14 d or more after the second dose, occurring in persons without prior SARS-CoV-2 infection. One hundred percent efficacy was demonstrated against the secondary endpoint of severe disease (defined as cases of symptomatic COVID-19 illness [as above] plus adjudicated evidence of clinical signs of severe systemic illness [defined as any of the following findings: ≥30 breaths/minute respiratory rate; ≥125 beats/minute heart rate; SpO2 ≤ 93% on room air at sea level; PaO2/FiO2 <300 mmHg; respiratory failure or acute respiratory distress syndrome; evidence of shock; significant acute renal, hepatic, or neurologic dysfunction; admission to an intensive care unit; or death). Vaccine tolerability was comparable across groups. Solicited AEs (e.g. injection site pain) and systemic AEs were again common, mostly mild-to-moderate, and resolving within a few days. No imbalance in SAEs or deaths was observed. There were no concerns highlighted for subgroups, including age, sex, race, ethnicity, comorbidities, or prior SARS-CoV-2 infection. VRBPAC noted that special populations (those who were pregnant or breastfeeding) had been excluded from enrollment, that no cases of severe hypersensitivity had been reported, and that longer term safety follow-up would be informative. These issues were to be further evaluated by clinical research and by routine and enhanced pharmacovigilance (e.g. post-authorization safety studies). Safety data for phase III trial participants were to be followed up for a total of 24 months, including outcomes of incidental pregnancies. Comprehensive monthly safety reports were to be provided to the FDA, summarizing accruing data on AEs, including by subpopulations of interest. Additionally, Moderna agreed to implement a registry to evaluate pregnancy outcomes and to conduct an active surveillance study of 23 prespecified AESIs.

Post-authorization safety surveillance of mRNA-1273
The EUA approvals of mRNA-1273 (Moderna, December 18, 2020), BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech, December 11, 2020), and Ad26.COV2.S (Janssen, February 27, 2021) were followed by the most intensive safety monitoring in US history.
The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, which typically meets thrice annually, convened 31 times between June 2020 and August 2022 to prepare for and monitor COVID-19 vaccines. Anticipating the introduction of COVID- 19 vaccines, early meetings focused on clinical assessment (safety monitoring, potential risks), prioritization, and resource allocation of limited vaccine supplies. Following their introduction, subsequent meetings reviewed emergent vaccine effectiveness and safety data, benefit-risk, and performance in special populations (e.g. immune-compromised), updating their assessment as the virus evolved and the vaccines were deployed on a massive scale. Post-authorization safety evaluation for the COVID-19 vaccines, including mRNA-1273, relied upon multiple complementary data sources and systems to identify and assess both expected reactions as well as potential rare safety signals as vaccine use expanded.
COVID-19 vaccine adverse events of special interest (SPEAC pre-authorization list + subsequent additions).
Organ class (SPEAC body system)	AESI (SPEAC term)	Applicability to different vaccine platforms	Rationale for inclusion in SPEAC (applicable code[s] and reference[s])a	Causality assessmentb	 	Immunologic/Hypersensitivity	Anaphylaxis	All vaccine types	Table 1 (vaccination in general).Rationale codesa: 1, 2	Yes (discussed in manuscript)	 	Vaccine-associated enhanced disease (VAED)	All vaccine types (theoretical concern for COVID-19 vaccines)	1, 2, 5	No	 	Vasculitides	All vaccine types	3, 4	No	 	Delayed hypersensitivity reactionc	Potentially vaccine-specific	Oct 2022 update 6	Clinical trial and post-authorization observations. Discussed in manuscript.	 	Multisystem inflammatory	Multisystem inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C; expanded to adults in later updates)	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	3, 4	No	 	Respiratory	Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	3, 4	No	 	Cardiac	Myocarditis/pericarditis	Observed with COVID-19 disease; previously observed with modified vaccinia Ankara vaccine	3, 4 (and platform-specific)	Yes (discussed in manuscript)	 	Acute cardiac injury (other than myocarditis/pericarditis) incl. microangiopathy, heart failure/cardiogenic shock, stress cardiomyopathy, coronary artery disease, arrhythmia	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	3, 4	No	 	Hematologic/Vascular	Coagulation disorder/thrombosis/thromboembolism (e.g., DVT, PE, stroke, bleeding, disseminated intravascular coagulation)	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI); specific syndrome TTS is vaccine-type specific (see separate row)	3, 4	No	 	Thrombocytopenia	All vaccine types	1, 2. Included for differential diagnosis with COVID-19–related hematologic complications.	No	 	Thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (TTS)c	Adenoviral-vector COVID-19 vaccines (US: Janssen/Ad26.COV2.S)	Oct 2022 update 6.	No (discussed in manuscript)	 	Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP)c	Adenoviral-vector COVID-19 vaccines (US: Janssen/Ad26.COV2.S)	Oct 2022 update 6	No	 	Capillary leak syndrome (flare-ups)c	Adenoviral-vector COVID-19 vaccines (US: Janssen/Ad26.COV2.S listed in EUA materials)	Oct 2022 update 6.	No	 	Renal	Acute kidney injury (AKI)	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	3, 4	No	 	Gastrointestinal/Hepatic	Acute liver injury	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	3, 4	No	 	Acute pancreatitisc	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	Dec 2020 update, based on accumulating evidence as a COVID-19 complication.	No	 	Endocrine	Subacute thyroiditisc	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	Dec 2020 update based on accumulating evidence as a COVID-19 complication.	No	 	Musculoskeletal	Acute aseptic arthritis	Platform-specific: r-VSV vector vaccines		No	 	Rhabdomyolysisc	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	Dec 2020 update based on accumulating evidence as a COVID-19 complication.	No	 	Neurologic/Neuro-sensory	Generalized convulsion	All vaccine types	1, 2, 4	Pediatric febrile seizure observed post-authorization. Discussed in manuscript.	 	Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS)	All vaccine types (AESI); US signal: Janssen/Ad26.COV2.S	2, 4	No (discussed in manuscript)	 	Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)	All vaccine types	3	No	 	Aseptic meningitis	Platform-specific: live viral vaccines, including measles		No	 	Encephalitis/encephalomyelitis	Platform-specific: live viral vaccines, including measles		No	 	Meningoencephalitis	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	1, 4	No	 	Anosmia and ageusia	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	3, 4	No	 	Bell’s palsyc	Platform-specific: intranasal E. coli heat-labile toxin adjuvanted vaccine (SPEAC rationale); also reported post-authorization for some products	Dec 2020 update. Included as platform/adjuvant-specific AESI. 2	Observed in phase III trial; not confirmed post-authorization	 	Dizziness and tinnitusc	Vaccine-type specific in SPEAC updates (adenoviral vector)	Oct 2022 update 6	No	 	Dermatologic	Chilblain-like lesions	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	3, 4	No	 	Single organ cutaneous vasculitis	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	3, 4	No	 	Erythema multiforme	All vaccine types (COVID-19 disease AESI/differential diagnosis)	3, 4	No	 	Facial swelling in persons with dermal fillersc	Potentially vaccine-specific: mRNA vaccines	Oct 2022 update 6	Observed in phase III trial; not confirmed post-authorization	 	Injected limb/Administration site	Extensive limb swellingc	Potentially vaccine-specific	Oct 2022 update 6	No	 	Other/General	Other serious local/systemic AESI (unsolicited local/systemic reactions, including injection site abscess, nodule, or cellulitis, fatigue, diarrhea)	All vaccine types	1, 2	Fatigue was reported in clinical trials as a reactogenicity-type finding, applicable to all age groups
AESI, adverse event of special interest; SPEAC, Safety Platform for Emergency vACcines.
List based on SPEAC D2.3 (May 25, 2020) and later SPEAC updates.
aSPEAC rationale codes (used in the “Rationale for inclusion” column): 1 = Prior established association with immunization (established for multiple vaccines). 2 = Prior established association with a vaccine/platform/adjuvant relevant to one or more candidate vaccine platforms. 3 = Theoretical concern based on immunopathogenesis. 4 = Theoretical concern related to viral replication during wild-type disease. 5 = Theoretical concern demonstrated in an animal mode with ≥1 candidate vaccine platforms. 6 = Added based on a safety signal declared by a regulator with a requirement to update product information.
bSafety monitoring is an ongoing process evaluating new and established safety signals, including all AESI, to determine whether current safety assessment and communication (e.g. labeling) is accurate.
cAdded after May 25, 2020.
Pharmacovigilance requires a tightly regulated set of activities intended to detect, evaluate, and prevent (or mitigate) untoward effects of a vaccine (or drug) aiming to ensure that those products with a favorable benefit/risk profile are used in a way that maximizes benefits while minimizing risks. Manufacturers systematically and regularly review a range of data sources, including preclinical, clinical, and observational research studies; published literature; social media; and spontaneous reports to identify safety signals (i.e. information suggesting a treatment may cause an effect, either beneficial or harmful, that merits further evaluation and corroboration). In practice, only a small proportion of spontaneous reports or new safety signals observed following licensure are both confirmed and found to materially affect benefit/risk. Most are rejected because there are more likely explanations for the finding, basic information is missing, or multiple reports are received for the same case. In the case of COVID-19 vaccines, safety monitoring was facilitated by publication of a set of 18 AESIs that specified particular AEs considered relevant for COVID-19 vaccines. These AESIs provided a framework for more intensive monitoring authorized COVID-19 vaccines, including mRNA-1273 (Table 1).
By the end of December 2021, more than 500 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines are estimated to have been administered in the US, of which approximately 40% were mRNA-1273. In comparison, the total number of COVID-19 vaccine doses administered dwarfed by more than 3:1 the number of influenza vaccine doses (the most widely used vaccine prior to COVID-19) administered in the prior year. Safety monitoring was strengthened through new systems such as V-Safe, a smart phone–based active surveillance tool in which vaccine recipients voluntarily and self-reported their vaccine experiences. Developed by the CDC, V-safe was used to provide real-time insight into health events following vaccination, and separately to follow maternal complications, pregnancy outcomes, and early infant health among people who were pregnant at the time of vaccination. Existing systems, such as the FDA Biologics Effectiveness and Safety (BEST) Initiative, were adapted for near real-time evaluation of safety signals using both Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and commercial claims data following more than 225 million persons, and the FDA-CMS Medicare 4 data systems were newly deployed to review daily Medicare claims for vaccine safety. These activities augmented long-standing core elements of US vaccine safety surveillance, including the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS, which is the national passive spontaneous reporting system and jointly maintained by the FDA and CDC) and the Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD), an active surveillance activity that collects data from approximately 12 million persons (permitting nearly real-time identification of safety signals through rapid cycle analysis, as well as their evaluation through formal observational research studies). Among other attributes, the VSD is informative because it provides background rates for AEs, which is one of several important criteria used to evaluate causality. Collectively, these resources provided a greater range of data to inform safety in a timely manner. V-Safe was especially useful in describing reactogenicity, other short-term reactions, and pregnancy follow up. VAERS served as a national early warning system for rare or unexpected events after mRNA-1273 vaccination. FDA BEST and CMS data supported near real-time evaluation of potential signals in very large populations, including older adults. The VSD provided prompt signal detection, background rate comparisons, and the infrastructure to conduct formal observational analyses to refine safety signals and assess whether they were causally related and of concern.
At the time of EUA, the product safety information reflected data accrued during product development, including the risk for solicited local and systemic reactions (collectively referred to as reactogenicity, i.e. expected short-lived local and systemic signs and symptoms, such as injection site pain or headache occurring shortly after immunization, and that reflect an inflammatory response primarily driven by an innate immune response). Additionally, this information included a contraindication for persons with a known history of a severe allergic reactions (such as anaphylaxis) to any known component of the vaccine. Post-authorization surveillance extended safety evaluation beyond clinical trial findings by assessing the vaccine in broader populations and under real-world conditions.
Since December 2020 EUA, thousands of safety topics have been evaluated for mRNA-1273, from the common to the rare and unexpected. Safety signals generally required evaluation across different systems and included clinical and epidemiologic review before conclusions could be drawn regarding causality and their relevance to benefit-risk.
To structure this review, safety topics are arranged sequentially by category. Discussed first are those AEs that have been determined to represent clinically important safety risks (through clinical trials and/or post-authorization surveillance) and that have warranted risk communication and mitigation (e.g. through product labeling). These are followed by review of findings for special populations, which are defined as groups for which vaccine safety, immunogenicity, and effectiveness may differ from the general population due to biological, developmental, physiological, or clinical factors, and for whom safety data were lacking during development or at the time of EUA. A discussion of AESIs follows. AESIs are pre-specified safety topics identified prior to EUA (or subsequently) that are of interest because of their potential causal association with a vaccine, based on biological plausibility, prior experience with a similar vaccine or vaccine platform, or known pathophysiology, and merit focused monitoring, and evaluation. Finally, other emergent safety topics are reviewed.

Anaphylaxis
The EUA contained a contraindication for use in those with known history of a severe allergic reaction to any vaccine component; however, no case of anaphylaxis had occurred in the clinical development program. Within weeks of their introduction, reports of anaphylaxis among recipients of mRNA-1273 were received by VAERS, with the CDC reporting 10 cases (a rate of 2.5 cases per million doses administered). Of these, nine occurred in persons with documented history of allergies/allergic reactions, of whom five had a prior history of anaphylaxis. These rates are comparable to those for anaphylaxis following influenza immunization and far lower than those reported for all-cause anaphylaxis in the general population. Within weeks, the CDC issued recommendations to monitor for and manage allergic reactions following receipt of COVID-19 vaccines.

Myocarditis and pericarditis
Viral infections are considered the most frequent causes of both myocarditis and pericarditis. Myocarditis refers to inflammation of myocardial tissue, most commonly following viral infection, with clinical findings ranging from mild self-limited disease to severe cardiac impairment. Pericarditis is inflammation of the pericardial sac surrounding the heart, also often triggered by viral infection. Cases are typically mild and self-limited but may be associated with severe complications, such as pericardial effusion, tamponade, or pericardial fibrosis. Myopericarditis shares features of each syndrome. Diagnosis and management vary depending upon the clinical presentation.
Prior to the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic, myocarditis had been observed in persons infected with either of two closely related coronaviruses, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV. Within months of the first reports of SARS-CoV-2 it was recognized as a complication of COVID-19, and myocarditis was found to be up to 16 times more frequent in hospitalized patients with COVID-19 compared with those without COVID-19, with the greatest risk among those aged <16 y or over 75 y.
Bmyopericarditis had also been observed following the introduction (in 2002) of smallpox vaccine (modified vaccinia virus Ankara, live non-replicating) in US military personnel, which prompted the Safety Platform for Emergency vACcines (SPEAC) to list it as an AESI for investigational COVID-19 vaccines.
In clinical development leading up to the December 2020 EUA for mRNA-1273 there had been no associated reported cases of myocarditis or pericarditis; however, in April 2021, several myocarditis cases in BNT162b2 vaccine recipients were reported to be under investigation in Israel. Nearly contemporaneously, the US Department of Defense reported suspected cases occurring in recipients of either mRNA vaccine. Initial review of other data sources during these early months after EUA, including Kaiser-Permanente Northern California (December 14, 2020–June 26, 2021) did not detect a significant risk for myocarditis in association with the mRNA vaccines.
These reports immediately prompted intense investigation of post-vaccination myocarditis and pericarditis by regulators, public health authorities, and the biopharmaceutical companies, to determine whether the vaccines were causally associated with the outcomes (including whether they were occurring at rates above background rates in the vaccinated population). During the period leading up to a revised EUA Fact Sheet (June 24, 2021) that described the risk of myocarditis and pericarditis for mRNA-1273, it became clear that the cases followed a common pattern: risk was greatest for younger males, typically occurring within a few days following vaccination, most commonly after the second dose of the primary series, and that most cases resolved within a few days with conservative management (e.g. rest, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents). The observations were central to and included in regulatory risk communication as well as ongoing safety monitoring.
In July 2021, the CDC published working case definitions of myocarditis, pericarditis, and myopericarditis. At that time, they estimated that for the group at highest risk (males aged 12–17 y shortly following a second vaccine dose), for every million doses of either COVID-19 mRNA vaccine received, approximately 56–69 cases of myocarditis would be expected to occur. This estimate was counterbalanced by the estimated benefit of preventing 5,700 hospitalizations, 71 intensive care unit (ICU) admissions, and 2 deaths. Data from the National Patient-Centered Research Network (PCORnet) indicated that the risk for myocarditis/pericarditis attributable to COVID-19 disease significantly exceeded that of COVID-19 vaccine – associated myocarditis in all age and sex groups. A systematic review comparing the clinical features of COVID-19–associated myocarditis with those associated with mRNA COVID-19 vaccines found substantive differences, with cases due to SARS-CoV-2 infection more likely to require ICU admission, to require the use of inotropic agents or beta-blockers to support blood pressure and cardiac output, or to result in complications or death.
Myocarditis/pericarditis continues to be carefully monitored. Rates reported through the FDA BEST network (which pooled results for mRNA-1273 and BNT162b2) have declined over time. For the period 2020–2021, when COVID-19 vaccines were newly introduced and many persons had not been exposed to the virus, reporting rate (defined as the number of adverse reports submitted to VAERS divided by the estimated number of vaccine doses administered per time interval) for persons 18–64 y was 14.92 cases/million doses. During the subsequent years 2022–2023, the reporting rate for that same age group declined to 8.0 cases/million doses. The risk of post-vaccination myocarditis has been evaluated according to vaccine dose and has declined with booster doses (compared with the two-dose primary series). Review of VAERS reports for booster doses of mRNA-1273 (September 22, 2021–February 6, 2022) indicated that the reporting rate for myocarditis among adults was the highest in males aged 18–24 y, declining from 56.3 reports/million doses administered after second dose to 8.7 reports/million doses administered after third dose.
As is true for many vaccine-associated rare AEs, the immunopathogenesis for myocarditis following COVID-19 vaccination remains unknown. It is clear that the demographic characteristics are similar to those of viral myocarditis, with risk rising with adolescence and predominantly in males, suggesting a role of testosterone-mediated immune modulation as a contributing factor. Some early observational studies suggested that a greater antigen dose was a risk factor for vaccine-associated myocarditis. In one, rates of myocarditis among males 18–24 y, occurring within 7 d of the second dose of the primary series, were nominally lower for BNT162b2 (52.4 cases/million doses) than for mRNA-1273 (56.3 cases/million doses). A shorter dosing interval for the primary series has been associated with greater risk, especially among younger males. The original EUAs for the vaccines called for a 21-d interval between first and second doses for BNT162b2 and 28 d for mRNA-1273. In a population based study conducted in Ontario, Canada (December 2020–September 2021, an increased risk of myocarditis was identified among 18–24 y old male mRNA-1273 recipients who received their second primary series dose 30 or fewer days after first dose compared with those receiving the second dose more than 30 d following first dose (83.9 cases/million doses [95% CI, 47.0–138.4 cases/million doses] vs 16.2 cases/million doses [95% CI, 10.2–24.6 cases/million doses], respectively). Combined with nonclinical findings, this observation may suggest that shorter prime-boost dosing intervals are associated with a more pro-inflammatory response (that may in turn be a risk factor for myocarditis). The risk for post-vaccine myocarditis is not restricted to mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccines; an elevated risk has also been observed with the adjuvanted protein-based vaccine, NVX-COV2373. Independent of the complexity of understanding the cause(s) of COVID-19 vaccine-associated myocarditis, it is important to recognize that the risks for and severity of myocarditis and pericarditis are greater due to COVID-19 disease than for myocarditis following vaccination.

Syncope
In the setting of vaccination, syncope (fainting) is considered an anxiety-related event resulting in an acute vasovagal reaction, which may occur on account of the experience of vaccination (e.g. fear of receiving an injection) rather than as an immune response to the vaccine. Circumstances such as a mass vaccine campaign may catalyze this type of response. In April 2021, the CDC received reports of clusters of syncope cases at mass vaccination sites for the Ad26.COV2.S vaccine. Concerns for these anxiety-related vasovagal reactions in the setting of pandemic response were sufficient to issue a warning for the risk of syncope and were added to the product label for mRNA-1273 (it had already been present in the label for BNT162b2 and has since been added as well to NVX-CoV2373). The common verbiage notes that syncope could occur in association with “injectable vaccines” (i.e. not with any specific vaccine).

Special populations
As a precautionary measure, vaccine development typically excludes certain groups from the phase III studies leading to initial product licensure. These groups, such as those who are pregnant or immunocompromised, may subsequently be evaluated through dedicated studies and/or pharmacovigilance activities.

Pregnancy and lactation
Although people who were pregnant, planning to become pregnant, or breastfeeding were excluded from enrolling in mRNA-1273 clinical trials for EUA, a few incidental pregnancy cases (n = 13, 6 vaccine; 7 placebo) occurred in the phase III study. No adverse outcomes in pregnancy were reported in that study.
Early in 2020, pregnancy had been identified as a risk factor for severe COVID-19 outcomes, including the need for ICU admission and mechanical ventilation, and was later found to be a risk factor for death from COVID-19. COVID-19 was also identified as a risk factor for pre-term birth and adverse neonatal outcomes. Given these considerations, and that nonclinical reproductive toxicity studies had not identified concerns, the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG), shortly followed by the ACIP, recognized pregnancy as a high-risk medical condition for COVID-19, advising that those who were pregnant or breastfeeding could choose to be vaccinated. Following introduction of the mRNA vaccines, the new CDC V-safe Pregnancy Registry provided nearly real-time data on pregnancy outcomes among pregnant women who had enrolled. Their initial assessment of rates of spontaneous abortion, stillbirth, term birth, and congenital anomalies found all of these to be within expected US background rates (among 3,958 participants). Based upon the risk posed by COVID-19 in pregnancy and accruing information regarding vaccine safety in this group, in April 2021 the CDC recommended that pregnant women be vaccinated. Large studies conducted at this time affirmed the initial findings from V-safe regarding safety from adverse pregnancy outcomes and have been further affirmed by more recent studies. An observational retrospective study of 46,079 pregnant women (Dec 15, 2020–July 22, 2021) drawing data from 8 health care organizations participating in the Vaccine Safety Datalink women found that compared with contemporaneous pregnant women who did not receive an mRNA-COVID vaccine, there was no increased risk for small for gestational age (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR] 0.95; 95% CI 0.87–1.03) or preterm births (aHR 0.91; 95% CI 0.82–1.01). The findings applied to women who received one or more vaccine doses during the second and third trimesters (the sample size was inadequate to characterize the effect of exposure during the first trimester vaccination). Maternal vaccination has also been found to be protective against COVID-19 hospitalization (including ICU admission/mechanical ventilation) in infants aged <6 months.
COVID-19 mRNA vaccines have also been evaluated in lactation. The design of COVID-19 mRNA vaccines results in rapid degradation of the LNP at the injection site and nearby lymph nodes, with minimal or no detectable mRNA in breast milk. mRNA is present in nearly all consumed food and is rapidly degraded by RNAases. Studies evaluating vaccine mRNA in human breast milk have either not detected it or identified it sporadically and transiently (less than 48 hours after vaccination) in trace amounts. To date, post-licensure studies have not found lactation to be a risk factor for adverse infant outcomes in COVID-19 vaccinees. Since the original EUA, major public health agencies, including CDC and the WHO, have suggested vaccination for lactating women (and have subsequently strengthened their recommendations). Following vaccination, SARS-CoV-2 specific IgG and IgA antibodies have been shown to pass into breast milk, resist degradation, correlate with maternal levels, and have the potential to provide additional protection to the nursing infant.

Pediatric populations
Recognizing that COVID-19 posed a serious risk to all age groups, early clinical research evaluating mRNA-1273 in younger adolescents was initiated in December 2020. An age de-escalation strategy was employed, successively enrolling younger age groups (12–17 y, 6–11 y, 6 months–5 y) only after safety had been characterized in the preceding older group, so that immune response and safety could be evaluated while safeguarding more vulnerable (younger) children. In this manner, the studies leading to the EUA (June 2022) ultimately selected doses for the primary COVID-19 vaccine series of 100, 50, and 25 µg in these age groups, respectively, each with a 28-d dosing interval.
These clinical trials (with total sample sizes of 3,732 participants randomized 2:1, 4,016 randomized 3:1, and 4,802 randomized 3:1 [mRNA-1273 vs placebo], respectively) demonstrated an overall safety profile of the vaccine in the pediatric population that was largely similar to that previously observed in persons aged ≥18 y, although the proportions of local and systemic reactogenicity cases varied somewhat by age. In older children, local reactogenicity (especially injection site pain), fatigue, and headache were more common. In comparison, among those aged 6 months–5 y, age-appropriate systemic findings, including irritability, crying, sleepiness, and appetite loss were more common. Symptom onset for most of these occurred within 1–2 d, with a median duration of 2–3 d. Grade 3 events were rare. No related cases of death or multi-inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) were observed.
In the open-label phase of the trial in 12–17-y-olds, one 14-y-old male was considered to have probable myocarditis, with onset 1 d after second dose, resolution of symptoms 8 d later, and was without sequelae 28 d following event onset. Several cases of fever ≥40°C were reported in the 6 months–5 y group. Vaccine safety was tracked promptly following the EUA (June 2022) for children aged 6 months and older, following the respective approaches that had been established by Moderna, the FDA, and CDC with the EUA for adults. For the period June–August 2022, the data collected through VAERS and V-safe were reviewed in the Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR). VAERS reports indicated that for children aged 6 months–2 y, the major reported systemic reactions for the mRNA vaccines were irritability and crying (occurring in approximately one-half of children). For children 3 y and older, systemic reactions were less dominant while local reactions were more common. V-safe was used to proactively monitor infant experience (through a message-based smart phone reported by parents/caregivers) along with augmented data collected in VAERS and was especially informative for reactogenicity. Overall, the MMWR report concluded that reactogenicity and safety findings were similar to those previously reported for the clinical trials leading up to the EUA for mRNA-1273.
Pediatric febrile seizures are convulsions occurring in young children, most often aged 6 months–5 y, that typically occur in association with a viral infection and less commonly in association with certain vaccines. Among viral etiologies, respiratory viruses that have winter peaks in incidence, including Influenza A and B, respiratory syncytial virus, and adenovirus, as well as SARS-CoV2, have been associated with febrile seizures. These seizures are common (2–5% incidence in young children) usually brief, self-limited and benign, typically do not reflect underlying organic neurologic illness, and are generally isolated incidents and free from sequelae. Febrile seizures have been reported as the most common neurological complication of COVID-19. In a cross-sectional multi-center study evaluating outcomes in 15,137 children with COVID-19-associated hospitalization, febrile seizures represented 38.9% of all neurological complications (n = 582; or 3.8%). In addition to viral etiologies, several vaccines, including those targeting influenza, measles/mumps/rubella, diphtheria/tetanus/pertussis (acellular), polio (inactivated), and Haemophilus influenzae b, have been associated with an approximately 3–5 fold increased risk of febrile seizure compared with control population, typically within 0–12 d following vaccination.
An FDA/BEST analysis evaluated 21 prespecified outcomes among children aged 6 months–17 y who exclusively received either one of the ancestral monovalent mRNA COVID-19 vaccines (BNT162b2: n = 3,920,563; mRNA-1273: n = 176,427) or NVX-CoV2373 (n = 53) through early 2023. The time frame represented the first months of pediatric mRNA-1273 availability for those under 16 y of age; BNT162b2 had been approved for use in persons 16 and older in December 2020. The authors identified a signal for seizure among children aged 2–5 y who had received an mRNA-based vaccine. The finding was further evaluated by sensitivity analysis, indicating a statistically significant signal specifically for febrile seizure, and only for mRNA-1273 recipients, when compared with one of two reference time periods (2019) that were used to provide background rates for febrile seizures. The authors suggested the finding be investigated through additional studies. A subsequent self-controlled case series assessment, using the same three FDA/BEST commercial insurance data sources, indicated an elevated risk for febrile seizure, among 2–4-y-old recipients of mRNA-1273 within 1 d after vaccination. The risk difference (compared with that for d 8–63 following vaccination) equated to approximately 3 cases/100,000 doses (95% CI–0.31, 6.75). While the finding has not been corroborated by other sources, the potential for febrile seizures for children aged 2–5 y has been recognized in post-authorization safety surveillance communication (August 2024). COVID-19 is a risk factor for febrile seizures. Among children aged 6 months to <5 y, it has been estimated that there are approximately 190 cases/100,000 SARS-CoV-2 infections, greatly exceeding that associated with vaccination.

Immune-compromised populations
A range of disorders may result in immunocompromise, including: (1) inherited/primary immune conditions; (2) infections affecting immune response (e.g. HIV/AIDs); (3) acquired diseases, such as malignancies, diabetes mellitus, or autoimmune diseases; or (4) medical treatments that directly affect the immune system (e.g. the use of tumor necrosis factor-alpha treatment in managing Crohn’s disease). Such conditions may affect different components of immune response.
As of December 2020 (when VRBPAC considered the EUA), safety data for mRNA-1273 on these populations had been restricted to persons with HIV/AIDS who were considered stable on treatment, and findings were similar to those of the general trial population. Based on concern for the risk of severe COVID-19 in these populations, the mRNA COVID-19 vaccines were recommended for use in a broad range of immunocompromised individuals. The primary concern for mRNA COVID-19 vaccines in immunocompromised persons was whether they would be sufficiently immunogenic, as suggested by suboptimal immune response after a two dose primary series. To determine whether a 100-µg booster dose of mRNA-1273 might bolster the immune response, a trial was conducted in solid organ transplant recipients who had been previously vaccinated with that vaccine. Results demonstrated improved immunogenicity compared with the two-dose series, leading to a recommendation for a three-dose primary series in certain immunocompromised persons. Compared with the Moderna phase III (COVE) trial participants, a lower proportion of subjects experienced reactogenic events (e.g. 77% experiencing injection site reactions [all grade 1–2] compared with 91.6% of COVE trials participants [including 9.1% grade 3 and no grade 4]).
Although there may be specific safety considerations for different immunocompromised populations, the same general pattern has been found to be consistent in all these groups compared with the general population: local and systemic reactogenicity, without the identification and confirmation of additional safety concerns unique to these groups. Within the solid organ transplant population, a systematic review of mRNA vaccine experience did not find evidence for increased risk of transplant organ rejection. In persons living with HIV/AIDS, a study of 510 persons (97% on antiretroviral therapy) who received COVID-19 mRNA vaccines was evaluated prior to and 1 month following vaccination. Vaccinees did not experience a decline in CD4+ T-cell count or an increase in viral load; in fact, there may have been a modest improvement in these parameters. Among persons with a rheumatic/musculoskeletal disease, a meta-analysis that included 100 studies found the relative risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection to be 52% higher than the general population, with the risk of death 74% higher than the general population. A retrospective cohort study conducted during the Omicron wave evaluated 2061 patients with a systemic autoimmune rheumatic disease and COVID-19 infection, and characterized the risk for hospitalization in older patients (adjusted odds ratio [aOR] 1.05/y (95% CI 1.04–1.07); African-Americans (aOR 4.15 [compared with White race], 95% CI 2.30–7.51), CD20 inhibitor therapy (aOR 2.22 [compared to antimalarial monotherapy], 95% CI 1.02–4.81), and glucocorticoid treatment (aOR 2.07 [compared with no glucocorticoid use], 95% CI 1.41–3.04). COVID-19 vaccination has been shown to reduce the risk of COVID-19 related hospitalization in persons with systemic autoimmune rheumatic diseases (SARD). Compared with those who had not been vaccinated within the prior 12 months, SARD patients who had received a COVID-19 vaccine within <3 months and 3–6 months had a decreased risk of COVID-19 related hospitalization (aOR 0.41, 95% CI 0.22–0.75 and aOR 0.38, 95% CI 0.20–0.72, respectively). A Korean population-level cohort study of more than 9 million individuals evaluated the safety of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines in persons with any of 16 autoimmune diseases and found that (compared with historical pre-pandemic controls) after 1 y of follow-up and receipt of at least one mRNA-1273 dose, there was no increased risk for disease flares; after a third dose, modest elevations were seen in a combined analysis of the two mRNA vaccines (adjusted hazard ratios for rheumatoid arthritis [1.14, 99% CI 1.08–1.21], alopecia areata [1.12, 1.05–1.19], psoriasis [1.16, 1.06–1.27]), though the authors noted that the effect size was small and needed to be considered in the setting of overall positive benefit. A similarly designed study, also conducted in Korea, did not find elevated risk for incident autoimmune disease following receipt of at least one dose of an mRNA-COVID-19 vaccine, regardless of age, sex, or type of mRNA vaccine received.

Adverse events of special interest
Adverse events of special interest are pre-specified AEs that, based on scientific evidence and biological plausibility, are of special interest in connection with a specific vaccine or vaccine platform, and which therefore merit focused and enhanced monitoring through active and/or passive surveillance. Specifying an AE as an AESI does not presume that a causal association has been established for a vaccine under development, only that it merits additional attention. Indeed, the list of AESIs published by SPEAC in advance of the introduction of any COVID-19 vaccines was intended to support a harmonized approach to the identification and evaluation of AEs that might be observed in the course of COVID-19 vaccine development, and included AESIs with: (1) established association with immunization (multiple vaccines); (2) prior association with vaccine/adjuvant/platform relevant for ≥1 candidate vaccines; (3) theoretical concerns based on immunopathogenesis, wild-type disease, or animal model; and (4) additions made based on safety signals identified regulatory authorities and required for inclusion in product information (Table 1). Beyond clinical development, the list has been particularly useful for assessing specified AEs that are sufficiently uncommon to have been detected in the phase III vaccine trials (the phase III trials for each mRNA-based vaccine enrolled >30,000 participants), the most notable example being myocarditis.
Observational research studies evaluating safety outcomes for mRNA-1273.
Study	Title	Data source	Study characteristics	Key findings	 	Lloyd et al.Vaccine (2022) 40:6481–6488	Near real-time surveillance of safety outcomes in US COVID-19 vaccine recipients aged 12 to 64 y.	FDA Biologics Effectiveness and Safety (BEST) Initiative, including 3 U.S. commercial insurance claims databases (Optum, HealthCore, CVS Health).	Early warning rapid surveillance conducted biweekly or monthly. Used rapid cycle analysis to evaluate 17 outcomes of interest among vaccinated persons aged 12–64, comparing adverse event rates to historical background rates. Follow-up periods: Optum (Dec 11, 2020–Jan 22, 2022), HealthCore (Dec 11, 2020–Jan 7, 2022), CVS Health (Dec 11, 2020–Dec 31, 2021). Included >16 million vaccinated individuals. Included BNT162b2, mRNA-1273, and Ad26COV2.S.	Among 17 outcomes, 15 did not meet the statistical signal threshold in any database. Myocarditis/pericarditis met the statistical signal threshold following BNT162b2 in 2 of 3 databases (rate ratios [RR] range 1.83–2.47), but not for mRNA-1273. Anaphylaxis met the signal threshold in all 3 databases following both BNT162b2 (RRs 4.48–10.86) and mRNA-1273 (RRs 7.64–12.40). Study intended for signal identification, not causality assessment.	 	Faksova et al.Vaccine (2024) 42:2200–2211	COVID-19 vaccines and adverse events of special interest: A multinational GVDN cohort study of 99 million vaccinated individuals.	GVDN Global COVID Vaccine Safety (GCoVS) Project included electronic healthcare datasets from 10 sites across 8 countries; used common protocol and pooled observed-to-expected event framework.	Observational cohort using common protocol and pooled observed to expect event rates for 13 selected AESIs (neurologic, hematologic, cardiac). AESIs were assessed for risk window 0–42 d following vaccination with mRNA vaccines (BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273) and adenovirus-vector vaccine (ChAdOx1). Total vaccinated cohort: ~99 million; risk periods contributed 23,168,335 person-years of follow-up (including 36,178,442 mRNA doses). Data collected ~Dec 2020–Aug 2023.	For mRNA-1273: acute disseminated encephalomyelitis showed elevated observed-to-expected ratio after dose 1 only (OE 3.78, 95% CI 1.52–7.78).a Myocarditis OEs elevated after doses 1,2, and 3 for mRNA-1273 (OE 3.48, 95% CI 3.00–4.01; 6.10, 95% CI 5.52–6.72; 2.01, 95% CI 1.60–2.49), and for BNT162b2 (2.78, 95% CI 2.61–2.95; 2.86, 95% CI 2.70–3.03; and 2.09, 95% CI 1.88–2.32), respectively. OE ratios for myocarditis were more modestly elevated for ChADOx1 after doses 1 and 2. OE ratios were also elevated for pericarditis for mRNA-1273 after either dose 1 (OE 1.74, 95% CI 1.54–1.97) and dose 4 (i.e. booster [OE 2.64, 95% CI 2.05–3.35) Study also reported elevated OE ratios for Guillain–Barré syndrome and cerebral venous sinus thrombosis signals following ChAdOx1.	 	Urdaneta et al.Open Forum Infectious Diseases (2024) 11:ofae067	Global safety assessment of adverse events of special interest following 2 y of use and 772 million administered doses of mRNA-1273.	Moderna global safety database (primarily spontaneous adverse event case reports) with administered dose estimates for mRNA-1273 (original strain).	Cumulative review of spontaneous AE reports in Moderna’s global safety database from 18 Dec 2020 to 17 Dec 2022, covering > 772 million administered doses. Observed-to-expected ratios estimated for predefined AESIs proposed ahead of vaccine use. Expected rates derived from historical background rates. Dataset included 658,759 case reports (associated with 2,517,669 adverse events; N.B. a case report may contain >1 adverse event).	Evidence of increased risk identified for: anaphylaxis (OE ratio within 3 d after vaccination (OE 2.09, 95% CI 1.93–2.25); among vaccinees aged 12–40 y, myocarditis within 7 d after vaccination after any dose (OE 3.89, 95% CI 3.50–4.32); among men after dose 2, 8.57, 95% CI 6.88–10.68); and for pericarditis 0–7 d after vaccinations (OE 3.47, 95% CI 2.89–4.16). Most other AESIs had reporting rates below expected background incidence. AESI reports provide information for signal identification only.	 	Zwiers et al.ICPE (2024) poster/VAC4EU	VAC4EU study to identify risk factors and characterize the clinical course of myocarditis/pericarditis following mRNA-1273 vaccination in four European countries: first descriptive analyses.	Secondary healthcare/registry data from VAC4EU network data access partners across 4 European countries: Danish registries; Norwegian registries; CPRD (UK); SIDIAP (Catalonia, Spain); VID (Valencia, Spain).	Case-cohort design. Base cohort: individuals with ≥1 dose of mRNA-1273 during Jan 2021–Aug 2024; ≥1 y prior to enrollment; no myocarditis/pericarditis in prior 6 months. Cases: myocarditis/pericarditis within 30 d after mRNA-1273 receipt; 1:4 calendar-time matched controls. Descriptive results included data through Dec 2022 (Denmark, Norway, Spain) or Jun 2023 (UK; pending). mRNA-1273 recipients: Denmark 679,702; Norway 1,544,983; SIDIAP 266,558; VID 2,120,376 (CPRD pending).	Counts (selected DAPs): myocarditis – Denmark 45; Norway 80; SIDIAP <5; VID 20. Pericarditis – Denmark 52; Norway 138; SIDIAP <5; VID 70. Cases had higher proportion of males and younger individuals than controls. Conclusion that younger age and male sex may be associated with myocarditis/pericarditis occurrence within 30 d after mRNA-1273; comorbidities and prior healthcare utilization may be associated with pericarditis.	 	Gruber et al.medRxiv preprint (posted Jan 2025)	Safety monitoring of multiple health outcomes following 2023–2024 COVID-19 vaccination among Medicare beneficiaries aged 65 y and older in the United States.	U.S. Medicare Fee-for-Service (FFS) claims database (health plan data).	Near real-time monitoring of 2023–2024 formula COVID-19 vaccines (Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, Novavax) from Sept 2023 to Apr 2024. Evaluated 14 pre-specified health outcomes using self-controlled case series used (where case counts allowed) with conditional Poisson regression; adjusted for seasonality and other factors. Follow-up period 16 d for anaphylaxis; 90 d for all other outcomes. Approximately 7.6 million Medicare FFS beneficiaries received a 2023–2024 vaccine (Pfizer 3,689,356; Moderna 3,841,245; Novavax 30,171). Study period: Sept 2023–April 2024.	No new safety signals identified following 2023–2024 vaccination in Medicare beneficiaries ≥65. No statistically significant elevations reported for Moderna (mRNA-1273)
ADEM, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; AESI, adverse event of special interest; CI, confidence interval; GVDN, Global Vaccine Data Network; OE, observed versus expected.
aThe finding of elevated OE ratio for ADEM has not been replicated in large observational studies in the UK, Australia, and the US VSD.
Observational studies, often conducted within large databases coordinated by managed care organizations or insurers, have been useful to identify and characterize AESIs. Several studies have relied upon the Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD), a research collaboration coordinated by the CDC and composed of 8 participating large health systems having sophisticated analytical capabilities. The VSD has played a central role in vaccine safety assessment since the 1990s. In the pandemic, the VSD provided early findings for COVID-19 mRNA vaccine safety after the initial EUA for adults and then for vaccine safety in children aged 6 months–5 y following EUA. The former study characterized safety among 6.2 million persons who received 11.8 million mRNA vaccine doses, finding no meaningfully elevated risks for any of 23 AESIs within 1–21 d following vaccination (compared with a similar group 22–42 d after vaccination). The pediatric study, which occurred well after myocarditis had been recognized in adult vaccine recipients, used similar methods for 23 AESIs, differentiated risk by vaccine type, and found no statistically significant elevated risk for either of the mRNA vaccines (mRNA-1273: 112,006 doses; BNT162b2: 135,005 doses), while acknowledging that these sample sizes had limited power to detect very rare events. A detailed review of observational methods used in vaccine safety research is outside the scope of this review; however, Table 2 provides insight into the breadth of data sources and methods that have been utilized to evaluate mRNA-1273 safety. It includes an FDA Biologics Effectiveness and Safety (BEST) Initiative study using administrative data from several large health care plans, a European cohort study evaluating approximately 35 million mRNA-1273 recipients across eight EU countries, a multinational observational cohort study that evaluated AESIs from 10 sites across eight countries (>99 million person-years), a company-based review of spontaneous reports of AESIs received from all sources following more than 772 million administered doses of mRNA-1273, and a self-controlled case series assessment of AESIs among Medicare recipients (aged ≥65 y) who received 2023–2024 COVID-19 vaccine formulations. Apart from the findings for myocarditis/pericarditis and anaphylaxis discussed earlier, no additional AESIs had a consistent and reproducible elevated risk attributed to mRNA-1273 exposure.

Other adverse events and safety topics
Since December 2020 EUA, Moderna has evaluated thousands of different AEs. Among these, myocarditis and pericarditis have received the greatest attention and were recognized by the CDC in June 2025 as the only AEs distinct to the mRNA vaccines. In spring 2021, within months of the introduction of three COVID-19 vaccines in the US (the two mRNA vaccines BNT162b2 and mRNA-1273, as well as the adenovirus-vectored vaccine Ad26.COV2.S), two very rare AEs received dedicated attention from ACIP: thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (TTS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome. TTS is characterized by blood clotting in association with low platelet counts, may involve the cerebral sinuses and abdominal veins, and is considered an immune-mediated syndrome involving anti-PF4 IgG antibodies that trigger thrombosis and leading to platelet consumption and activation of inflammatory pathways. The syndrome resembles autoimmune heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, except that it occurs in the absence of heparin. Available evidence has not found either of the mRNA COVID-19 vaccines to be associated with vaccine-induced immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia. Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acute immune mediated peripheral neuropathy characterized by rapidly progressive ascending weakness and absent reflexes, most often following viral infection (and rarely vaccination). GBS has been evaluated and similarly found not to be associated with either mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. Immediately following detection (within VSD) of an apparently increased rate of ischemic stroke within 21 d of vaccination in persons aged ≥65 y who had concomitantly received a bivalent mRNA COVID-19 booster plus a high-dose (or adjuvanted) influenza vaccine, ACIP evaluated the issue, concluding that other federal systems had not replicated the finding. Additional studies (domestic and international) were similarly unable to replicate the finding; available evidence does not support the mRNA COVID-19 vaccine as increasing the risk for ischemic stroke.
Cases of urticaria had been observed during mRNA-1273 clinical development and reported to prescribers in the Fact Sheet as of December 2020, with 0.3% of vaccine recipients (vs. 0.1% of placebo recipients) reporting hypersensitivity events of injection site rash or injection site urticaria during the 28-d follow-up period after any dose (for the phase I-III trials). Based on reports received following EUA, the information was included as postmarketing information, meaning that reports had been received but that characterizing the frequency of occurrence was not possible. As noted previously, febrile seizures were observed within months following EUA for children and similarly acknowledged.
Table 1 provides a summary of the current assessment of mRNA-1273 safety with reference to the cumulative SPEAC list of AESIs. Among these 33 AESIs, only anaphylaxis and myocarditis/pericarditis have been causally associated with the vaccine. Several other AESIs have been reported, either in registrational clinical trials and/or have been recognized post-authorization to occur an unknown frequency. In these cases, an association has been recognized, but causality has not been confirmed. Establishment of causality requires not only a temporal relationship, but also a confirmed diagnosis with plausible time to onset, supportive clinical/epidemiological evidence, and an assessment of alternative etiologies.
As SARS-CoV-2 had evolved since its emergence, since the initial EUA several variant-matched mRNA-1273 formulations have been introduced. Post-authorization data to date have not identified and confirmed new AEs that are novel and clearly distinct from those observed with earlier vaccine formulations. Vaccine safety monitoring is ongoing.

Conclusions
The COVID-19 pandemic posed the greatest public health challenge since the Great Influenza of 1918. Until May 2023, when the pandemic was declared to have ended and COVID-19 had evolved into an endemic disease, COVID-19 had directly resulted in more than 1.13 million deaths in the US along with an estimated domestic economic impact of $14 trillion. While experts considered it highly improbable, two COVID-19 vaccines advanced from bench to bedside (EUA) in less than 1 y. Under extraordinary pandemic conditions, the rapid large-scale introduction of these vaccines created enormous expectations for government agencies and manufacturers to scrupulously monitor vaccine safety while urgently providing these vaccines on a massive population level scale.
More than 500,000 doses of COVID-19 vaccines were administered in the US within 1 y of EUA. Existing federal vaccine safety systems were bolstered (increased frequency of ACIP meetings, daily safety reporting capability for FDA/CMS) and new safety systems deployed (e.g. V-safe, BEST), while manufacturers such as Moderna expanded their pharmacovigilance capacity to meet the unique needs of monitoring the safety of a new vaccine distributed at massive scale in the setting of a pandemic.
Most important vaccine safety events are identified within a few months of licensure, and this was true for both anaphylaxis and myocarditis/pericarditis. There are comparatively few novel safety concerns that have emerged many years after vaccine introduction and have occurred almost exclusively in live-attenuated viral (or bacterial) vaccines. These include vaccine-associated viscerotropic disease and neurotropic disease (17D yellow fever vaccine), vaccine-associated paralytic polio (oral polio vaccine), and vaccine strain herpes zoster (Varicella vaccine). Late-emerging confirmed safety concerns are uncommon with other vaccine platforms (though ongoing surveillance helps identify them). The safety profile of mRNA-1273 was substantially characterized within approximately 1 y of its introduction across different age groups and special populations.
Considering both the rapidity and scale of vaccine introduction and the intensity of pharmacovigilance activities, COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring has been more comprehensive and more efficient than that for previously introduced vaccines. The interval between identification of a possible safety concern (i.e. anaphylaxis, myocarditis/pericarditis, thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome, and GBS) and action by public health regulatory agencies for all COVID-19 vaccines ranged from a few weeks to a few months, following intensive and comprehensive assessment of each of these safety signals. As examples, the CDC and FDA issued a pause statement on the use of the adenovirus 26−based vaccine, Ad26.COV2.S on April 13, 2021, 4 d after the European Medicines Agency (the FDA counterpart for the European Economic Area) indicated that it was formally evaluating cases of unusual blood clots associated with thrombocytopenia in recipients of that vaccine. Ten days later, the FDA revised the Fact Sheet for that vaccine, adding a warning that cases of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia had been observed. In June, 2021, the CDC Vaccine Safety Technical (VaST) Work Group reported that reports of GBS had been observed at higher than expected frequency among recipients of Ad26.COV2.S. Approximately 2 weeks later, the respective Fact Sheet was updated to include information suggesting an elevated risk for GBS in recipients of the Ad26.COV2.S. For myocarditis, the time from ACIP awareness of myocarditis and pericarditis and subsequent evidence-based assessment and regulatory action (label change) was just 39 d. Compare these intervals with the history of the rhesus tetravalent rotavirus vaccine, which was voluntarily withdrawn 13 months after initial reports of intussusception.
Pharmacovigilance is a continual process intended not only to identify and assess new safety signals, but also to refine (and mitigate) known risks. In contrast to medicinal products that are selectively prescribed by physicians to treat patients for a new or ongoing illness, vaccines are intended to prevent an illness, often in healthy populations, and are typically recommended for broad use at a population level. As such, societal expectations are especially high for vaccine safety monitoring. The US has had a particularly comprehensive and robust vaccine pharmacovigilance system, drawing data from multiple complementary sources that are then integrated to inform vaccine safety. Among these, registrational clinical trials provide systematically collected and detailed safety data on predefined study populations but cannot reasonably be designed to identify safety events that occur at very low frequency. Trials are often criticized for enrolling homogeneous populations, including underrepresentation of minority groups that may face different safety risks. To ensure that its phase III (COVE) trial population was representative of the US population, Moderna intentionally slowed enrollment to enhance appropriate inclusion of minority groups (e.g. black and Hispanic populations), ultimately achieving 37% of the trial population (compared with 40% of the US population). Following authorization, standard (aka “routine”) post-authorization safety monitoring, through the evaluation of data from sources such as spontaneous reports, is especially useful for identifying rare events occurring in the general population and remains a standard tool to identify very rare AEs. As an example, VAERS played an essential role in first characterizing the frequency and basic demographic characteristics of post-COVID-19 vaccine myocarditis. VAERS is subject to several known limitations, including: (1) under-reporting; (2) incomplete reports (e.g. lack of data on comorbidities and comedications); (3) uncertainty in confirming reports; (4) reporting biases (e.g. reporting may be subject to external influences such as media reports). Observational studies, often employing large, linked databases, frequently including millions of individuals, can be designed with comparator populations to support risk estimation. Their constraints may include: (1) limited ability to detect exceptionally rare events (e.g. to detect and characterize events occurring <1 per million doses); (2) reliance (often) upon administrative billing rather than medical record-level data to conduct analyses; (3) challenges in controlling for confounding (as vaccine use is not randomized as in a trial). Registries such as the V-Safe Pregnancy Registry, introduced during the pandemic, provide structured outcome data from women who self-identified and were useful for quickly assessing general safety among vaccinated pregnant women who enrolled. Like other registries, it was limited by enrollment bias (registry participants volunteered to participate), lack of a comparison group, and loss to follow up. Characterizing particular safety questions in some specialized populations with small populations, e.g. risk of disease flares in patients with auto-immune disease may best be assessed through systematic review or meta-analyses, acknowledging that the small numbers of exposed persons may lead to relatively imprecise risk estimates.
The safety profile of mRNA-1273 has been informed by clinical trials, spontaneous reporting, active surveillance in large, linked databases, and other data sources, each having distinct strengths and limitations. In aggregate, COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring has been exceptionally intensive and conducted at an unprecedented scale. The safety profile of mRNA-1273 and the succeeding variant-matched vaccines has been broadly consistent for several years. Systematic safety monitoring continues to assess new and emerging safety concerns, as pharmacovigilance is an ongoing, iterative process supporting timely and accurate safety assessment of medicinal products.

Supplementary Material

Disclosure statement
WS is an employee of Moderna, Inc., and may hold stock/stock options in the company.

Data availability statement
The data in this review are summarized from published articles and publicly available sources.

Abbreviations
ACIP
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
ACOG
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
Ad26.COV2.S
Janssen/Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine (Ad26.COV2.S)
AESI
Adverse event(s) of special interest
BEST
Biologics Effectiveness and Safety (BEST) Initiative (FDA)
BNT162b2
Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine (BNT162b2)
CD4
CD4 T lymphocyte (helper T cell) count/cells
CDC
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
CMS
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
COVE
COVE trial (Moderna phase 3 efficacy trial)
COVID-19
Coronavirus disease 2019
DSMB
Data and Safety Monitoring Board
EUA
Emergency Use Authorization
GBS
Guillain – Barré syndrome
LNP
Lipid nanoparticle
MERS-CoV
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
MIS-C
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
mRNA
messenger RNA
mRNA-1273
Moderna COVID-19 vaccine (mRNA-1273)
NVX-CoV2373
Novavax COVID-19 vaccine (NVX-CoV2373)
OWS
Operation Warp Speed (OWS)
SARS-CoV-2
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
SPEAC
Safety Platform for Emergency vACcines
TTS
Thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome
VAERS
Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
VRBPAC
Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory Committee (VRBPAC)
VSD
Vaccine Safety Datalink (VSD)

Supplementary Information
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed online at https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2026.2653369

References
Risk assessment: outbreak of acute respiratory syndrome associated with a novel coronavirus, Wuhan, China; first update – 22 January 2020
First case of 2019 novel coronavirus in the United States
Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response. Determination that a public health emergency exists nationwide as the result of the 2019 novel coronavirus
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)
Update: Severe acute respiratory syndrome — worldwide and United States, 2003
COVID-19 public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC). Global research and innovation forum: towards a research roadmap
Characteristics of and important lessons from the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: summary of a report of 72 314 cases from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention
The US strategic national stockpile (SNS) ventilators in COVID-19: a comparison of functionality and analysis regarding the emergency purchase of 200,000 devices
COVID-19: before the fall, an evidence-based narrative review of treatment options
What we know about COVID-19 vaccine development
Trump unveils ‘warp-speed’ effort to create coronavirus vaccine by year’s end
Operation Warp Speed: Accelerated COVID-19 vaccine development status and efforts to address manufacturing challenges
Accelerating COVID-19 therapeutic interventions and vaccines (ACTIV): an unprecedented partnership for unprecedented times
Explaining operationWarp speed
FDA in brief: FDA issues guidance on emergency use authorization for COVID-19 vaccines
COVID-19: FDA defies Trump to publish rigorous vaccine development guidelines
About Covpn
FDA briefing document: Moderna COVID-19 vaccine
Developing safe and effective Covid vaccines — Operation Warp Speed’s strategy and approach
mRNA vaccines—a new era in vaccinology
Wuhan seafood market pneumonia virus – whole genome sequence
SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine design enabled by prototype pathogen preparedness
Evaluation of the mRNA-1273 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 in nonhuman primates
Considerations for developmental toxicity studies for preventive and therapeutic vaccines for infectious disease indications: guidance for industry
An mRNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2—preliminary report
Antibody persistence through 6 months after the second dose of mRNA-1273 vaccine for COVID-19
Durability of responses after SARS-CoV-2 mRNA-1273 vaccination
A preliminary report of a randomized controlled phase 2 trial of the safety and immunogenicity of mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
Safety and immunogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA-1273 vaccine in older adults
Efficacy and safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
Vaccines and related biological products advisory committee meeting: December 17, 2020 – meeting minutes
Vaccines and related biological products advisory committee meeting, June 14-15, 2022; FDA briefing document, EUA amendment request for use of the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine in children 6 months through 17 years of age
COVID-19 vaccine safety reporting systems
Interim recommendation of the advisory committee on immunization practices for use of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine in persons aged ≥18 years — United States, July 2022
Guideline on good pharmacovigilance practices (GVP)
Vaccine safety signals – what are they and what to do when you find one
D2.3 priority list of adverse events of special interest: COVID-19 (version 1.1)
SPEAC_D2.3_V2.0_COVID-19_20200525_PUBLIC.PDF
MMWR: allergic reactions including anaphylaxis after Moderna COVID-19 vaccine (Dec 2020–Jan 2021)
Updated COVID-19 AESI list
SO2_D2.1.2_V1.2_COVID-19_AESI UPDATE 23Dec2020 REVIEW_FINAL.PDF
SPIKEVAX (COVID-19 vaccine, mRNA) prescribing information (2024-2025 formula) (includes dermal filler swelling; delayed injection-site reactions)
Flu vaccination coverage, United States, 2019–20 influenza season
FDA updates of COVID-19 vaccine safety activities
Surveillance for adverse events after COVID-19 mRNA vaccination
Importance of background rates of disease in assessment of vaccine safety during mass immunisation with pandemic H1N1 influenza vaccines
The how’s and what’s of vaccine reactogenicity
Allergic reactions including anaphylaxis after receipt of the first dose of Moderna COVID-19 vaccine - United States, December 21, 2020-January 10, 2021
Risk of anaphylaxis after vaccination in children and adults
Anaphylaxis in America: Prevalence and characteristics of anaphylaxis in the United States
Interim considerations: preparing for the potential management of anaphylaxis after COVID-19 vaccination
Myocarditis
Myocarditis and inflammatory cardiomyopathy: current evidence and future directions
Diagnosis and treatment of pericarditis
SARS-coronavirus modulation of myocardial ACE2 expression and inflammation in patients with SARS
Acute myocarditis associated with novel Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
Myopericarditis following smallpox vaccination among vaccinia-naive US military personnel
Clinical predictors of mortality due to COVID-19 based on an analysis of 150 patients from Wuhan, China
Cardiac involvement in a patient with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Cardiac implications of novel Wuhan coronavirus, February 14, 2020
Association between COVID-19 and myocarditis using hospital-based administrative data - United States, March 2020-January 2021
Israel said probing link between Pfizer shot and heart problem in men under 30
Myocarditis following immunization with mRNA COVID-19 vaccines in members of the US military
COVID-19 subcommittee of the WHO Global Advisory Committee on Vaccine Safety (GACVS) reviews cases of mild myocarditis reported with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines
Fact sheet for healthcare providers administering vaccine (Vaccination providers): Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) of the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine to prevent coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Analysis of myocarditis among 252 million mRNA-1273 recipients worldwide
Use of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine after reports of myocarditis among vaccine recipients: update from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices - United States, June 2021
Cardiac complications after SARS-CoV-2 infection and mRNA COVID-19 vaccination - PCORnet, United States, January 2021-January 2022
Clinical characteristics and prognostic factors of myocarditis associated with the mRNA COVID-19 vaccine
Risk of myocarditis and pericarditis after the COVID-19 mRNA vaccination in the USA: a cohort study in claims databases
Safety monitoring of bivalent COVID-19 mRNA vaccines among recipients 6 months and older in the United States
Third time’s a harm? Cardiac risk of SARS CoV 2 mRNA booster vaccines in younger men
Safety monitoring of COVID-19 vaccine booster doses among adults - United States, September 22, 2021-February 6, 2022
Novavax COVID-19 vaccine, adjuvanted (Nuvaxovid) – prescribing information [Package insert]
Sex differences in immune responses
Myocarditis cases reported after mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccination in the US from December 2020 to August 2021
Epidemiology of myocarditis and pericarditis following mRNA vaccination by vaccine product, schedule, and interdose interval among adolescents and adults in Ontario, Canada
Altering the mRNA-1273 dosing interval impacts the kinetics, quality, and magnitude of immune responses in mice
Myopericarditis associated with the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine (NVX-CoV2373): a retrospective analysis of individual case safety reports from VigiBase
Anxiety-related adverse events following immunization (AEFI): a systematic review of published clusters of illness
Anxiety-related adverse event clusters after Janssen COVID-19 vaccination — five U.S. mass vaccination sites, April 2021
Characteristics of women of reproductive age with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection by pregnancy status—United States, January 22–June 7, 2020
Update: characteristics of symptomatic women of reproductive age with laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection by pregnancy status—United States, January 22–October 3, 2020
Clinical manifestations, risk factors, and maternal and perinatal outcomes of coronavirus disease 2019 in pregnancy: living systematic review and meta-analysis
Birth and infant outcomes following laboratory-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection in pregnancy - SET-NET, 16 jurisdictions, March 29-October 14, 2020
Vaccinating pregnant and lactating patients against COVID-19
Use of Pfizer–BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine: clinical considerations. Emergency meeting of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Preliminary findings of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine safety in pregnant persons
Spontaneous abortion following COVID-19 vaccination during pregnancy
COVID-19 vaccination during pregnancy and first-trimester miscarriage
Association of COVID-19 vaccination in pregnancy with adverse peripartum outcomes
COVID-19 infection and vaccination during first trimester and risk of congenital anomalies: Nordic registry based study
Receipt of COVID-19 vaccine during pregnancy and preterm or small-for-gestational-age at birth—eight integrated health care organizations, United States, December 15, 2020–July 22, 2021
Effectiveness of maternal mRNA COVID-19 vaccination during pregnancy against COVID-19–associated hospitalizations in infants aged <6 months during SARS-CoV-2 omicron predominance—20 states, March 9, 2022–May 31, 2023
Evaluation of messenger RNA from COVID-19 BTN162b2 and mRNA-1273 vaccines in human milk
Detection of messenger RNA COVID-19 vaccines in human breast milk
The many pathways of RNA degradation
The effects of COVID-19 vaccination on lactating women: a systematic review of the literature
SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in breast milk after vaccination
Evaluation of mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine in adolescents
Evaluation of mRNA-1273 COVID-19 vaccine in children 6 to 11 years of age
Evaluation of mRNA-1273 vaccine in children 6 months to 5 years of age
Vaccines and related biological products advisory committee meeting June 14-15, 2022. FDA briefing document. EUA amendment request for use of the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine in children 6 months through 17 years of age
COVID-19 mRNA vaccine safety among children aged 6 months–5 years — United States, June 18, 2022–August 21, 2022
A review of febrile seizures: recent advances in understanding of febrile seizure pathophysiology and commonly implicated viral triggers
COVID-19 and acute neurologic complications in children
Safety of ancestral monovalent BNT162b2, mRNA-1273, and NVX-CoV2373 COVID-19 vaccines in U.S. children aged 6 months–17 years
Febrile seizure risk following monovalent COVID-19 mRNA vaccination in US children aged 2-5 years
Incidence of febrile seizures in children with COVID-19
Third time’s a charm - COVID-19 vaccine hope for solid-organ transplant recipients
Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: FDA authorizes additional vaccine dose for certain immunocompromised individuals
Randomized trial of a third dose of mRNA-1273 vaccine in transplant recipients
Efficacy and safety of COVID-19 vaccination in solid organ transplant recipients: a systematic review and network meta-analysis
SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccination and short-term changes in viral load and CD4/CD8 T-cell counts in people living with HIV
SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 outcomes in rheumatic diseases: a systematic literature review and meta-analysis
Patients with systemic autoimmune rheumatic diseases remain at risk for hospitalisation for COVID-19 infection in the Omicron era (2022-2024): a retrospective cohort study
Long-term risk of autoimmune diseases after mRNA-based SARS-CoV2 vaccination in a Korean, nationwide, population-based cohort study
Risk of autoimmune skin and connective tissue disorders after mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccination
COVID-19 vaccines: safety surveillance manual
Safety of COVID-19 mRNA vaccination among young children in the Vaccine Safety Datalink
Good pharmacoepidemiology practices (GPP)
Real-time vaccine safety surveillance for the early detection of adverse events
A maximized sequential probability ratio test for drug and vaccine safety surveillance
11th revision of the ENCePP guide on methodological standards in pharmacoepidemiology published
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and transverse myelitis following COVID-19 vaccination – a self-controlled case series analysis
The risk of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) following COVID-19 vaccination in England: a self-controlled case-series analysis
Near real-time surveillance of safety outcomes in US COVID-19 vaccine recipients aged 12 to 64 years
Myocarditis/pericarditis after Spikevax—multi-country cohort results
COVID-19 vaccines and adverse events of special interest: a multinational Global Vaccine Data Network (GVDN) cohort study of 99 million vaccinated individuals
Global safety assessment of adverse events of special interest following 2 years of use and 772 million administered doses of mRNA-1273
Safety monitoring of multiple health outcomes following 2023–2024 COVID-19 vaccination among Medicare beneficiaries aged 65 years and older in the United States
Update on CDC’s COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring
Thrombotic thrombocytopenia after ChAdOx1 nCov-19 vaccination
Updated recommendations from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices for use of the Janssen (Johnson & Johnson) COVID-19 vaccine after reports of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome among vaccine recipients—United States, April 2021
Guillain-Barre syndrome
Use of COVID-19 vaccines after reports of adverse events among adult recipients of Janssen (Johnson & Johnson) and mRNA COVID-19 vaccines (Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna): update from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices—United States, July 2021
Ischemic stroke, COVID-19 and influenza in adults ages ≥65 years
Stroke risk after COVID-19 bivalent vaccination among U.S. older adults
Ba.1 bivalent COVID-19 vaccine use and stroke in England
Stroke, myocardial infarction, and pulmonary embolism after bivalent booster
Update on COVID-19 and influenza vaccine safety
Package insert Spikevax
COVID-19’s total cost to the U.S. economy will reach $14 trillion by end of 2023
Why a coronavirus vaccine could take way longer than a year
Acute viscerotropic disease following vaccination against yellow fever
Advisory committee on immunization p. Poliomyelitis prevention in the United States. Updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
Prevention of herpes zoster: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Joint CDC and FDA statement on Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine
Letter authorizing revision of the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine emergency use authorization (addition of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome warning)
COVID-19 vaccine safety technical (VaST) work group report, June 28, 2021
Fda news release — Coronavirus (COVID-19) update: July 13, 2021
Intussusception among recipients of rotavirus vaccine–United States, 1998-1999
Withdrawal of rotavirus vaccine recommendation
Diversity and inclusion in clinical trials: evolution throughout the development of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine
Risk of flare or relapse in patients with immune-mediated diseases following SARS-CoV-2 vaccination: a systematic review and meta-analysis