Workup and management of liver transplantation in alcohol‐related liver disease
Abstract
Alcohol‐related liver disease (ALD) represents the most common indication for liver transplantation (LT) worldwide. Outcomes of LT for ALD are comparable with those of LT for other etiologies; however, ALD is still considered a controversial indication for LT, mainly because it is considered a self‐inflicted disease with a high risk of return to alcohol use after LT. Pre‐LT evaluation criteria have changed over time, with a progressive re‐evaluation of the required pre‐transplant duration of abstinence. Despite the fact that some transplant programs still require 6 months of abstinence in order to consider a patient suitable for LT, there is increasing evidence that a pre‐transplant abstinence period of <6 months can be considered for well‐selected patients. Early LT for severe alcohol‐related hepatitis that has not responded to medical therapy has been shown to be an effective therapeutic option with high survival benefit when performed within strict and well‐recognized criteria. However, high variability in LT access exists for these patients due to the presence of social and medical stigma. A psycho‐social assessment, together with an evaluation by an addiction specialist, should be mandatory in patients with ALD who are potential candidates for LT in order to assess the risk of post‐transplant return to alcohol use and to ensure good long‐term outcomes. Finally, before LT, attention should be paid to the presence of other potential comorbidities (i.e., cardiovascular and neurological diseases), which could represent a potential contraindication to LT. Similarly, after LT, patients should be adequately monitored for the development of cardiovascular events and screened for “de novo” tumors, although standardized protocols for this monitoring do not exist at this time.

INTRODUCTION
Alcohol‐related liver disease (ALD) is the most common indication for liver transplantation (LT) in Europe and North America, with survival rates following LT for ALD that are comparable to those of LT for other liver diseases. However, alcohol‐related cirrhosis still represents a controversial indication, mainly due to the perception that it is a self‐inflicted disease and due to the potential risk of return to alcohol‐drinking after LT, with a negative impact on the new graft. Alcoholism is known to be one of the most severely stigmatized illnesses, even more so than psychiatric pathologies because society blames alcoholic patients for their illness and ALD patients have reported feeling discriminated against by health professionals in several studies. Additionally, structural stigma, which refers to institutional and government policies disadvantages the stigmatized group and is particularly relevant when resources are scarce, such as in the case of LT. Numerous surveys of the general public, patients, and health care professionals indicate the ALD patients are thought to have lower priority for access to available liver grafts. In this context, the probability of LT referral for ALD remains significantly less compared to non‐alcohol‐related etiologies, regardless of current drinking status. Indeed, although LT is a life‐saving treatment in many indications, the ever‐increasing shortage of organs has accentuated the low priority given to patients with ALD and despite the excellent results of LT in these patients, the health professionals remain reluctant to refer to these patients towards a transplant evaluation which is ultimately only carried out in a minority of them.
Furthermore, even if the results of early therapy for alcohol‐related hepatitis (AH) in Europe and the United States (US) are encouraging, heterogeneities persist for this indication throughout the world not only between different countries, but also between different centers in the same country.
The evaluation process for the LT of patients with alcohol‐related cirrhosis is quite similar to that of patients with other etiologies of cirrhosis. Indeed, the indications and contraindications for LT in patients with alcohol‐related cirrhosis are the same as those for patients with cirrhosis of any etiology. However, there are specific issues that need to be addressed during the evaluation process and after LT, including evaluation of addiction, screening of return to alcohol drinking, and specific somatic evaluation related to potential multisystemic effects of long‐term alcohol abuse.

HOW TO SELECT A PATIENT WITH ALD FOR LT
The selection of LT candidates with alcohol‐use disorder (AUD) is influenced by the risk of return to alcohol use after LT. The 6‐month rule, which advocates for a 6‐month period of abstinence before admitting patients with ALD to the LT waiting list, was previously used in many transplantation centers. Although longer abstinence may be associated with lower rates of alcohol relapse, the association of a 6‐month cut‐off with post‐LT return to alcohol use in patients with ALD is neither validated nor applicable for patients who are unlikely to survive 6 months without LT. It is now well established that a pre‐transplant abstinence period of <6 months can be considered for well‐selected patients and guidelines from the US and Europe do not currently propose a 6‐month abstinence period as a mandatory selection criterion. There is currently no consensus on the appropriate minimum duration of alcohol abstinence that must be achieved before patients can be placed on the waiting list. Indeed, abstinence can lead to significant improvements in liver function, avoiding the need for transplantation and one of the main challenges is to identify patients susceptible to improve their liver function thanks to abstinence, showed that ALD patients had more favorable waiting list outcomes than non ALD patients with 16% lower risk of removal for deterioration and 191% higher risk of removal for improvement, which likely reflects the benefits of alcohol abstinence. Moreover, Pose et al. showed that 8.6% of patients with alcohol‐related decompensated cirrhosis were delisted after improvement at a median time of 29 months after waiting list admission. Lower MELD scores and higher platelets at waiting list admission were independently associated with delisting due to improvement. Women also have a higher probability of being delisted after improvement, partially due to reduced early access to LT for height discrepancies. Five years after delisting, the cumulative probability of remaining free from liver‐related death or LT was 76%. These improvements in liver function therefore most often occur within 3 months of stopping alcohol use, but can occur beyond 6 months of abstinence and ALD is the underlying etiology in the majority of patients who are removed from the LT waiting list following recompensation.
Interestingly, Herrick‐Reynolds et al showed that ALD patients with <6‐months of abstinence had similar patient survival, allograft survival and relapse‐free survival than patients with more than 6 months of abstinence. Moreover, Carrique et al. showed that a prospective program providing relapse prevention treatment for ALD patients with <6 months of abstinence resulted in a reduction in return to alcohol after LT.
Other risk factors, such as a family history of AUD, lack of desire to abstain, and weak social support, are also associated with return to alcohol drinking after LT. Thus, the pre‐transplant evaluation must include a variety of factors that must be interpreted by an addiction specialist who is an integral member of the transplant team. It has been demonstrated that the presence of an alcohol addiction unit within the liver transplant center reduces the risk of alcohol recidivism after LT.
The most effective treatment for AUD is a combination of psychosocial interventions including motivational enhancement therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy, attendance at support groups such as Alcoholics Anonymous, and pharmacological therapy. Specific drugs combined with counseling can prevent recidivism in patients with AUD. However, the use of some drugs (such as disulfuram, naltrexone, or acamprosate) is limited in patients with decompensated cirrhosis due to potential hepatotoxicity or the lack of studies on the use of these molecules in this patient population. Baclofen is safe and seems to be effective for preventing alcohol relapse in patients with advanced ALD, but it has not been investigated in the LT recipient population.
In the context of evaluation for LT of patients with ALD, a specific population is represented by patients with severe alcohol‐related hepatitis (sAH), which is a clinical syndrome characterized by a very high mortality rate (nearly 70%) in patients who do not respond to medical therapy. For many years, this disease was considered an absolute contraindication to LT due to the absence of pre‐LT abstinence and for the high risk of post‐LT return to alcohol use. However, in 2011, in a multicenter French‐Belgian study, Mathurin et al. showed that early LT (eLT) can significantly increase survival in patients with sAH who have not responded to medical therapy, if performed within strict selection criteria. This required a dedicated multidisciplinary approach evaluating social and family support, and absence of psychiatric disorders, to assess the willingness and ability of the patient to adhere to lifelong total alcohol abstinence. Only patients who fulfilled the above‐mentioned criteria were considered suitable for LT. Another important finding from this experience was the high risk of invasive aspergillosis in these patients, highlighting the need for strict screening for infection (including opportunistic infections) before placing the patient on a waiting list for LT.
Similarly, Lee et al. evaluated the role of eLT in patients with sAH in the US who had not responded to medical therapy. Although patient characteristics were different compared with the seminal study by Mathurin et al. due to the fact that, at explant, 41% of patients had cirrhosis with no signs of hepatitis and only 54% underwent steroid therapy, evaluation criteria for LT were similar. The main difference was that psychiatric comorbidities, if well controlled, were not considered an absolute contraindication by most centers (10 out of 12), and neither was a recent gastrointestinal bleeding.
More recently, an Italian multicenter study representing the first experience in Italy and the second in Europe, evaluated the role of eLT for sAH that had not responded to medical therapy. Only 50% of the patients underwent steroid therapy, and all of the patients presented with histological signs of AH developed on a background of alcohol‐related cirrhosis at explant. Similar to the French‐Belgian experience, patients with psychiatric comorbidities were excluded from the study, whereas patients with previous gastro‐intestinal bleeding were not excluded.
Independent of the differences in baseline patient characteristics and the slight differences in selection criteria, these three multicenter studies all showed that patients with sAH that had not responded to medical therapy who underwent eLT, after a strict and multidisciplinary selection process, achieved significantly higher survival rates at 1, 2, and 3 years compared with patients with sAH that had not responded to medical therapy who were denied this therapeutic option. Considering these results, scientific societies have included specific recommendations in their practical guidelines stating that sAH can be considered a potential indication for eLT only in highly selected patients.
However, high variability still exists in access to eLT for sAH, not only between countries but also between different centers in the same country, generating a potential “postcode lottery” scenario where the likelihood of being listed for transplantation is related to the place you live and the policy of the local transplant center. This heterogeneity seems highly correlated to the stigma that patients with ALD, and in particular patients with AH, often experience, affecting the healthcare of ALD patients at all stages, from prevention, early detection, and intervention, to allocation of scarce resources in LT.

DEFINITION, DETECTION, AND CONSEQUENCES OF RETURN TO ALCOHOL DRINKING
Return to alcohol use is reported in 10%–50% of transplant recipients for alcohol‐related cirrhosis. This large variation in reported prevalence rates is probably due to different definitions used, with some studies defining return to alcohol‐use as any alcohol use while others only include harmful drinking. Long‐term studies have demonstrated that occasional or moderately heavy drinking does not impact graft function or patient survival. However, significant alcohol intake is associated with poor survival after LT. An estimated 10%–20% of patients who return to alcohol use after LT have a harmful drinking pattern and it has been shown that severe alcoholic relapse usually occurs in the early years after LT and is responsible for severe graft injury in a very few years with a cumulative risk of cirrhosis of 15% at 3 years, 32% at 5 years, and 54% at 10 years after severe alcoholic relapse. Moreover, recurrence of alcohol‐related cirrhosis is associated with a high risk of liver decompensation and a poor prognosis, with a survival rate of 37.8% at 5 years after diagnosis of cirrhosis.
In patients undergoing eLT for sAH, the rates of return to alcohol use after LT range between 12.5% and 34% when any use is considered and from 10% to 22% when harmful drinking is evaluated.
Considering the impact of return to alcohol use after eLT for sAH, a recent study reported that high alcohol intake was more frequent after eLT than after standard LT for alcohol‐related cirrhosis, but confirmed the survival benefit related to eLT with no differences in survival rates between the sAH group and patients with alcohol‐related cirrhosis who underwent the standard evaluation.
Conversely, Lee et al. showed that patients returning to alcohol use after eLT had a significantly lower survival rate at 3 years compared with post‐transplant abstinent patients (75% vs. 97%, p = 0.03). The same group recently demonstrated that different patterns of return to alcohol use after eLT for sAH are associated with different post‐LT outcomes. In particular, patients who resume alcohol drinking early after LT have the worst survival rates compared with abstinent patients and with those who return to alcohol use late after LT.
These observations reinforce the need for adequate and multidisciplinary pre‐ and post‐LT assessment with specific interventions to identify patients at risk, to reinforce the importance of abstinence, and to prevent graft injury. Indeed, complete abstinence after transplantation should always be the goal for patients undergoing LT for ALD.
Screening for alcohol use should be assessed in all patients on the waiting list and early after LT, ideally starting with validated screening questionnaires such as the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test. Biological markers of alcohol consumption and, particularly, direct biomarkers of alcohol metabolism such as ethyl glucuronide (EtG), ethyl sulfate (EtS), and phosphatidylethanol (Peth), have been shown to increase sensitivity for detection of alcohol. EtG and EtS are detectable in the urine with a window for alcohol detection of about 4–5 days, with a reported sensitivity of 62%–89% and a specificity of 93%–99%. These alcohol metabolites can also be found in hair, which is a very specific marker of long‐term alcohol consumption, but hair samples of sufficient length may not be available. Finally, the presence of Peth in blood samples indicates alcohol consumption in the last 28 days, with high sensitivity and specificity. The specific biochemical test used depends on availability, program resources, and costs and, although these tools can help to identify heavy or persistent alcohol use, the role of addiction experts in the transplant unit is essential and addiction specialists are needed not only before but also during patient follow‐up after LT to reduce the risk of relapse.
Although the use of validated screening questionnaires and the use of biological markers of alcohol consumption are useful instruments to assess and pre‐LT alcohol use, they have not been proved to be associated with return to alcohol use after LT. Therefore, these biomarkers should be used to monitor pre‐LT and post‐LT alcohol abstinence and therefore adherence to medical indications, but they should be considered as part of a multidisciplinary assessment.
In the setting of eLT for sAH, as well as for patients with alcohol‐related cirrhosis, it is crucial to identify potential risk factors for return to alcohol use after LT overall, with particular attention to sustained patterns. Beyond the above‐mentioned strategies, which can be applied to all patients with ALD, dedicated approaches for patients with sAH should be put into place due to the fact that the different clinical picture and high severity of the disease often do not allow a prolonged pre‐LT evaluation.
The Sustained Alcohol use post‐Liver Transplantation (SALT) score has been developed, based on four variables associated with post‐transplant high alcohol intake (>10 drinks/day at hospitalization, ≥2 prior failed rehabilitation attempts, any history of prior alcohol‐related legal issues, and history of non‐tetrahydrocannabinol illicit substance abuse). A SALT score of <5 is associated with a negative predictive value of 95% (95% CI: 89%–98%) for sustained alcohol use post‐LT, whereas a SALT score of ≥5 is associated with a positive predictive value (PPV) of 25% (95% CI: 10%–47%).
The same group recently published preliminary data on the use of artificial intelligence to predict post‐LT harmful alcohol use in patients who are undergoing eLT for sAH. The model identifies specific variables related to social support and substance use as highly important to predict post‐LT harmful alcohol use, with a PPV of 0.891 (95% CI 0.620–1.000) in the training set and a PPV of 0.82 (95% CI 0.625–1.000) in the external validation cohort.
Although larger studies are needed to confirm these preliminary data, we believe that technology, namely artificial intelligence, could represent a crucial step towards an integrated and more sophisticated assessment of risk to return to alcohol use in patients with ALD.

SPECIFIC SOMATIC EVALUATION FOR ALD PATIENTS BEFORE AND AFTER LT
Patients with ALD often present with malnutrition, bone density loss, sarcopenia, and vitamin deficiencies. A multidisciplinary approach including nutritional status assessment and identification and treatment of osteopenia and osteoporosis is thus recommended during pre‐LT evaluation.
ALD patients may also suffer from various neurological syndromes, including seizures, brain atrophy and dementia, Wernicke's encephalopathy, Wernicke‐Korsakoff's syndrome, and polyneuropathy. Therefore, a careful evaluation by a neurologist is highly recommended. Although in some cases alcohol‐related dementia is difficult to differentiate from hepatic encephalopathy, the distinction is necessary because alcohol‐related dementia is often irreversible and represents a contraindication to LT, whereas hepatic encephalopathy is largely reversible after LT.
As patients who receive LT for ALD have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and the incidence of cardiovascular events is higher in patients transplanted for ALD compared to patients transplanted for other causes of liver disease, additional screening for atherosclerosis and ischemic heart disease before LT and pharmacological therapies must be initiated as soon as possible to control arterial hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, and obesity.
Previous alcohol abuse, often associated with tobacco use, has been shown to be associated with increased risk of cancer, in particular upper gastrointestinal, oropharyngeal, and lung cancers. Moreover, in patients transplanted for ALD the incidence of “de novo” tumors as a cause of death after LT has been reported to be at least two‐fold higher compared to other indications. Although there are no general guidelines for pre‐transplant cancer screening and for post‐LT cancer surveillance in patients with ALD, a more intensive surveillance protocol including, among other things, upper GI endoscopy, chest CT‐scan, and otolaryngological examination, should be considered. In particular, we believe that upper GI endoscopy and colonoscopy should be performed within 3 years after LT and then every 5 years, whereas gynecological and dermatological screening should be performed annually. Chest CT‐scan, and otolaryngological examination should be performed annually in smoking patients (Figure 1).
Multiorgan evaluation before and after liver transplantation in patients with ALD. ALD, alcohol‐related liver disease; CV, cardiovascular; ENT, ear, nose, throat.

CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, ALD represents the primary indication for LT worldwide. Despite the fact that post‐LT survival outcomes are comparable to other etiologies, ALD patients still suffer from reduced access to LT, mainly due to the perception that ALD is a self‐inflicted disease and to the risk of return to alcohol‐use after LT. To improve care for people with ALD in the setting of LT, the stigma of ALD needs to be challenged and the implementation of training on ALD‐related stigma for health professionals is one of the strategies to reduce stigma. A thorough pre‐transplant multidisciplinary assessment is necessary to properly identify potential risk factors of reduced post‐transplant survival and of increased risk of return to harmful alcohol use (Figure 2). Similarly, in the post‐LT setting, a dedicated follow‐up should be offered to patients transplanted for ALD, including an addiction specialist and a psychologist, to early diagnose and adequately treat the return to alcohol use. Lastly, patients with ALD should be screened regularly for cardiovascular and neurological diseases, psychiatric disorders, and neoplasms before and after LT.
The multidisciplinary evaluation of liver transplantation in patients with alcohol‐related liver disease.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose with regard to the preparation of this manuscript.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

REFERENCES
Impact of DAAs on liver transplantation: major effects on the evolution of indications and results. An ELITA study based on the ELTR registry
Alcoholic liver disease replaces hepatitis C virus infection as the leading indication for liver transplantation in the United States
Consequences of perceived stigma among patients with cirrhosis
The stigma of alcohol‐related liver disease and its impact on healthcare
Public and professional attitudes to transplanting alcoholic patients
Management of alcohol use disorder in patients requiring liver transplant
Liver transplantation for alcoholic liver disease
Liver transplantation for alcoholic hepatitis: being consistent about where to set the bar
Liver transplantation for alcoholic hepatitis: a survey of liver transplant centers
EASL Clinical Practice Guidelines: management of alcohol‐related liver disease
A shorter duration of pre‐transplant abstinence predicts problem drinking after liver transplantation
Evaluation of early vs standard liver transplant for alcohol‐associated liver disease
Diagnosis and treatment of alcohol‐associated liver diseases: 2019 practice guidance from the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases
Superior wait‐list outcomes in patients with alcohol‐associated liver disease compared with other indications for liver transplantation
A notable proportion of liver transplant candidates with alcohol‐related cirrhosis can be delisted because of clinical improvement
Results of early transplantation for alcohol‐related cirrhosis: integrated addiction treatment with low rate of relapse
Liver transplantation in alcoholic patients: impact of an alcohol addiction unit within a liver transplant center
Early liver transplantation for severe alcoholic hepatitis
Invasive aspergillosis in patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis
Outcomes of early liver transplantation for patients with severe alcoholic hepatitis
Liver transplantation for severe alcoholic hepatitis: a multicenter Italian study
Alcohol‐related liver disease: clinical practice guidelines by the Latin American Association for the Study of the Liver (ALEH)
Timing of liver transplantation in alcoholic cirrhosis
Alcohol relapse after liver transplantation for alcoholic liver disease: does it matter?
Recidivism in liver transplant recipients for alcohol‐related liver disease
Excessive alcohol consumption after liver transplantation impacts on long‐term survival, whatever the primary indication
Severe alcoholic relapse after liver transplantation: what consequences on the graft? A study based on liver biopsies analysis
Natural history of recurrent alcohol‐related cirrhosis after liver transplantation: fast and furious
Early liver transplantation for severe acute alcohol‐related hepatitis after more than a decade of experience
Early liver transplantation for severe alcohol‐related hepatitis not responding to medical treatment: a prospective controlled study
Patterns of alcohol use after early liver transplantation for alcoholic hepatitis
Urinary ethyl glucuronide as a novel screening tool in patients pre‐ and post‐liver transplantation improves detection of alcohol consumption
Determination of ethyl glucuronide in hair improves evaluation of long‐term alcohol abstention in liver transplant candidates
Improved detection of alcohol consumption using the novel marker phosphatidylethanol in the transplant setting: results of a prospective study
Predicting low risk for sustained alcohol use after early liver transplant for acute alcoholic hepatitis: the sustained alcohol use post‐liver transplant score
Artificial intelligence to identify harmful alcohol use after early liver transplant for alcohol‐associated hepatitis
Management of osteoporosis in liver disease
Challenges in transplantation for alcoholic liver disease
Liver transplantation for alcoholic liver disease in Europe: a study from the ELTR (European Liver Transplant Registry)