Targeting the brain’s glymphatic pathway: A novel therapeutic approach for cerebral small vessel disease
Cerebral small vessel disease encompasses a group of neurological disorders characterized by injury to small blood vessels, often leading to stroke and dementia. Due to its diverse etiologies and complex pathological mechanisms, preventing and treating cerebral small vessel vasculopathy is challenging. Recent studies have shown that the glymphatic system plays a crucial role in interstitial solute clearance and the maintenance of brain homeostasis. Increasing evidence also suggests that dysfunction in glymphatic clearance is a key factor in the progression of cerebral small vessel disease. This review begins with a comprehensive introduction to the structure, function, and driving factors of the glymphatic system, highlighting its essential role in brain waste clearance. Afterwards, cerebral small vessel disease was reviewed from the perspective of the glymphatic system, after which the mechanisms underlying their correlation were summarized. Glymphatic dysfunction may lead to the accumulation of metabolic waste in the brain, thereby exacerbating the pathological processes associated with cerebral small vessel disease. The review also discussed the direct evidence of glymphatic dysfunction in patients and animal models exhibiting two subtypes of cerebral small vessel disease: arteriolosclerosis-related cerebral small vessel disease and amyloid-related cerebral small vessel disease. Diffusion tensor image analysis along the perivascular space is an important non-invasive tool for assessing the clearance function of the glymphatic system. However, the effectiveness of its parameters needs to be enhanced. Among various nervous system diseases, including cerebral small vessel disease, glymphatic failure may be a common final pathway toward dementia. Overall, this review summarizes prevention and treatment strategies that target glymphatic drainage and will offer valuable insight for developing novel treatments for cerebral small vessel disease.

Introduction
Cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD) is one of the most prevalent cerebrovascular disorders, characterized by injury to blood vessels (small arteries, arterioles, capillaries, and venules) in the brain, with diameters ranging from 50 to 500 μm (Bordes et al., 2022; Elahi et al., 2023; Jia et al., 2024; Wei et al., 2024). The neuroimaging features observed in patients with CSVD include white matter hyperintensities, recent small subcortical infarcts, presumed vascular origin lacunes, expanded perivascular spaces, cerebral microbleeds, and cerebral atrophy (Chen et al., 2019; Wardlaw et al., 2019). The persistent hypoperfusion associated with CSVD may impair neurons and their supporting cells, leading to a reduction in the synthesis of neurotrophic factors and hindering neural regeneration (Nakazaki et al., 2019). As the global population ages, the number of patients with CSVD is increasing, and the disease is increasingly affecting younger individuals (Li et al., 2020). Up to 45% of individuals with CSVD may eventually develop dementia, and 25% may experience a stroke, resulting in a growing burden on society (Litak et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2022). The early clinical symptoms of CSVD are often subtle and dynamic, which may significantly hinder timely treatment and negatively impact patients’ quality of life and health status (Shi and Wardlaw, 2016). Current research on the pathological mechanisms of CSVD primarily focuses on vascular pathological alterations, inflammatory responses, and disruption of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) (Gao et al., 2022; Wan et al., 2023). Given the complexity and multifactorial nature of the pathogenesis of CSVD, these findings are insufficient for a comprehensive understanding of its pathological mechanisms. Therefore, there is an urgent need to deepen our understanding of CSVD and thoroughly explore its pathogenesis.
The recently discovered glymphatic system is a brain-wide fluid transport pathway that facilitates the removal of metabolic waste from the central nervous system (CNS) through the influx and efflux of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and interstitial fluid (ISF) (Iliff et al., 2012). This clearance function is particularly important in neurodegenerative diseases characterized by the pathological accumulation of solutes, such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and Parkinson’s disease (PD) (Plog and Nedergaard, 2018; Harrison et al., 2020). Effective glymphatic function aids in eliminating harmful substances generated after injury, thereby reducing inflammation and oxidative stress and promoting nerve regeneration (Mizutani, 2020). Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) is a common clinical subtype of CSVD, primarily characterized by the deposition of amyloid-β (Aβ) on the walls of small vessels, which can lead to cognitive impairment and hemorrhagic stroke (Markus and de Leeuw, 2023). Previous studies have shown that CAA exacerbates perivascular clearance impairment in APP/PS1 mice, suggesting that the glymphatic system plays a role in Aβ clearance (Mestre et al., 2017; Kim et al., 2020). This finding provides a novel perspective for researching the pathophysiology of CSVD, specifically regarding the potential association between glymphatic system dysfunction and the pathogenesis as well as clinical manifestations of CSVD.
Research on the mechanisms underlying the role of the glymphatic system in CSVD is still developing. Dysfunction of the glymphatic system has been shown to be associated with cerebrovascular risk factors, such as aging, hypertension, and diabetes (Kress et al., 2014; Jiang et al., 2017; Da Mesquita et al., 2018b; Mestre et al., 2018; Mortensen et al., 2019).
In this review, we first describe the structure, physiological functions, and driving factors of the glymphatic system. We then summarize available evidence of glymphatic dysfunction in CSVD from various perspectives, including pathogenesis, clinical subtypes, neuroimaging biomarkers, clinical manifestations of dementia, and therapeutic strategies. This review aims to identify novel treatment strategies for CSVD and provide theoretical evidence for the development of early biomarkers for the disease.

Literature Retrieval Strategy
A comprehensive search of the PubMed database was conducted for studies published from 2000 to the present (2024). The search strategy included the following terms and their various combinations: aquaporin 4, cerebral amyloid angiopathy, cerebral small vessel disease, cerebrospinal fluid, DTI-ALPS, glymphatic system, and perivascular space. We carefully screened the literature by reviewing titles and abstracts to exclude publications that were clearly unrelated. Only studies that focused on CSVD, the glymphatic system, and their interconnections were included in the analysis.

Glymphatic System

An overview of the glymphatic system
The concept of the glymphatic system was introduced by Iliff et al. in 2012, revealing a waste clearance mechanism in the brain that is analogous to the lymphatic system. Impaired glymphatic clearance can lead to the accumulation of metabolic waste in the brain, potentially resulting in cognitive decline. Subsequent research has progressively highlighted that factors such as age, sleep quality, anesthetic states, and physical activity can all influence the performance of the glymphatic system. In particular, the expression and function of aquaporin-4 (AQP4) are considered essential for the effective functioning of the glymphatic system. Recent studies have also shown that diffusion tensor imaging along the perivascular space (DTI-ALPS) method can be used to assess the functionality of the glymphatic system, with the ALPS index emerging as a potential neuroimaging biomarker for monitoring glymphatic activity. Furthermore, in the field of pharmacotherapy, the glymphatic system holds promise as an efficient pathway for drug delivery in the treatment of CNS diseases (Figure 1). The glymphatic system also provides a novel perspective on waste clearance in the brain.
Timeline of the development of the glymphatic system and its role in central nervous system diseases.
AQP-4: Aquaporin-4; CNS: central nervous system; CSVD: cerebral small vessel disease; EEG: electroencephalogram.

Structure and physiological functions of the glymphatic system
The brain, one of the most metabolically active organs, was conventionally thought to be immunologically privileged and devoid of a lymphatic system (Plog and Nedergaard, 2018). However, it was not until 2012 that Iliff et al. first identified a fluid transport pathway within the mouse brain. They demonstrated that fluorescent tracer-labeled cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) enters the brain parenchyma from the periarterial space (Virchow-Robin space), undergoes fluid exchange with the ISF, removes interstitial solutes, and exits along the perivenous space (Iliff et al., 2012; Lohela et al., 2022). CSF secretion is a dynamic process influenced by various factors, including neural activity, blood pressure, and metabolic status (Wang et al., 2022). The choroid plexus, a primary site of CSF production, actively secretes CSF into the ventricles. After its production, CSF forms convection with the ISF to facilitate waste removal (Municio et al., 2023; Saunders et al., 2023). This fluid flow relies on the support of astrocytic AQP4 and is functionally similar to the peripheral lymphatic system, as it promotes fluid circulation and metabolic waste removal (Da Mesquita et al., 2018a; Rasmussen et al., 2018; Peng et al., 2023). Consequently, the brain compensates for the absence of lymphatic capillaries with a form of perivascular perfusion to maintain homeostasis, a mechanism referred to as the glymphatic system.
The glymphatic system consists of a periarterial route for CSF influx, a paravascular route for ISF efflux, and a fluid convective pathway dependent on AQP4 water channels (Iliff et al., 2012). Iliff et al. (2012) injected fluorescent tracers into the mouse cisterna magna and observed that the tracers diffused along the cortical arteries and entered the brain parenchyma along the lateral sides of penetrating arteries. The flow of the fluorescent tracer in the perivascular space (PVS) was confined by densely packed astrocyte end-feet (Iliff et al., 2012). After approximately 1 hour, the tracer accumulated around parenchymal venules and subsequently flowed out along the internal cerebral veins and lateral ventral caudal rhinal veins. They demonstrated that the AQP4 of perivascular astrocytes drives the overall flow of the ISF and the clearance of interstitial solutes, including soluble amyloid-beta (Aβ). While the perivascular influx of CSF remained undisturbed in AQP4-deficient mice, CSF-ISF exchange in the brain parenchyma was markedly impaired, resulting in a 70%–80% decrease in interstitial solute clearance (Iliff et al., 2012). The perivascular localization of AQP4 facilitates the transport of CSF-ISF and the clearance of waste. Two subsequent studies identified non-vascular structures in the dura mater expressing molecular markers of lymphatic endothelial cells, which were designated as the meningeal lymphatic system (Aspelund et al., 2015; Louveau et al., 2015). These meningeal lymphatics were connected to the peripheral lymphatic system and drained interstitial solutes exported by the upstream glymphatic system into the periphery, thereby facilitating the removal of metabolites from the brain (Iliff et al., 2015). These studies not only validated the perivascular influx of CSF but also confirmed the direction of fluid transport, with CSF entering the brain parenchyma via the periarterial route and ISF exiting through the perivenous route.
The glymphatic system serves multiple functions in neurophysiology, with the clearance of metabolic wastes and toxins being one of its most central roles (Hablitz and Nedergaard, 2021). Figure 2 shows the normal and impaired glymphatic system. AQP4 deficiency results in a 70% decrease in the clearance of radiolabeled [3H] mannitol from the mouse brain parenchyma, dramatically impairing the waste removal function of the glymphatic system (Iliff et al., 2012). Another study indicated that in APP/PS1 mice with AQP4 deficiency, there is increased accumulation of Aβ in the brain, decreased interstitial solute clearance, and increased cognitive impairment (Xu et al., 2015). Additionally, the glymphatic system plays a crucial role in distributing nutrients throughout the brain (Wang et al., 2023). Several studies have shown that glucose, lipid molecules, amino acids, and growth factors are efficiently transported across the brain via the glymphatic system, ensuring the maintenance of brain health and function (Thrane et al., 2013; Lundgaard et al., 2015; Christensen et al., 2021).
Normal and impaired glymphatic system.
In a normal glymphatic system, CSF flows in from the arterial (red vessels) PVS and out through the venous (blue vessels) PVS, effectively removing metabolic wastes (purple blobs) from the brain. However, in a damaged glymphatic system, the CSF-ISF exchange is impaired, which hinders the removal of metabolic wastes from the brain. AQP4: Aquaporin-4; CSF: cerebrospinal fluid; EPVS: enlarged perivascular space; ISF: interstitial fluid; PVS: perivascular space.
Sleep is a crucial period for the brain to eliminate metabolic waste; moreover, the functioning of the glymphatic system is closely linked to sleep, particularly rapid eye movement (REM) sleep (Si et al., 2022). During sleep, the activity of the glymphatic system increases, facilitating the clearance of metabolic waste accumulated during wakefulness, such as Aβ. This process helps maintain metabolic balance in the brain (Xie et al., 2013; Christensen et al., 2021).

Summary and reflections on the factors that drive the flow of glymphatic fluid
The function of the glymphatic system is driven by multiple mechanisms (Yue et al., 2024; Zou et al., 2024). One of the key drivers of CSF influx in the perivascular space and the removal of interstitial solutes is cerebral arterial pulsation (Yamada et al., 2013). Iliff et al. (2013) found that unilateral ligation of the internal carotid artery significantly reduced cerebral arterial pulsation in mice and this also slowed the rate of exchange of CSF and ISF in the brain parenchyma, as demonstrated through in vivo two-photon imaging and in vitro fluorescence imaging. Another study used particle tracking techniques to quantify CSF flow rates and revealed a close correlation between CSF flow rates and arterial wall motion rates (Mestre et al., 2018). This observation suggested that CSF influx may be propelled by the motion of arterial walls. Similarly, low-frequency arteriolar oscillations in the brains of awake mice were shown to drive the paravascular efflux of ISF fluorescent dextran, with the rate of efflux correlating with the amplitude of local vascular oscillations (Van Veluw et al., 2020). However, cardiac pulsation is not the only factor that influences the glymphatic system. Kiviniemi et al. (2016) utilized ultra-fast magnetic resonance encephalography to investigate the physiological mechanisms that affect CSF pulsations and found that, in addition to cardiac pulsations, respiratory and low-frequency vasomotor pulsations also play a role. Cardiac pulsations primarily occur in the periarterial space, driving CSF influx, while respiratory pulsations circulate periodically from the perivenous space to the center of the brain (Kiviniemi et al., 2016). Furthermore, an RT-PCMRI study demonstrated that the depth of respiration also influenced CSF velocity, indicating that the driving forces of respiration and cardiac pulsation on CSF were comparable during deep abdominal breathing but weaker during natural breathing (Yildiz et al., 2017).
Sleep is essential for the brain’s ability to clear harmful metabolites, and the glymphatic system is more active during this state (Mendelsohn and Larrick, 2013). Xie et al. (2013) found that the influx of CSF tracers in the periarterial space was significantly reduced in awake mice compared with that in mice that were naturally sleeping or anesthetized. Furthermore, the clearance of interstitial solutes, such as Aβ or 14C-inulin, was approximately twice as fast in sleeping or anesthetized mice compared with awake mice. This enhanced clearance is attributed to 60% increase in the volume of interstitial space during sleep or anesthesia, resulting in significant improvement in solute clearance efficiency (Xie et al., 2013). The clearance function of the glymphatic system was similar in anesthetized and sleeping mice, suggesting that the system’s activity is influenced more by the physiological states of sleep and wakefulness than by circadian rhythms (Xie et al., 2013). However, a recent study indicated that the clearance function of the glymphatic system exhibits a circadian rhythm, peaking at midday. This circadian regulation persisted even under constant light conditions, but the absence of the AQP4 gene effectively eliminated this daily rhythm (Hablitz et al., 2020). Notably, the levels of tau protein in the mouse hippocampal ISF showed rhythmic fluctuations in glymphatic clearance that corresponded with the sleep-wake cycle. While the half-life of intracellular tau protein in the mouse brain is approximately 10 days, it ranges from 1 to 2 hours in CSF or ISF (Holth et al., 2019). Therefore, fluctuations in the sleep-wake cycle significantly accelerate the glymphatic clearance of tau protein in the ISF. The type of anesthetic used also affects glymphatic influx in mice. Hablitz et al. (2019) administered six different anesthetics and found that CSF influx was highest during ketamine/xylazine (K/X) anesthesia, followed by isoflurane, dexmedetomidine, and pentobarbital. Additionally, an interesting study demonstrated that different body positions during sleep can influence CSF-ISF transport, with glymphatic transport and Aβ clearance being most effective in the lateral position compared to the supine or prone positions (Lee et al., 2015).
Based on the currently available research findings, we propose several new insights and reflections that could guide future investigations into glymphatic function and its role in diseases. The glymphatic system operates through multiple mechanisms, indicating a complex regulatory network. Future research should explore the interactions among these mechanisms and how they collectively maintain a stable brain environment. Given that both respiratory and cardiac pulsations influence CSF flow, studying their interactions could enhance our understanding of functional changes within the glymphatic system under various physiological states. For instance, comparing the driving forces of cardiac and respiratory pulsations during deep abdominal breathing and natural breathing may reveal novel physiological regulatory mechanisms. While the activity of the glymphatic system is enhanced during sleep, it remains unclear whether this increase is a direct effect of sleep or an indirect result of other physiological changes, such as a decrease in heart rate and muscle relaxation. Furthermore, different anesthetics have varying effects on the glymphatic system, necessitating further research to identify their specific impacts on waste clearance efficiency. The lateral sleeping position appears to be more conducive to waste clearance, a finding that may have implications for the prevention and treatment of brain diseases. Investigating the relationship between sleep positions and brain health among different populations, such as older adults and patients, may yield valuable clinical insights and applications. Given the influence of various physiological characteristics on the glymphatic system, personalized medical strategies could optimize brain waste clearance for specific patients. For example, treatment plans might be tailored based on patients’ breathing patterns, cardiac function, and sleep habits.

Correlation Mechanism Between the Glymphatic System and Cerebral Small Vessel Disease
Several clinical studies have shown that dysfunction of the glymphatic system is associated with white matter hyperintensities and cognitive deficits in patients with CSVD (Zhang et al., 2021; Ke et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2022; Tian et al., 2023). Additionally, impaired glymphatic clearance has been observed in common animal models of CSVD (Wang et al., 2017; Davoodi-Bojd et al., 2019; Xue et al., 2020; Cao et al., 2022). These findings suggest that dysfunction of the glymphatic system may be linked to various vascular pathological mechanisms underlying CSVD.

Hemodynamic dysfunction
Cerebral hemodynamic dysfunction is a significant pathogenic mechanism of CSVD (Pantoni, 2010; Wardlaw et al., 2019). Changes in cerebral hemodynamics include arteriosclerosis, alterations in vascular pulsatility, reduced cerebral blood flow (CBF), diminished cerebrovascular reactivity, and abnormalities in blood pressure variability (Shi et al., 2016; Avolio et al., 2018; Nam et al., 2020). Increased blood pressure variability can lead to atherosclerosis; furthermore, the development of atherosclerosis and changes in vascular pulsatility further disrupt vascular endothelial cells, contributing to the progression of CSVD (Jolly et al., 2013; Yang et al., 2017; Riba-Llena et al., 2018). Cerebral hemodynamic dysfunction often triggers the enlargement of the PVS. Blair et al. (2020) demonstrated that decreased cerebrovascular reactivity, was associated with an enlarged PVS (EPVS) in the basal ganglia. Another study found that enlargement of the PVS in the basal ganglia in a cognitively normal older adult population was associated with a significant reduction in CBF, reflecting hemodynamic alterations (Liu et al., 2021). The PVS serves not only as a neuroimaging marker of CSVD but also as a conduit for waste removal by the glymphatic system (Yang et al., 2017). An EPVS has been recognized as a key indicator of dysfunctional central nervous system (CNS) glymphatic clearance (Hicks et al., 2023). In summary, excessive ISF accumulation in the EPVS may further impair interstitial solute glymphatic clearance (Brown et al., 2018). Additionally, a significant accumulation of inflammatory cells in the EPVS may remodel and disrupt the fluid clearance function of the glymphatic system (Bechmann et al., 2001; Gareau et al., 2002; Guillemin and Brew, 2004; Brown et al., 2018).

Neurovascular unit dysfunction
The neurovascular unit (NVU) consists of neurons, glial cells (astrocytes and microglia), vascular cells (endothelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and pericytes), as well as basement membranes and the extracellular matrix (Iadecola, 2017). The NVU functions to regulate the permeability of the BBB, control vascular tone and blood flow, and facilitate the transport of nutrients while removing metabolic waste products (Yang et al., 2022). The interactions among the components of the NVU are essential for maintaining the normal function of the cerebrovascular system (Evans et al., 2021). Any structural or functional alterations in the NVU, caused by various factors, can lead to CSVD. The NVU and the glymphatic system are considered an integrated physiological unit that supports brain self-regulation (Sabayan and Westendorp, 2021; Yao et al., 2023). Specifically, the NVU responds to neural activity signals, resulting in increased local CBF through a process referred to as neurovascular coupling (NVC) (Zlokovic, 2011; Tiedt et al., 2022). The regulation of CBF is influenced by cardiac output and arterial blood pressure, while arterial pulsation plays a crucial role in driving the perivascular influx of CSF (Segal, 2005; Hart and Charkoudian, 2014; Mestre et al., 2018; Evans et al., 2021). Therefore, during NVC, it is likely that there is not only an increase in local CBF but also an acceleration of CSF flow. The findings of a recent study by Holstein-Rønsbo et al. (2013) supported this hypothesis; the researchers used whisker stimulation to induce NVC in mice, and observed accelerated influx and clearance of a CSF tracer within the glymphatic system. Furthermore, dysfunction in the neurovascular and glymphatic systems can lead to dysregulation of the cerebrovascular system and impaired clearance of metabolites, ultimately accelerating the accumulation of white matter lesions (Venkat et al., 2017; Sabayan and Westendorp, 2021). Thus, the overall function of the NVU and glymphatic system is closely related to the pathophysiological mechanisms of CSVD.

Blood–brain barrier damage
Blood–brain barrier (BBB) damage is a key pathological factor that exacerbates the development of CSVD (Cuadrado-Godia et al., 2018). The BBB is composed of vascular endothelial cells, basement membranes, pericytes, and astrocyte end-feet, which collectively maintain the barrier’s properties by restricting the exchange of substances between blood and brain tissue (Daneman and Prat, 2015). The outermost layer of the BBB consists of astrocytes, whose processes often swell to form end-feet that cover the surfaces of blood vessels (Stokum et al., 2015). AQP4 is highly expressed in astrocyte end-feet and plays a critical role in mediating fluid transport within the glymphatic system. However, a recent study found that upregulation of AQP4 expression improved BBB integrity and alleviated perihematomal edema in mice with intracerebral hemorrhage (Jeon et al., 2021). The BBB and glymphatic system may work synergistically to maintain brain homeostasis (Verheggen et al., 2018). Dysfunction of the BBB increases its permeability, allowing fluids, protein macromolecules, inflammatory mediators, and immune cells to leak into the perivascular tissue (Ueno et al., 2019). This leakage can lead to cerebral edema, neuroinflammation, and hemodynamic dysfunction, severely affecting vascular health and immune homeostasis in the brain. Notably, BBB disruption results in increased production and decreased clearance of Aβ, with Aβ deposition further exacerbating BBB disruption (Burgmans et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2021). Aβ transport is also dependent on the glymphatic system, as it removes deposited Aβ via the CSF-ISF efflux pathway when the amount of Aβ exceeds the transport capacity of the BBB (Groothuis et al., 2007). Additionally, interstitial solutes located away from the BBB can reach closer regions through fluid convection, enhancing the efficiency of clearance (Iliff et al., 2012; Tarasoff-Conway et al., 2015). Thus, BBB transport and glymphatic system clearance appear to be complementary mechanisms.

Neuroinflammation
Neuroinflammation plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of CSVD, with a sustained inflammatory response contributing to irreversible CNS injury (Fu and Yan, 2018). A review by Evans et al. (2021) provides detailed evidence of the close relationship between CSVD and inflammation. Briefly, the disruption of the BBB in CSVD facilitates the infiltration of inflammatory cells and their mediators, such as cytokines and chemokines, into the brain’s parenchyma, triggering a neuroinflammatory response. This response stimulates microglial cells, leading to the release of a broader array of inflammatory mediators, further escalating the inflammatory response. Moreover, neuroinflammation contributes to the impairment of vascular endothelial cells, exacerbating vascular dysfunction, which is a pivotal pathological hallmark of CSVD (Bai et al., 2022; Del Cuore et al., 2022). Two recent studies found that the prevalence of CSVD increases with elevated systemic immune-inflammation index (SII) levels, and higher SII levels correlate with the severity of CSVD. Notably, SII is positively associated with imaging features of CSVD, such as EPVS in the basal ganglia (BG-EPVS) (Jiang et al., 2022). Additionally, SII correlates with cognitive deficits in patients with CSVD, suggesting that SII may contribute to cognitive decline by exacerbating the burden of CSVD (Xiao et al., 2023). Overall, neuroinflammation is a critical factor in the pathogenesis of CSVD. During neuroinflammation, glymphatic damage inhibits the clearance of inflammatory mediators from the brain, triggering an inflammatory cascade (Filiano et al., 2017). Concurrently, activation of astrocytes alters their morphology and affects fluid transport within the glymphatic system. Furthermore, the accumulation of immune cells and inflammatory mediators in the PVS may obstruct the conduits for CSF and ISF influx and efflux, creating a vicious cycle (Zhou et al., 2009; Ivan et al., 2020). Manouchehrian et al. (2021) demonstrated a significant reduction in perivascular CSF flow in mice following systemic exposure to lipopolysaccharide (1 mg/kg), indicating that neuroinflammation adversely affects CSF movement. Altered AQP4 polarity is a potential link between glymphatic system dysfunction and neuroinflammation. The loss of perivascular AQP4 polarization is associated with a significant decrease in CSF-ISF exchange efficiency (Kress et al., 2014). Furthermore, several studies have shown that AQP4 polarity is compromised in the context of neuroinflammation, which inevitably affects the function of the glymphatic system (Wang et al., 2012; Ren et al., 2013; Genel et al., 2021).

Role of Glymphatic System Dysfunction in Different Subtypes of Cerebral Small Vessel Disease
Previous studies have demonstrated that dysfunction of the glymphatic system leads to the accumulation of waste products in the brain, contributing to the development of CSVD (Zhang et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2023). However, more in-depth research is needed to clarify the exact relationship between the glymphatic system and CSVD. Effectively modulating glymphatic function may prove to be a viable treatment strategy for CSVD in the future (Figure 3).
Glymphatic dysfunction in animal models of cerebral small vessel disease.
Created using Figdraw (https://www.figdraw.com; ID: YWPTOaa5aa). AQP4: Aquaporin-4; CSF: cerebrospinal fluid; ISF: interstitial fluid; SHRs: spontaneously hypertensive rats; SHRSPs: stroke-prone SHRs; T2DM: type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Arteriolosclerotic cerebral small vessel disease
Arteriolosclerotic CSVD is often referred to as age-related and vascular risk factor-related CSVD (Pantoni, 2010). Glymphatic dysfunction has been linked to vascular risk factors, such as aging, hypertension, and diabetes. Aging is the most significant risk factor for CSVD, with its prevalence reported to be approximately 5% in individuals aged 50 years and nearly 100% in those aged 90 years (Cannistraro et al., 2019). A clinical study utilizing diffusion tensor imaging with the artificial intelligence-based ALPS (DTI-ALPS) method assessed glymphatic function in a cohort of participants aged 13–88 years (Hsiao et al., 2023). The study revealed a significant decrease in the ALPS index with advancing age. Additionally, a cohort study using contrast-enhanced MRI at multiple time points observed impaired clearance in both the glymphatic pathway and lymphatic vessels in the aging human brain (Zhou et al., 2020). Experiments in rodents further demonstrated that when Aβ was injected into the brains of older mice (18–20 months old), there was a reduction of approximately 40% in the paravascular clearance of Aβ compared with younger mice (2–3 months old), along with a 27% decrease in the pulsation of intracortical arterioles (Kress et al., 2014). Overall, aging leads to a decreased clearance capacity of the glymphatic system, which in turn increases the risk of small vessel pathology. As the society continues to age, it becomes increasingly important to address the risks of diseases and mortality associated with aging.
Spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) and stroke-prone SHRs (SHRSPs) are common animal models of arteriolosclerotic CSVD. Arterial pulsations are the major driver of CSF transport in the glymphatic system, and vascular lesions due to hypertension may block CSF flow in the brain (Mestre et al., 2018). Several studies have indicated slowed paravascular influx and efflux of CSF, extensive loss of APQ4 polarization, and impaired glymphatic clearance in SHRs or SHRSPs compared with normal rats (Held et al., 2017; Xue et al., 2020; Monte et al., 2022). Mortensen et al. (2019) used dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI to assess glymphatic transport kinetics in young and adult SHR rats, and the results showed that glymphatic transport was impaired in SHRs of both age groups, with more pronounced impairment in adult SHRs. In other words, glymphatic dysfunction progressively worsens with the development of chronic hypertension.
In the early stages of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), patients already exhibit increased permeability of the BBB, which further accelerates the progression of CSVD (Chen et al., 2022). Emerging evidence suggests a correlation between diabetes and glymphatic dysfunction, potentially contributing to cognitive decline in patients with T2DM (Zhang et al., 2019; Wei et al., 2023). Yang et al. (2020) used DTI-ALPS method to evaluate glymphatic function in patients with T2DM and found that the severity of T2DM was associated with lower water diffusivity along the PVS. Similar findings were observed in a rat model of T2DM, where MRI results indicated that the clearance rate of a contrast agent in the hippocampus of a rat model of T2DM was three times slower than that in normal rats. Subsequent fluorescence imaging analysis demonstrated that, at 6 hours after the injection of a fluorescent tracer, a significantly greater amount of tracer remained in the hippocampus of a rat model of T2DM compared with normal rats. Notably, the residual amounts of both the contrast agent and tracer were negatively correlated with cognitive impairment in the T2DM model rats (Jiang et al., 2017). Another animal study revealed that in a rat model of T2DM, impairment of glymphatic clearance occurred before the onset of cognitive deficits and gradually worsened as the disease progressed (Boyd et al., 2024). The role of the glymphatic system in diabetic cognitive impairment warrants further investigation.

Amyloid-related cerebral small vessel disease
CAA is a prevalent subtype of CSVD characterized by the deposition and aggregation of Aβ in the walls of small blood vessels, leading to degeneration and destruction of the vessel walls (Markus and de Leeuw, 2023). CAA is often asymptomatic, and its severity is closely related to age. It frequently coexists with other neurodegenerative diseases in the older adult population, such as AD (Greenberg et al., 2020; Durrani et al., 2023). Although Aβ deposition is a common pathological feature of both CAA and AD, the composition of the deposits differs: CAA deposits are predominantly composed of soluble Aβ40, while senile plaques in AD are primarily composed of insoluble Aβ42 (Boulouis et al., 2016; Tiwari et al., 2019; Leuzy et al., 2022). Increased Aβ40 in the brain is more likely to be deposited in the vessel walls rather than in the parenchyma, facilitating its clearance via the perivascular drainage pathway (Boulouis et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2023). The accumulation of Aβ in CAA is partially due to the overexpression of Aβ and partially due to impaired clearance mechanisms (Lui et al., 2023).
The glymphatic system is one of the pathways that clears soluble Aβ from the brain and plays a crucial role in the development of CAA (Greenberg et al., 2020). Dysfunction of the glymphatic system in CAA is significantly associated with the severity of CSVD and cognitive impairment (Xu et al., 2022). The PVS serves as a neuroimaging marker of CSVD, and impaired glymphatic clearance leads to fluid accumulation in the PVS. A recent clinical study utilized ex vivo MRI and validated models to quantify the relationship between enlarged EPVS and other pathological changes in brains with CAA, finding that PVS enlargement was positively correlated with Aβ accumulation in the vessel walls of the overlying cortex (Perosa et al., 2022). Interestingly, soluble tracers injected into the ISF of the Tg2576 mouse brain exhibited a patchy and fragmented distribution along the arterial basement membrane, mirroring the distribution pattern of Aβ in the human brain affected by CAA (Hawkes et al., 2011). In another study, two-photon imaging and immunofluorescence were used to evaluate glymphatic fluid transport in APP/PS1 mice, and the findings revealed impaired perivascular CSF influx in middle-aged mice. This impairment was further exacerbated in older mice, which exhibited severely impaired fluid efflux and reduced clearance of interstitial solutes (Kim et al., 2020).
In conclusion, impaired glymphatic clearance of solutes, such as Aβ from the ISF, is a key pathogenic mechanism underlying CAA. The interplay between these processes exacerbates the accumulation of brain waste and contributes to vascular cognitive impairment.

Diffusion Tensor Image Analysis Along the Perivascular Space Enables Non-Invasive Assessment of Glymphatic System Function In Vivo
Assessing the function of the glymphatic system primarily relies on imaging the fluid dynamics of the PVS. Currently, dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) is predominantly used in clinical trials to evaluate glymphatic function in the human brain (Taoka and Naganawa, 2020). Following intrathecal injection of a contrast agent, glymphatic flow is analyzed by quantifying the residual contrast agent at different time points using T1-weighted imaging (Watts et al., 2019). However, angiography is an invasive procedure that may trigger allergic reactions or cause renal impairment in humans. Furthermore, a complete DCE-MRI scan requires a longer duration, especially when dynamic data are collected at multiple time points, which can increase patient discomfort. In animal studies, in vivo two-photon imaging is commonly used to observe glymphatic CSF flow in rodents. However, this technique is limited to the superficial brain regions, such as the cerebral cortex (Holtmaat et al., 2009). The temporal resolution of two-photon imaging is relatively low, potentially missing subtle changes or rapid events occurring during dynamic glymphatic circulation (Papagiakoumou et al., 2020). Additionally, positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) can visualize glymphatic system function by utilizing radioactive tracers. However, due to the risk of radiation exposure, PET-CT is not suitable for frequent use, and this may limit the assessment of long-term changes in the glymphatic system (Figure 4).
In vivo imaging techniques for the detection of glymphatic pathway.
CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid; DCE-MRI: dynamic contrast enhanced-magnetic resonance imaging; DTI-ALPS: diffusion tensor image-along the perivascular space; PET-CT: positron emission tomography-computed tomography.
The DTI-ALPS method has recently gained widespread use in clinical studies of the glymphatic system, particularly in relation to neurological disorders, such as aging, stroke, AD, CSVD, and sleep disorders (Taoka et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2020; Lv et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2022). As a non-invasive technique, DTI-ALPS can be used to evaluate the glymphatic system’s activity by quantifying the diffusion movement of water molecules along the PVS (van der Thiel et al., 2023). Taoka et al. (2017) first reported the DTI-ALPS method in 2017, and demonstrated that the calculated ALPS index indicates the diffusion rate of water molecules within the PVS. A decrease in the ALPS index suggests a reduction in the dispersion rate of water molecules in the PVS, indicating impaired glymphatic function. Notably, the ALPS index was significantly correlated with changes in contrast agent signals observed in classical DCE-MRI, which supports the clinical feasibility of the DTI-ALPS method for assessing glymphatic clearance function (Zhang et al., 2021). Therefore, the ALPS index is expected to serve as a potential neuroimaging biomarker for evaluating glymphatic system activity.
In patients with CSVD, the ALPS index is significantly associated with glymphatic system dysfunction and cognitive impairment. Zhang et al. (2021) found that several neuroimaging markers of CSVD, including white matter hyperintensities, basal ganglia EPVS, lacunes, and cerebral microbleeds, were correlated with the mALPS index, suggesting that glymphatic function may be impaired in patients with CSVD. Tang et al. (2022) evaluated the ALPS index in both cognitively impaired and cognitively normal patients with CSVD, and found significant differences between the two groups. After adjusting for common vascular risk factors and markers of CSVD, the independent association between cognitive impairment and glymphatic dysfunction remained significant. This indicates that glymphatic dysfunction may be an independent contributory factor to cognitive impairment in patients with CSVD. However, large-scale, multicenter clinical research data on DTI-ALPS are needed to validate its effectiveness in diagnosis and treatment.

Glymphatic Failure Is a Common Final Pathway to Cognitive Impairment and Dementia
Age is one of the most significant risk factors for dementia, with the risk increasing markedly among individuals over 65 years of age (Livingston et al., 2017). Adequate sleep is essential for maintaining good health and slowing the aging process; however, both the quality and quantity of sleep tend to decline with normal aging (Didikoglu et al., 2020). Disruption of regular sleep architecture is closely associated with various neurodegenerative diseases, including AD, PD, frontotemporal dementia, and Huntington’s disease (Husain, 2021; Voysey et al., 2021). One critical aspect of altered sleep architecture in older adults is the decreased entry into stage 3 deep non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep (Musiek et al., 2018). Glymphatic clearance, a mechanism that removes metabolic waste and toxins from the brain, is more active during sleep than when awake. In rodents, glymphatic clearance occurs primarily during NREM sleep. Similarly, in humans, glymphatic CSF flux shows periodic increases during NREM sleep, effectively clearing metabolites from the brain (Lewis, 2021; Ungurean et al., 2023). This suggests that the reduction of NREM sleep duration in older adults may lead to a catastrophic decline in glymphatic clearance, resulting in the accumulation of protein waste, which may further exacerbate the development of neurodegenerative dementia (Musiek et al., 2018). Recent clinical studies have provided direct evidence linking glymphatic function to cognitive impairment. Hsu et al. (2023) found that in patients with AD, the ALPS index serves as a mediator between the deposition of amyloid and tau proteins and cognitive dysfunction. This finding suggests that glymphatic failure may significantly contribute to cognitive decline in patients with AD. Li et al. (2024) conducted a study on individuals in the early subjective cognitive decline stage of AD and found a trend of decreasing glymphatic function in the subjective cognitive decline group, indicating that glymphatic dysfunction may precede cognitive impairment. Another study’s findings were consistent with this observation and also further demonstrated that a lower ALPS index was associated with a higher risk of cognitive decline and clinical progression. Therefore, early onset glymphatic dysfunction may serve as a predictor of neurodegenerative changes and dementia (Huang et al., 2024). There may be a direct causal relationship between the degradation of the glymphatic system and neurodegenerative dementia. Additionally, CSVD negatively impacts cognitive function and is a critical factor in cognitive impairment and vascular dementia. Glymphatic dysfunction also exacerbates vascular cognitive impairment and may be associated with the progression of neurodegenerative dementia (Nedergaard and Goldman, 2020). Therefore, glymphatic failure may represent a final common pathway to dementia in both normally aging individuals and those with vascular impairments.

Preventive and Therapeutic Strategies for Targeting Glymphatic Drainage Function
Currently, the treatment for CSVD primarily involves managing traditional vascular risk factors and symptomatic relief, which has significant limitations (Li et al., 2018). Patients with CSVD experience impaired glymphatic drainage, leading to the accumulation of wastes such as Aβ in the brain, which exacerbates microvascular damage and further promotes pathological progression (Hong et al., 2024). Therefore, restoring glymphatic drainage is a new approach for the clinical treatment of CSVD with promising clinical benefits for patients in the future (Table 1).
Effects of different interventions on glymphatic function
Intervention	Animal model	Species	Glymphatic function	Behavioral outcome	Study description	Reference	 	Chronic sleep fragmentation	Normal	Mice	↓ CSF infux↓ ISF solute clearance	↓ Learning and memory↑ Anxiety-like behaviors	Effects of chronic sleep fragmentation on brain glymphatic clearance function in young mice	Deng et al., 2024	 	Voluntary wheel running	Aging	Mice	↑ ISF solute clearance	↑ Learning and memory	Effects of voluntary wheel running on cognitive performance and glymphatic clearance efficiency in aged mice	He et al., 2017	 	Intermittent fasting	AD	Mice	↑ Polarized AQP4↑ ISF solute clearance	↑ Learning and memory	The role of intermittent fasting on AQP4 polarity, Aβ clearance, and cognitive function in APP/PS1 mice	Zhang et al., 2017	 	Oral intake of n-3 PUFAs	Normal	Mice	↑ ISF solute clearance	↑ Learning and memory	Effects of oral administration of n-3 PUFAs on glymphatic function and learning memory capacity in healthy mice	Ren et al., 2017	 	tPBM	Normal	Mice	↑ ISF solute clearance	Not investigated	tPBM effects on glymphatic drainage function as well as Aβ deposition in mice	Semyachkina-Glushkovskaya et al., 2021	 	Electroacupuncture	SAMP8 mice	Mice	↑ CSF infux↑ Polarized AQP4	↑ Learning and memory	The role of electroacupuncture on glymphatic function and cognitive function in SAMP8 mice	Liang et al., 2021	 	Yi-Zhi-Fang-Dai formula	I/R	Mice	↑ Polarized AQP4	Not investigated	Restorative effects of Yi-Zhi-Fang-Dai formula on AQP4 polarity and Aβ clearance in I/R mice	Lyu et al., 2021
AQP4: Aquaporin-4; Aβ: amyloid-β; CSF: cerebrospinal fluid; I/R: ischemia/reperfusion; ISF: interstitial fluid; n-3 PUFAs: omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids; SAMP8: senescence accelerated mouse prone 8; tPBM: transcranial photostimulation.
A healthy lifestyle, which includes adjusting sleep architecture, engaging in physical exercise, and practicing intermittent fasting, may help prevent or improve glymphatic function in patients with CSVD. The sleep-wake cycle regulates the clearance function of the glymphatic system. During sleep, the glymphatic system is active, facilitating the transport of CSF, while its function is suppressed during wakefulness (Rasmussen et al., 2022). Furthermore, chronic sleep fragmentation in young wild-type mice has been shown to disrupt glymphatic clearance in the brain, leading to impaired cognitive function (Deng et al., 2024). Therefore, improving sleep quality and maintaining good sleep habits can effectively enhance the function of the glymphatic system, reducing the risk of disease occurrence and progression. Physical activity also positively impacts glymphatic drainage function. Voluntary wheel running exercise substantially improved cognitive decline and enhanced glymphatic clearance efficiency in aged mice (He et al., 2017). In terms of diet, intermittent fasting restored AQP4 polarity and accelerated Aβ clearance from the brains of APP/PS1 mice, thereby ameliorating cognitive deficits (Zhang et al., 2017). Additionally, the oral intake of nutritional omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids greatly promoted the interstitial fluid solute clearance rate, reduced hippocampal Aβ deposition, and improved learning and memory abilities in healthy adult mice (Ren et al., 2017). In conclusion, good sleep, regular exercise, and a healthy diet may contribute to improved glymphatic drainage function; however, further in-depth research is still needed.
Some medical interventions, such as non-invasive brain stimulation, electroacupuncture, and traditional Chinese herbal formulas, can enhance glymphatic drainage function. Transcranial photobiomodulation (tPBM) is considered a promising non-invasive therapy for removing Aβ from the brain. Research has shown that ISF solute clearance and ISF efflux were substantially increased in tPBM-treated mice, suggesting that tPBM effectively mediates glymphatic drainage function and reduces Aβ deposition in the brain (Semyachkina-Glushkovskaya et al., 2021). Additionally, electroacupuncture has been proven to improve daily activities and cognitive levels in patients with AD, although its specific mechanisms remain incompletely understood (Liang et al., 2021). Chemicals with anti-inflammatory effects can also improve glymphatic drainage function by attenuating the inflammatory response. For example, β-hydroxybutyrate has been found to inhibit microglial activation, thereby alleviating neuroinflammation and enhancing glymphatic drainage function, ultimately reducing nerve damage in mice with subarachnoid hemorrhage (Tan et al., 2024). Understanding how anti-inflammatory drugs affect the glymphatic system can help elucidate the complex relationship between neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration and would provide novel treatment strategies for neurodegenerative diseases.
Recent reports indicate that electroacupuncture at the Baihui (GV20), Yintang (GV29), and Shuigou (GV26) points may improve cognitive function in SAMP8 mice by restoring AQP4 polarity and enhancing CSF influx (Liang et al., 2021). Another study found that the Chinese herbal prescription, Yi-Zhi-Fang-Dai, effectively inhibited AQP4 depolarization and alleviated acute accumulation of Aβ in the brain following cerebral ischemia and reperfusion (Lyu et al., 2021). Despite the long history of traditional Chinese medicine in treating dementia, research on its role in the glymphatic system is still rudimentary. Further exploration is needed to uncover the potential of traditional Chinese medicine in enhancing glymphatic function.

Limitations
This review has some limitations: First, the literature search was limited to articles in English language published in the PubMed database. This limitation may have resulted in the exclusion of relevant studies published in other languages or databases, potentially affecting the comprehensiveness of our findings. To address this, future studies could use a more inclusive search strategy that incorporates multiple languages and databases. Second, some of the findings discussed in this review are based on animal models, which may not fully replicate the complexity of CSVD in humans. Therefore, the translation of these findings to clinical practice requires further validation.

Conclusions
In this article, we detail the drainage pathways, clearance functions, and factors driving CSF flow in the glymphatic system. Based on existing findings, we summarize the pathological mechanisms underlying the association between CSVD and glymphatic failure. Glymphatic dysfunction may occur throughout the development of CSVD. We also provided direct evidence of glymphatic failure in patients with various subtypes of CSVD and rodent models. Although DTI-ALPS is currently an important tool for the non-invasive assessment of glymphatic clearance function, the validity of this parameter still requires improvement. We look forward to future studies that utilize more advanced visualization tools to assist in examining glymphatic clearance efficiency in CSVD. Glymphatic failure may be a devastating event leading to CSVD and dementia, and the restoration of glymphatic drainage appears to be a potential therapeutic strategy. Our study offers a fresh perspective on the prevention and progression of CSVD and opens up new possibilities for developing therapeutic approaches.
The novelty of this review lies in its synthesis of current knowledge regarding the role of the glymphatic system in the pathogenesis of CSVD and its association of glymphatic dysfunction with specific CSVD subtypes, providing valuable information for future diagnosis and treatment strategies. Furthermore, this review not only deepens our understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying CSVD, but also suggests that targeting the glymphatic system may be a promising approach for preventing and treating cognitive impairment and dementia. However, there remains a lack of comprehensive understanding of the dynamics of glymphatic systems in healthy and disease states, as well as technical challenges in measuring CSF flow and ISF transport in vivo in this field. The development of higher-resolution and more sensitive imaging technologies in the future will facilitate the visualization and quantification of glymphatic functions in real-time, thereby helping to validate and improve glymphatic-related neuroimaging indicators.
Conflicts of interest: None declared.
C-Editor: Zhao M; S-Editors: Wang J, Li CH; L-Editor: Song LP; T-Editor: Jia Y

Data availability statement:
Not applicable.

References
A dural lymphatic vascular system that drains brain interstitial fluid and macromolecules
Cerebral haemodynamics: effects of systemic arterial pulsatile function and hypertension
Advances in the role of endothelial cells in cerebral small vessel disease
Immune surveillance of mouse brain perivascular spaces by blood-borne macrophages
Intracranial hemodynamic relationships in patients with cerebral small vessel disease
Genetics of common cerebral small vessel disease
Sporadic cerebral amyloid angiopathy: pathophysiology, neuroimaging features, and clinical implications
The glymphatic response to the development of type 2 diabetes
Understanding the role of the perivascular space in cerebral small vessel disease
Amyloid-β interacts with blood-brain barrier function in dementia: a systematic review
CNS small vessel disease: a clinical review
Digoxin ameliorates glymphatic transport and cognitive impairment in a mouse model of chronic cerebral hypoperfusion
Cerebral small vessel disease:neuroimaging markers and clinical implication
Spatiotemporal dynamics of cerebral vascular permeability in type 2 diabetes-related cerebral microangiopathy
Is the glymphatic system the missing link between sleep impairments and neurological disorders? Examining the implications and uncertainties
Cerebral small vessel disease: a review focusing on pathophysiology, biomarkers, and machine learning strategies
The meningeal lymphatic system: a new player in neurophysiology
Functional aspects of meningeal lymphatics in ageing and Alzheimer’s disease
The blood-brain barrier
Modeling glymphatic system of the brain using MRI
The role of immunosenescence in cerebral small vessel disease: a review
Chronic sleep fragmentation impairs brain interstitial clearance in young wildtype mice
Longitudinal sleep efficiency in the elderly and its association with health
Mediators of cognitive impairment in cerebral amyloid angiopathy
Cerebral small vessel disease-related dementia: more questions than answers
Cardiovascular comorbidities, inflammation, and cerebral small vessel disease
How and why do T cells and their derived cytokines affect the injured and healthy brain?
Emerging role of immunity in cerebral small vessel disease
Cerebral small vessel disease: pathological mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets
Imaging inflammation:direct visualization of perivascular cuffing in EAE by magnetic resonance microscopy
The role of AQP4 in the pathogenesis of depression, and possible related mechanisms
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy and Alzheimer disease—one peptide, two pathways
Efflux of drugs and solutes from brain: the interactive roles of diffusional transcapillary transport, bulk flow and capillary transporters
Microglia, macrophages, perivascular macrophages, and pericytes: a review of function and identification
The glymphatic system: a novel component of fundamental neurobiology
Increased glymphatic influx is correlated with high EEG delta power and low heart rate in mice under anesthesia
Circadian control of brain glymphatic and lymphatic fluid flow
Impaired glymphatic function and clearance of tau in an Alzheimer’s disease model
Sympathetic neural regulation of blood pressure: influences of sex and aging
Perivascular drainage of solutes is impaired in the ageing mouse brain and in the presence of cerebral amyloid angiopathy
Voluntary exercise promotes glymphatic clearance of amyloid beta and reduces the activation of astrocytes and microglia in aged mice
Vascular basement membrane alterations and β-amyloid accumulations in an animal model of cerebral small vessel disease
Associations of enlarged perivascular spaces with brain lesions, brain age, and clinical outcomes in chronic traumatic brain injury
Glymphatic influx and clearance are accelerated by neurovascular coupling
The sleep-wake cycle regulates brain interstitial fluid tau in mice and CSF tau in humans
Long-term, high-resolution imaging in the mouse neocortex through a chronic cranial window
The relationship between amyloid pathology, cerebral small vessel disease, glymphatic dysfunction, and cognition: a study based on Alzheimer’s disease continuum participants
Association of cognition and brain reserve in aging and glymphatic function using diffusion tensor image-along the perivascular space (DTI-ALPS)
Magnetic resonance images implicate that glymphatic alterations mediate cognitive dysfunction in Alzheimer disease
Glymphatic system dysfunction predicts amyloid deposition, neurodegeneration, and clinical progression in Alzheimer’s disease
Sleep and neurodegenerative diseases
The neurovascular unit coming of age: a journey through neurovascular coupling in health and disease
A paravascular pathway facilitates CSF flow through the brain parenchyma and the clearance of interstitial solutes, including amyloid β
Cerebral arterial pulsation drives paravascular CSF-interstitial fluid exchange in the murine brain
Implications of the discovery of brain lymphatic pathways
Dwellers and trespassers: mononuclear phagocytes at the borders of the central nervous system
Upregulation of AQP4 improves blood-brain barrier integrity and perihematomal edema following intracerebral hemorrhage
Blood-brain barrier pathology in cerebral small vessel disease
Association of inflammatory markers with cerebral small vessel disease in community-based population
Impairment of the glymphatic system after diabetes
Early detection of microstructural white matter changes associated with arterial pulsatility
Glymphatic dysfunction mediates the influence of white matter hyperintensities on episodic memory in cerebral small vessel disease
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy aggravates perivascular clearance impairment in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse model
The neurovascular unit-on-a-chip: modeling ischemic stroke to stem cell therapy
Ultra-fast magnetic resonance encephalography of physiological brain activity-glymphatic pulsation mechanisms?
Impairment of paravascular clearance pathways in the aging brain
Glymphatic dysfunction in isolated REM sleep behavior disorder
The effect of body posture on brain glymphatic transport
Blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease
The interconnected causes and consequences of sleep in the brain
Cerebral small vessel disease
Age-related cerebral small vessel disease and inflammaging
Impaired glymphatic function as a biomarker for subjective cognitive decline: an exploratory dual cohort study
Electroacupuncture improves clearance of amyloid-β through the glymphatic system in the SAMP8 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease
Cerebral Small Vessel Disease
The association between perivascular spaces and cerebral blood flow, brain volume, and cardiovascular risk
Dementia prevention, intervention, and care
The glymphatic system: implications for drugs for central nervous system diseases
Structural and functional features of central nervous system lymphatic vessels
Pathogenesis of cerebral amyloid angiopathy caused by chaotic glymphatics—Mini-review
Direct neuronal glucose uptake heralds activity-dependent increases in cerebral metabolism
The glymphatic system: a novel therapeutic target for stroke treatment
Yi-Zhi-Fang-Dai formula exerts neuroprotective effects against pyroptosis and blood-brain barrier-glymphatic dysfunctions to prevent amyloid-beta acute accumulation after cerebral ischemia and reperfusion in rats
Acute systemic LPS-exposure impairs perivascular CSF distribution in mice
Cerebral small vessel disease: recent advances and future directions
Sleep facilitates clearance of metabolites from the brain: glymphatic function in aging and neurodegenerative diseases
Perivascular spaces, glymphatic dysfunction, and small vessel disease
Flow of cerebrospinal fluid is driven by arterial pulsations and is reduced in hypertension
Aging of the vascular system and neural diseases
Characterization of perivascular space pathology in a rat model of cerebral small vessel disease by in vivo magnetic resonance imaging
Impaired glymphatic transport in spontaneously hypertensive rats
Choroid plexus aquaporins in CSF homeostasis and the glymphatic system: their relevance for Alzheimer’s disease
Circadian rest-activity pattern changes in aging and preclinical Alzheimer disease
Intravenous infusion of mesenchymal stem cells improves impaired cognitive function in a cerebral small vessel disease model
Distinct association between cerebral arterial pulsatility and subtypes of cerebral small vessel disease
Glymphatic failure as a final common pathway to dementia
Cerebral small vessel disease: from pathogenesis and clinical characteristics to therapeutic challenges
Scanless two-photon excitation with temporal focusing
Aquaporin-4 in glymphatic system, and its implication for central nervous system disorders
Perivascular space dilation is associated with vascular amyloid-β accumulation in the overlying cortex
The glymphatic system in central nervous system health and disease:past, present, and future
The glymphatic pathway in neurological disorders
Fluid transport in the brain
Omega‐3 polyunsaturated fatty acids promote amyloid‐β clearance from the brain through mediating the function of the glymphatic system
“Hit & Run” model of closed-skull traumatic brain injury (TBI) reveals complex patterns of post-traumatic AQP4 dysregulation
Arterial stiffness is associated with basal ganglia enlarged perivascular spaces and cerebral small vessel disease load
Neurovascular-glymphatic dysfunction and white matter lesions
The choroid plexus: a missing link in our understanding of brain development and function
Regulation of blood flow in the microcirculation
Night photostimulation of clearance of beta-amyloid from mouse brain: new strategies in preventing Alzheimer’s disease
Cerebral blood flow in small vessel disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Update on cerebral small vessel disease: a dynamic whole-brain disease
Neuroimaging evidence of glymphatic system dysfunction in possible REM sleep behavior disorder and Parkinson’s disease
Mechanisms of astrocyte-mediated cerebral edema
β-hydroxybutyrate alleviates neurological deficits by restoring glymphatic and inflammation after subarachnoid hemorrhage in mice
The association between glymphatic system dysfunction and cognitive impairment in cerebral small vessel disease
Evaluation of glymphatic system activity with the diffusion MR technique: diffusion tensor image analysis along the perivascular space (DTI-ALPS) in Alzheimer’s disease cases
Neurofluid dynamics and the glymphatic system: a neuroimaging perspective
Clearance systems in the brain-implications for Alzheimer disease
Paravascular microcirculation facilitates rapid lipid transport and astrocyte signaling in the brain
Impaired glymphatic system as evidenced by low diffusivity along perivascular spaces is associated with cerebral small vessel disease: a population-based study
The neurovascular unit and systemic biology in stroke—implications for translation and treatment
Alzheimer’s disease: pathogenesis, diagnostics, and therapeutics
Disturbance of intracerebral fluid clearance and blood-brain barrier in vascular cognitive impairment
Wide-spread brain activation and reduced CSF flow during avian REM sleep
Novel developments in non-contrast enhanced MRI of the perivascular clearance system: what are the possibilities for Alzheimer’s disease research?
Vasomotion as a driving force for paravascular clearance in the awake mouse brain
White matter damage and glymphatic dysfunction in a model of vascular dementia in rats with no prior vascular pathologies
Interaction between blood-brain barrier and glymphatic system in solute clearance
The treatment of sleep dysfunction in neurodegenerative disorders
Plasma inflammatory biomarkers in cerebral small vessel disease: a review
Relationship between amyloid-β deposition and blood-brain barrier dysfunction in Alzheimer’s disease
Cognitive deficits and delayed neuronal loss in a mouse model of multiple microinfarcts
Focal solute trapping and global glymphatic pathway impairment in a murine model of multiple microinfarcts
Cerebrovascular activity is a major factor in the cerebrospinal fluid flow dynamics
The lymphatic drainage systems in the brain: a novel target for ischemic stroke?
Small vessel disease: mechanisms and clinical implications
Measuring glymphatic flow in man using quantitative contrast-enhanced MRI
Vascular risk factors and astrocytic marker for the glymphatic system activity
Cognitive impairment in cerebral small vessel disease induced by hypertension
Sustained release of vascular endothelial growth factor A and basic fibroblast growth factor from nanofiber membranes reduces oxygen/glucose deprivation-induced injury to neurovascular units
Systemic immune-inflammation index is associated with cerebral small vessel disease burden and cognitive impairment
Sleep drives metabolite clearance from the adult brain
Glymphatic dysfunction correlates with severity of small vessel disease and cognitive impairment in cerebral amyloid angiopathy
Glymphatic pathway in sporadic cerebral small vessel diseases:from bench to bedside
Deletion of aquaporin-4 in APP/PS1 mice exacerbates brain Aβ accumulation and memory deficits
Concomitant enlargement of perivascular spaces and decrease in glymphatic transport in an animal model of cerebral small vessel disease
Influence of respiration on cerebrospinal fluid movement using magnetic resonance spin labeling
Evaluation of glymphatic system using diffusion MR technique in T2DM cases
Cerebral small vessel disease alters neurovascular unit regulation of microcirculation integrity involved in vascular cognitive impairment
The relationship between ambulatory blood pressure variability and enlarged perivascular spaces: a cross-sectional study
Updated understanding of the glial-vascular unit in central nervous system disorders
Quantifying the influence of respiration and cardiac pulsations on cerebrospinal fluid dynamics using real‐time phase‐contrast MRI
Interplay between the glymphatic system and neurotoxic proteins in Parkinson’s disease and related disorders: current knowledge and future directions
Intermittent fasting protects against Alzheimer’s disease possible through restoring aquaporin-4 polarity
Role of the glymphatic system in ageing and diabetes mellitus impaired cognitive function
Glymphatic clearance function in patients with cerebral small vessel disease
Role of endothelial TLR4 for neutrophil recruitment into central nervous system microvessels in systemic inflammation
Dysfunction of the glymphatic system might be related to iron deposition in the normal aging brain
Impairment of the glymphatic pathway and putative meningeal lymphatic vessels in the aging human
Neurovascular pathways to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and other disorders
Glymphatic system: a gateway for neuroinflammation