Educational data mining in medical education: A five-level approach
The healthcare industry in each country has one of the most important and sophisticated educational systems that produces and stores a large amount of educational data daily. Data generated by the interaction of managers, patients, instructors, students, employees, and all those who are involved with educational systems can revolutionize medical education through analysis and prediction of the hidden patterns of knowledge, skills, and attitude that have been neglected in this massive amount of data. This study aims to review data mining in medical education and provide a comprehensive picture of it in different educational dimensions. In this study, we performed a literature review from 2010 to 2022 in IEEE, SSCI, Elsevier, CIVILICA, and Science Direct. Two hundred and fifty articles were identified. In total, 34 documents were included in the study. Interned articles’ methodological quality was assessed using the five-step method proposed by Carnwell and Daly. This method is used for summarizing texts, summarizing points of view, and finally providing a line of guidance for future research. A five-level taxonomy was developed in this study which includes educational policy and management, instructional designing and planning, educational technologies, learning content, and learning outcomes. To increase the efficiency of data mining techniques at each level, some useful recommendations were presented in more detail. Educational data mining (EDM) as a new methodology can lead to better policy-making, more proper planning, and more effective decisions. EDM by extracting data makes it easier to describe and predict educational trends, which can guarantee the success of medical education more than before.

Introduction
In today’s world, with the help of computers, we have witnessed fundamental changes in educational systems. Nonetheless, the demand for improvement continues, and relentless efforts have been made to find more effective and beneficial ways to improve teaching and learning processes and outcomes.
The number of educational institutions has increased dramatically over recent years, and all of these institutions produce and store large volumes of educational data that are not easy to retrieve or use manually. Powerful techniques and tools are needed to extract knowledge from educational data.
Data mining techniques are effective ways to discover valuable knowledge contained in data and have been used in various fields such as research, business, medicine, and other sciences. However, educational data mining (EDM) is an emerging field in its infancy. A huge amount of data in the educational system remains intact and requires the application of data mining techniques and in-depth data analysis.
Data mining means extracting hidden information, patterns, or relationships in large volumes of data in one or more large databases to make appropriate decisions. Some researchers consider data mining to be synonymous with knowledge discovery in databases, while data mining, despite its importance in the knowledge discovery process, is only one of the steps in this process. The following 7 steps are entailed:
Data cleaning (to remove noise and inconsistent data)
Data integration (where multiple data sources may be combined)
Data selection (where data relevant to the analysis task is retrieved from the database)
Data transformation (where data are transformed and consolidated into forms appropriate for mining by performing summary or aggregation operations)
Data mining (an essential process where intelligent methods are applied to extract data patterns)
Pattern evaluation (to identify the truly interesting patterns representing knowledge based on interestingness measures)
Knowledge presentation (where visualization and knowledge representation techniques are used to present mined knowledge to users).
EDM is a new trend exploring knowledge patterns in educational systems. EDM uses statistics, machine learning, and various data mining algorithms to discover information from educational data. Since the application of data mining in medical education is increasing globally, there is a need to grasp the various applications of EDM in medical education. This paper aims to review data mining in medical education and provide a comprehensive picture of it in different educational dimensions.

Materials and Methods

Study design and setting
This study was conducted through web mining and reviewing data sources. The current research focuses on the related articles and documents to understand and examine the aspects and frameworks that include the main issue. As Boaro pointed out, reviewing articles can be used not only for criticizing but also for summarizing texts, summarizing points of view, and expressing the most important points. We performed a five-step method proposed by Carnwell and Daly for review research, which includes: 1) determining the main scope of review; 2) recognizing relevant data sources; 3) an extensive review of the subject literature; 4) classification of results; 5) conclusion and determination of future research. According to Carnwell and Daly, the researcher begins with a clear definition of the field of research and an evaluation of the main research literature and then tries to expand the discussion by looking beyond what others have done. For this purpose, the researcher should identify the components of the research and the gap in knowledge, then organize the evidence in the results, and in the next step, discuss, reach a conclusion, and finally provide a line of guidance for future research. Reputable databases such as IEEE, SSCI, Elsevier, CIVILICA, Science Direct, and Web of Science were searched for articles related to EDM and its application in the field of health systems.

Study participants and sampling
Both Persian and English language articles published during the years 2010– 2022 were examined. The terms searched in this study included medical education, health system, data mining, EDM, and educational technology. Related terms such as data mining techniques, learning process, curriculum, learning environment, online education, information systems, and medical decision-making systems were also searched.

Data collection tool and technique
In the initial search, 250 articles were retrieved, and after a quick review, articles unrelated to the main purpose of the research or published in languages other than Persian and English were excluded from the study. Finally, 34 articles were classified into five groups and thoroughly reviewed. The Carnell and Daly approach was used to achieve the results.

Ethical consideration
Institutional ethics were not required as no human participants, people, medical records, or animal studies were involved in the study.

Results
By reviewing the articles [Table 1], the application of data mining in medical education was identified at five levels: educational policy and management, curriculum design and planning, educational technologies, learning content, and learning outcomes. In addition, the mechanisms required for the development of medical education data mining and the greater productivity of the techniques of this science, based on the analysis of each level, are presented in Table 2. This integrated framework can help increase the awareness and understanding of upstream stakeholders to validate the provision of the infrastructure needed to apply EDM knowledge in the health system.
Performed a literature review from 2010 to April 2022
#		Year		Authors		Title	 	1		2022		Jayasri, N and Aruna		Big data analytics in health care by data mining and classification techniques. ICT Express	 	2		2022		Cubillas, J, et al.		Use of data mining to predict the influx of patients to primary healthcare centers and construction.	 	3		2021		De Gagne, et al.		Analysis of cyber incivility in posts by health professions students: Descriptive Twitter data mining study	 	4		2020		Babaee, M and Rastegarpour		Applications of opinion mining in higher education. Human information interaction.	 	5		2020		Gupta, M. K and Chandra		A comprehensive survey of data mining. International Journal of Information Technology	 	6		2019		Saura, J. R., et al.		Detecting indicators for startup business success: Sentiment analysis using text data mining. Sustainability	 	7		2019		Liu, K. J, et al.		Application status and development of big data in medical education in China. Medical Data Mining	 	8		2019		Hernández-Blanco, A., et al.		A systematic review of deep learning approaches to educational data mining. Complexity	 	9		2019		Ferraz, R. R. N., et al.		Implementation of a distance learning program focused on continuing medical education with the support of patent-based data mining	 	10		2019		Alban, M. and Mauricio		Predicting university dropout through data mining: Systematic literature.	 	11		2018		Ray, S., et al.		Applications of educational data mining and learning analytics tools in handling big data in higher education	 	12		2018		Rodrigues, M, et al.		Educational data mining: A review of evaluation process in the e-learning	 	13		2017		Romero, C. and Ventura		Educational data science in massive open online courses	 	14		2017		Yazdani, S., et al.		Medical education in cyberspace: Critical considerations in the health system.	 	15		2017		Rizal, M. T., Y. and Yusof		Application of data mining in forecasting graduates’ employment	 	16		2016		Patel, S., and Patel		Survey of data mining techniques used in the healthcare domain	 	17		2016		Konstantinidis, S. T., and Bamidis		Why decision support systems are important for medical education	 	18		2016		Saa, A. A.		Educational data mining and students’ performance prediction	 	19		2016		Mishra, T., et al.		Students’ employability prediction model through data mining.	 	20		2015		Kerr, D.		Using data mining results to improve educational video game design	 	21		2015		Thakar, P., and Mehta		Performance analysis and prediction in educational data mining	 	22		2015		Ahmad, P., et al.		Techniques of data mining in healthcare: A review.	 	23		2014		Arora, R. K. and Badal		Mining association rules to improve academic performance	 	24		2014		Herland, M., et al.		A review of data mining using big data in health informatics.	 	25		2014		Peña-Ayala, A.		Educational data mining: A survey and a data mining-based analysis of recent works.	 	26		2014		Wallden, S. and Mäkinen		Educational data mining and problem-based learning.	 	27		2014		Shivakumar, B. L., et al.		A survey on data-mining technologies for prediction and diagnosis of diabetes	 	28		2013		Taneja, A		Heart disease prediction system using data mining techniques.	 	29		2013		Jantawan, B. and Tsai		The application of data mining to build a classification model for predicting graduate employment	 	30		2012		Baradwaj, B. K. and Pal		Mining educational data to analyze students’ performance	 	31		2012		Milovic, B. and Milovic		Prediction and decision-making in health care using data mining	 	32		2010		Bhattacharya, P. et al.		Automated data mining: An innovative and efficient web-based approach to maintaining resident case logs	 	33		2010		Romero, C. and Ventura		Educational data mining: A review of the state of the art	 	34		2010		Bhattacharya, P., et al.		Automated data mining: An innovative and efficient web-based approach to maintaining resident case logs.
Mechanisms required for the establishment and development of medical education data mining
Level		Mechanisms	 	Educational policy and management		Raising awareness and creating comprehensive morale and determination in managers and senior officials of the health and medical education systemMultilateral cooperation between the Ministry of Science and the Ministry of Health for the use of valuable raw data and the establishment of EDMAllocation of resources, budget, specialized manpower, and common guidelines and proceduresEstablishing a national medical science information center and providing a community standard to educational institutions for data collection and storageDesign and development of integrated platforms to create the necessary infrastructure for the use of EDM in medicineEstablishing a data monitoring organization and its permanent monitoring of the correctness of data entry and providing feedback on how data are collectedConsidering the opinion of elites and experts in EDM for educational planning and policiesIntegrated management of stakeholders (politicians, educational institutions, educational content producers, students, professors, and patients) through the application of data-mining knowledgePerformance evaluation of organizations and educational institutions, educational staff, and students by data mining techniquesReflecting on international experiences and reviewing and applying the best methods for developing medical EDM	 	Curriculum design and planning		Designing, planning, and implementing the curriculum according to the exploration of medical educational data and finding the existing models hidden in the dataModeling students’ learning patterns through data monitoring to design and prepare personalized educational content for learning supportProviding facilities and research grants for researchers and educational designers in the medical EDM fieldAvailability of patient data after removing confidential fields for educational research processes and setting treatment plansAnalyzing students’ data for predicting course enrollment, performance, and success, and identifying abnormal cases	 	Educational technologies		Setting up decision-support systems based on data from online systems and web-based training environmentsOnline opinion mining and refinement of students’ opinions to model their behavior and performancePlanning, design, development, management, and evaluation of e-learning based on automatic data refinement for discovering different learning models to evaluate students’ educational needsImplementing data mining techniques on data and providing objective and real feedback from the structure	 	Learning content		Providing appropriate, up-to-date, and complete content based on searching educational data and existing patterns hidden in educational systems databasesPreparation of localized guide maps for various diseases by exploring the data and symptoms of different illnesses to create online databases to improve public healthDeveloping new teaching methods based on data mining	 	Learning outcomes		Job qualification examination for students, novice doctors, and specialists by refining the available dataConducting entrance exams, recruiting, and maintaining human resources according to classified data and informationInvestigating the success of medical education institutions by measuring the employment rate for recent graduatesDiscovering the weaknesses and strengths of medical graduates in the workplace based on registration data and years of study for improving content and educational programs

Discussion
The present findings indicate that EDM knowledge can identify hidden patterns in the medical education system and health care at five levels. In the following, each level is discussed.
Level of educational policy and management.
Today, the health industry produces a huge amount of data, such as hospital data, diagnostic and treatment data, health data, medication data, educational data, research data, and much more, that requires careful refinement.
Clearly, in most cases, humans are unable to classify and organize these vast amounts of data for decision-making and policy-making. Data mining is one of the best ways in medical education to gain the necessary knowledge through data acquisition, analysis, and discovery. This knowledge can help produce a better understanding of the prevailing conditions that surround this collection. Health systems around the world need efficient, organized, and knowledge-based decision makers and managers in these systems that make hundreds of critical decisions daily, and the quality of decisions in each executive position depends on the quality of the information underlying the decision.
Physicians also need useful and efficient knowledge to move from traditional medicine to evidence-based medicine and to make wise decisions in diagnosing and treating diseases.
The last decade has seen an increase in the use of data mining techniques and the discovery of patterns and models that can be useful in the decision-making and policy-making process.
The first and most important step to solving problems in the medical education of the health system is to create and implement comprehensive, logical, and practical policies that effectively respond to the functions of this industry. There is also a need for a system that can make predictions to assist in correct decision-making.
Such an approach is based on a careful analysis of the characteristics and priorities of the system that can help policymakers deal with system problems and achieve their goals more effectively. Knowledge gained through data mining can help increase productivity and efficiency in various areas and lead to improved decision quality, especially when it is necessary to reduce costs and increase the quality of services.
Konstantin Dis and Bamidis (2016) conducted a study to determine the need to apply decision support systems (DSSs) in medical education, in which they stated that the presence of DSSs in medical education aims to help the decision-making process at different levels of the education process. It seems necessary to use these EDM systems because DSSs use EDM techniques.
To create an accurate DSS, its exact role, the challenges it may face, and all stakeholders involved in the learning process must be identified. Stakeholders are as follows: 1) medical education policymakers; 2) managers of medical universities; 3) medical education content providers; and 4) students and professors of medical sciences of all religions involved in the learning process can use the wealth of educational data in different ways and for different decisions according to their needs.
Medical education policymakers, administrators of medical universities, providers of medical educational content, students, professors of medical sciences, and all stakeholders involved in the learning process can use the wealth of educational data in different ways and for different decisions based on their needs.
Level of educational design and planning.
In recent decades, we have seen the introduction of digital tools and their expansion in the field of education. Extensive interactions between learner and teacher, the high volume of production, reproduction, and sharing of digital educational resources, and the connection of these resources with each other as well as today’s cheap storage technology have produced a huge amount of educational data in the health system.
The analysis of students’ information is necessary to classify and create a decision tree. Analysis and comprehension of educational information demonstrate students’ performance or focus on predicting their future performance and provide a roadmap for design and planning.
EDM uses many techniques such as decision trees, neural networks, and Bayesian algorithms to analyze educational data. This knowledge is used to predict enrollment in a particular course, identify abnormalities in test results, predict academic performance, and more.
Many EDM studies have focused on improving educational design and performance review.
Baradwaj and Pal (2012), in a study entitled “Student performance analysis based on educational data mining,” presented a data mining model for the higher education system. Researchers have used the decision tree to classify data and discover a pattern for recognizing student performance at the end of the semester. Using this technique, universities are able to identify students who intend to drop out or who need special attention and make appropriate plans in this regard.
This model is also able to help teachers design a more useful curriculum and increase the quality of their education.
In a study conducted by Pina Ayalana (2014) entitled “Educational data mining: Review and analysis of recent data,” EDM approaches are divided into different types of educational systems, disciplines, tasks, methods, and algorithms and into six models. Applications include the following: 1) student modeling, 2) performance modeling, 3) assessment, 4) behavioral modeling, 5) support and feedback modeling, and 6) teacher support. Level of educational technologies.
The medical profession requires continuously modernized and up-to-date knowledge that must be provided at any time, place, and in any way required by specialists.
With the spread of online medical education, the importance of exploiting the data accumulated in online environments and databases and discovering specific patterns that can provide countless possibilities for educational institutions becomes more colorful than before.
Romero and Ventura (2010) introduced educational designers, educational planners, educational administrators, researchers, professors, and students as the main stakeholders in EDM. Web-based and smart learning environments have been called the golden mines of information that must be explored and exploited.
Medical data exploration provides computer programmers with terms they can use to encode and search web-based academic resources.
Wallden and Mäkinen (2014), in their study entitled “Data mining and problem-based learning,” stated that in medical education, the use of theoretical concepts by students as a skill is challenging.
The authors applied EDM techniques to the input data of the international virtual medical school (IVIMEDS) model system in the virtual patient (VP) curriculum of Medical School. The program was based on the students’ ability to make appropriate diagnoses based on the symptoms of patients and to choose the correct treatment method. The results showed that the new method of reinforcing problem-based learning using the input data are appropriate for the framework of March and Smith (1995). This framework is a criterion for evaluating different methods that are defined based on efficiency, effectiveness, generalization, and ease of use; therefore, the model presented by researchers was well considered in the framework.
In another study entitled “Automated data mining,” Bhattacharya et al. (2010) examined the effectiveness of data mining methods in resident reporting. The results showed that the automated data mining method is a powerful tool for data collection and analysis. In addition to recording reports, it can be used to record the indicators required by the accreditation council to evaluate training programs and provide prompt feedback for clients.
With the automated method, there is no need for medical residents to enter information into the system, and can spend their time on other tasks. However, adopting an automated system that accurately and completely enters the clinical histories of patients into a web-based system seems to be much more useful and effective.
The automated system is also able to provide more accurate diagnoses than the manual system, which will help the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) better assess the quality of training programs for residents.
Planners can also make the necessary changes to training programs using the information added to the system. This method can be an optimized tool to reflect and evaluate the educational needs of each medical resident.
The automated method also provides specific demographic information about patients that residents can use for their research projects. Finally, this system can be used in continuing education programs for physicians.
Level of learning content.
All content data can discover and access the hidden golden pattern for improvement.
Content preparation based on exploring educational data and models hidden in the data can be one of the key elements in the success of a medical education program. Taneja (2013) stated that data mining techniques can be used effectively to model and predict cardiovascular diseases.
The proposed model can be used as a tool to provide content to cardiology residents to help them diagnose cardiac diseases. In addition, the proposed model has a high sensitivity rate that can be used by inexperienced cardiologists as screening for heart patients.
By using EDM, students’ success in performing various tasks can be examined, and then appropriate learning resources, materials, and learning pathways that lead to more successful learning experiences can be suggested. EDM provides objective and realistic feedback on the structure and content of the course, and instructors can discover their students’ learning patterns to assist in grouping them into smaller groups with similar learning needs. Thus, it increases the overall effectiveness of the content of the proposed curriculum.
Level of learning outcomes.
Changing the concept of competency and the methods of qualifying medical education is unique. The workforce is the main and most important resource and asset of any organization, especially service-oriented organizations. Medical education content providers should know how effective the productive content, resources, learning methods, teachers, and student learning patterns are in creating the qualifications required for graduates to enter the health labor market. It also helps medical students and freshly starting physicians evaluate their performance and increase their capabilities so that they can provide better medical services to patients.
Applying data mining techniques to medical education data to track and measure educational activities in this area can be very helpful. In a study entitled “Application of association rules to improve academic performance,” Arora and Badal (2014) succeeded in identifying weak students in later semesters according to the criteria obtained from the data of graduated students for use by educational planners to improve the performance of these students by considering the extra programs they need. Awareness of the degree of graduates’ qualifications in obtaining job positions allowed us to evaluate the effectiveness of educational programs and measure the overall success of these programs in providing the efficient manpower required by the health industry. It also helps match educational proposals and activities.
Mishra et al. (2016) used various data mining classification techniques and finally proposed a model for predicting the job qualifications of master’s degree graduates in computer science for educational institutions to help those students who may be unemployed due to a lack of required skills after graduation.
Jantawan and Tsai (2013) developed a model with an optimal ability to accurately predict the employment status of students (unemployed, employed, and uncertain status) after graduation.
This model, based on actual data collected from students during the year before graduation, identified the characteristics affecting their employment and determined students’ employment status.

Strengths, limitation, and recommendation
To the best of our knowledge, no similar review article has been conducted in this field yet.
As a limitation, first, the literature’s infancy resulted in a paucity of relevant articles and, consequently, a small number of included studies. Second, we narrowed our inclusion criteria to Persian and English language articles, while there may be valuable studies in other languages. Finally, we reviewed the studies described in the literature, while there could be EDM projects around the world that are yet to be mentioned in publications.

Conclusion
Cultivating capable and efficient human resources is the most important factor in the success of the health system in meeting the growing needs and wishes of society. This will be possible with accurate, comprehensive, up-to-date, flexible, and efficient curricula developed for the needs of students. Thus, medical education institutions are constantly making efforts to discover new and effective methods and apply them to medical education.
One science that can be effective in this field is EDM. The databases of medical institutions and universities are full of valuable data that enables the extraction of rich knowledge and educational models, and this can lead to greater efficiency and success in the health medical education system. In addition, educational management, curriculum design and planning, educational technologies, learning content, and learning outcomes can bring about a great change in the country’s medical education. The researchers have provided the necessary mechanisms for the implementation of this knowledge in medical education, which can lead to an increase in the quality of educational activities and the health system, thus improving quality.

Future research
Future research can examine the role of EDM in the design of intelligent educational systems and the impact of these knowledge techniques on the successful and safe establishment of medical education in electronic environments.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

References
Digital revolution and its impact on education systems in developing countries
Educational data mining for grouping students in e-learning system
Big Data and Education
Educational data mining: A review of evaluation process in the e-learning
Performance analysis and prediction in educational data mining: A research travelogue
Big data analytics in health care by data mining and classification techniques
Use of data mining to predict the influx of patients to primary healthcare centres and construction
Detecting indicators for startup business success: Sentiment analysis using text data mining
A comprehensive survey of data mining
Data Mining Concepts and Techniques
From Data Mining to Knowledge Discovery in Databases Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques
Educational data mining & students’ performance prediction
A systematic review of deep learning approaches to educational data mining
Application status and development of big data in medical education in China
Implementation of a distance learning program focused on continuing medical education with the support of patent-based data mining
Analysis of cyberincivility in posts by health professions students: Descriptive Twitter data mining study
The use of temperature-programmed and dynamic/transient methods in catalysis: Characterization of ceria-based, model three-way catalysts
Strategies for the construction of a critical review of the literature
Quality and trustworthiness in qualitative research in counseling psychology
Medical education in cyberspace: Critical considerations in the health system
Intelligent feedback polarity and timing selection in the Shufti intelligent tutoring system
Automated data mining: An innovative and efficient web-based approach to maintaining resident case logs
Why decision support systems are important for medical education
A review of data mining using big data in health informatics Application of data mining in medical applications
Survey of data mining techniques used in healthcare domain
Applications of opinion mining in higher education
Health care financing in Iran; Is privatization a good solution?
From data mining to knowledge discovery in databases
A survey on health data using data mining techniques
Using data mining results to improve educational video game design
A model-based approach to predicting graduate-level performance using indicators of undergraduate-level performance
Mining educational data to analyze students’ performance
Predicting university dropout through data mining: A systematic literature
Educational data mining: A survey and a data mining-based analysis of recent works
Educational data mining: A review of the state of the art
Educational data mining and problem-based learning
Design and natural science research on information technology
Heart disease prediction system using data mining techniques
Educational data science in massive open online courses
Techniques of data mining in healthcare: A review
Applications of educational data mining and learning analytics tools in handling big data in higher education
Application of data mining in forecasting graduates’ employment
A survey on data-mining technologies for prediction and diagnosis of diabetes
Prediction and decision making in health care using data mining
Mining association rules to improve academic performance
Students’ employability prediction model through data mining
The application of data mining to build classification model for predicting graduate employment