Review Article: Green Management of IBD—New Paradigms for an Eco‐Friendly Approach
ABSTRACT
Background
The worldwide prevalence of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is increasing, with its potential evolution as a global disease and a consequent increase in its burden on healthcare systems. These estimates do not factor in the ‘real’ price of IBD, which, beyond curbing career aspirations, instilling social stigma, and impairing the quality of life in patients, could also significantly affect the environment.
Aim
To highlight potential areas for intervention and develop management strategies aimed at minimising environmental impacts in the field of IBD over time.
Methods
Various aspects of IBD care (organisation of IBD centres, diagnostics and therapeutics) are examined from an environmental sustainability perspective.
Results
Each stage, from the patient's means of transport to the hospital to the physician's diagnostic and therapeutic decisions, contribute to CO2 and waste production. Strategies to contain the environmental impact are feasible. Some are easy to implement, such as ensuring the appropriateness of the diagnostic and therapeutic pathway for patients; others need to be implemented in synergy with healthcare providers' policies and pharmaceutical companies.
Conclusions
With an inevitable increase in the number of patient visits, endoscopies, laboratory testing, and long‐term therapeutic strategies for IBD, the clinical community should be aware of environmental concerns and investigate possible strategies to reduce the environmental impact of IBD care.
The increasing prevalence of IBD, with an inevitable increase in the number of visits, instrumental examinations and laboratory testing, also poses a problem of environmental sustainability. Long‐term strategies in clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic management are possible to mitigate the “carbon footprint” of IBD.

Introduction
The healthcare industry represents a considerable potential burden on climate change, as it accounts for more than 4% of total greenhouse emissions. These straightforward yet concerning data should serve as a basis for raising awareness about eco‐friendly health actions and encourage research and methodologies aimed at influencing global strategies to hinder current climate change.
Therefore, it is more necessary than ever to develop care pathways aimed at containing environmental impact while simultaneously acting on energy consumption, transportation, production, use, and disposal of products, all in pursuit of eco‐sustainable healthcare.
In recent years, proposals have been made in the field of gastroenterology to mitigate the healthcare impact on the environment. In particular, a “green endoscopy” plan has been designed to reduce the total number of endoscopies, avoid inappropriate examinations, minimise the number of unnecessary biopsies, and focus on the correct recycling of waste materials. To date, no study has evaluated the impact of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) care on the environment.
The global incidence and prevalence of IBD are rising, and the latest international consensus on this topic emphasised the importance of a close monitoring of treatment response. This inevitably leads to an increase in the number of visits, endoscopies, laboratory tests, and therapies. The clinical community should explore possible strategies to reduce their impact on the environment and, when evaluating different therapeutic options with similar clinical efficacy, should seriously consider the “greenest” one.
In this paper, we discuss potential areas for sustainable interventions, from the organisation of IBD centres and the strategic use of virtual care to diagnostic and therapeutic options in IBD care.

The IBD Centres: From the Building to the Network
Implementing an eco‐sustainable IBD centre implies, when feasible and in line with the hospital's strategy, starting from the design stage and paying careful attention to some key factors, including construction materials, energy use, waste management, and the comfort of both patients and staff. Eco‐friendly materials, such as recycled steel and/or sustainably harvested wood, and materials with low volatile organic compounds (VOCs), could be used to minimise air pollution and improve indoor air quality. Particular attention should be paid to the use of energy‐efficient appliances and lighting systems to reduce energy consumption. Green waste management practices should be adopted to establish composting and recycling programs to minimise waste production and divert materials from landfill. Finally, IBD centres should be designed with patient comfort in mind; colours and fabrics that promote relaxation should be chosen, and features such as quiet spaces should be incorporated to enhance patient well‐being.
Since the design of an IBD centre is of paramount importance, it should be considered that the current management of IBD patients is at different complexity levels, from primary‐ to tertiary‐level centres. The availability of highly specialised multidisciplinary IBD care has recently led to the strengthening of tertiary‐level centres at the expense of smaller primary‐ and secondary‐level ones. This phenomenon has led to the migration of patients to distant reference centres, which may be far from home, in the search for better care.
Centralising care leads to better outcomes in terms of standardisation of high‐quality care but it could also be inconvenient for patients and ultimately increase pollution emissions associated with multiple trips to the center.
Therefore, it may be desirable to organise IBD centres to improve the quality of life of patients and simultaneously reduce the impact on the environment by strategically shifting the focus of care towards a network of smaller centres and larger tertiary satellites.
A virtuous model, already implemented in some geographical areas, centralises the first‐access clinical evaluation, first‐level intestinal ultrasound (IUS), and first‐level endoscopies (e.g., surveillance in low‐risk patients and control of inflammation in cases that cannot be safely treated by non‐invasive methods) in smaller centres, while more complex multidisciplinary clinical cases are addressed to tertiary community referral centres. This organisation would reduce the need for patient travels while allowing for high‐quality care and the possibility to access the referral centre whenever necessary. In other cases, patients would have the opportunity to receive timely and appropriate care at home.

Virtual Care
Reduced access to outpatient clinics contributes to a decrease in CO₂ emissions associated with transportation. Effective reduction in access is supported by an appropriate and smart use of telemedicine. “Home‐based” follow‐up visits for clinically stable patients, or short‐term follow‐ups for those previously assessed in person could significantly reduce in‐person visits, limiting transportation‐related pollution, especially for patients who live far from the main healthcare center.
Clinical assistance can be provided remotely through telemedicine and/or digital health tools. Physicians can evaluate patients' clinical status and need deciding whether they need to be seen in person at a tertiary IBD centre, managed in a smaller centre, or if telemedicine alone is sufficient to provide the necessary care.
Recent evidence suggests that strengthening self‐care practices can help physicians monitor patients and promptly identify those requiring additional care. A crucial facilitator of this process are IBD nurses, who play a proactive role in patient education and involvement, and whose commitment could reduce hospital admissions. Through telemedicine, IBD nurses can establish the first contact when patients need support, bringing medical guidance directly to patients' homes.
During the COVID‐19 pandemic, it was necessary to defer non‐urgent investigations, thus offering an opportunity to implement remote management for IBD patients. During this period, the presence of a dedicated contact centre service proved effective in maintaining key clinical outcomes and addressing each patient's concern.
Through telemedicine and the proactive support of IBD nurses, enhanced patient self‐care and a sustainable and efficient plan for IBD care are achievable. From a circular perspective, this approach benefits patients, the healthcare system, and the environment.

Diagnosis
Laboratory tests, imaging, and endoscopic procedures are essential for IBD care. These diagnostic tools play a pivotal role in confirming the presence of IBD, distinguishing between its subtypes, and assessing disease severity. Laboratory tests, including blood and stool tests, provide valuable information regarding inflammatory markers, nutritional deficiencies, and potential complications. Cross‐sectional imaging techniques, including IUS, computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), are useful tools to evaluate the state of the intestinal wall. Endoscopy, which allows clinicians to detect characteristic mucosal features of IBD, is critical to determining phenotype, assessing disease severity and evaluating mucosal and histological healing.
Taken together, these diagnostic tools are essential for disease monitoring over time, thus facilitating optimal management strategies tailored to patients' individual needs However, it is more important than ever to manage all these diagnostic resources in an optimal manner with an emphasis on environmental sustainability (Figure 1).
Eco‐friendly solutions to reduce IBD environmental impact. The current IBD patient care encompasses many aspects whose environmental impact cannot be ignored. Endoscopy and histological exams are not eco‐friendly procedures, but they can be limited preferring more sustainable options to evaluate disease state in different clinical contexts. The way patients with IBD are managed today usually requires in‐person access to tertiary centres usually far‐from‐home, contributing to transport‐related pollution. This can also be limited by favouring virtual care and smaller, closer‐to‐home primary IBD centres. Even the choice of the therapy has environmental consequences. When feasible, the clinician should consider the “greener” choice, like oral therapies, and should be sensitive to the production and recycling policy of the pharmaceutical companies that provide those drugs.

Laboratory Testing
Patient sampling for diagnostic purposes significantly contributes to waste production since it often involves the use of single‐use plastics for collection, plastic tubes for storage, and plastic bags for shipping. Appropriateness criteria and adequate timing of prescription are essential to reduce costs but also to minimise environmental impact. Point‐of‐care testing has the potential to mitigate part of this impact and should therefore be implemented in large IBD centres.
Furthermore, the promotion of environmentally sustainable practices in the laboratory (e.g., improving waste management, reducing unnecessary orders from suppliers, caring for equipment, optimising water use and processes) could contribute to reducing environmental impacts while providing a high level of quality care to patients.
Additionally, digital documentation could lessen paper consumption and storage requirements, while facilitating the sharing of results among healthcare providers.

Cross‐Sectional Imaging
The issues of energy consumption and environmental sustainability in radiology have attracted considerable attention in recent years. MRI usage, in particular, poses significant problems, including relevant energy waste, water contamination from gadolinium‐based contrast agents, and the depletion of limited resources like helium.
The electricity consumed annually by a single MRI machine is comparable to that of 26 households, with MRI exhibiting a significantly higher energy consumption than other imaging techniques, such as CT. When considering both production and operational phases, MRI examinations generate an average of 20 kg CO₂ emissions per scan, equivalent to approximately 83 km of driving in a petrol‐powered vehicle.
Although CT requires less energy than MRI, its energy consumption and the environmental impact of iodinated contrast remain substantial. Among cross‐sectional imaging techniques, ultrasound shows the smallest environmental impact. This, along with recent evidence supporting the use of IUS in IBD patients, should encourage physicians to prioritise this method whenever possible.

Endoscopy
Whenever possible, clinicians should actively reduce the number of unnecessary endoscopies owing to relatively new and non‐invasive complementary techniques. For example, IUS has shown high accuracy and good correlation with endoscopic findings in ileal, colonic, and perianastomotic diseases, whereas for colonic diseases, faecal calprotectin is a good predictor of disease activity and mucosal healing. In most patients, these two techniques could provide as much information as endoscopy with the advantage of generating less waste. Furthermore, risk stratification based on individual risk factors may help reduce unnecessary colonoscopies for surveillance of preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions. Based on ECCO recommendations, patients should be stratified into low‐, intermediate‐ or high‐risk groups. In this case, the dosage of faecal calprotectin, in association with a full recording of the clinical history, could facilitate adherence to recommendations and patients' correct risk stratification. Patients with persistently elevated faecal calprotectin levels carry a higher risk of dysplasia and adenocarcinoma and should intensify endoscopic surveillance.
Additionally, new endoscopic instruments with high‐definition imaging, optical, and digital enhancement, have greatly improved the visualisation of fine vascular and mucosal patterns, allowing endoscopic images to closely reflect histological changes associated to injury, inflammation and healing. In recent decades, there has been an ongoing debate regarding the need to perform random four‐quadrant biopsies every 10 cm for surveillance, even in the era of high‐definition endoscopy and virtual chromoendoscopy. Growing evidence suggests that with new endoscopic instruments, colonic dysplasia can be detected most of the time; therefore, targeted biopsies instead of traditional random biopsies could provide the same benefit to patients. This approach would also be the most environmentally friendly, reducing the number of samples to analysed and, consequently, the consumption of single‐use plastic vials and the amount of pollutant fixative for histology (e.g., formalin).
Furthermore, environmentally friendly practices should be integrated into endoscopic procedures. These might include using reusable rather than disposable equipment, such as biopsy forceps and polypectomy snares; instruments that could be cleaned and sterilised for repeated use; energy‐efficient endoscopes and other devices; the implementation of water‐saving measures, like low‐flow systems; and the correct disposal of detergents and chemical products.

Histology
Histological analysis is one of the components of the high “carbon footprint” of digestive endoscopy. Processing a biopsy involves around 11 steps with estimated emissions of approximately 0.28 kg CO2 when using a single jar for multiple samples and 0.79 kg CO2 when using 3 jars, one for each sample. These greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions are comparable to those produced by driving a passenger car for 1.1 km (0.28 kg CO2) and 3.2 km (0.79 kg CO2), respectively.
In the field of histology, particularly for ulcerative colitis (UC), growing focus on histological healing as a potential therapeutic target, could increase the demand for histological analyses in the coming years. Notably, the absence of histological activity predicts better outcomes in terms of disease remission and reduced risk of dysplasia and could help in the decision‐making process for the escalation or downgrading of therapies. However, even in this context, a more environment‐friendly alternative may limit the number of biopsy samples to be processed. For instance, chromoendoscopy has demonstrated a good correlation with histological activity , especially when combined with artificial intelligence.

Therapeutics
Patients with IBD require ongoing medication management to control their symptoms, achieve and maintain remission, and prevent disease progression. The choice of diagnostic and therapeutic strategies and the timing of follow‐up visits can have a significant impact on the environment and lead to negative consequences if not managed in a sustainable manner.
Currently, when evidence is insufficient to guide decisions, the choice between different advanced therapies typically depends on balancing effectiveness, costs, severity of disease, potential complications and patient expectations; moreover, when selecting a drug, it might be desirable to also consider indirect costs in terms of environmental harm. In today's world, the release of targeted guidelines with a “green” perspective would help physicians make more sustainable choices regarding conventional and, especially, advanced therapies.

Choose the Greener Formulation and Dosage
5‐aminosalicylates (5‐ASA), especially mesalamine, are still among the most prescribed drugs for both UC and Crohn's disease (CD) and have a huge impact on IBD‐related waste production. In CD, however, its administration to maintain remission, particularly in ileal disease, is not associated with clear clinical benefits. Furthermore, discontinuation of 5‐ASA therapy should be considered when transitioning to advanced therapies. Both these considerations should be taken into account when treating these patients, with the goal of minimising costs, environmental impact, and prevent potential side effects.
Currently, advanced therapies for IBD involve various routes of administration. Drugs such as infliximab, ustekinumab, risankizumab, mirikizumab, adalimumab, golimumab or vedolizumab are available in multiple formulations, for intravenous and subcutaneous administration. Recent clinical trials have demonstrated the equivalence of subcutaneous infliximab and vedolizumab formulations with intravenous ones. In this case, physicians should be encouraged to choose an alternative capable of minimising the number of accesses to centres, limiting CO2 emissions related to transportation and waste materials—mainly single‐use, plastic, and non‐recyclable materials—associated with the administration of drugs.
Likewise, since evidence is not yet conclusive regarding the optimal sequencing of therapy based on the different mechanisms of action after first‐ or second‐line failure, a greener choice should be preferred when efficacy and side‐effects profiles are comparable. For instance, orally administered small molecules (e.g., JAK inhibitors and S1P receptor modulators) may be more sustainable in terms of waste produced. When oral administration is not feasible, prescribers might opt for subcutaneous drug administration less frequently.
In general, when choosing an intravenous or subcutaneous drug for maintenance, each treatment option should be pursued to maintain scheduled dosing intervals for as long as possible. For instance, literature supports returning to an 8‐week vedolizumab schedule in patients previously on a 4‐week schedule without compromising efficacy. Similarly, for ustekinumab, therapy may be extended from every 8 weeks to every 12 weeks in patients with sustained remission.
Finally, for anti‐TNF alpha drugs, in particular infliximab, the implementation of routine therapeutic drug monitoring could provide a more rational use of drugs, avoiding unnecessary administrations and allowing reduction or even discontinuation in stable patients, reducing costs and waste.
From an ecological perspective, when clinically feasible, the preferred optimisation schedule for inflimixab would be 10 mg/kg every 8 weeks instead of 5 mg/kg every 4 weeks.
Further clinical studies should be conducted to establish rigorous criteria for discontinuing biological therapy in patients in long‐term remission, and the possibility of interrupting second‐level treatment should also be taken into consideration.

Choose the Greener Production Process
Without forgetting the need to offer the patient the best therapeutic option in relation to their needs and circumstances, it is advisable to prefer medicines produced through sustainable processes and avoid harmful chemical substances. Biosimilars are drugs comparable to biological medicines but produced using more environmentally friendly techniques. They are made using living cells and biotechnological processes that require fewer resources than traditional biological drugs. Biosimilars have been shown to be as effective as their biological counterparts in treating IBD. However, it is interesting to note that the production of small‐molecule drugs (SMDs) (tofacitinib, JAK inhibitors, S1P1R modulators) requires 10–100 times less water than biological drugs. These agents show interesting characteristics for both patients and physicians, but also from the perspective of environmental impact, as they can be administered orally or topically, unlike other drugs, which instead require injections or infusions. Moreover, production of SMDs is cheaper and easier than that of biologic drugs.
Other treatment options have shown promising results in patients with IBD. Some plant‐based therapies, such as curcumin, Qin Dai, aloe vera, or turmeric, have been shown anti‐inflammatory properties and could facilitate the management of symptoms. These therapies are often sustainably sourced with low environmental impacts, so they should be considered more frequently as adjunct options.
Furthermore, faecal microbiota transplantation can be of help to restore a healthy gut microbiome and to reduce inflammation, and in some specific conditions, such as IBD complicated by Clostridioides difficile infection, it could represent a natural and ecological alternative to traditional drugs.
Finally, the role of diet in IBD management is often underestimated. Evidence suggests that an appropriate nutritional regimen can improve the clinical activity of the disease and reduce complications. This may allow for fewer clinic and hospital admissions, therapeutic escalations, and rescue therapies. Therefore, nutritional counselling could be a conscientious option with benefits for both the patient and the environment.

Environmental Sustainability and Health Technology Assessment
Given the significant therapeutic advancements in recent years—and those anticipated in the near future in the field of IBD, the orientation of Health Technology Assessment (HTA) is highly relevant for companies investing in the sector.
HTA is an essential multidisciplinary process designed to evaluate the properties and impacts of health technologies. Its primary goal is to support decision‐making in healthcare by promoting efficiency, equity, and high quality within healthcare systems. This process integrates various dimensions, including clinical, economic, social, and ethical considerations, to ensure a comprehensive assessment of technologies. The result of this evaluation is then reported to policymakers, healthcare providers, and other stakeholders to inform health policies and practices.
A cornerstone of HTA methodology is the HTA Core Model developed by the European Network for Health Technology Assessment (EUnetHTA). This model provides a standardised framework for conducting HTAs and it is structured around nine domains: health problems and the current use of technology, description and technical characteristics of technology, safety, clinical effectiveness, costs and economic evaluation, ethical analysis, and organisational, social, and legal aspects. These domains cover all aspects of health technology, facilitating standardised assessments and promoting collaboration among HTA agencies across different health systems.
In addition to these core assessments, environmental evaluations are increasingly integrated into HTA to take into account also the environmental impacts of health technologies. This involves analysing factors, such as the carbon footprint of manufacturing processes, waste generation, and resource consumption. Incorporating environmental assessments ensures a more holistic understanding of a technology's long‐term sustainability and aligns healthcare practices with broader environmental goals.

Other Issues
The proper disposal of medications is important to prevent the harmful effects of pharmaceuticals on the environment. Physicians should encourage patients to refer to pharmacies that prioritise sustainable practices such as reducing packaging waste, using eco‐friendly means of transport, and providing medication take‐back programs to safely dispose of unused or expired drugs.
Additionally, recycling and optimisation programs aimed at reducing medical waste from products used in patient care, such as ostomy bags, wipes, gloves, syringes, IV bags, and tubing, and choosing biodegradable and/or reusable products can help lessen environmental impact.
Other relevant issues also include drug packaging and marketing. Packaging encompasses various components (such as bottles, vials, closures, caps, ampoules, and blisters) that encase pharmaceutical products throughout their journey from production to utilisation. Medications can be packaged in minimal refillable containers made of recyclable materials (such as paper or specific plastics) or biodegradable materials (such as plant‐based plastics or compostable materials). It is clear that not all eco‐sustainable packaging options may be appropriate for all medications or patients with IBD, but all efforts should be directed towards minimising waste to the greatest extent possible. For this reason, it would be fundamental for health practitioners to work closely with industries to determine the best packaging option for this category of patients (Figure 2). For example, risankizumab as an excellent option for treating moderately to severely active Crohn's disease. However, the drug “on body” delivery device poses a disposal problem and perhaps should be rethought in a more sustainable shape.
The path to greener management of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). IBD require a highly complex management, which has both a significant environmental impact and a huge potential for improvement. Favouring forms of non‐paper communication with pharmaceutical companies, preferring more sustainable therapies and reducing the production of waste materials, represent viable solutions to reduce the impact that the disease itself and its management have on the environment.
Finally, it is important to consider the environmental impact of drug marketing. For example, pharmaceutical companies can use digital marketing methods such as email campaigns, social media, and online advertisements, instead of paper‐based marketing materials.

Conclusions
Currently, the battle against pollution and waste is fundamental to determine the future and destiny of humanity, as we do not have a spare planet.
Every stage of IBD care contributes to waste production and environmental pollution. IBD is a common condition projected to increase in prevalence in the coming years. This will be reflected in an increased number of hospital admissions, diagnostic procedures, and therapies prescribed. While ensuring patient well‐being, it is essential to recognise the interdependence between patient health and the broader ecological integrity of our planet. Physicians have already learned to consider not only the clinical efficacy of their choices but also their economic impact on national healthcare systems. The time has also come to consider the impact of clinical choices on the environmental ecosystem (Figure 3). Scientific societies may play a key role in this evolution, and eco‐sustainability should be integrated in guidelines: when different treatment options are comparable in clinical efficacy and cost, the “greenest” choice should be prioritised.
The three main points on the same scale. The optimization of IBD diagnostic and therapeutic processes should certainly take into account cost and effectiveness parameters but also the best environmental sustainability. Better long‐term management of these diseases should include a balance between these three factors, to achieve a more sustainable healthcare system.
Interestingly, in a virtuous circle, the implementation of these actions could also improve patient outcomes by reducing the burden of industrialization‐related gastrointestinal disorders, including IBD. In fact, epidemiological data implicate environmental pollutants in IBD, whose global incidence is rising, in parallel with increasing pollution levels.

Author Contributions
Giovanni Cammarota: conceptualization, investigation, funding acquisition, writing – original draft, validation, visualization, supervision. Lucrezia Laterza: writing – original draft, writing – review and editing. Stefano Bibbò: writing – original draft, writing – review and editing. William Fusco: visualization, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing. Tommaso Rozera: visualization, writing – original draft, writing – review and editing. Eugenio Di Brino: writing – original draft. Serena Porcari: writing – review and editing. Franco Scaldaferri: validation. Gianluca Ianiro: validation, writing – original draft. Antonio Gasbarrini: validation. Alessandro Armuzzi: writing – original draft, supervision, validation.

Conflicts of Interest
Gianluca Ianiro has received personal fees for acting as a speaker for Alfa Sigma, Biocodex, Illumina, Malesci, Sofar, and Tillotts Pharma and personal fees for acting as consultant or advisor for Biocodex, Malesci, and Tillots PharmaAG reports personal fees for consultancy for Eisai Srl, 3PSolutions, Real Time Meeting, Fondazione Istituto Danone, Sinergie Srl Board MRGE, and SanofiSpA; personal fees for acting as a speaker for Takeda SpA, AbbVie, and Sandoz SpA; and personal fees for acting on advisory boards for VSL3 and Eisai Srl. Alessandro Armuzzi reports consulting/advisory board fees from AbbVie, Alfa Sigma, Amgen, Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Celltrion, Eli‐Lilly, Ferring, Galapagos, Gilead, Giuliani, Janssen, Lionhealth, MSD, Nestlé, Pfizer, Protagonist Therapeutics, Roche, Samsung Bioepis, Sandoz, Takeda, Tillots Pharma; speaker's fees from AbbVie, AG Pharma, Amgen, Biogen, Bristol‐Myers Squibb, Celltrion, Eli‐Lilly, Ferring, Galapagos, Gilead, Janssen, Lionhealth, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Samsung Bioepis, Sandoz, Takeda, Teva Pharmaceuticals; research grants from MSD, Takeda, Pfizer, Biogen. All other authors declare no competing interests.

Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

References
Health Care's Climate Footprint: How the Health Sector Contributes to the Global Climate Crisis and Opportunities for Action
Global Health and Environmental Pollution
Sustainability in Gastroenterology and Digestive Endoscopy: Position Paper From the Italian Association of Hospital Gastroenterologists and Digestive Endoscopists (AIGO)
Reducing the Environmental Footprint of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) and European Society of Gastroenterology and Endoscopy Nurses and Associates (ESGENA) Position Statement
Green Endoscopy: British Society of Gastroenterology (BSG), joint Accreditation Group (JAG) and Centre for Sustainable Health (CSH) Joint Consensus on Practical Measures for Environmental Sustainability in Endoscopy
The Global Burden of IBD: From 2015 to 2025
STRIDE‐II: An Update on the Selecting Therapeutic Targets in Inflammatory Bowel Disease (STRIDE) Initiative of the International Organization for the Study of IBD (IOIBD): Determining Therapeutic Goals for Treat‐to‐Target Strategies in IBD
Eco‐Friendly Hospital Architecture
Efficient Lighting Within the Health Service
Low Energy as Part of a Flexible Strategy in Hospital Design
Reducing Waste and Increasing Sustainability in Health Care Settings
Psychology of Office Design
Improving the Care of Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) Patients: Perspectives and Strategies for IBD Center Management
Remote Care Through Telehealth for People With Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Review Article: Telecare in Gastroenterology‐Within the COVID‐19 Pandemic and Beyond
Implementing a Self‐Management Strategy in Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD): Patient Perceptions, Clinical Outcomes and the Impact on Service
Effects of Introduction of an Inflammatory Bowel Disease Nurse Position on Healthcare Use
The Impact of a Dedicated Contact Centre on the Clinical Outcome of Patients With Inflammatory Bowel Disease During the COVID‐19 Outbreak
Innovation in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Care During the COVID‐19 Pandemic: Results of a Global Telemedicine Survey by the International Organization for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease
International Organization for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Global Strategies for Telemedicine and Inflammatory Bowel Diseases
The Role of Laboratory Tests in Crohn's Disease
ECCO‐ESGAR Guideline for Diagnostic Assessment in IBD Part 1: Initial Diagnosis, Monitoring of Known IBD, Detection of Complications
Different Levels of Healing in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: Mucosal, Histological, Transmural, Barrier and Complete Healing
Sustainability in Laboratory Medicine
The Environmental Impact of Energy Consumption and Carbon Emissions in Radiology Departments: A Systematic Review
Environmental Sustainability and MRI: Challenges, Opportunities, and a Call for Action
The Energy Consumption of Radiology: Energy‐ and Cost‐Saving Opportunities for CT and MRI Operation
Environmental Impacts of Abdominal Imaging: A Pilot Investigation
The Environmental Cost of Unwarranted Variation in the Use of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed Tomography Scans
Tackling the Increasing Contamination of the Water Supply by Iodinated Contrast Media
Intestinal Ultrasound as a Non‐invasive Tool to Monitor Inflammatory Bowel Disease Activity and Guide Clinical Decision Making
Intestinal Ultrasound in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Novel and Increasingly Important Tool
Intestinal Ultrasound in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Valuable and Increasingly Important Tool
Intestinal Ultrasound for Monitoring Therapeutic Response in Patients With Ulcerative Colitis: Results From the TRUST&UC Study
Use of Intestinal Ultrasound to Monitor crohn's Disease Activity
Faecal calprotectin
Faecal Calprotectin in Assessment of Mucosal Healing in Adults With Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Meta‐Analysis
Fecal Calprotectin Predicts Mucosal Healing in Patients With Ulcerative Colitis Treated With Biological Therapies: A Prospective Study
Fecal Calprotectin: A Reliable Predictor of Mucosal Healing After Treatment for Active Ulcerative Colitis
Optimal Range of Fecal Calprotectin for Predicting Mucosal Healing in Patients With Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
ECCO Guidelines on Inflammatory Bowel Disease and Malignancies
Can Dysplasia Surveillance Be Better Targeted in Ulcerative Colitis by Using Faecal Calprotectin?
Advanced Endoscopic Techniques in the Assessment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease: New Technology, New Era
Evolving Role of Endoscopy in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Going Beyond Diagnosis
Comparison of Targeted vs Random Biopsies for Surveillance of Ulcerative Colitis‐Associated Colorectal Cancer
Life Cycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions of Gastrointestinal Biopsies in a Surgical Pathology Laboratory
Incremental Benefit of Achieving Endoscopic and Histologic Remission in Patients With Ulcerative Colitis: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Colorectal Carcinoma Surveillance|ECCO E‐Guide
P254 re‐Defining the Concept of Endoscopic and Histological Healing by Using Electronic Virtual Chromoendoscopy and Probe Confocal Endomicroscopy in Ulcerative Colitis
A Virtual Chromoendoscopy Artificial Intelligence System to Detect Endoscopic and Histologic Activity/Remission and Predict Clinical Outcomes in Ulcerative Colitis
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Crohn's Disease: Medical Treatment
ECCO Guidelines on Therapeutics in Ulcerative Colitis: Medical Treatment
AGA Technical Review on the Medical Management of Moderate to Severe Luminal and Perianal Fistulizing Crohn's Disease
Common Instances of Low‐Value Care in Inflammatory Bowel Diseases
AGA Clinical Practice Guidelines on the Management of Moderate to Severe Ulcerative Colitis
Efficacy and Safety of Subcutaneous Vedolizumab in Patients With Moderately to Severely Active Crohn's Disease: Results From the VISIBLE 2 Randomised Trial
Efficacy of Biological Therapies and Small Molecules in Induction and Maintenance of Remission in Luminal Crohn's Disease: Systematic Review and Network Meta‐Analysis
Efficacy of Biological Therapies and Small Molecules in Moderate to Severe Ulcerative Colitis: Systematic Review and Network Meta‐Analysis
Vedolizumab Efficacy, Safety, and Pharmacokinetics With Reduced Frequency of Dosing From Every 4 Weeks to Every 8 Weeks in Patients With Crohn's Disease or Ulcerative Colitis
Safety of Ustekinumab in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Pooled Safety Analysis of Results From Phase 2/3 Studies
Doubling the Infliximab Dose Versus Halving the Infusion Intervals in Crohn's Disease Patients With Loss of Response
Withdrawal of Infliximab or Concomitant Immunosuppressant Therapy in Patients With Crohn's Disease on Combination Therapy (SPARE): A Multicentre, Open‐Label, Randomised Controlled Trial
Discontinuation of Infliximab Therapy in Patients With Crohn's Disease
A Regulatory Perspective on Biosimilar Medicines
Environmental Considerations in Biologics Manufacture
Innovations in Oral Therapies for Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Complementary and Alternative Medications in the Management of Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Review of the Effects and Mechanism of Curcumin in the Treatment of Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Curcumin‐QingDai Combination for Patients With Active Ulcerative Colitis: A Randomized, Double‐Blinded, Placebo‐Controlled Trial
The First International Rome Consensus Conference on Gut Microbiota and Faecal Microbiota Transplantation in Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Dietary Guidance From the International Organization for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Diseases
Nutritional Status as a Predictor of Hospitalization in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Review
The New Definition of Health Technology Assessment: A Milestone in International Collaboration
The HTA Core Model®‐10 Years of Developing an International Framework to Share Multidimensional Value Assessment
Incorporating Carbon Into Health Care: Adding Carbon Emissions to Health Technology Assessments
Incorporating Environmental and Sustainability Considerations Into Health Technology Assessment and Clinical and Public Health Guidelines: A Scoping Review
Main Challenges of Incorporating Environmental Impacts in the Economic Evaluation of Health Technology Assessment: A Scoping Review
Health Technology Assessment di icodec per la gestione dei pazienti affetti da diabete in Italia. Quaderni dell'Italian
“WHO Technical Report Series, No. 902, 2002; Guidelines on packaging for pharmaceutical products”
P1144 Forecasting the Future Prevalence of Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Korea Through 2048: An Epidemiologic Study Employing Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average Models
A Greener Gastroenterology: Challenges and Opportunities for an Eco‐Sustainable Approach to Digestive Diseases
The United European Gastroenterology Green Paper‐Climate Change and Gastroenterology. United European
Emerging Role of Environmental Pollutants in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Risk, Outcomes and Underlying Mechanisms