Diagnostic Performance of Grayscale Ultrasonography in the Evaluation of Mass-forming Breast Lesions
In our study, we evaluated the diagnostic performance of grayscale ultrasonography (USG) in risk stratification of mass-forming breast lesions. Our study included 90 cases, in which 88 were females and 2 cases were male with age ranging from 16 to 73 years. Out of 90 lesions, 51 (58%) lesions were benign and 39 (39%) lesions were malignant. High-resolution USG done in all 90 lesions revealed sensitivity (90.2%), specificity (74.36%), positive predictive value (PPV) (82.14%), negative predictive value (NPV) (85.29%), and accuracy (83.33%). Calculated weighted kappa value 0.665, indicating better level of agreement in predicting malignant lesions compared to gold standard. Our study revealed that USG is sensitive and specific test in detecting malignant lesions with high PPV and NPV; the calculated weighted kappa value was 0.665, indicating better level of agreement in predicting malignant lesions compared to gold standard.

INTRODUCTION
Breast cancer is currently the most common cancer globally, accounting for 12.5% of new annual cancer cases, and is first and second leading cause of cancer deaths in 95 countries. In India, breast cancer incidence drastically increased almost by 50%, from being the 4th most common cancers in women in the 1990s to number one cancer today. As per Globocon data 2020, in India, BC accounted for 13.5% of cancer cases and 10.6% of all deaths. Among American women, about 30% of newly diagnosed cancers in women are breast cancers and is the second leading cause of cancer death. Breast cancer incidence rate estimate in the United States is 126.9% as per Annual report from recent Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End results Program (SEER) given by the National Cancer Institute (NCI). The incidence rate a woman born in United States has about a 1 in 8 chance of being diagnosed with breast cancer at some time during her life. Various risk factors for breast cancer are female gender, old age 45 and above, personal history of breast cancer, ductal carcinoma in situ, lobular carcinoma in situ, personal history of benign breast disease, inherited risk of breast cancer: women with family history of breast cancer in a first degree relative (mother, sister, or daughter), women who have inherited changes in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes or in certain other genes, dense breast tissue, reproductive history of exposure to estrogen, hormone therapy post menopause, radiation therapy to the breast or chest, obesity, drinking alcohol. Hence, history can be helpful in establishing initial level of suspicion of malignancy consequently, for guiding effective evaluation. Sonography has got a key role in the evaluation of mass-forming breast lesions; it is an effective screening as well as diagnostic tool in patients with mass-forming breast lesions. Although the X-ray mammography is the standard screening modality, it is not effective in women with dense breasts. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and ultrasonography (USG) are optional screening modalities. About MRI, has limitations, i.e., difficult accessibility, technical limitations, financial constraints in low economic countries, and also requires correlation with either Mammography or USG for confirmation and characterization of if any lesion noticed. Hence, the USG is supplementary to both X-ray mammography and MRI. Various indications of whole breast screening USG are: (1) As an optional adjunct to screening mammography for a women with a high lifetime breast cancer risk (20% or greater), who are not candidates for breast MRI or cannot easily access breast MRI. (2) Women with heterogeneously or extremely dense breasts for whom supplemental screening options have been suggested. (3) Cancer staging, in patients newly diagnosed with breast cancer who are not candidates for breast MRI or who cannot easily access breast MRI. Appropriate indications for diagnostic sonography of the breast and axilla are: (1) Evaluation and characterization of palpable masses and other breast related signs and/or symptoms. (2) Evaluation of suspected or apparent abnormalities detected on mammography, breast MRI or other imaging modalities. (3) Initial imaging evaluation of palpable breast masses in patients under 30 years of age who are not at high risk for development of breast cancer. (4) Evaluation of symptoms in lactating and pregnant patients. (5) Evaluation of problems associated with breast implants. (6) Treatment planning for radiation therapy. (7) Identification of abnormal axillary lymph nodes in patients with newly diagnosed, or recurrent breast cancer, or in patients with findings highly suggestive of malignancy or palpable findings in axilla.

Aims
To evaluate the diagnostic performance of USG in risk stratification of mass-forming breast lesions using BI-RADS fifth edition-2014-lexicon for the assessment of BI-RADS categories, and using the histopathology diagnosis as a reference standard.

Objectives
To assess the diagnostic performance of USG in predicting malignant breast lesions
To assess the diagnostic performance of USG in predicting benign breast lesions.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
All the patients with age ≥17 years with breast lump referred to the radiology department with clinical suspicion of palpable or nonpalpable breast lesions and subsequent histopathology examination (HPE)
Patients undergoing breast screening with incidentally detected mass lesions and subsequent HPE were included in the study.

Inclusion criteria
Patients with palpable/nonpalpable solid or cystic breast lesions
Both males and females, age group ≥18 years, both outpatients and inpatients
Patients who underwent subsequent fine-needle aspiration cytology/biopsy/surgery for HPE correlation
Patients who gave written consent.

Exclusion criteria
Patients without HPE diagnosis
Patients not willing to give the written consent.

Technique
Sonography on all patients was done with an Esaote MyLab™ Seven ultrasound (US) machine unit using a linear, high-frequency probe (3–12 MHz). Complete sonography is performed with the use of radial scan technique. Sonography (either targeted or complete) performed with the patient lie supine on examination table, US gel placed on the probe and skin, sequential sweeping of the breast surface with probe done with gentle but firm transducer pressure; lateral segments and axilla scanned with patient in contralateral oblique position. For better lesion localization imaginary segmentation of breast done into analog clock face, and the clock face further divided into four quadrants. Any lesion found was marked with the use of corresponding position on imaginary analog clock face. The same was documented in the generated report for future follow-up sessions.

Image interpretation
BI-RADS Fifth Edition-2014-Lexicon for Breast USG developed by American College of Radiology was followed for characterization of mass using morphological descriptors and feature categories, and final assessment of the mass was made using BI-RADS US categories. Lesion location annotation was done using a consistent and reproducible system, such as clock-face location and distance from the nipple.
The morphologic descriptors used for the interpretation of mass are shape, orientation, margin, echo pattern, posterior features, and calcifications according to the Ultra sonography breast imaging and reporting system lexicon (US BI RADS).
The most common morphologic features associated with benign sonographic findings are as follows [Figures 1 and 2]:
Smooth and well-circumscribed margins
Hyperechoic, isoechoic, or mildly hypoechoic in echogenicity
Thin echogenic capsule or well-defined capsule border
Ellipsoid shape, wider than tall appearance
Macro-lobulated margin: <3 lobulations
Posterior acoustic enhancement.
35-year female high-resolution ultrasound breast (a) Showed well-defined lobulated heterogeneously hypoechoic wider than tall lesion in right breast at 9’o clock position. Histopathology examination (HPE) (H and E, ×40), (b) Showed well circumscribed lesion comprising of proliferation of ducts and stroma – s/o Fibroadenoma
43-year female, high-resolution ultrasound breast (a) Showed well-defined lobulated heterogeneously hypoechoic wider than tall lesion in right breast at 7–8’o clock position. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (May Grunwald Giemsa stain [MGG], ×40) smear, (b) Showed tight cohesive clusters of ductal epithelial cells and myoepithelial cells- s/o Fibroadenoma
The most common morphologic features associated with malignant findings are as follows: [Figures 3 and 4]
Hypoechoic mass, on occasion, hyperechoic in appearance
Spiculated margins
Ill-defined borders, architectural distortion of surrounding soft tissue
Posterior acoustic shadowing
Taller than wide appearance
Microcalcifications present.
55-year female, high-resolution ultrasound breast (a) Showed well-defined micro-lobulated heterogeneously hypoechoic lesion with spiculated margins from 12 to 2’o clock position in right breast. Histopathology examination (HPE) (H and E, ×100), (b) Showed pleomorphic cells with round to oval vesicular nucleus, distinct nucleolar and moderate amount of cytoplasm -s/o Invasive breast carcinoma No specified type (NST)
67-year female, high-resolution ultrasound (a) Showed well-defined transversely oriented diffusely hypoechoic lesion with internal vascularity in axillary tail of left breast. On Histopathology examination (HPE) (H and E, ×100), (b) Showed sheets of tumor cells with marked nuclear pleomorphism --s/o Invasive breast carcinoma no specified type (NST)

Image analysis
Final assessment of lesion with the use of BI-RADS US categories 1–6 done to all the 90 lesions.

RESULTS
Statistical analysis was done by SPSS software (IBM, Chicago, Illinois, USA).
A total of 90 cases were included in the study.
A total of 90 cases were included in the study. Maximum number of cases were found in the 41–50 years’ age group (34%) [Table 1]. The number of females was 88 (97%) and the number of males was 2 (3%) [Table 2]. Maximum cases presented with lump in breast, 69 (77%) [Table 3]. Out of 90 lesions solid lesions were 77 (87%), cystic were 10 (11%), solid and cystic were 3 (2%) [Table 4]. Out of 90 lesions, 56 (62%) lesions were diagnosed to be benign and 34 (38%) lesions were malignant with ultrasonography. Out of 90 lesions, 51 lesions were proven to be benign (58%) and 39 were proven to be malignant (39%) with histopathology examination [Table 5]. In our Study; Out of 56 benign lesions, 46 (82%) were concordant with HP diagnosis and out of 34 malignant lesions, 29 (85%) lesions were concordant with HPE diagnosis [Table 6]. Among 51 benign lesions, maximum lesions were Fibroadenomas 34 (68%), followed by fibrocystic disease10 (20%) [Table 7]. Among 39 malignant lesions, Maximum lesions were Invasive breast carcinoma (NST) 33(85%), followed by ductal carcinoma in situ 2(5%) [Table 8].
Demographic data of 90 cases
Patient’s age group (years)	Number of patients (%)	 	15–20	10 (11)	 	21–30	9 (10)	 	31–40	13 (14)	 	41–50	31 (34)	 	51–60	15 (17)	 	61–70	7 (8)	 	71–80	5 (6)	 	Total	90 (100)
Sex distribution in 90 cases
Sex	Number of cases (%)	 	Female	88 (97)	 	Male	2 (3)	 	Total	90 (100)
Clinical presentation
Clinical presentation	Number of patients (%)	 	Lump in breast	69 (77)	 	Pain in breast	9 (10)	 	Nipple discharge	1 (1)	 	Known case of breast lesion	6 (7)	 	Recurrent	1 (1)	 	Family history of breast cancer	3 (3)	 	Bleeding ulcer over chest wall	1 (1)	 	Total	100 (100)
Morphology of lesions on ultrasonography
Morphology	Number of lesions (%)	 	Solid	77 (87)	 	Cystic	10 (11)	 	Solid and cystic	3 (3)	 	Total	90 (100)
Number of benign and malignant lesions among 90 lesions on fine-needle aspiration cytology/histopathology
FNAC/histopathology	Number of lesions	 	Benign	51 (58)	 	Malignant	39 (42)	 	Total	90 (100)
FNAC=Fine-needle aspiration cytology
Grayscale ultrasonogram correlate of benign versus malignant lesions with HPE among 90 lesions
Modality Ultrasonogram	HPE	 	Benign, n (%)	Malignant, n (%)	Total, n (%)	 	Benign	46 (82)	10 (18)	56 (62)	 	Malignant	5 (15)	29 (85)	34 (38)	 	Total	51	39	90 (100)
HPE=Histopathology examination
Various benign neoplasms among benign lesions
Benign lesions	Number of lesions (%)	 	Fibroadenoma	34 (68)	 	Fibroepithelial lesion	1 (2)	 	Fibrocystic disease	10 (20)	 	Ductal papillomatosis	1 (2)	 	Acute mastitis	1 (2)	 	Phyllodes	3 (4)	 	Fat necrosis	1 (2)	 	Total	51 (100)
Various malignant breast neoplasms
Malignant lesions	Number of lesions (%)	 	Invasive breast carcinoma (NST)	33 (85)	 	Ductal carcinoma in situ	2 (5)	 	Secretory carcinoma	1 (2)	 	Papillary ductal carcinoma in situ	1 (2)	 	Intraductal papilloma with adjacent carcinoma in situ and foci of microinvasive carcinoma	1 (3)	 	Non-Hodgkin lymphoma b cell lineage	1 (3)	 	Total	39 (100)
NST=No specified type
In our study breast lesions were more frequent among 41–50 years’ age group (34%).
The number of females was 88 (97%) and the number of males was 2 (3%).
Maximum cases presented with lump in breast 69 (77%).
Out of 90 lesions solid lesions were 77 (87%), cystic were 10 (11%), solid and cystic were 3 (2%).
Out of 90 lesions, 51 lesions were benign (58%) and 39 were malignant (39%).
Maximum lesions were fibroadenomas 34 (68%) out of 51 benign lesions.
Maximum lesions were invasive breast carcinoma (NST) 33 (85%) out of 39 malignant lesions.
Out of 90 lesions on ultrasonogram, 56 (62%) lesions were benign and 34 (38%) lesions were malignant. Out of 56 benign lesions, 46 (82%) were showing correlation with HPE, and out of 34 malignant lesions, 29 (85%) lesions were showing correlation with HPE.

DISCUSSION
Breast cancer is currently the most common cancer globally and is the first and second leading cause of cancer deaths in 95 countries. Malignant lesions are more frequent in the 50 years and above age group, but no age is exempt for malignancy. Hence, the women of every age should be aware of risk factors and breast self-examination techniques and further investigation when required. Regarding imaging, X-ray mammography is a standard screening test, but is not effective in women with dense breasts. In our study, we evaluated the diagnostic performance of grayscale sonography in risk stratification of mass-forming breast lesions to determine whether sonography could help accurately distinguish benign solid breast lesions from indeterminate or malignant lesions and whether this distinction could be definite enough to obviate biopsy. In our study, we included both palpable and nonpalpable and solid and cystic lesions. A total of 90 patients were included in the study; maximum number of patients were found in the 41–50 years’ age group (34%). Out of 90 patients, 88 (97%) were female and 2 (3%) were male. In our study, the most common clinical presentation is lump in breast, and out of 90 patients, 69 (77%) presented with lump in breast. In our study, benign lesions are more common at all ages. Out of 90 cases, 51 (58%) cases were benign and 39 (39%) cases were malignant. In our study most common benign lesion was fibroadenoma 34(68%) [Table 6] and most common malignant lesion was invasive breast carcinoma (NST) 33 (85%) [Table 7]. In our study, analysis of grayscale parameters of mass forming breast lesions in 90 patients evaluated with high resolution ultrasound revealed sensitivity (90.2%), specificity (74.36%), positive predictive value (82.14%), negative predictive value (85.29%), and accuracy (83.33%) in predicting benign or malignant lesions. The calculated weighted kappa value was 0.655, showing better level of agreement [Table 9].
Grayscale ultrasonography sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value, negative predictive values, accuracy, weighted kappa value, and P value
Reliability	USG (%)	 	Sensitivity	90.20	 	Specificity	74.36	 	PPV	82.14	 	NPV	85.29	 	Accuracy	83.33	 	Weighted kappa value	0.655	 	P	0.001
PPV=Positive predictive value, NPV=Negative predictive value, USG=Ultrasonography

CONCLUSION
US is a highly effective imaging tool for guiding effective evaluation of women with palpable breast abnormalities and should be used for all women with suspicious findings at clinical breast examination.

Financial support and sponsorship
Nil.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.

REFERENCES
Evaluation of breast lesions by digital mammography and ultrasound along with fine-needle aspiration cytology correlation
Evaluation of palpable breast masses
Breast cancer in India: Present scenario and the challenges ahead
Epidemiology of breast cancer in Indian women
Breast cancer statistics, 2022
Imaging management of palpable breast abnormalities
Characterization of suspicious breast lesions with dynamic contrast enhanced MRI in comparison to conventional mammography and ultrasonography
Breast ultrasound during lactation: Benign and malignant lesions
Breast lesions in women under 25 years: Radiologic-pathologic correlation
Ultrasound characterization of breast masses
Follow-up interval for probably benign breast lesions on screening ultrasound in women at average risk for breast cancer with dense breasts
Clinicoradiological approach to sonomammographic spectrum of breast disorders
High-quality breast ultrasonography
Ultrasound for breast cancer detection globally: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Evaluation of focal breast lesions on ultrasound, color Doppler and real time elastography: A prospective study
Ultrasound evaluation of biopsy proven malignant breast mass
A comparative clinicopathological study between ultrasonography, mammography, fine needle aspiration cytology and core needle biopsy of breast lump
Toward a standardized breast ultrasound lexicon, BI–RADS: Ultrasound
Breast Ultrasound
BI-RADS for sonography: Positive and negative predictive values of sonographic features
Solid breast nodules: Use of sonography to distinguish between benign and malignant lesions
Are irregular hypoechoic breast masses on ultrasound always malignancies? A pictorial essay
Ultrasonographic features and clinical implications of benign palpable breast lesions in young women
Characterization of breast masses with sonography: Can biopsy of some solid masses be deferred?
Sonographic evaluation of solid breast nodules. Symposium Mammographicum
Practice Bulletin Number 179, July 2017, Reaffirmed 2021
Difference analysis of sensitivity of BI-RADS classification of breast mass with different pathological types