Preventing all‐cause hospitalizations in type 2 diabetes with sodium‐glucose cotransporter‐2 inhibitors and glucagon‐like peptide‐1 receptor agonists: A narrative review and proposed clinical approach
Abstract
Patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) are at increased risk for hospital admissions, and acute hospitalizations are associated with a worse prognosis. However, outcomes related to all‐cause hospital admissions (ACHAs) were often overlooked in trials that demonstrated the cardiovascular and kidney benefits of sodium‐glucose cotransporter‐2 (SGLT2) inhibitors and glucagon‐like peptide‐1 receptor agonists (GLP‐1RAs). This review includes a contemporary literature summary of emerging data regarding the effects of SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP‐1RAs on ACHAs. The role of SGLT2 inhibitors in preventing ACHAs was shown in exploratory investigations of several randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and was further supported by real‐world evidence (RWE). However, the association between GLP‐1RA use and lower ACHA risk was mainly shown through RWE, with minimal available RCT data. We also discuss the advantages and challenges of studying ACHAs. Finally, we propose an easily memorized (“ABCDE” acronym) clinical approach to evaluating T2D status and treatment in admitted patients, as they transition from hospital to community care. This systematic approach may assist clinicians in recognizing possible pitfalls in T2D management, thereby preventing subsequent hospitalizations and improving patient prognoses. While acute admission can sometimes be perceived as a management failure, it should also be viewed as an opportunity to take action to prevent the next hospitalization.

INTRODUCTION
Patients with diabetes comprise approximately a quarter of annual hospital admissions in the United States, and approximately 14% of hospitalization days are attributed to diabetes and its complications. The estimated costs of diabetes‐related preventable hospitalizations in the United States increase at a 1.6% annual rate, derived mainly from higher diabetes prevalence. Cardiovascular‐, infectious‐ and nervous‐system‐related aetiologies comprise the main portion of acute hospitalizations in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D). However, the presence of diabetes is associated with a higher risk of hospitalizations for various other reasons. These include some that are not traditionally considered diabetes‐related (eg, certain cancers and noninfectious noncancerous respiratory conditions). Recurrent hospitalizations are common in patients with diabetes and are associated with a worse prognosis. Thus, all‐cause hospital admissions (ACHAs) serve as an indispensable marker for disease state and progression. Moreover, hospital admissions have significant implications for individual patients' quality of life and overall burden on healthcare systems and payers.
Despite that, ACHA outcomes have been less studied relative to other adverse clinical outcomes, such as incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), hospitalizations due to HF (hHF), all‐cause mortality, among others. ACHA‐based outcomes are often limited by lack of specificity, difficulty in sorting emergency versus elective hospitalizations, reporting inconsistencies, seasonal fluctuation and pandemics, alterations due to sociodemographic status, and regional variations in treatment approaches, healthcare systems and regulations. Endpoints related to ACHAs are not standardized and may include first or recurrent hospitalization event rate, percent of admitted patients, time to hospital admission, days‐alive‐and‐out‐of‐hospital (DAOH), or percent of DAOH out of potential follow‐up. These endpoints differ in how they address hospitalization duration or other competing risk events (eg, death). It is also challenging to assess hospitalization severity, which could be partly derived from length of stay or intensive care requirement. Furthermore, each endpoint may be applicable in different populations; DAOH, for example, is especially relevant in populations at high risk of recurrent hospitalization. Overall, the prognostic value and economic implications for each definition remain to be determined.
While older glucose‐lowering agents (GLAs) had mostly glycaemic control properties, sodium‐glucose cotransporter‐2 (SGLT2) inhibitors and glucagon‐like peptide‐1 receptor agonists (GLP‐1RAs) exert additional benefits. Most importantly, the majority of them have clinical cardiovascular or kidney protective effects, earning them the term diabetes‐/disease‐modifying drugs (DMDs) (Figure 1). Specifically, some GLP‐1RAs protect from MACE (usually composed of cardiovascular death or nonfatal stroke or myocardial infarction) and SGLT2 inhibitors reduce hHF and improve kidney outcomes. Some evidence indicates that specific SGLT2 inhibitors also reduce MACE rate and GLP‐1RAs reduce proteinuria and may improve kidney outcomes in T2D. GLP‐1RAs were also shown to increase the likelihood of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis resolution. SGLT2 inhibitors were suggested to improve liver enzyme values in patients with T2D and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Of note, there is no clear evidence that SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP‐1RAs improve neuropathy or retinopathy outcomes in patients with T2D. However, both DMDs were suggested to delay, to some degree, the onset of T2D in populations at risk.
The effect of sodium glucose cotransporter‐2 (SGLT2) inhibitors and glucagon‐like peptide‐1 receptor agonists (GLP‐1RAs; diabetes‐/disease‐modifying drugs), on different cardiometabolic risk factors and clinical outcomes, including all‐cause hospital admissions
This review aims to provide a contemporary summary of emerging exploratory data from randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and real‐world evidence (RWE), indicating a role for SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP‐1RAs in preventing ACHA outcomes, primarily in patients with T2D. Based on the findings, we outline a systematic clinical approach that could assist hospitalists and primary care practitioners in evaluating patients' diabetes status during the peri‐discharge period.

METHODS
This narrative review covers RCTs or RWE with comparable treatment arms, with either SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP‐1RAs, that reported an outcome related to ACHA. An electronic search was carried out on January 5, 2022. The following terms were searched in PubMed: SGLT2 inhibitors all cause admissions; SGLT2 inhibitor all cause admissions; SGLT2 inhibitors “all‐cause hospitalizations”; SGLT2 inhibitors “all‐cause” “hospitalizations”; GLP‐1 receptor agonists “all‐cause hospitalizations”; GLP‐1 receptor agonists all‐cause hospitalizations; GLP‐1 receptor agonists “all‐cause” “hospitalizations”; GLP‐1 receptor agonists “all‐cause” “admissions”; GLP‐1 receptor agonists all‐cause admissions. The main manuscripts and appendices of the cardiovascular and kidney outcome trials with SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP‐1RAs were also searched. In addition, the papers linked to these studies in ClinicalTrial.gov were also scanned. Finally, papers from the personal library of the authors that are relevant to this topic were also included. Only articles published in English were considered.

RESULTS

SGLT2 inhibitors and all‐cause hospital admissions
The associations of SGLT2 inhibitor use with risk of ACHA were tested in predefined and post hoc analyses of cardiovascular outcome trials (CVOTs) as well as some RWE (Table 1). Overall hospital admission was tested in a post hoc analysis of the EMPA‐REG OUTCOME study, comprising patients with T2D and established cardiovascular disease (CVD). In that study, 13.7%, 8.9% or 6.2% had at least one hospitalization due to a cardiac disorder, infectious disease, or a nervous‐system‐related aetiology, respectively. Empagliflozin use was associated with a lower rate of both first (12% reduction) and total (17% reduction) all‐cause hospitalization events. In a time‐to‐event analysis, the risk reduction for ≥3, ≥4, ≥5 or ≥6 ACHA events with empagliflozin compared with placebo was 21% (95% confidence interval [CI] 6‐33), 34% (95% CI 17‐48), 43% (95% CI, 22‐58) or 53% (95% CI 30‐69), respectively.
Analysis from randomized controlled trials and real‐world evidence testing the effect of diabetes‐/disease‐modifying drugs on all‐cause hospitalizations
SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP‐1RAs	RCT/ RWE	Study	Participants and comparators	Effect on overall hospitalization (main findings)	 	SGLT2 inhibitors	RCT	CANVAS programmeNeal, 2017	Patients with T2D and risk for or established CVD. Canagliflozin (n = 5795 patients) vs. placebo (n = 4347 patients)Prespecified outcome	Risk of hospitalization for any cause with canagliflozin (118.7/1000 patient‐years) compared with placebo (131.1/1000 patient‐years; HR 0.94, 95% CI 0.88‐1.00)	 	RCT	EMPA‐REG OUTCOMEMcGuire, 2020	Patients with T2D and established CVD. Empagliflozin (n = 4687) vs. placebo (n = 2333)Post hoc analysis	Lower rate of all‐cause admission to the hospital with empagliflozin compared with placebo for the first events (rate ratio 0.88, 95% CI 0.81‐0.96) and for total events (rate ratio 0.83, 95% CI 0.76‐0.91). Similar findings in time to event analysis (HR 0.89, 95% CI 0.82‐0.96)	 	RCT	SOLOIST‐WHFSzarek, 2021	Patients with T2D and recent worsening due to HF. Sotagliflozin (n = 608 patients) vs. placebo (n = 614 patients)Prespecified analysis	Mean days alive and out of hospital was higher in sotagliflozin (rate ratio 1.03, 95% CI 1.00‐1.06; P = 0.027)Patients with ≥1 hospitalization: Sotagliflozin, n = 234 (38.5%); placebo, n = 254 (41.1%); P = 0.30Patients with ≥2 hospitalizations:Sotagliflozin, n = 99 (16.3%); placebo, n = 136 (22.1%); P = 0.009	 	RCT	EMPEROR‐preservedAnker, 2021	Patients with HFpEF, with and without T2D. Empagliflozin (n = 2997 patients) vs. placebo (n = 2991 patients)Prespecified outcome	Total number of all‐cause hospitalizations: Empagliflozin (n = 2566) vs. placebo (n = 2769; HR 0.93, 95% CI 0.85‐1.01)	 	RCT	CANVAS programmeFeng, 2021	Patients with T2D and risk for or established CVD Canagliflozin (n = 5795 patients) vs. placebo (n = 4347 patients)Post hoc analysis	Lower rate of total (first and recurrent) hospitalizations with canagliflozin compared with placebo (rate ratio 0.92, 95% CI 0.86‐0.98), with no interaction between those with (rate ratio 0.93, 95% CI 0.86‐1.01) or without (rate ratio 0.90, 95% CI 0.80‐1.02) established CVD at baseline (Pinteraction = 0.66)Tested also different aetiologies (cardiac, infectious or nervous), overall and by baseline CVD history	 	RCT	EMPA‐REG OUTCOME Kaku, 2021	Patients with T2D and established CVD (same cohort as in McGuire, 2020Specific focus on patients self‐identified as Asian.Empagliflozin (noverall = 4687; nasians = 1006) vs. placebo (noverall = 2333; nasians = 511)Post‐hoc analysis	In the overall participants, the HR (95% CI) for ≥1, ≥2, ≥3, ≥4, ≥5 or ≥6 all‐cause hospitalizations events with empagliflozin compared with placebo was 0.89 (0.82‐0.96), 0.89 (0.79‐1.00), 0.79 (0.67‐0.94), 0.66 (0.52‐0.83),0.57 (0.42‐0.78), or 0.47 (0.31‐0.70), respectivelyEmpagliflozin's reduction in total hospitalizations event rate was consistent in Asian and non‐Asian subgroups (Pinteraction = 0.65)	 	RWE	Cahn, 2018	Patients with T2D, initiators of SGLT2 inhibitors vs. DPP‐4 inhibitors (matched populations, 3464 pts each)	Compared to DPP‐4 inhibitors, initiators of SGLT2 inhibitors were less likely to experience any hospitalization (OR 0.66, 95% CI 0.56‐0.78), or hospitalization due to AKI (OR 0.47, 95% CI 0.27‐0.80)	 	RWE	Li, 2021	Patients with T2D and HfpEF, initiators of SGLT2 inhibitors (89 patients) or sitagliptin (161 patients). PS‐matched	Lower risk of all‐cause hospitalization in SGLT2 inhibitors group (HR 0.48, 95% CI 0.33‐0.70)	 	RWE	Sheu, 2021	Patients with T2D, initiators of empagliflozin vs. DPP‐4 inhibitors (matched populations 28 712 patients each)	Compared to DPP‐4 inhibitors, rate of all‐cause hospitalizations (RR 0.73, 95% CI 0.67‐0.79), risk for first hospitalization (HR 0.77, 95% CI 0.73‐0.81), rate of emergency room visit (RR 0.88, 95% CI 0.83‐0.94), and rate of outpatient visits (RR 0.96, 95% CI 0.96‐0.97) were lower in initiators of empagliflozin	 	GLP‐1RAs	RCT	REWINDGerstein, 2019	Patients with T2D and risk for or established CVD. Dulaglutide (n = 4949 patients) vs. placebo (n = 4952)Adverse event reporting	Dulaglutide –2062 (41.7%); Placebo –2108 (42.6%); P = 0.18	 	RWE	Segal, 2007	Patients on‐treatment with exenatide (n = 3225) matched with patients treated with insulin	Based on data, the projected monthly hospitalization frequency with exenatide would be no different than insulin (relative odds 1.02, 95% CI 0.33‐1.98)	 	RWE	Best, 2011	Patients with T2D initiating exenatide (21 754 pts) compared with oGLAs (361 771 patients)	Exenatide initiators had a lower risk of all‐cause hospitalization (HR 0.94, 95% CI 0.91‐0.97) or CVD‐related hospitalizations (HR 0.88, 95% CI 0.79‐0.98)	 	RWE	Pawaskar, 2011	Patients with T2D initiating exenatide (compared with insulin glargine [2506 patients each, PS‐matched])	Exenatide‐treated patients had lower likelihood of all‐cause hospitalizations (OR 0.81, 95% CI 0.68‐0.95), or hospitalization due to macrovascular complications (OR 0.70, 95% CI 0.54‐0.90), but not for microvascular complications (OR 0.92, 95% CI 0.62‐1.37)	 	RWE	Dalal, 2015	Patients with T2D treated with basal insulin initiating either RAI (n = 5013) or a GLP‐1RA (n = 1705). PS‐matched 3:1. Follow‐up duration of up to 1 year for each patient	In the GLP‐1RA arm, there was a smaller proportion of patients with ≥1 event of all‐cause and diabetes‐related hospitalization, compared with the RAI arm (13.6% vs. 18.6%, and 11.8% vs. 15.7% of participants, respectively; P < 0.0001).	 	RWE	Levine, 2017	Patients with T2D treated with basal insulin and with inadequate glycaemic control. Propensity matching (1:3) of initiators of GLP‐1RA (n = 312) or RAI (n = 799). In a second comparison GLP‐1RA (n = 320) vs. basal insulin dose adjustment (n = 815). Follow‐up duration of up to 1 year for each patient	Proportion of patients with ≥1 all‐cause hospitalization was 14.1% and 15.9% in the GLP‐1RA and RAI arm, and 13.1% and 14.4% in the GLP‐1RA and basal insulin dose adjustment arm, respectively. No significant difference between groups was detected	 	RWE	Melzer‐Cohen, 2019	Patients with T2D. Patients adherent to liraglutide were compared to those discontinuing within 12 months. (882 patients each cohort, PS‐matched)	Liraglutide continuers were less likely to experience an ACHA than discontinuers (18.6% vs. 22.8%; P = 0.034], during 12‐24 months post‐index dateNo significant between‐arm difference was observed in hospitalizations defined as diabetes‐related (6.5% vs. 8.6; P = 0.104)	 	SGLT2 inhibitors vs. GLP‐1RAs	RWE	Thomsen, 2021	Patients with T2D initiating empagliflozin (n = 14 148) or liraglutide (n = 12 628). IPTW was used for comparison	Empagliflozin initiators had a lower risk for a composite of ACHA or death (HR 0.93, 95% CI 0.90‐0.97), or for ACHA alone (HR 0.93, 95% CI 0.90‐0.98)	 	RWE	Lyu, 2021	Patients with T2D, who initiated SGLT2 inhibitors (n = 2492), GLP‐1RAs (n = 1982) or DPP‐4 inhibitors (n = 4762). IPTW was used for comparison	Compared with DPP‐4 inhibitors, initiation of SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP‐1RAs was associated with a lower risk of ACHA (HR 0.85, 95% CI 0.75‐0.95 or HR 0.89, 95% CI 0.78‐0.98, respectively). No significant difference was observed between SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP‐1RAs (HR 0.92, 95% CI 0.80, 1.07)Similar findings were observed for CVD hospitalizations, defined as either hHF, MI or stroke (HR SGLT2 inhibitors vs. DPP‐4 inhibitors 0.61, 95% CI 0.47, 0.79; HR GLP‐1RA vs. DPP‐4 inhibitors 0.77, 95% CI 0.60, 0.99 and HR SGLT2 inhibitors vs. GLP‐1RA 0.79, 95% CI 0.58, 1.08)
Abbreviations: AKI, acute kidney injury; CV, cardiovascular; CVD, cardiovascular disease; CI, confidence interval; DMD, diabetes‐/disease‐modifying drug; DPP‐4, dipeptidyl peptidase‐4; GLA, glucose‐lowering agent; GLP‐1RA, glucagon‐like peptide‐1 receptor agonist; HFpEF, heart failure and preserved ejection fraction; hHF, heart failure hospitalization; HR, hazard ratio; IPTW, inverse probability of treatment weighting; MI, myocardial infarction; oGLA, other glucose‐lowering agent; OR, odd ratio; PS, propensity score; RAI, rapid‐acting insulin; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RWE, real‐world evidence; SGLT2, sodium‐glucose cotransporter 2; T2D, type 2 diabetes.
In the CANVAS programme, which included populations with high risk for or established CVD, the risk for any hospitalization, a predefined secondary outcome, was 0.94 (95% CI 0.88‐1.00) in the canagliflozin‐treated arm compared with placebo. In a post hoc analysis, there was an 8% (95% CI 2‐14) reduction in the rate of acute hospitalization (first and recurrent) in canagliflozin compared with placebo, which seemed to be consistent in populations with high risk of CVD and those with established CVD (P interaction = 0.66). Also in this study, the three most common hospitalization aetiologies were cardiac disorders (23.7% of all hospitalizations), infections and infestations (15.0%), and nervous system‐related disorders (9.0%). The between‐arm differences in risk for cardiac‐, infectious‐, and nervous‐system‐related hospitalizations were 0.81 (95% CI 0.75‐0.88), 0.94 (95% CI 0.86‐1.02) and 0.96 (95% CI 0.88‐1.05), respectively.
The SOLOIST‐WHF study tested the SGLT2 + 1 inhibitor sotagliflozin in patients with T2D and a recent worsening of heart failure (HF); assessment of the number of DAOH was included in the protocol. This endpoint considers the length of all hospital admissions and the competing outcome of death. Numbers of DAOH were slightly higher in the sotagliflozin compared with placebo group (rate ratio 1.03 [95% CI 1.00‐1.06]; P = 0.027). Compared with placebo, the sotagliflozin arm had fewer patients requiring recurrent hospitalization (22.1% vs. 16.3%, respectively; P = 0.009).
Finally, in the EMPEROR‐Preserved study, involving patients with HF and preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF; ejection fraction > 40%) with and without T2D, the number of ACHAs was a prespecified secondary outcome. No significant difference was observed with empagliflozin versus placebo (hazard ratio [HR] 0.93 [95% CI 0.85‐1.01]).
Data from RWE expanded the association between SGLT2 inhibitor use and lower risk of ACHA to broader populations with T2D. Furthermore, SGLT2 inhibitor use in real‐world settings was associated with reductions in the number of emergency room and outpatient visits (Table 1 ).  Importantly, these studies used an active comparator design. Thus, SGLT2 inhibitor initiators were at lower risk of ACHA compared with initiators of other GLAs, mainly dipeptidyl peptidase‐4 (DPP‐4) inhibitors.

GLP‐1RAs and all‐cause hospital admission
Adverse event reporting from the REWIND trial did not find a lower rate of patients with overall hospitalizations in the dulaglutide arm or placebo arm (41.7% and 42.6%, respectively; P = 0.18). We are unaware of a more comprehensive analysis of hospitalization aetiologies or durations in CVOTs involving GLP‐1RAs. A cohort study from 2007 found no difference in the rate of overall hospitalizations amongst exenatide users, compared with insulin. However, two later studies found that patients with T2D initiating exenatide had a lower risk of overall hospitalizations compared with initiators of other GLAs or when directly compared with insulin glargine. In another study, patients treated with basal insulin (n = 6718) who initiated a GLP‐1RA were less likely to be hospitalized in the following year compared to those who started rapid‐acting insulin (13.6% vs. 18.6%, respectively; P < 0.0001). However, no statistically significant difference between groups was observed in another study of a similar design involving a smaller sample of patients (n = 1111; 14.1% and 15.9% in the GLP‐1RA and rapid‐acting insulin arms). A more recent cohort study found that liraglutide‐adherent patients were less likely to be hospitalized than a matched non‐adherent cohort.

SGLT2 inhibitors compared with GLP‐1RAs and ACHAs
Two RWE studies used inverse probability of treatment weighting to directly compare ACHA in patients treated with SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP‐1RAs. In one study, patients who initiated empagliflozin (n = 14148) had a significantly lower risk for all‐cause hospitalization compared to those initiating liraglutide (n = 12 628; HR 0.93 [95% CI 0.90‐0.98]). Another smaller study involved initiators of DPP‐4 inhibitors (n = 4762), SGLT2 inhibitors (n = 2492) and GLP‐1RAs (n = 1982). Compared with DPP‐4 inhibitors, initiators of either SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP‐1RAs had a lower risk for ACHA (HR 0.85 [95% CI 0.75‐0.95] or HR 0.89 [95% CI 0.78‐0.98], respectively). No significant difference was observed between SGLT2 inhibitor initiators compared with GLP‐1RAs (HR 0.92 [95% CI 0.80‐1.07]).

DISCUSSION
Support for a role for SGLT2 inhibitors in preventing ACHA comes from post hoc analyses of RCTs data. Most studies demonstrated a lower rate of ACHA in patients with T2D treated with SGLT2 inhibitors compared with controls. However, data regarding the effect of GLP‐1RAs on overall hospitalizations comes mainly from RWE, with limited data from RCTs. Nonetheless, in most of these RWE analyses, participants who used GLP‐1RAs had significantly better ACHA outcomes compared with their controls.
The formerly mentioned drawbacks in studying ACHA, especially lack of outcome specificity, seem to underlie the lack of statistical significance in some ACHA endpoints. More specific endpoints that also consider recurrent hospitalizations often result in more robust between‐arm differences. These limitations also contribute to the small magnitude of relative risk reduction with SGLT2 inhibitors (up to 5‐20%), compared to a more substantial effect on other clinically relevant outcomes, such as hHF (reaching approximately 30% risk reduction). Nonetheless, due to a higher event rate, the magnitude of SGLT2 inhibitor‐mediated risk change in absolute scale was numerically higher for ACHA than for hHF (although the reduction in ACHA did not always achieve statistical significance). For example, the number of participants with an event per 1000 patient‐years in canagliflozin versus placebo group was 118.7 versus 131.1 for ACHA, compared to 5.5 versus 8.7 for hHF (CANVAS programme). This results in an absolute difference with canagliflozin of –12.4 for ACHA, and –3.2 for hHF (participants/1000 patient‐years). Even in EMPEROR‐Preserved, which included patients with HF with or without T2D, there was an absolute difference with empagliflozin compared to placebo, of –203 ACHA events, and –134 hHF events (2566 vs. 2769, and 407 vs. 541 events, respectively). These numbers highlight the possible value of testing drug effects on ACHA.

Hospital admission as an opportunity to prevent recurrent hospitalization: ABCDE acronym
Although sometimes perceived as a management failure, acute hospitalization is an opportunity to reassess a patient's diabetes status, thereby facilitating actions that would prevent the next hospitalization. In the next section, we propose an easily memorized clinical approach (acronym “ABCDE”) that can be relevant both to hospitalists at the peri‐discharge period and to primary care practitioners at the first clinic follow‐up visit. In short, a hospitalization episode should prompt a thorough  Assessment of diabetes status, including glycaemic  Balance, the presence of diabetes‐related  Complications, and adequate use of  DMDs. Exposure to possibly harmful GLAs should be avoided (Figure 2). Importantly, we do not mean to replace comprehensive society guidelines but rather we aim to provide a working framework for physicians that may assist in recognizing possible management pitfalls that may underlie recurrent hospitalizations.
Systematic evaluation of patient's diabetes status during the peri‐discharge period to prevent subsequent hospitalization (“ABCDE” acronym). A, Hospitalization period should prompt a thorough Assessment of the patient's diabetes status. This includes evaluating the patient's risk of having undiagnosed prediabetes or type 2 diabetes (T2D). B, Glycaemic Balance should be surveyed based on recent glycated haemoglobin value, followed by adequate recommendations to meet patients' glycaemic targets. C, Does a diabetes Complication underlie or contribute to the present hospitalization? Possible attributes include direct endocrine conditions or indirect aetiologies. Patients' treatment should be adjusted to reduce the risk for complication while properly addressing concomitant risk factors. Identification of hospitalization as a complication of diabetes may motivate the patient to improve adherence to the treatment plan. D, Diabetes‐/disease‐modifying drugs' (DMDs; ie, SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP‐1RAs with shown cardiovascular or kidney efficacy) prescription should be independent of glycaemic control and/or metformin use. Besides their direct cardiovascular and/or kidney benefits, DMDs may also reduce the risk of subsequent hospitalization. E, Search for Exposure to possibly harmful glucose‐lowering agents (GLAs) and discontinue unnecessary treatment. GLA side effects sometimes underlie hospitalization aetiology. CKD, chronic kidney disease; DKA, diabetes ketoacidosis; HF, heart failure; HHS, hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular event

Glycaemic control and all‐cause hospitalization
Prediabetes and T2D are too often underdiagnosed; the International Diabetes Federation report estimated that 50% of global patients with diabetes are undiagnosed. Random plasma glucose screening is recommended in most admitted patients, independent of a previous diabetes diagnosis. In some high‐risk or obese populations, targeted investigation (eg, fasting plasma glucose or glycated haemoglobin [HbA1c]) should be considered during hospitalization. In admitted patients with hyperglycaemia and/or diabetes, an HbA1c test is warranted if not performed in the prior 3‐month period.
Most data regarding the effect of glycaemic control in patients with T2D on ACHA outcomes comes from RWE. Analyses of 10 002 patients with T2D in Canada found a higher rate of emergency room visits and hospital admissions in patients with higher baseline HbA1c levels. In a larger UK cohort (n = 97 689), higher HbA1c was associated with a slight but significant increase in risk of all‐cause and diabetes‐related hospitalizations (3% and 8% higher risk per each 1% unit increase in baseline HbA1c, respectively). Another study found a nonlinear relationship between HbA1c and ACHA risk, with a threshold estimated at HbA1c of 61 mmol/mol (7.7%). Above this threshold, each 11 mmol/mol (1%) baseline HbA1c increase was associated with a 6.3% higher rate of hospitalizations. In the ADVANCE RCT, intensive blood glucose control (targeting ≤6.5%) resulted in a lower risk for a composite endpoint of major adverse microvascular and macrovascular events, yet patients in this group had a higher risk for ACHA, one of the prespecified secondary outcomes (44.9%, vs. 42.8%; HR 1.07 [95% CI 1.01‐1.13]). This was accompanied by an increase in hospitalizations due to hypoglycaemia (1.1% vs. 0.7%; odds ratio 1.52 [95% CI 1.01‐2.28]). Nonetheless, these findings were observed with older GLAs, while newer GLAs (ie, DPP‐4 inhibitors, SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP‐1 RAs) have favourable adverse events profiles with lower risk for hypoglycaemia and weight gain. Moreover, patients and caregivers were not blinded to arm allocation. All in all, there are limited high‐quality RCT data linking glycaemic targets with ACHA, while in RWE poor glycaemic control may mark general poor treatment compliance. Additionally, older age and frailty contribute to ACHA outcomes to a significantly greater extent, possibly diluting the effects of glycaemic control.

Preventing diabetes complications and appropriate use of DMDs
T2D often coincides with other cardiometabolic risk factors, for example, obesity, hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, and more. Over half of the global population with T2D have NAFLD, approximately a third have established CVD, a quarter have chronic kidney disease, and 10% to 15% have HF. In patients with diabetes, follow‐up directed by guidelines (including measurement of HbA1c, cholesterol, kidney markers, blood pressure, body mass index, smoking status assessment, foot care, and more) was recently associated with a lower mortality risk.
Diabetes‐/disease‐modifying drugs improve adverse cardiovascular and kidney outcomes in patients with T2D. Position statements recommend DMD treatment independently of glucose control or background metformin use in patients with T2D and increased cardiorenal risk, yet their use amongst appropriate patients remains low. Cumulating post hoc analyses of RCTs and RWE suggest that DMDs can also improve prognosis in those with T2D and lower cardiorenal risks (Figures 1 and 2).
A complete review of the in‐hospital treatment of T2D is beyond the scope of this paper. However, data regarding the use of SGLT2 inhibitors in a hospital setting are briefly discussed, as it may provide a mean to increase their subsequent continuous use in those who are appropriate candidates. SGLT2 inhibitor use in admitted patients initially raised safety concerns regarding the possibility of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), urinary tract infection and acute kidney injury (AKI; although more recent data indicate a protective role for SGLT2 inhibitors against AKI). The recent DARE‐19 study compared dapagliflozin and placebo in 1250 noncritically ill patients hospitalized with COVID‐19 and at least one cardiometabolic risk factor. Dapagliflozin use was associated with a numerically lower, but nonsignificant reduction in the risk for the primary composite multi‐organ‐based outcome (HR 0.80 [95% CI 0.58‐1.10]). No safety concerns were found, including no significant increase in risk of AKI (3.4% and 5.5% in the dapagliflozin and placebo arms, respectively) or DKA (0.3% in the dapagliflozin arm). Practically, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) standards of care state that basal insulin is the preferred GLA during hospitalization, while continuation of home regimens may be appropriate only under certain circumstances. However, recent consensus statements list SGLT2 inhibitors as a possible GLA in hospitalized patients with moderate COVID‐19, along with GLP‐1RAs, DPP‐4 inhibitors and insulin.
It is possible that SGLT2 inhibitor initiation before discharge is associated with better clinical outcomes. In the SOLOIST‐WHF trial, treatment with sotagliflozin or placebo was initiated in patients hospitalized due to worsening HF (49% of participants) or immediately after discharge. Sotagliflozin treatment resulted in a lower risk of the composite primary outcome of cardiovascular death or re‐hospitalization or an urgent visit due to HF. In a small study (n = 80), empagliflozin initiation within 24 hours after presenting with acute decompensated HF was safe and associated with a lower risk of the secondary composite clinical endpoint of in‐hospital worsening HF, re‐hospitalization for HF, or all‐cause death at 60 days (P = 0.014). However, the trial's clinical and laboratory‐based primary endpoints were not achieved (EMPA‐RESPONSE‐AHF). The recently presented EMPULSE study (n = 530) showed clinical benefit for empagliflozin over placebo when initiated after initial stabilization during hospitalization due to HF (NCT04157751). Other ongoing RCTs continue to test the use of SGLT2 inhibitors in subjects hospitalized due to HF. The DICTATE‐AHF study tests dapagliflozin's initiation within the first 24 hours of admission until discharge, and other studies test its initiation throughout hospitalization and continuation after that (NCT04249778 and NCT04363697 [DAPA ACT HF‐TIMI 68]). In addition, the DELIVER study tests dapagliflozin in patients with HFpEF during hospitalization or within 30 days post discharge (NCT03619213). Thus, in upcoming years we expect to have cumulating RCT data regarding the safety and efficacy of SGLT2 inhibitor initiation and use at different stages of hospitalization due to HF.
Initiation of GLP‐1RAs in hospitalized patients effectively improved glucose control, and was relatively safe, with some increases in gastrointestinal side effects, as expected. We are unaware of RCTs that tested the effect of GLP‐1RA initiation during hospitalization on long‐term cardiorenal outcomes.
The decision to change the GLA regimen during hospitalization depends on the patient's characteristics, the practitioner's preference, and local practice. Sometimes financial and insurance considerations limit DMD treatment during hospitalization, while in other cases, hospitalists encounter lower bureaucratic restrictions, and healthcare providers take their recommendations more seriously. Thus, DMD initiation for those who are appropriate candidates should be the primary goal, rather than exact timing.

Medication side effects
Side effects of GLAs may lead to or contribute to hospitalization. Acute hospitalizations provide an opportunity to review patients' GLA regimens and discontinue potentially inappropriate medications. Table 2 outlines the side effects of commonly used GLAs; some of them may lead to urgent outpatient visits or hospitalization.
Main side effects and contraindications for the major classes of glucose‐lowering agents
GLA class	Side effects	Caution/ contraindications	References	 	Biguanides	Lactic acidosisGI side effectsVitamin B12 deficiencyMetallic taste	Dose reduction in eGFR <45 mL/min/1.73 m2; and contraindicated in <30 mL/min/1.73 m2.Some suggest holding for 24 hours before and 48 hours after injection of iodinated contrast dyes		 	DPP‐4 inhibitors	Pancreatitis?Joint painHeart failure? (saxagliptin)	History of pancreatitis		 	GLP‐1RAs	GI side effectsPancreatitis?Medullary thyroid carcinoma?Increase heart rate	History of pancreatitisMEN, type 2Personal or family history of medullary thyroid carcinoma		 	Insulin	Weight gainHypoglycaemic eventsLipo‐atrophy/hypertrophy at injection sites			 	SulphonylureasMeglitinides	Weight gainHypoglycaemic events	Avoid use in patients with history of hypoglycaemic unawareness or severe liver disease.eGFR adjustment is needed for specific drugs		 	SGLT2 inhibitors	(Euglycaemic) DKAGenitourinary tract infectionsFor sotagliflozin (SGLT2+1 inhibitor) – Diarrhoea and hypoglycaemic eventsFournier gangrene?Amputations? (only CANVAS trial)	Do not initiate if eGFR <25‐45 mL/min/1.73 m2 (depending on the drug and local regulations)Stop if ESKD present		 	TZDs	Fluid retention/oedemaHeart failureWeight gainBone fracturesMacular oedemaAnaemiaBladder cancer?Increased LDL? (rosiglitazone)	HFrEFCaution in patients with significant elevation in liver enzymes
Abbreviations: DKA, diabetes ketoacidosis; DPP‐4, dipeptidyl peptidase‐4; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; ESKD, end‐stage kidney disease; GI, gastrointestinal; GLA, glucose‐lowering agent; GLP‐1RA, glucagon‐like peptide‐1 receptor agonist; HFrEF, heart failure with reduced ejection fraction; LDL, low‐density lipoprotein; MEN, multiple endocrine neoplasia; SGLT2, sodium‐glucose cotransporter 2; TZD, thiazolidinedione.
Insulin, sulphonylureas (SUs) and glinides are associated with hypoglycaemic events and increased body weight, and their use was implicated in emergency hospitalizations of older adults. In the CAROLINA trial, compared to the glimepiride arm, participants receiving linagliptin had a significantly lower risk of hypoglycaemia outcomes, including hospitalization due to hypoglycaemia (HR 0.07). Increased hypoglycaemic events were also observed when comparing SUs with pioglitazone (the pragmatic TOSCA.IT study) or with liraglutide (GRADE study; ADA 2021 conference). RWE data suggested worse cardiovascular and kidney outcomes in patients treated with SUs compared with DMDs, or even other GLAs. Thus, although some patients can benefit from SUs (which are often less costly), there is emerging agreement in the field that SU use should be limited. Updated position statements suggest that GLP‐1RAs should be the first‐line injectable GLA, and basal insulin alone should be considered only in those that cannot tolerate GLP‐1RAs or have uncontrolled hyperglycaemia. Short‐acting insulin is associated with a higher risk of hypoglycaemia and weight gain and should be limited.
Metformin is associated with lactic acidosis, requiring dosage adjustment or avoidance of its use in patients with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of <45 or 30 mL/min/1.73 m2, respectively. Thiazolidinediones were associated with increased risk of weight gain, fractures, anaemia, oedema (including macular oedema), and hHF.
Although under debate, incretin use may be associated with pancreatitis, especially of the idiopathic form. Saxagliptin was associated with a higher risk of hHF, mainly in those with eGFR ≤60 mL/min/1.73 m2, however, RCTs with other DPP‐4 inhibitors did not report similar findings. GLP‐1RAs are associated with gastrointestinal adverse events such as nausea, diarrhoea, constipation and vomiting, which may lead to dehydration and subsequent hospitalization. The GLP‐1RA regimen should be initiated with a low dose and increased gradually, while paying attention to the possible emergence of adverse events.
Use of SGLT2 inhibitors reduces eGFR levels by an average of 4 to 6 mL/min/1.73 m2 immediately upon treatment initiation. However, a smaller than 30% acute eGFR decrease in patients with diabetic kidney disease was not associated with a higher risk of adverse safety outcomes. DKA is a relatively rare yet clinically important adverse event that has been linked to SGLT2 inhibitor treatment. It may present as euglycaemic DKA, which is not a direct‐forward diagnosis, requiring clinicians' awareness. RCT and RWE data observed a higher risk for genitourinary infections with SGLT2 inhibitors. Whether SGLT2 inhibitor treatment is associated with a higher risk of Fournier's gangrene is hard to determine. Sotagliflozin, a SGLT2 + 1 inhibitor, was associated with diarrhoea and hypoglycaemia, possibly related to SGLT1 expression in the gastrointestinal system.

Concluding remarks
This contemporary literature review of available evidence from RCTs and RWE found that SGLT2 inhibitors may improve outcomes related to ACHA. Only limited knowledge is available regarding the effect of GLP‐1RAs on overall hospitalizations, although existing data also indicate a beneficial effect. Future studies using available data already gathered in cardiovascular and kidney outcome trials may provide more information regarding different ACHA‐related endpoints with DMDs in various populations. Pursuing this line of research may result in better characterization of the different ACHA endpoints, thereby facilitating their utility as candidate clinical outcomes in future studies.
Treatment inertia presents a significant obstacle in the management of T2D, and may sometimes result in recurrent hospitalizations. Thus, the hospitalization period should prompt a reassessment of the patient's diabetes status. Inpatient wards bring together a broad multidisciplinary team, for example, dieticians, diabetes‐specialized nurses, pharmacists, social workers, treating physicians and diabetes experts. Such a skilled team can help recognize and overcome hidden obstacles that interfere with T2D management, as simple as demonstrating to patients how to use insulin or GLP‐1RA injection. The stress and inconvenience associated with hospital admission may facilitate behavioural and conceptual changes in patients' disease perception, leading to a new lifestyle and medical strategies. Although some may see an acute hospitalization as failure in patient management, we hope that the “ABCDE” acronym, along with an effective use of DMDs, may transform it into an opportunity to overcome treatment inertia and improve patient prognoses.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Ofri Mosenzon has served on Advisory Boards for Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly, Sanofi, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Boehringer Ingelheim, Novartis, AstraZeneca, Merck and BOL Pharma, has received research grant support through Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital from Novo Nordisk and AstraZeneca, and has served on a Speaker's Bureau for AstraZeneca, Novo Nordisk, Eli Lilly, Sanofi, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Boehringer Ingelheim and Jansen. Meir Schechter and Matan Fischer have no conflict of interest to declare.

PEER REVIEW
The peer review history for this article is available at https://publons.com/publon/10.1111/dom.14675.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created or analyzed in this study.

REFERENCES
Economic costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2017
Factors contributing to increases in diabetes‐related preventable hospitalization costs among U.S. adults during 2001‐2014
Reasons for hospitalizations in patients with type 2 diabetes in the CANVAS programme: a secondary analysis
Effects of empagliflozin on first and recurrent clinical events in patients with type 2 diabetes and atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a secondary analysis of the EMPA‐REG OUTCOME trial
Trends in leading causes of hospitalisation of adults with diabetes in England from 2003 to 2018: an epidemiological analysis of linked primary care records
Diagnosing diabetes and preventing rehospitalizations: the urban diabetes study
Hospital readmission of patients with diabetes
Effect of sotagliflozin on total hospitalizations in patients with type 2 diabetes and worsening heart failure: a randomized trial
Canagliflozin and cardiovascular and renal events in type 2 diabetes
The effect of empagliflozin on the total burden of cardiovascular and hospitalization events in the Asian and non‐Asian populations of the EMPA‐REG OUTCOME trial of patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease
Sotagliflozin reduces total hospitalizations and increases days alive and out of hospital in the soloist‐whf trial
From glucose lowering agents to disease/diabetes modifying drugs: a “SIMPLE” approach for the treatment of type 2 diabetes
Empagliflozin and progression of kidney disease in type 2 diabetes
Empagliflozin, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes
Canagliflozin and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes: results from the CANVAS program randomised clinical trials
Dapagliflozin and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes
Effects of dapagliflozin on development and progression of kidney disease in patients with type 2 diabetes: an analysis from the DECLARE‐TIMI 58 randomised trial
Effects of ertugliflozin on kidney composite outcomes, renal function and albuminuria in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: an analysis from the randomised VERTIS CV trial
Cardiovascular outcomes with Ertugliflozin in type 2 diabetes
Canagliflozin and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes and nephropathy
Liraglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes
Liraglutide and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes
Semaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes
Dulaglutide and renal outcomes in type 2 diabetes: an exploratory analysis of the REWIND randomised, placebo‐controlled trial
Dulaglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes (REWIND): a double‐blind, randomised placebo‐controlled trial
Albiglutide and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease (harmony outcomes): a double‐blind, randomised placebo‐controlled trial
Sotagliflozin in patients with diabetes and recent worsening heart failure
Sotagliflozin in patients with diabetes and chronic kidney disease
Sodium‐glucose cotransporter protein‐2 (SGLT‐2) inhibitors and glucagon‐like peptide‐1 (GLP‐1) receptor agonists for type 2 diabetes: systematic review and network meta‐analysis of randomised controlled trials
Cardiovascular and renal outcomes with Efpeglenatide in type 2 diabetes
Weight loss variability with SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP‐1 receptor agonists in type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity: mechanistic possibilities
Blood pressure control in type 2 diabetes mellitus with arterial hypertension. The important ancillary role of SGLT2‐inhibitors and GLP1‐receptor agonists
A placebo‐controlled trial of subcutaneous Semaglutide in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
Beneficial effects of SGLT2 inhibitors on fatty liver in type 2 diabetes: a common comorbidity associated with severe complications
Liraglutide safety and efficacy in patients with non‐alcoholic steatohepatitis (LEAN): a multicentre, double‐blind, randomised, placebo‐controlled phase 2 study
Empagliflozin in heart failure with a preserved ejection fraction
Effects of sodium‐glucose cotransporter type 2 inhibitors on cardiovascular, renal, and safety outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease: a meta‐analysis of randomized controlled trials
Dulaglutide versus insulin glargine in patients with type 2 diabetes and moderate‐to‐severe chronic kidney disease (AWARD‐7): a multicentre, open‐label, randomised trial
Use of glucagon‐like peptide 1 receptor agonists and risk of serious renal events: Scandinavian cohort study
Comparative effectiveness of SGLT2 inhibitors, GLP‐1 receptor agonists, DPP‐4 inhibitors, and sulfonylureas on risk of kidney outcomes: emulation of a target trial using health care databases
Effects of dapagliflozin and n‐3 carboxylic acids on non‐alcoholic fatty liver disease in people with type 2 diabetes: a double‐blind randomised placebo‐controlled study
Dapagliflozin and new‐onset type 2 diabetes in patients with chronic kidney disease or heart failure: pooled analysis of the DAPA‐CKD and DAPA‐HF trials
3 years of liraglutide versus placebo for type 2 diabetes risk reduction and weight management in individuals with prediabetes: a randomised, double‐blind trial
Acute renal outcomes with sodium‐glucose co‐transporter‐2 inhibitors: real‐world data analysis
Sodium‐glucose Cotransporter‐2 inhibitor use is associated with a reduced risk of heart failure hospitalization in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction and type 2 diabetes mellitus: a real‐world study on a diverse urban population. Drugs Real World Outcomes
Healthcare resource utilization in patients treated with empagliflozin in East Asia
Sodium‐glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, glucagon‐like Peptide‐1 receptor agonists, and dipeptidyl Peptidase‐4 inhibitors, and risk of hospitalization
Using propensity scores subclassification to estimate effects of longitudinal treatments: an example using a new diabetes medication
Risk of cardiovascular disease events in patients with type 2 diabetes prescribed the glucagon‐like peptide 1 (GLP‐1) receptor agonist exenatide twice daily or other glucose‐lowering therapies: a retrospective analysis of the LifeLink database
Healthcare resource utilization and costs assessment of type 2 diabetes patients initiating exenatide BID or glargine: a retrospective database analysis
The effects of exenatide bid on metabolic control, medication use and hospitalization in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus in clinical practice: a systematic review
Adding rapid‐acting insulin or GLP‐1 receptor agonist to basal insulin: outcomes in a community setting
Comparing clinical outcomes and costs for different treatment intensification approaches in patients with type 2 diabetes uncontrolled on basal insulin: adding glucagon‐like peptide 1 receptor agonists versus adding rapid‐acting insulin or increasing basal insulin dose
A retrospective database study of Liraglutide persistence associated with glycemic and body weight control in patients with type 2 diabetes
Cardiovascular events, acute hospitalizations, and mortality in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus who initiate empagliflozin versus liraglutide: a comparative effectiveness study
Association of SGLT2 inhibitors with cardiovascular and kidney outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes: a meta‐analysis
IDF Diabetes Atlas 10th ed. 2021. https://www.diabetesatlas.org/en/. Accessed February 15, 2022.
Trends in prevalence of diabetes and control of risk factors in diabetes among US adults, 1999‐2018
Not performing an OGTT results in significant underdiagnosis of (pre)diabetes in a high risk adult Caucasian population
Undetected dysglycaemia common in primary care patients treated for hypertension and/or dyslipidaemia: on the need for a screening strategy in clinical practice. A report from EUROASPIRE IV a registry from the EuroObservational research Programme of the European Society of Cardiology
15. Diabetes Care in the Hospital: standards of medical Care in Diabetes‐2021
Hospital admission rates and emergency department use in relation to glycated hemoglobin in people with diabetes mellitus: a linkage study using electronic medical record and administrative data in Ontario
Rates and risk of hospitalisation among patients with type 2 diabetes: retrospective cohort study using the UKgeneral practice research database linked to English hospital episode statistics
Relationship between HbA1c and risk of all‐cause hospital admissions among people with type 2 diabetes
Intensive blood glucose control and vascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes
The global epidemiology of NAFLD and NASH in patients with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
Prevalence of cardiovascular disease in type 2 diabetes: a systematic literature review of scientific evidence from across the world in 2007‐2017
Heart failure and chronic kidney disease manifestation and mortality risk associations in type 2 diabetes: a large multinational cohort study
Clinical manifestations of kidney disease among US adults with diabetes, 1988‐2014
Global, regional, and national burden of chronic kidney disease, 1990‐2017: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2017
Completion of annual diabetes care processes and mortality: a cohort study using the National Diabetes Audit for England and Wales
2019 ESC guidelines on diabetes, pre‐diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases developed in collaboration with the EASD
9. Pharmacologic approaches to glycemic treatment: standards of medical Care in Diabetes‐2021
Executive summary of the 2020 KDIGO diabetes management in CKD guideline: evidence‐based advances in monitoring and treatment
Real‐world use of cardioprotective glucose‐lowering drugs in patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease: a Danish nationwide cohort study, 2012 to 2019
Abstract 14678: prevalence of Sglt2 inhibitor and Glp‐1 receptor agonist prescriptions in patients with comorbid diabetes and cardiovascular disease in an integrated academic health system
Comparative effectiveness of the sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor Empagliflozin versus other Antihyperglycemics on risk of major adverse kidney events
Lower cardiorenal risk with sodium‐glucose cotransporter‐2 inhibitors versus dipeptidyl peptidase‐4 inhibitors in patients with type 2 diabetes without cardiovascular and renal diseases: a large multinational observational study
Kidney outcomes associated with use of SGLT2 inhibitors in real‐world clinical practice (CVD‐REAL 3): a multinational observational cohort study
SGLT2 inhibitors for prevention of cardiorenal events in people with type 2 diabetes without cardiorenal disease: a meta‐analysis of large randomized trials and cohort studies
Cardiorenal outcomes with sodium/glucose cotransporter‐2 inhibitors in patients with type 2 diabetes and low kidney risk: real world evidence
Lower risk of hospitalization for heart failure, kidney disease and death with sodium‐glucose co‐transporter‐2 inhibitors compared with dipeptidyl peptidase‐4 inhibitors in type 2 diabetes regardless of prior cardiovascular or kidney disease: a retrospective cohort study in UKprimary care
Mechanism and reversal of drug‐induced nephrotoxicity on a chip
Acute kidney injury in patients on SGLT2 inhibitors: a propensity‐matched analysis
Network meta‐analysis of novel glucose‐lowering drugs on risk of acute kidney injury
Dapagliflozin in patients with cardiometabolic risk factors hospitalised with COVID‐19 (DARE‐19): a randomised, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled, phase 3 trial
COVID‐19 and metabolic disease: mechanisms and clinical management
The management of type 2 diabetes before, during and after Covid‐19 infection: what is the evidence?
Randomized, double‐blind, placebo‐controlled, multicentre pilot study on the effects of empagliflozin on clinical outcomes in patients with acute decompensated heart failure (EMPA‐RESPONSE‐AHF)
The SGLT2 inhibitor empagliflozin in patients hospitalized for acute heart failure: a multinational randomized trial
Efficacy and safety of dapagliflozin in acute heart failure: rationale and design of the DICTATE‐AHF trial
Dapagliflozin in heart failure with preserved and mildly reduced ejection fraction: rationale and design of the DELIVER trial
A randomized controlled trial on the safety and efficacy of exenatide therapy for the inpatient management of general medicine and surgery patients with type 2 diabetes
Debate on insulin vs non‐insulin use in the hospital setting‐is it time to revise the guidelines for the Management of Inpatient Diabetes?
Emergency hospitalizations for adverse drug events in older Americans
Effect of linagliptin vs glimepiride on major adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes: the CAROLINA randomized clinical trial
Effects on the incidence of cardiovascular events of the addition of pioglitazone versus sulfonylureas in patients with type 2 diabetes inadequately controlled with metformin (TOSCA.IT): a randomised, multicentre trial
Sulfonylureas as second line drugs in type 2 diabetes and the risk of cardiovascular and hypoglycaemic events: population based cohort study
Positioning sulphonylureas in a modern treatment algorithm for patients with type 2 diabetes: expert opinion from a European consensus panel
Congestive heart failure and cardiovascular death in patients with prediabetes and type 2 diabetes given thiazolidinediones: a meta‐analysis of randomised clinical trials
Pioglitazone and the secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. A meta‐analysis of randomized‐controlled trials
Risk of fracture with thiazolidinediones: an updated meta‐analysis of randomized clinical trials
Dipeptidyl Peptidase‐4 inhibitors and the risk of heart failure
Heart failure, saxagliptin, and diabetes mellitus: observations from the SAVOR‐TIMI 53 randomized trial
Managing the gastrointestinal side effects of GLP‐1 receptor agonists in obesity: recommendations for clinical practice
Gastrointestinal tolerability of once‐weekly semaglutide 2.4 mg in adults with overweight or obesity, and the relationship between gastrointestinal adverse events and weight loss
Insights from CREDENCE trial indicate an acute drop in estimated glomerular filtration rate during treatment with canagliflozin with implications for clinical practice
Euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis in the setting of SGLT2 inhibitor use and hypertriglyceridemia: a case report and review of literature
Risk of diabetic ketoacidosis after initiation of an SGLT2 inhibitor
Comparison of new Oral hypoglycemic agents on risk of urinary tract and genital infections in type 2 diabetes: a network meta‐analysis
Association of Sodium‐Glucose Cotransporter 2 inhibitor treatment with risk of hospitalization for Fournier gangrene among Men
SGLT2 inhibitors and the risk of hospitalization for Fournier's gangrene: a nested case‐control study
Disturbance of intestinal absorption following metformin therapy (observations on the mode of action of biguanides)
Association of biochemical B₁₂ deficiency with metformin therapy and vitamin B₁₂ supplements: the National Health and nutrition examination survey, 1999‐2006
Dipeptidyl peptidase‐4 inhibitors and risk of arthralgia: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
Fournier's gangrene in patients with type 2 diabetes using second‐line antidiabetic medications