Toward a systems metabolic engineering approach to improve thermotolerance of Escherichia coli
Escherichia coli is one of the leading microbial chassis for bioproduct manufacturing in biotechnology. However, its use in high-temperature bioprocesses is restricted to its mesophilic nature. Rational engineering for improving thermotolerance in E. coli is challenging due to the limited understanding of the molecular functions and interactions involved in supraoptimal thermal adaptation. In recent decades, various approaches have been applied to increase the thermotolerance of E. coli. In this review, we examine the effect of temperature on cellular growth and thermal adaptation at supraoptimal temperatures and discuss how this knowledge can be applied to increase thermotolerance in E. coli. We particularly emphasize systems, synthetic, and evolutionary biology approaches that translate into systems metabolic engineering strategies to improve E. coli thermotolerance. We expect that systems-level insights into heat-stress physiology will enable data-driven strategies for the development of thermotolerant E. coli strains that can be used in high-temperature bioprocesses.

Introduction
Microbial fermentation is an attractive solution for producing biofuels and commodity chemicals from lignocellulosic biomass feedstocks. Commercial fermentations typically involve high carbon source concentrations, elevated product titers, and operational conditions of temperatures above 48 °C and acidic pH values. These conditions are suboptimal for most mesophilic microbial production strains. Nevertheless, high-temperature fermentations offer several advantages, including reduced cooling efforts, lower risk of contamination, and simplified conditioning (for instance, before alcohol distillation). Furthermore, simultaneous saccharification and fermentation of pretreated lignocellulosic biomass at temperatures near 50 °C is essential for fully activating cellulases, thereby reducing enzyme dosage requirements. Maximizing the performance of microbial strains at high temperatures is crucial to minimize enzyme costs and prevent productivity losses due to thermal inactivation, which are the main bottlenecks in lignocellulosic bioprocesses.
In Escherichia coli and other organisms, thermal niches, also known as thermotolerant curves or norms of reaction, describe growth as a function of temperature and define the temperature range where balanced growth is maintained in serial dilution cultivations. These niches define the maximum growth rate that can be sustained over a range of temperatures. The shape of the curve is characterized by exponential growth from the lowest temperature to the optimal temperature, where the maximal growth rate occurs. Beyond this point, growth decreases sharply to zero. The range of temperatures higher than the optimal is referred to as the supraoptimal growth range. For E. coli, the supraoptimal range extends from 38 °C to 48 °C, which is significantly lower than that of thermophilic bacteria (65–84 °C). Therefore, using E. coli in high-temperature bioprocesses require either extending its growth into the supraoptimal temperature range or shifting its thermal niche to temperatures beyond 48 °C, ideally, extending its thermotolerance to 50 °C or higher.
Industrial research programs have aimed to select and optimize thermotolerant microorganisms for high-temperature fermentations, focusing on isolation of strains from extreme environments or through classical mutagenesis. Given the challenges of isolating a suitable microorganism, the motivation of engineering model microbes, such as E. coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae, using recombinant DNA technology has increased. However, thermotolerance is a complex phenotype arising from highly interactive molecular and biochemical network interactions, posing a significant challenge. Moreover, the limited understanding of genetic bases and basic, structural, mechanistic, and biochemical pathways underlying microbial thermotolerance makes the rational application of recombinant DNA technology difficult. Despite these challenges, high-throughput techniques and discovery approaches, including genomics, proteomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics, fluxomics, evolutionary engineering, synthetic biology, and systems biology, have been applied to guide the rational design of thermotolerant E. coli strains.
Systems metabolic engineering is a discipline that integrates the advances of systems biology, synthetic biology, and evolutionary engineering into traditional metabolic engineering (Fig. 1). This approach has been previously applied to the production of various compounds, including organic acids, bioplastics, and amino acids. Metabolic engineering aims to optimize cellular processes to produce compounds of interest from specific substrates. Among these cellular processes to be optimized are those involved in thermotolerance. In evolutionary engineering, thermal fitness in E. coli can be visualized as (i) a vertical shift in growth rate within the supraoptimal temperature range or (ii) as a horizontal shift toward higher temperature limits. Genetic mutations that improve fitness may arise from molecular interactions between DNA, RNA, proteins, and metabolites. These can be identified through modern genomic tools. Whole-genome sequencing and other genomic techniques can provide a catalog of genes, their functions, and interactions, thereby enabling the desired thermotolerant phenotype. These mutations can be detected through systematic modeling and contextualization, such as genome-scale metabolic models (GSMM). This comprehensive approach helps address the current gaps in our understanding of E. coli thermotolerance, enabling the identification of key genomic changes that confer enhanced thermotolerance.
System metabolic engineering approaches to increase thermal tolerance in E. coli. (1) Traditional metabolic engineering strategies involve the heterologous expression or replacement of enzymes with thermotolerant counterparts; (2) evolutionary engineering has been applied to improve enzyme thermostability and to increase thermotolerance in various microbial strains; (3) synthetic biology approaches, including the design of synthetic regulatory circuits and the application of advanced genome editing tools, contribute to engineering thermotolerant phenotypes; and (4) systems biology integrates genome-scale metabolic models and regulatory networks with computational simulations to rationally design and optimize thermotolerant microbial cell factories
Evolutionary engineering via adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) relies on growth at a selected elevated temperature, which inherently limits the range of temperatures for selection. Upon sequencing and modeling, it is possible to identify allelic changes that are selected during thermal adaptation. Essentially, these models map the relation between genotype and phenotypic expression under environmental pressures. Specifically, identifying thermolabile proteins might guide the engineering of microorganisms with enhanced thermostability.
Molecular, biochemical, and engineering principles can also be applied to improve cellular thermotolerance through genetic modifications using recombinant DNA techniques. The genetic basis of a particular phenotype can be mapped through sequencing; introducing those modifications into a model strain conceptually represents the principles of reverse (or inverse) metabolic engineering. When constructing or identifying a thermotolerant phenotype, studies show that thermotolerance is limited by biological factors, such as thermolabile proteins, which can be studied from comparative analysis between thermophilic and mesophilic bacteria. Furthermore, the essential molecules of life must be flexible enough to carry out their biological functions while maintaining sufficient stability to minimize the risk of thermal deactivation.
In this review, we examine how high temperatures affect cellular growth and evaluate how this knowledge has been applied to engineer a thermotolerant phenotype in E. coli in a rational manner. From a systems metabolic engineering approach, we integrate insights derived from synthetic biology, systems biology, and evolutionary engineering (Fig. 1). We anticipate that this integrated perspective will guide the development of rational strategies to increase the thermotolerance of E. coli strains.

The thermotolerance engineering
Remarkably, E. coli can grow between 10 °C and nearly 48 °C, i.e., in a range of almost 40 °C, depending on the nutrient availability and culture conditions. In Davis minimal media with glucose, E. coli B is capable of sustaining growth between 12 °C and 42 °C. The thermotolerant curve of E. coli NC3 (a B/r derivative) in MOPS-rich medium containing glucose, L-amino acids, vitamins, and all the nucleic acid bases indicated a maximum growth temperature of 48 °C. The increase in the maximum growth temperature (12 to 46 °C) was observed for E. coli MG1655 growing in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium. In nutrient broth, ten E. coli strains reach a growing temperature from 4.2/6.4 °C to 44/48 °C, with an optimal temperature () of ~39 °C to 42 °C. The optimal temperature at maximum growth rate () was observed between 36 °C and 37 °C and 39 °C to 40 °C in minimal and rich medium, respectively. The maximal  was ~0.89 1/h in minimal medium and around 1.7 1/h in rich medium. These results indicate that the maximum temperature () of the E. coli thermal niche was displaced by 2 °C, and the  4 to 6 °C in rich medium compared with minimum medium, respectively.
The temperature dependence of growth can be modeled by the Arrhenius equation, , where  is the growth rate,  is a specific model constant,  represents the activation energy,  is the ideal gas constant and  is the absolute temperature. Herendeen et al.  demonstrated that the activation energy for the growth of E. coli B/r in either minimal or rich medium follows three distinct stages, depending on the temperature. Between 23 °C and 37 °C,  remains constant at approximately 56 kJ/mol in both minimal and rich media. This range is known as the “normal rate” of growth, where cellular functions, particularly enzymatic activities, are modulated by stable protein/mRNA species and abundance. Above 37 °C, the growth rate declines slightly up to 42 °C, then drops sharply between 42 °C and 48 °C, a trend that is media-dependent. During supraoptimal temperature range (38–48 °C), abrupt changes are observed in protein and mRNA abundances and in maintenance energy ( energy used to counteract thermal stress rather than growth). The activation energy for maintenance and protein turnover during this phase ranged from 212 to 515 kJ/mol and 44 to 115 kJ/mol, respectively. These values are close to protein denaturation (400–800 kJ/mol) and enzymatic activation (20 to 100 kJ/mol), with the 56 kJ/mol mark consistent with the growth rate at 23–37 °C. Therefore, enzymatic reactions are not the main constraint for growth, as they occur faster than diffusion and protein folding, which are quicker than E. coli’s 20-min doubling time. For some proteins, folding may take longer than 20 min, becoming a critical bottleneck. ATP required for maintenance () increases 10–12-fold between 37 °C and 42 °C. This sharp increase correlates with the low thermostability of many proteins. Overall, protein folding, stability, and refolding are the major limiting factors for cellular thermostability, contributing to the rapid decrease in growth rate. The thermal properties of proteins ultimately influence the success of E. coli’s proteome stability and growth under thermal stress.
We argue that the use of E. coli in high-temperature bioprocesses requires an integrative approach that enables optimal growth rates beyond the upper limit of its thermal niche. In recent years, synthetic biology, systems biology, and evolutionary engineering have separately achieved significant advances in increasing thermotolerance in E. coli. The following sections outline how these approaches can be integrated to enhance the thermotolerance of E. coli.

Integrating the evolutionary engineering perspective
Evolutionary biotechnology applies the principles of natural selection, mutation, and recombination to improve phenotypes in microorganisms. In practice, this mainly includes experimental protocols, such as adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE), which utilize serial passages for batch fermentations in flasks or continuous cultures in bioreactors. Evolutionary biotechnology approaches complement rational metabolic engineering strategies for the improvement of complex phenotypes such as thermotolerance. Systems metabolic engineering is used to deconvolute complex phenotypes resulting from ALE experiments by integrating multi-omics data. Systems metabolic engineering for the design of thermotolerant strains involves the evolutionary engineering of both proteins and microorganisms (Fig. 2).
Evolutionary biotechnology strategies. a Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) through serial passaging, continuous culture, and plate-based selection has been employed to generate thermotolerant microbial strains; b directed evolution of thermosensitive enzymes increases their thermostability, enabling their expression and integration into biosynthetic pathways to improve overall thermal tolerance; and c synthetic evolution tools are continuously emerging, allowing targeted mutagenesis at multiple specific genomic loci to accelerate strain adaptation and trait optimization

Directed evolution
Several studies have examined the stability of the E. coli proteome under high-temperature culture conditions. The stability of the E. coli proteome was assessed by exposing protein extracts to elevated temperature and inducing protein denaturation. A subset of 83 proteins showed a mean denaturation temperature () of 40.4–46.7 °C with a 90% denaturation range () of 41.8–47 °C. This analysis revealed that 14 gene-coding proteins (grpE, adk, nrdA, obgE, prs, nusA, rpoD, pheS, hisS, frr, rho, accC, nadE and fabI) are essential for the growth of E. coli for protein, nucleic acid, and fatty acid biosynthesis and nucleotide and cofactor binding processes. Thus, this experimental assessment of protein thermostability suggests that E. coli growth impairment occurs within the temperature range of 42 °C to 47 °C. Interestingly, these temperatures closely align with the maximum growth limits of E. coli in both minimal and rich media.
Directed evolution allows the development of proteins with new or improved functionalities through iterative rounds of genetic diversification and library screening or selection. In recent years, directed evolution has been applied to the development of heat-resistant proteins. From a systems metabolic engineering perspective, specific enzymatic reactions will result as the limiting step due to thermostability issues. In E. coli, this growth limitation has been identified for enzymes involved in methionine synthesis, specifically MetA and MetE. Heterologous expression of metA gene from the thermophilic Geobacillus kaustophilus enhanced the growth of E. coli at 44 °C. Furthermore, E. coli growth rate was significantly favored expressing a mutated metA gene, obtained through directed evolution, as it allowed growth at both high and moderate temperatures. However, methionine supplementation for growth at 45 and 46 °C suggests the existence of at least one more thermosensitive enzyme in the methionine biosynthesis pathway. In subsequent experiments, Mordukhova and Pan  continued generating metE mutants through directed protein evolution. The selected metE variant accelerated the growth rate at 45 °C, demonstrating that the final reaction of methionine synthesis was the limiting step for cell growth.

Evolutionary engineering
Adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) is a powerful tool in metabolic engineering for strain development and optimization. Under a typical ALE experiment, microbial populations are propagated for multiple generations under a defined selection pressure. Over time, spontaneous mutations arise, and natural selection enriches mutations that increase fitness under a given environmental condition. This method leverages the natural competence of microorganisms to recombine their DNA and self-replication, introducing changes in DNA sequences and leading to mutations. In ALE experiments, evolutionary paths can be traced for each mutation, forming a multidimensional fitness landscape. Mutations that enhance survival and reproduction in a particular environment are passed on to subsequent generations and can be identified through whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and functional genomics (FG). However, some beneficial mutations may be complex to identify due to the accumulation of neutral mutations. Therefore, when a rational engineering approach fails, due to insufficient knowledge about the genetic components underlying a desired phenotype, analysis of ALE strains can be used to perform reverse-engineering strategies to improve production strains further.
ALE experiments have been performed in E. coli strains to increase the thermotolerance niche (Table 1). Two major cultivation regimes are commonly used: batch and continuous, with the cultures maintained in test tubes, agar plates, flasks, or bioreactors (Fig. 2). ALE is particularly effective at selecting genetic mutations that improve E. coli performance under stressful conditions, as large populations of 1 × 108 – 1 × 1010 cells increase the mutation rate via molecular DNA recombination during each division. In E. coli, the mutation rate is 5 × 10− 10 per base pair per replication or about 1 × 10− 3 – 2 × 10− 3 mutations per genome per replication. With division times ranging from 20 min to less than 10 h, roughly one mutation per cell could occur every 12 to 58 days for doubling times of 42 min to 3.5 h (µ of 1.0 or 0.2 1/h). This translates to approximately 1 × 108 to 1 × 1010 mutations per population every 12 or 58 days. The mutation rate increases in response to various stressors, such as elevated temperatures, and decreases with high final population densities. Therefore, rapid evolution in response to high temperatures can be achieved over about 200 generations at 42 °C (~1 month).
Thermal adaptive laboratory evolution experiments
Strain	Condition	Tmax (°C)	Reference	 	E. coli B derivative Bc251	10 mL Davis minimal medium+ 25 µg/mL glucose, 120 rpm (flask)	41.5		 	E. coli B	10 mL Davis minimal medium+ 25 µg/mL glucose	42		 	E. coli B	10 mL Davis minimal medium+ 25 µg/mL glucose, 120 rpm (flask)	42		 	E. coli K-12MG1655	M9 minimal media+ 4 g/L glucose	42		 	E. coli B REL1206	Davis minimal medium+ 25 mg/L glucose	42.2		 	E. coli K-12 MG1655	M9 minimal media+ 4 g/L glucose	45.3		 	E. coli DH1 DleuB::(gfpuv5-kmr)	5 mL modified M63 medium+ 2 mM leucine+ 25 mg/mL of kanamycin sulphate, 130 rpm (flask)	45.9		 	E. coli JU15	AM1 mineral medium +40 g/L glucose +0.1–1 g/L tryptone +0.05–0.5 g/L yeast extract	48		 	E. coli K-12MG1655 zba::kan	7 mL LB medium (tube)	48.5		 	E. coli K-12 MG1655	LB mediumin the automated Evolugator apparatus	49.7		 	E. coli DH5α	Iterative liquidand plate cultivation in LB medium	50
Each mutation impacts fitness to varying degrees and directions across the multidimensional fitness landscape. Identifying beneficial mutations, particularly those that enhance ancestral fitness, is a challenging task. For example, in one study, 1331 gene mutations were analyzed from 115 populations that evolved over 2000 generations at 42.2 °C in minimal media. This represents a tiny fraction of the approximately 6 × 1013 mutations that could theoretically occur. Therefore, finding a beneficial mutation is akin to finding a needle in a haystack. A practical solution is to consider mutations in genes or genome segments that mutate repetitively across independent experiments. It is unlikely for mutation events to be consistently captured across independent ALE experiments. Still, key mutations can be discovered through both predictable and non-intuitive mechanisms. In this context, genome-scale metabolic models and associated computational methods are valuable tools for identifying beneficial mutations.
There are two possible outcomes for thermal adaptation in ALE experiments at supraoptimal temperatures: either the entire thermal niche, including optimal and growth temperature limits, shifts to higher temperatures, or only the optimum shifts without altering the limits. For instance, the thermal niche of most independent E. coli strains evolved over 2000 generations in minimal media at constant temperatures of 32, 37, or 42 °C, as well as fluctuating temperatures between 32 and 42 °C, showed little change in their thermal niche. Only one of the 37 °C lines failed at 41.5 °C, and one of the 42 °C lines survived at 43 °C. Further analyses demonstrated that E. coli adapted more quickly to 42 °C than to lower temperatures, and lines propagated in temperature oscillations between 32 °C and 42 °C adapted better to 42 °C but lost fitness at lower temperatures.
Gradual temperature increments have also been tested to expand the thermal niche (Table 1). In LB medium, E. coli strain MG1655 was evolved by increasing the temperature from 37 to 42, 45, 47, 48, and 48.5 °C over 620 generations (~2 years). All the strains evolved at temperatures > = 42 °C improved their fitness, whereas the strains evolved at 37 °C did not show improvement. The strain isolated at 48.5 °C showed a maximum temperature of growth, , of 48.5 °C but showed no thermotolerance improvement after 600 generations. In a separate ALE experiment using stepwise temperature increments similarly yielded a strain that thrived at 49 °C. Kishimoto et al. (2010) isolated evolved E. coli strain at 36.9, 41.2, 43.2, and 44.8 °C in minimal media. Strains isolated at temperatures above 36.9 °C shifted both the optimal (Top) and maximum growth temperatures (Tmax) compared to the parental strain (~37 °C and 42 °C). The strain evolved at 44.8 °C, grew at 45.9 °C, but did not grow at 46.8 °C, although its relative fitness rapidly declined after several months.
Together, these results demonstrate that upper thermal limits expanded by only 1 to 3 °C. Although adaptation to near-lethal temperatures triggered more rapid evolution, cell populations did not significantly extend the thermal limits beyond this narrow range.

Integrating the synthetic biology approach
Synthetic biology applies engineering principles to the rational design and modification of living systems. Integrating synthetic biology with classical genetic engineering, systems biology, and evolutionary engineering has accelerated the development of thermotolerant strains (Fig. 3). However, progress is tempered by metabolic burden, context-dependent performance, and limited transferability across hosts, underscoring the need for standardized benchmarks and validation beyond laboratory conditions.
Synthetic biology strategies to increase thermal tolerance in E. coli. a Thermosensitive protein replacement with thermostable variants to maintain functionality at elevated temperatures; b stress-resistance genes expression to enhance cellular resilience under thermal stress; c heat-shock protein overexpression to assist in proper protein folding and protection against heat-induced denaturation; and d membrane engineering to modify lipid composition and maintain membrane integrity and fluidity at higher temperatures

Synthetic heat shock response
At supraoptimal (> 38 °C) and lethal (> 42–48 °C) temperatures, the proteome of E. coli becomes highly thermolabile. The accumulation of unfolded proteins triggers the heat shock response (HSR), characterized by the expression of more than 20 heat-shock proteins (HSPs), including molecular chaperones and proteases, which protect the proteome from denaturation. In E. coli, the ATP-dependent response of HSP70 (DnaK/DnaJ/GrpE) and HSP60 (GroEL/GroES) are the main system assisting protein folding. The expression of HSPs increases at different rates, with a maximum response in the transition from 28 °C to 42 °C. In this range, some HSPs can increase as much as 50-fold. At 42 °C, total protein synthesis shows a transient increase (1.5-fold) compared to that at 30 °C. Notably, HSPs can account for up to 15% or 21% of the total protein after temperature increases from 30 °C to 42 °C or 46 °C, respectively. At the same time, protein turnover increases threefold, while the maintenance coefficient rises 10–13-fold. However, protease-mediated degradation may result from depletion of intracellular amino acid pools during intense protein synthesis, rather than from heat shock. This depletion triggers the SpoT-mediated stringent response, which is characterized by reduced synthesis of RNA and transport/metabolic proteins. Both the HSR and the stringent response can affect cell growth at supraoptimal temperatures.
Table 2 summarizes successful examples in which the overexpression or heterologous expression of HSPs results in improved thermotolerance in different microbial platforms. Most studies focus on adaptation to lethal temperatures through brief exposure to temperatures ranging from 50 °C to 54 °C, typically assessing population survival rates after a maximum of 60 min. For instance, the expression of GroEL/GroES homolog from Geobacillus thermopakistaniens extended the growth range of E. coli to 55 °C in LB medium (7 °C higher than the parental strain). Similarly, the heterologous expression of the N-terminal domain of L-asparaginase (NPfA) from Pyrococcus furiosus enabled E. coli to grow at 52 °C in LB medium, with survival to 62 °C for 30 min. This NPfA functions similarly to small heat shock proteins in response to increased temperature, exhibiting both internal chaperone activity and molecular chaperone-like behavior. It prevents heat-induced protein aggregation in vitro and helps maintain protein solubility and structural integrity under thermal stress.
Examples of successful improvements of E. coli thermotolerance achieved through the expression of heterologous HSPs from various sources, including thermotolerant bacteria and archaea
HSP	Organism protein source	Tmax(°C)	Survival capacity improvement	Reference	 	YbeD	E. coli	46	Up to 1.8 OD600 at 12 h		 	16.9-kDa class I LMM HSP	Oryza sativa L.	47.5	more than 70% and 30% at 15 min and 1 h		 	GroESL	Pseudomonas putida	47.5	69% at 16 h		 	Class I cytosolic sHSP	Castanea sativa Mill.	50	2-fold after 60 min		 	LbpA and LbpB	E. coli	50	13–19% at 30 min		 	HSP70	Nicotiana tabacum	50	21.2% at 1 h		 	HSP17.7	Daucus carota L.	50	75% at 1 h		 	Pfu-prefoldin	Pyrococcus furiosus	50	53% at 1 h		 	HSP17	Caenorhabditis elegans	50	Growth effectively during 16 h		 	HSP70	Daucus carota L.	50	35% at 1 h		 	HSP17.7 Cromosomal integration	Daucus carota L.	50	2-fold after 60 min		 	AgsA	Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium	50	up to 0.4 OD600 at 12 h		 	p26	Artemia franciscana	54	4–5 log10(CFU/mL) at 60 min		 	HSP20	Tigriopus japonicus	54	2–3 log10(CFU/mL) at 60 min		 	GroEL/GroES	Geobacillus thermopakistaniensis	55	4.33 × 105 CFU/mL at 1 h		 	N-terminal domain of L-asparaginase	Pyrococcus furiosus	52–62	Typical growth behavior at 52 °C during 16 h and 90% to 62 °C for 30 min
The application of Synthetic Biology has also led to an increase in tolerance to high temperatures. The integration of a plasmid of a thermotolerant and a quorum regulation system allowed E. coli to grow at 43 °C. The thermotolerant system is composed of different heat shock proteins and RNA thermometers that hierarchically increase the optimal temperature by sensing the temperature. In addition, the quorum regulation system operates by sacrificing individuals in the population to reduce metabolic heat, sensing cell temperature and density.

Expression of thermophilic proteins
While proteins from thermophiles and mesophilic microorganisms fold with similar dynamics, thermophilic proteins are more thermostable. This may be due to the unfolding rates of thermophilic proteins are several orders of magnitude slower than those of mesophiles.
Explaining protein thermostability through individual amino acid differences and their interactions within a functional structure is highly complex. However, there are examples where minor structural alterations are sufficient to enable survival under extreme conditions. As a result, a general strategy for specific amino acid replacements or intermolecular interactions between mesophilic and thermophilic proteins cannot be universally applied. For instance, the Gibbs free energy () of transfer from n-octanol to water for the various amino acid side chains ranges from 0 (e.g., Ser) to 13 kJ/mol (e.g., Trp), while a single hydrogen bond can stabilize a protein structure by −2 to −7.5 kJ/mol. Substituting polar residues in the protein core is highly destabilizing because it disrupts water-accessible structures. For example, replacing Ile by Asp increases the stability of RNases H by 21.3 kJ/mol in T. thermophilus and by 12.12 kJ/mol in E. coli. Other common substitutions resulting from hiding charged residues in the hydrophobic core, are Met → Lys or Leu → Asp. Although charged groups are commonly exposed to water and their coulombic interactions are not so crucial for protein stabilization, buried ion pairs can significantly affect stability when inside the core (typically, one ion-pair per 150 amino acid residues on average). However, while buried ion-pairs may not induce significant structural adaptations, they can stabilize the residual structure in the unfolded state of RNase H in T. thermophilus, allowing for reversible folding in the absence of a denaturant.
The packing density of amino acid residues is a determinant of the solvent-accessible surface area, which in turn affects enzyme kinetics. A protein’s optimal stability and flexibility may depend on the primary structure and chain length of the polypeptide. Therefore, a single mutation can be beneficial for thermostability, but the reverse is also possible. The marginal free energy for protein stabilization in aqueous solutions is sufficient to help under extreme conditions. Consistent with this, electrostatic and hydrophobic interactions primarily maintain protein structures. For example, substituting a non-polar, hydrophobic amino acid residue into a hydrophobic (Ile → Asp) core of the RNases H of E. coli and T. thermophilus reduces their  by 17 °C and 18 °C, from 86 °C to 69 °C, and from 66 °C to 48 °C, respectively. In contrast, the same substitution out of the hydrophobic core, i.e., replacing Leu with Asp in the RNase H periphery, did not significantly alter the . Notably, substituting Ile with Asp in T. thermophilus’s RNase H protein prevented the reversibility of protein unfolding by eliminating residual structure. This suggests that the solvent-accessible surface area plays an important role in maintaining structure and residual stability.
The design of proteins with higher thermal stability is a promising approach for identifying mutations to improve stability. However, increasing protein stability may not necessarily translate to enhanced growth tolerance at lethal temperatures. These efforts may require deeper analysis of proteome thermostability, functional genomics, and adaptive laboratory evolution.

Expression of genes that confer stress-resistance
Some proteins are characterized by conferring resistance to different types of abiotic stress. Evaluation of these heterologous proteins in E. coli is a promising approach for increasing thermotolerance. On one side, Yu el at. demonstrated that the expression of the betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase gene (badH) obtained from Ammopiptanthus nanus conferred resistance to both high salt concentrations and high temperatures of 55 °C for 15 min. On the other hand, Niu et al. (2017) reported a significant increase in E. coli’s tolerance to temperatures of 42 °C for up to 10 h by expressing the plant E3 BnTR1 ligase. They found that the expression of BnTR1 induces the accumulation of σ32 and heat shock proteins. The evaluation of mutants created by Appukuttan et al. (2016) showed that DR1558, a response regulator of Deinococcus radiodurans, confers tolerance to various types of stress that can be directly or indirectly controlled by RpoS; regarding temperature, the cells showed tolerance at 54 °C for 60 min.
In addition, late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) proteins are a class of proteins associated with responses to various sources of abiotic stress. Characterization of these proteins in E. coli has shown protection at high temperatures. Overexpression of the Ammopiptanthus mongolicus LEA protein (AmLEA) maintained cell viability at 50 °C. This protective effect may be explained by its ability to maintain the other proteins in their functional conformation, similar to a chaperone’s protective role. Seven out of the 13 LEA proteins from Pinus tabuliformsi (PtaLEA) showed positive effects, increasing the rate of cell viability by 1.3 times per 50 min after induction at 50 °C. The expression of the LEA protein from Rosa chinensis (RcLEA) was shown to provide tolerance to high temperatures of up to 50 °C. In the same way,  reported that LEA4 from Brassica napus (BnLEA4-1) improves E. coli tolerance to high temperatures and salt stress, and  found that LEA-6 and LEA-7 from Dendrobium officinale (DofLEAs) have a similar effect on increasing thermotolerance in E. coli.

Membrane engineering
The proportion of thermophilic organisms present in the archaea domain is remarkable. One of the main differences they present regarding bacteria is their membrane composition. Bacteria are composed of glycerol-3-phosphate ester lipids whereas archaea have glycerol-1-phosphate ether lipids. This differential characteristic enables archaea to survive extreme conditions, including high temperatures. The modification of the E. coli membrane composition with 20–30% archaeal lipids has shown positive results for thermostability at 55–58 °C.

Integrating the systems biology perspective
Since growth temperature is a complex adaptive trait, it is necessary to incorporate an integral perspective in the design of thermotolerant strains. Systems biology is a discipline that enables us to understand biological processes on a larger organizational scale by integrating biological information. Additionally, incorporating evolutionary engineering into systems biology can provide insights into the processes that occurred during thermoadaptation within the context of evolutionary systems biology. By understanding the process of adaptation to high temperatures, we can gain insight into a series of factors to consider when developing thermotolerant strains.

Multi-omics analysis
By integrating ALE experiments with multi-omic platforms, researchers can deconvolute complex cellular programs into specific mutations, regulatory mechanisms, or enzymatic bottlenecks that enable E. coli to increase thermotolerance (Fig. 4). For instance, ALE experiments and genomics have revealed various types of mutations, including point mutations, insertions, and deletions, that directly affect thermotolerance. ALE experiments suggest that the convergence of changes is proportional to the level of the functional organization of the genes. While convergence is low at the point mutation level, it increases at the gene, operon, and functional complex levels. Additionally, reverse engineering of the rpoB and rho genes demonstrates that while some mutations are related to increased fitness, others are epistatic mutations.
Multi-omics analysis for thermal adaptation. Principal genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics mechanisms of thermally adapted cells. At the genomic level, accumulated mutations across the genome tend to shift from beneficial to neutral over time, without further increases in fitness. At the transcriptomic level, thermally adapted cells tend to restore gene expression levels to a steady-state condition despite sustained heat stress. At the proteomic level, adapted cells optimize the allocation of cellular resources among the metabolic proteome fraction (Qp), molecular chaperones (Qc), and ribosomal proteins (Qr) to support efficient growth under elevated temperatures
The number of mutations present in thermotolerant evolved strains depends on the adaptation process, with some strains encoding from 10 up to 360 mutations. The number of mutations increases as the ALE time and target temperature increase. However, these mutational changes undergo a transition from positive to neutral as the desired adaptation temperature increases. This suggests that reaching higher adaptation temperatures requires long evolutionary times to allow the accumulation of sufficient genomic changes.
The use of transcriptomics allows for the understanding of how mutations modify gene expression to facilitate survival at high temperatures. Some authors have shown that, in both rich and minimal media, gene expression levels tend to be restored to similar levels present in the ancestral strain at 37 °C. In addition, comparative transcriptomics between ancestral and evolved strains at 37 °C and at high temperatures suggests that the increase in thermotolerance requires maintaining expression levels similar to those at the optimal parental temperature.
Despite transcriptome homeostasis, thermally adapted cells still maintain an inducible heat shock system response. Additionally, heat-inducible genes in the range of 37 °C to 42 °C suggest that increased fitness at high temperatures is associated with altered patterns of heat-inducible gene expression. In general, the mutations presented in each of the evolved strains serve to reverse the transcriptional changes induced by high temperatures. Reverse engineering of the convergent mutations present in the rpoB gene suggests that the increase in fitness is due to the effect that early mutations acquired in the global transcriptional regulator have on restoring global gene expression from the stress state to its pre-stress state. Additionally, the effect of rho gene mutations also plays an important role in the restoration of gene expression, particularly in the context of epistatic interactions.
At the proteomic level, comparing the abundance of proteins between the parental and thermally adapted strains could help rationalize the development of thermotolerant strains. In an ALE experiment, the differences in protein expression related to heat shock in an evolved strain were analyzed. Among the most significant changes of proteins in the evolved strains were an increase in the steady-state levels of heat shock proteins (ClpB, DnaK, GroEL, GroES, HtpG and YedU) and LysU, while the levels of the trigger factor Tig were reduced. In addition to this, other proteins with significant changes were also identified, showing decreased levels (tryptophanase, thymidine phosphorylase, deoxyribose phosphate aldolase, and purine nucleoside phosphorylase). In contrast, asparaginase II and cysteine synthase A showed the opposite trend. The increase of GroEL/ES up to 16-fold in the evolved endpoint strain suggests that there is a requirement for a significant increase in folding capacity for those thermolabile proteins. The absence of mutations in the sequenced heat shock genes (rpoH, dnaK, groEL, groES, htpG, and yedU) excludes the possibility of a direct cause related to the alteration of these genes. From an engineering perspective, this suggests that thermotolerant strains require an optimal protection system for thermolabile proteins. Both the increase in the expression of native chaperones and the heterologous expression of heat shock proteins are strategies that have been previously addressed.

Network analysis
Computational biology and bioinformatics have enabled the extraction of valuable information through the integration of diverse data in network analysis. Computational tools and algorithm development allow the analysis of large datasets to answer specific biological questions and test hypotheses without the need for experimentation. As computing power increases, computational tools will help analyze more information, allowing for more accurate simulations of cell physiology in various environments. Using network analysis, it is possible to study metabolic interactions, regulatory mechanisms, and signaling pathways. The integration of analysis at the network level of thermotolerant strains could help us better understand the changes made in thermoadaptation through the interaction of these elements.
Structural systems biology models have been shown to provide a mechanistic explanation for the causality of mutations related to growth temperature. Through the GEM-PRO framework, which integrates genome-scale metabolic models with the structural properties of proteins,  predicted growth-limiting proteins at high temperatures in E. coli. Although a large part of the structural characteristics of the proteins was obtained by computational prediction, the simulation showed a strong relationship with the experimental data in the range of 32 to 43 °C. The most thermosensitive growth-limiting proteins correspond to the group of cofactor biosynthesis pathways (such as pantothenate and coenzyme A). By simulating the increase in the critical temperature of the limiting proteins at 42 °C, the model predicted a two-fold increase in the maximum growth rate and a shift in the optimal growth temperature to 42 °C. The supplementation of nutrients such as pantothenate and biotin confirms the model’s accuracy in determining thermosensitive metabolic pathways. Additionally, the implementation of more complex models, such as the FoldMe model, has enabled further in-depth understanding of E. coli thermosensitivity. By integrating the chaperone network and genome-scale protein folding into the E. coli metabolism and expression model (the ME model)  simulated the multiscale cellular response at high temperatures. Under stress conditions at 45 °C, the model suggests that the increase in chaperones limits the synthesis of other cellular components by mediating both the need for correct protein folding and the global relocation of the proteome. Similar to what is observed in protein expression, the cell must increase the abundance of chaperones to protect thermolabile proteins. Thus, a strategy for designing thermotolerant strains could include increasing the abundance of improved chaperones and/or replacing thermolabile proteins with thermoresistant proteins. Since the cell undergoes an adjustment in protein abundance, proteome rearrangement engineering techniques could make it possible to modulate the proteomic state to design thermotolerant strains. In general, the simulations suggest that the maximum adaptation temperature of E. coli is limited by the energy expenditure required for the reallocation of the proteome, which involves increasing chaperones to protect thermolabile proteins and thereby limiting cell growth.

A system metabolic engineering platform

ALE experiments with whole genome sequencing (WGS)
Large-scale surveys aimed at identifying genes linked to the thermal adaptability of E. coli are invaluable sources for both intuitive and systematic gene targeting to develop thermotolerant strains. These surveys utilize Whole-Genome Sequencing (WGS) to detect single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in strains selected through ALE experiments. Additional approaches involve gene-knockout screening of temperature-sensitive mutants from comprehensive single-gene knockout libraries, genome-scale modeling and protein structure analysis to predict the effects of mutations and the modeling of proteome thermostability using diverse methodologies.
Mutational dynamics are complex, as they involve the selection of favorable mutations and the interactions between mutations. The mutation rate strongly influences adaptive evolution because interactions between pleiotropic and epistatic mutations alter the overall fitness. Depending on the nature of individual mutations and combinations, these effects can enhance or reduce fitness outcomes. The whole genome sequence of evolved E. coli strains selected based on their improved fitness has been previously studied. Given the low sequencing coverage of the evolved population (i.e., a small fraction of the total population is sequenced), it appears highly improbable that multiple mutations would repeatedly target a single gene by random chance during independent ALE experiments. For instance, the probability of sampling the same gene for two mutations is approximately P < 1 × 10− 12, and for 100 mutations in the same gene, P < 1 × 10− 200. The convergence of mutations identified across independent ALE and WGS experiments is illustrated in Table 3.
List of genes targeted in whole-genome sequencing in ALE experiments, gene-knockout screening of temperature-sensitive mutants from a single-gene knockout library, genome-scale modeling of protein structure, and measurements of proteome thermo-stability with different approaches
Gene	Total mutations	Description	 	rpoB°	88	RNA polymerase subunit b (27)	 	iclR	69	DNA-binding transcriptional repressor (7)	 	ybaL	67	Putative transporter (10)	 	cls	65	Cardiolipin synthase A (12)	 	rho*	48	Transcription termination factor (13)	 	rpoD* ~ °	38	RNA polymerase sigma factor 70 (15)	 	ilvL	30	ilvXGMEDA operon leader peptide (5)	 	glgP	29	Glycogen phosphorylase (17)	 	rpoC°	24	RNA polymerase subunit b’ (29)	 	mrdA~ °	23	Peptidoglycan DD-transpeptidase (1)	 	glpF	14	Glycerol facilitator (10)	 	cspC	14	Transcription antiterminator and regulator of mRNA stability (15)	 	mreB~	14	Cell shape-determining protein (1)	 	kpsD	13	SLBB domain-containing protein (-)	 	nusA*	13	Transcription termination/antitermination (16)	 	kpsE	11	capsule polysaccharide export inner-membrane protein (2)	 	rssB	11	Regulator of RpoS (13)	 	glpR°	9	DNA-binding transcriptional repressor (3)	 	mrdB	9	Peptidoglycan glycosyltransferase (13)	 	glpT	8	sn-glycerol 3-phosphate: phosphate antiporter (13)	 	fbp*	7	Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase 1 (29)	 	kpsM	7	KpsM protein	 	mreD	7	Cell shape determining protein (5)	 	mreC°	6	Cell shape determining protein (9)	 	glgC	6	Glucose-1-phosphate adenylyltransferase (17)	 	rpoS*	5	RNA polymerase sigma factor (16) − 227 units	 	rpoA°	4	RNA polymerase subunit a (26)	 	fruK	3	1-phosphofructokinase (14)	 	yfgA	3	cytoskeleton protein RodZ (7)	 	pykF	3	Pyruvate kinase 1 (19)	 	spoT	3	bifunctional (p)ppGpp synthase/hydrolase (13)	 	yhhZ	3	putative endonuclease YhhZ (1)	 	rffD	3	UDP-N-acetyl-D-mannosamine dehydrogenase (10)	 	yehQ	3	SWIM zinc finger domains-containing protein (3)	 	topA~	3	DNA topoisomerase I (1)	 	rpsA	3	30 S ribosomal subunit protein S1 (16)	 	abgB	3	p-aminobenzoyl-glutamate hydrolase subunit B (9)	 	mutL	3	DNA mismatch repair protein (17)	 	rne	3	Ribonuclease E (33)	 	ydcD	3	Uncharacterized protein	 	dnaE~ °	2	DNA polymerase III subunit a (1)	 	metA* °	2	Homoserine O-succinyltransferase (10)	 	cysH°	2	Phosphoadenosine phosphosulfate reductase (8)	 	glgA	2	Glycogen synthase (9)	 	glpE	2	Thiosulfate sulfurtransferase (6)	 	glpG	2	Rhomboid protease (9)	 	glpK	2	Glycerol kinase (19)	 	kpsT	2	ABC transporter ATP-binding protein (1)	 	malT	2	DNA-binding transcriptional activator (12)	 	yfeA	2	Putative cyclic di-GMP phosphodiesterase (4)	 	bcsC	2	Endo-1,4-D-glucanase (9)	 	nadR	2	DNA-binding transcriptional repressor/NMN adenylyltransferase (25)	 	ylbE	2	DUF1116 domain-containing protein (1)	 	dnaQ~ °	2	DNA polymerase III subunit epsilon (3)	 	metH*	2	Cobalamin-dependent methionine synthase (17)	 	atoC	2	DNA-binding transcriptional activator/ornithine decarboxylase inhibitor (11)	 	cbpA	2	Curved DNA-binding protein (12)	 	clpB	2	Protein disaggregase ClpB	 	dgsA	2	DNA-binding transcriptional repressor (10)	 	dusB	2	tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase B (10)	 	fadL	2	Long-chain FA membrane channel (8)	 	fis	2	DNA-binding transcriptional dual regulator (24)	 	frmR	2	DNA-binding transcriptional repressor (6)	 	glmS	2	L-glutamine&mdash;D-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase (15)	 	gltB	2	Glutamate synthase subunit GltB (17)	 	hemA	2	Glutamyl-tRNA (10)	 	hslU	2	ATPase component of the HslVU protease (21)	 	infB	2	Translation initiation factor IF-2β’ (21)	 	lon	2	Lon protease (20)	 	malQ	2	4-α-glucanotransferase (10)	 	manZ	2	Mannose-specific PTS enzyme IID component (10)	 	metW	2	tRNA-initiator Met(CAU) (3)	 	nth	2	Endonuclease III (3)	 	nupC	2	Nucleoside: H+ symporter NupC (10)	 	oppA	2	Oligopeptide ABC transporter periplasmic binding protein (14)	 	prfA	2	Peptide chain release factor RF1 (8)	 	proQ	2	RNA chaperone (15)	 	rhsB	2	rhs element protein RhsB (2)	 	rrlB	2	23 S ribosomal RNA (3)	 	tktB	2	Transketolase 2 (8)	 	uspA	2	Universal stress protein A (5)	 	ybeA	2	23 S rRNA m3Ψ1915 methyltransferase (11)	 	ybiO	2	Moderate conductance mechanosensitive channel YbiO (7)	 	ychE	2	MarC family putative inner membrane protein (2)	 	yehU	2	high-affinity pyruvate receptor (16)	 	yejM	2	lipopolysaccharide signal transducer LapC (5)	 	ygaH	2	L-valine exporter, YgaH component (3)	 	yjcO	2	Sel1 repeat-containing protein YjcO	 	ykgE	2	Putative lactate utilization oxidoreductase YkgE (2)	 	yraL	2	16 S rRNA 2’-O-ribose C1402 methyltransferase (10)	 	aroP	2	Aromatic amino acid: H+ symporter (10)	 	fadH	2	2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase (11)
Single underline denote essential genes, double underline denote conditional essential genes, (*) Tm > 47 °C based in, (~) Essential gene for temperatures higher than 45 °C, (°) temperature-sensitive when carrying specific mutations. The number of GO terms associated with the gene is in parentheses
The ten most recurrent mutations in genes (out of 92 genes) include six transcriptional factors (rpoB, iclR, rho, rpoD, ilvL, and rpoC), and three cell membrane -related proteins (cls, glgP, and mrdA). Interestingly, ybaL is suggested to belong to the CPA2 family of monovalent cation-proton antiporters. Among these, five genes (rpoB, rho, rpoD, rpoC, and mrdA) are essential for E. coli growth. Additional RNA polymerase subunits, such as rpoS and rpoA, were found to harbor 5 and 4 mutations, respectively, in independent ALE experiments. Other genes of interest include metA and metH, which encode enzymes for the first and final steps of the novo methionine biosynthesis, as well as metW, which encodes one of the six methionine tRNAs involved in initiating protein synthesis. Methionine biosynthesis presents a bottleneck for growth at supraoptimal temperatures above 42 °C. For instance, a strain with a point mutation in metE, which catalyzes the final step of methionine biosynthesis, exhibited significantly improved growth at 45 °C.
Additionally, reductions in amino acid pools due to increased HSP synthesis or decreased methionine synthesis can activate SpoT, which mediates the astringent response. Mutations in the spoT gene appeared in three independent ALE experiments. Among chaperons and proteases overexpressed during the HSR, only the protein disgregase ClpB (a protein disaggregase) and Lon (a protease) showed up in two or more independent ALE experiments. Interestingly, no mutations were identified in HSP genes rpoH, dnaK, groEL, groES, htpG, or yedU in the four strains isolated from ALE experiments at temperatures up to 48.5 °C in LB medium, except for single occurrences of rpoH and htpG in one of the 115 strains sequenced by Tenaillon et al. . Although this does fully account for all mutations that arise during evolution, a major library of point mutations in essential genes linked to thermal sensitivity has been developed. This library contains 15,120 temperature-sensitive mutants, each carrying a single amino acid change in one of the 346 essential proteins. From this library, 94 mutants with mutations that induce thermal sensitivity in E. coli were identified. Genes from this library targeted in ALE experiments are marked in Table 3 with (°).
Various genes targeted in the ALE-WGS project have been selected for inverse metabolic engineering to confer thermotolerance in parental E. coli strains. For instance, a premature stop codon in glpF, found in several evolved strains isolated from ALE experiments at 48.7 °C, suggested that deletion of the glpF gene in the ancestral E. coli improved thermotolerance. This was experimentally verified, as the deletion led to significantly enhanced growth rates within the 43 to 48 °C temperature range and shifted the optimal growth temperature from 37 °C to 43 °C.
Another mutation resulting in loss of function in fabA suggested that eliminating this gene could improve thermotolerance, although its impact on fitness at supraoptimal temperatures was modest. Additionally, ancestral E. coli strains transformed with nadR and aceB mutations from evolved strains (isolated at 32 °C and under temperature fluctuations of 32 to 42 °C, respectively) demonstrated that these mutations conferred a selective advantage under the specific thermal regimes in which they evolved. Interestingly, aceB mutations were beneficial under various conditions, and neither mutation was deleterious under any regime. Reverse engineering using four advantageous mutations in rpoB and rho, which were found in multiple strains isolated from ALE-WGS experiments was successfully carried out by. Of the two rho mutations, neither significantly affected relative thermotolerant fitness compared to the ancestral strain. However, the other six mutations resulted in relative fitness benefits averaging around 20%.

Proteomics analysis to identify thermosensitive targets
Proteome thermal stability at the domain level, based on limited proteolysis and mass spectroscopy (MS) was analyzed over a temperature range of 40 °C and 70 °C in E. coli and the thermophilic bacterium T. thermophilus. The study aimed to examine protein denaturation at supraoptimal and lethal growth temperatures, investigating how the loss of essential proteins leads to growth collapse. Extrinsic protein factors, such as ions, enzyme substrates, coenzymes, and metabolites, which may act as stabilizers, were also considered, as measurements were taken within the cellular matrix. Leuenberger et al.  found that in a minimal medium, 12% of the E. coli proteome (2030 proteins) showed degradation around 50 °C. Since E. coli growth ceased at approximately 47 °C, the study focused on proteins that lose their functionality below this temperature. Therefore, they calculated the temperature at which 90% of each protein denatures () and identified proteins with a  < 47 °C. These proteins, whose genes were also targeted in ALE experiments, are marked in Table 3 with an asterisk superscript.
Among the 92 genes listed in Table 3, only eight correspond to proteins with a  < 46 °C, including four transcriptional master regulators (Rho, RpoD, NusA, and RpoS) and two key enzymes in methionine biosynthesis, MetA ( = 46.4 °C) and MetH ( = 44.8 °C). Only MetL, ( of 45 °C) was detected in one ALE-WGS project. The metA and metL genes are conditionally expressed in minimum medium but not in rich medium, which explains the limited growth at 45–46 °C. In minimal medium, E. coli carrying the native cobalamin-independent homocysteine transmethylase MetE ( = 54.7 °C), crucial for methionine synthesis from homocysteine, could not grow at 44 °C in minimal medium. Remarkably, MetE mutants with 48.5 °C <  < 51.3 °C allowed survival at 45 °C, although these mutants accumulated toxic levels of L-homoserine. The metE gene was only targeted in one large-scale study, and it is not listed in Table 3.
Overall, 83 proteins (including 14 essential proteins) were identified with  < 47 °C. These essential proteins include key transcription and metabolic factors such as RpoD (RNA polymerase sigma factor RpoD), PheS (phenylalanine–tRNA ligase alpha subunit), NusA (transcription termination/antitermination), Prs (ribose-phosphate pyrophosphokinase), GrpE (nucleotide exchange factor in the DnaK-DnaJ-GrpE chaperone system), Frr (ribosome-recycling factor), ObgE (GTPase), NrdA (ribonucleoside-diphosphate reductase 1 subunit alpha), NadE (NH(3)-dependent NAD(+) synthetase), HisS (histidine–tRNA ligase), FabI (enoyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] reductase), Rho (transcription termination factor Rho), and AccC (biotin carboxylase). Other essential proteins with  = 47–50 °C include MrdA (peptidoglycan D, D-transpeptidase), MreB (cell shape-determining protein), RpsD (small ribosomal subunit protein uS4), and RpsJ (small ribosomal subunit protein uS10).
Roughly half of the 83 proteins with  values lower than 47 °C were involved in metabolic processes, including lipid and amino acid synthesis (methionine, branched-chain, and aromatic), pyrimidine nucleotides, sulfur metabolism, and cofactors synthesis. For instance, the glucokinase Glk  = 45.1 °C) is not essential for growth with glucose due to its phosphorylation during transport by the PTS system component PtsG ( = 45.8 °C). Essential enzymes were also identified as having low thermal stability, including adenylate kinase Adk ( = 45.15 °C), required for purine ribonucleotide biosynthesis, and pyruvate dehydrogenase subunit E1 AceE ( = 45.01 °C), which has a key role in the synthesis of acetyl-CoA. An independent study of proteins with  values below 52 °C identified several key proteins in E. coli related to various critical cellular functions. In this study, GatZ (D-tagatose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase) and RpoD (the RNA polymerase sigma factor) were identified. In addition, several topoisomerases were also identified, including GyrB (DNA gyrase subunit B), ParC (DNA topoisomerase IV subunit A), ParE (DNA topoisomerase IV subunit B), and TopA (DNA topoisomerase I). In addition, essential proteins involved in DNA replication, such as DnaA (chromosomal replication initiator protein) and DnaE (DNA polymerase III subunit alpha) were detected. Proteins related to cell shape and division, such as FtsA, FtsE, FtsI (peptidoglycan D, D-transpeptidase), MrdA (peptidoglycan D, D-transpeptidase), MreB (cell shape determining protein), and MukB (chromosome partition protein), were also identifie. Furthermore, ribosomal proteins, including RpsB, RpsC, RpsD, RpsE, RpsJ, and RpsL, were found to have lower thermal stability. Proteins involved in the transition from fermentative to oxidative metabolism, such as components of the respiratory complexes I and II (NuoA, NuoL, SdhB, SdhD), also displayed temperature-sensitive stability. Additionally, ClpP protease complexes are destabilized at ~68 °C, while the chaperone components ClpX and ClpA are destabilized at ~60 °C. Similarly, the Ruv DNA repair complex showed similar instability, with RuvA destabilizing at 70 °C and UvrB/UvrC at ~60 °C. The lowest  value was 48.6 °C for GatB (PTS system galactitol-specific EIIB component).
A gene-knockout library was screened to identify genes required for survival at 47 °C in LB medium with and without glucose. Of the 72 genes identified as essential for growth at high temperatures (> 47 °C), only five were targeted in a single ALE-WGSA project (not shown in Table 3) – pdxH (pyridoxine 5’-phosphate oxidase, which is conditionally essential), aceE (pyruvate dehydrogenase), rfaD (ADP-L-glycero-D-mannoheptose 6-epimerase), aptG (ATP synthase F1 complex subunit g, which is essential when glycerol is the carbon source), and dnaQ (DNA polymerase III subunit ε). Mutations in dnaQ can lead to an increased mutation rate.

Synthetic biology for an accelerated evolution
As highlighted previously, several proteins need to be engineered to expand the thermal niche of E. coli. Higher frequencies of spontaneous mutations can promote rapid adaptive evolution under stressful environments such as heat stress. However, increasing the mutation rate also induces the accumulation of deleterious mutations, which can reduce the overall fitness landscapes. Cellular mortality has been identified as a significant driving force behind the rapid evolution of mutation rates. Modeling the mutation rate, genome size, and the thermodynamic response of proteins suggests that the speed limit of molecular evolution, before extinction lethality, should not exceed six mutations per essential genome part per replication in mesophilic organisms, and only 1–2 mutations per genome per replication in thermophiles, that is 1000 times faster than the average mutation rate in E. coli.
The mutation rate during DNA replication in E. coli is about 5 × 10− 10 mutations per genome per replication. This rate has been increased through chemical and UV mutagenesis, however, selecting causal mutations remains challenging. Although labor-intensive, directed evolution methods combined with error-prone PCR, randomized oligonucleotide pools, and CRISPR-based genome editing have allowed for more controlled gene diversification and protein evolution compared to random mutagenesis. For instance, cellular hypermutation systems OrthoRep, MutaT7, and EvolvR have mutation rates as high as 1 × 10− 5, 1 × 10− 3, and 1 × 10− 5 to 1 × 10− 6 per base, respectively, leading to mutation rates up to 100,000-fold higher than the mutation rate in E. coli.
Hyper-mutagenic plasmids were also generated by introducing a library of dnaQ mutants (encoding the DNA polymerase III subunit ε) created via error-prone PCR in the pUC18 vector. DnaQ activity is essential for preventing spontaneous mutations. These mutagenic plasmids were selected in ALE experiments to improve resistance to butanol, acetate, and kanamycin. Genome replication engineering-assisted continuous evolution (GREACE) plasmids with strong (2839-fold), moderate (317-fold), and weak (30-fold) mutation rates were used to increase mutation frequency in E. coli DH5α cultivated in LB medium, with the temperature gradually increased from 45 to 49.5 °C. After two months of selection using the strong mutator plasmid, a strain capable of growing at 50 °C on LB plates was successfully isolated.

Concluding remarks and future directions
Over the last few decades, multiple strategies have advanced our understanding of thermotolerance mechanisms in E. coli (Fig. 5). To achieve a more rational design, efforts should be unified. This review discusses the effect of temperature on the growth of E. coli and highlights how synthetic biology, evolutionary engineering, and computational network models from systems biology can be integrated to expand the thermostability of E. coli strains.
Mechanisms of thermotolerance adaptation in Escherichia coli. Conceptual map of the principal cellular modules (protein complexes and biological processes) that repeatedly accumulate adaptive mutations during evolution at high temperature. These modules outline plausible intervention points for rational or evolution-guided engineering of thermotolerant E. coli
Further research should aim for integration of existing strategies within a systems metabolic engineering framework, as ALE experiments, physiological characterization, and functional analyses are labor-consuming. This knowledge could be translated to industrial projects as hypermutation platforms with mutation rates of ~1 × 101 could result beneficial for the development of novel bioproducts. In addition, MAGE and GREACE tools have proven effective in obtaining thermotolerant strains. Similarly, genome editing and other synthetic biology tools are expected to play a significant role in future ALE experiments, directing mutation rates toward specific genome regions or genes. This could be combined with high-throughput physiological characterization (evaluating trade-offs, strain stability, and metabolic changes), ALE mutations database, and systems biology approaches to contextualize genotype-phenotype relationships and automate hypothesis generation using machine learning algorithms.
Identifying labile proteins experimentally will certainly guide the engineering of microorganisms with enhanced thermostability. Thermodynamic data on proteins have been demonstrated to be crucial for understanding protein folding and stability mechanisms, as well as for designing stable mutants. Incorporating experimental and predicted protein structures from high-throughput proteomic analysis into genome-scale metabolic models could improve predictive accuracy and target key essential thermosensitive genes for replacement with thermostable versions. Protein engineering could help to obtain thermotolerant variants of thermolabile enzymes.
Finally, the engineering of stress response mechanisms has successfully improved thermal acclimatization and survival under drastic transient temperature increases. Although these efforts have not extended the range of supraoptimal temperatures, lessons can be taken from outstanding cases that involve the expression of heterologous chaperonins from thermophilic microorganisms. Next generation designs should aim to develop efficient heat-shock responses that alleviate metabolic burden and maintain proteome homeostasis at high temperatures.
Luis Caspeta: Deceased.
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
GPM: Review conceptualization, Literature review, Data analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review. EM: Writing - review & editing. MAC: Writing - review & editing. GG: Writing - review & editing. CL-C: review & editing. LC: Review conceptualization, Literature review, Data analysis, Writing - review & editing. AM: Review conceptualization, Literature review, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing.

Funding
This study was funded by the SECIHTI (Secretaría de Ciencia, Humanidades, Tecnología e Innovación), México, grant CF-2023-I-1116. GPM held a scholarship from SECIHTI.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Consent for publication
Not applicable.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Evolutionary response of Escherichia coli to thermal stress
High-temperature fermentation: how can processes for ethanol production at high temperatures become superior to the traditional process using mesophilic yeast?
Techno-economic analysis and environmental impact assessment of lignocellulosic lactic acid production
Simultaneous saccharification and fermentation for <Emphasis Type="SmallCaps">d</Emphasis>-lactic acid production using a metabolically engineered Escherichia coli adapted to high temperature
Evolutionary adaptation to temperature. II. Thermal niches of experimental lines of Escherichia coli
Levels of major proteins of Escherichia coli during growth at different temperatures
Selection and optimization of microbial hosts for biofuels production
Tools and strategies of systems metabolic engineering for the development of microbial cell factories for chemical production
Systems metabolic engineering for chemicals and materials
Systems metabolic engineering strategies for the production of amino acids
Systems metabolic engineering for citric acid production by Aspergillus niger in the post-genomic era
Evolution of thermal sensitivity of ectotherm performance
Protein and DNA sequence determinants of thermophilic adaptation
Toward a science of metabolic engineering
Inverse metabolic engineering: a strategy for directed genetic engineering of useful phenotypes
Structural systems biology evaluation of metabolic thermotolerance in Escherichia coli
Evolution of Escherichia coli for growth at high temperatures
Applicability of a model for non-pathogenic Escherichia coli for predicting the growth of pathogenic Escherichia coli
Evolution of thermal dependence of growth rate of Escherichia coli populations during 20,000 generations in a constant environment
Über die Dissociationswärme und den Einfluss der Temperatur auf den Dissociationsgrad der Elektrolyte
Thermosensitivity of growth is determined by chaperone-mediated proteome reallocation
The heat shock response of Escherichia coli is regulated by changes in the concentration of σ32
Maintenance coefficients and rates of turnover of cell material in Escherichia coli ML308 at different growth temperatures
Measurement of protein stability and protein denaturation in cells using differential scanning calorimetry
Physical limits of cells and proteomes
Effects of growth temperature on yield and maintenance during glucose-limited continuous culture of Escherichia coli
How do thermophilic proteins and proteomes withstand high temperature?
Role of proteome physical chemistry in cell behavior
Cell-wide analysis of protein thermal unfolding reveals determinants of thermostability
Improved thermostability and acetic acid tolerance of Escherichia coli via directed evolution of homoserine o-succinyltransferase
Evolved cobalamin-independent methionine synthase (MetE) improves the acetate and thermal tolerance of Escherichia coli
Evolutionary and reverse engineering to increase Saccharomyces cerevisiae tolerance to acetic acid, acidic pH, and high temperature
Evolutionary engineering of industrially important microbial phenotypes
The emergence of adaptive laboratory evolution as an efficient tool for biological discovery and industrial biotechnology
Rates of spontaneous mutation
Rate and molecular spectrum of spontaneous mutations in the bacterium Escherichia coli as determined by whole-genome sequencing
Opposing effects of final population density and stress on Escherichia coli mutation rate
Rapid evolution in response to high-temperature selection
Genetic architecture of thermal adaptation in Escherichia coli
Evolutionary adaptation to temperature. I. Fitness responses of Escherichia coli to changes in its thermal environment
Evolution of Escherichia coli to 42°C and subsequent genetic engineering reveals adaptive mechanisms and novel mutations
The molecular diversity of adaptive convergence
Laboratory evolution reveals transcriptional mechanisms underlying thermal adaptation of Escherichia coli
Transition from positive to neutral in mutation fixation along with continuing rising fitness in thermal adaptive evolution
Experimental evolution of a facultative thermophile from a mesophilic ancestor
Comparative genome analysis of a thermotolerant Escherichia coli obtained by genome replication engineering assisted continuous evolution (GREACE) and its parent strain provides new understanding of microbial heat tolerance
Thermotolerant yeast strains adapted by laboratory evolution show trade-off at ancestral temperatures and preadaptation to other stresses
The effect of selection environment on the probability of parallel evolution
Adaptive mutations in RNA polymerase and the transcriptional terminator Rho have similar effects on Escherichia coli gene expression
Thermotolerant yeasts selected by adaptive evolution express heat stress response at 30°C
Altered sterol composition renders yeast thermotolerant
Induction of a heat shock-like response by unfolded protein in Escherichia coli: dependence on protein level, not protein degradation
Regulation of the heat shock response in Escherichia coli: history and perspectives
GroEL–GroES-mediated protein folding
The Hsp70 chaperone machines of Escherichia coli: a paradigm for the repartition of chaperone functions
Transient rates of synthesis of individual polypeptides in Escherichia coli following temperature shifts
Transient regulation of protein synthesis in Escherichia coli upon shift-up of growth temperature
Heat-shock and stringent responses have overlapping protease activity in Escherichia coli: implications for heterologous protein yield
Transcription profiling of the stringent response in Escherichia coli
The stringent response
Cloning and characterization of thermostable GroEL/GroES homologues from Geobacillus thermopakistaniensis and their applications in protein folding
Heterologous expression of an engineered protein domain acts as chaperone and enhances thermotolerance of Escherichia coli
Overexpression of YbeD in Escherichia coli enhances thermotolerance
Expression of a gene encoding a 16.9-kDa heat-shock protein, Oshsp16.9, in Escherichia coli enhances thermotolerance
Engineering cellular robustness of microbes by introducing the GroESL chaperonins from extremophilic bacteria
Heterologous expression of a plant small heat-shock protein enhances Escherichia coli viability under heat and cold stress
Small heat shock proteins, IbpA and IbpB, are involved in resistances to heat and superoxide stresses in Escherichia coli
ATP-independent thermoprotective activity of Nicotiana tabacum heat shock protein 70 in Escherichia coli
Expression of a gene encoding the carrot HSP17.7 in Escherichia coli enhances cell viability and protein solubility under heat stress
Over-expression and characterization of recombinant prefoldin from hyperthermophilic archaeum Pyrococcus furiosus in Escherichia coli
A small heat shock protein enables Escherichia coli to grow at a lethal temperature of 50 C conceivably by maintaining cell envelope integrity
Carrot (Daucus carota L.) heat shock protein 70 gene (DcHsp70) confers tolerance to heat or cold stress in Escherichia coli cells
Development of transgenic Escherichia coli with improved viability by heterologous expression of a heat shock protein gene from carrot (Daucus carota L.)
Heterologous expression of AgsA enhances Escherichia coli tolerance to the combined effect of elevated temperature and zinc toxicity
Functional analysis of a small heat shock/α-crystallin protein from Artemia franciscana: oligomerization and thermotolerance
The intertidal copepod Tigriopus japonicus small heat shock protein 20 gene (Hsp20) enhances thermotolerance of transformed Escherichia coli
Genetic circuit-assisted smart microbial engineering
Intelligent microbial heat-regulating engine (IMHeRE) for improved thermo-robustness and efficiency of bioconversion
Thermodynamic stability and folding of proteins from hyperthermophilic organisms
Structural differences between mesophilic, moderately thermophilic and extremely thermophilic protein subunits: results of a comprehensive survey
Role of residual structure in the unfolded state of a thermophilic protein
Protein stability and molecular adaptation to extreme conditions
How quickly do proteins fold and unfold, and what structural parameters correlate with these values?
Ion pairs in the hydrophobic interior of a protein: how do proteins dissolve salt in oil?
Measuring and increasing protein stability
Enzymes under extremes of physical conditions
Relationship between amino acid properties and protein stability: buried mutations
Ddmut: predicting effects of mutations on protein stability using deep learning
Computational tools help improve protein stability but with a solubility tradeoff
Effects of single mutations on protein stability are Gaussian distributed
Heterologous expression of betaine aldehyde dehydrogenase gene from Ammopiptanthus nanus confers high salt and heat tolerance to Escherichia coli
Niu Y, Xu X, Liu C, Wang T, Liang K, Wang J, et al. A novel plant E3 ligase stabilizes Escherichia coli heat shock factor σ32. Sci Rep. 2017;7:4045. 10.1038/s41598-017-03056-6
Appukuttan D, Singh H, Park SH, Jung JH, Jeong S, Seo HS, et al. Engineering synthetic multistress tolerance in Escherichia coli by using a Deinococcal response regulator, DR1558. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2016;82(4):1154-1166. 10.1128/AEM.03371-15
Heterologous expression of an Ammopiptanthus mongolicus late embryogenesis abundant protein gene (AmLEA) enhances Escherichia coli viability under cold and heat stress
Functional characterization of the late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) protein gene family from Pinus tabuliformis (Pinaceae) in Escherichia coli
Rclea, a late embryogenesis abundant protein gene isolated from Rosa chinensis, confers tolerance to Escherichia coli and Arabidopsis thaliana and stabilizes enzyme activity under diverse stresses
Abiotic stress and ABA-inducible group 4 LEA from Brassica napus plays a key role in salt and drought tolerance
Functional insights into the late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) protein family from Dendrobium officinale (Orchidaceae) using an Escherichia coli system
Hyperthermophilic procaryotes
Converting Escherichia coli into an archaebacterium with a hybrid heterochiral membrane
First-step mutations during adaptation restore the expression of hundreds of genes
Bacterial transcriptome reorganization in thermal adaptive evolution
Thermally adapted Escherichia coli keeps transcriptomic response during temperature upshift exposure
Evolutionary changes in heat-inducible gene expression in lines of Escherichia coli adapted to high temperature
Systems biology of the structural proteome
Genome-scale models of metabolism and gene expression extend and refine growth phenotype prediction
A quantitative method for proteome reallocation using minimal regulatory interventions
Adaptive laboratory evolution – principles and applications for biotechnology
Evolutionary insight from whole-genome sequencing of experimentally evolved microbes
Construction of Escherichia coli K-12 in-frame, single-gene knockout mutants: the Keio collection
Update of thermotolerant genes essential for survival at a critical high temperature in Escherichia coli
<article-title update="added">Molecular strategy for survival at a critical high temperature in Eschierichia coli
Thermal proteome profiling in bacteria: probing protein state <Emphasis Type="Bold">in vivo</Emphasis>
Negative epistasis between beneficial mutations in an evolving bacterial population
Darwinian evolution can follow only very few mutational paths to fitter proteins
Under pressure: evolutionary engineering of yeast strains for improved performance in fuels and chemicals production
Mapping temperature-sensitive mutations at a genome scale to engineer growth switches in Escherichia coli
Specificity of genome evolution in experimental populations of Escherichia coli evolved at different temperatures
The EcoCyc database in 2021
The Transporter Classification Database (TCDB): recent advances
Initiator transfer RNAs
Growth rate of Escherichia coli at elevated temperatures: limitation by methionine
Inhibition of Escherichia coli growth by acetic acid: a problem with methionine biosynthesis and homocysteine toxicity
Mutagenic DNA repair in Escherichia coli. XIII. Proofreading exonuclease of DNA polymerase III holoenzyme is not operational during UV mutagenesis
Microbial selection in continuous culture
Role of mutator alleles in adaptive evolution
Adaptive tuning of mutation rates allows fast response to lethal stress in Escherichia coli
Protein stability imposes limits on organism complexity and speed of molecular evolution
In vivo hypermutation and continuous evolution
Methods for the directed evolution of proteins
Enhanced single-base mutation diversity by the combination of cytidine deaminase with DNA-repairing enzymes in yeast
CRISPR-guided DNA polymerases enable diversification of all nucleotides in a tunable window
Genome replication engineering assisted continuous evolution (GREACE) to improve microbial tolerance for biofuels production
Programming cells by multiplex genome engineering and accelerated evolution
Synthetic evolution
Synthetic biology for evolutionary engineering: from perturbation of genotype to acquisition of desired phenotype
ALEdb 1.0: a database of mutations from adaptive laboratory evolution experimentation
Machine learning applications in systems metabolic engineering
ProTherm and ProNIT: thermodynamic databases for proteins and protein–nucleic acid interactions