Utilization of Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Assessing Myocardial Fibrosis in Prognosis Evaluation and Risk Stratification of Patients with Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is the ultimate manifestation of the myocardial response to various genetic and environmental changes and is characterized mainly by impaired left ventricular systolic and diastolic function. DCM can ultimately lead to heart failure, ventricular arrhythmia (VA), and sudden cardiac death (SCD), making it a primary indication for heart transplantation. With advancements in modern medicine, several novel techniques for evaluating myocardial involvement and disease severity from diverse perspectives have been developed. Myocardial fibrosis is a significant contributor to VA events and SCD. Based on different pathological mechanisms, myocardial fibrosis can be categorized into replacement and interstitial forms. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) derived from cardiovascular magnetic resonance is the clinical gold standard for evaluating replacement myocardial fibrosis and exhibits high concordance with histological replacement fibrosis. However, because of the absence of normal tissue as a control, the LGE technique often fails to effectively visualize diffuse interstitial fibrosis. In such cases, T1 mapping and extracellular volume fraction mapping can be complementary or alternative methods to the LGE technique for detecting interstitial fibrosis. This review aimed to provide a comprehensive and precise assessment of myocardial fibrosis and to determine the use of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging for prognostic evaluation and risk stratification of patients with DCM.

1. Introduction
Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) affects approximately 0.04% of  adults and is the most prevalent form of cardiomyopathy. However, the  reported 5-year mortality rate can range from 20% to 50%, indicating  significant variability in patient prognosis. This exposes some individuals to  elevated risks of mortality. Therefore, accurately identifying high-risk patients  and guiding their prognosis are of utmost importance.
The left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) remains pivotal  in the current risk stratification of patients with DCM. However,  significant LVEF reduction has not been observed in most patients with DCM who  experienced sudden cardiac death (SCD) events over the past 15 years, indicating that LVEF is an imperfect predictor of SCD. This  is because the contraction and relaxation of the left ventricle involve a complex  coordinated process which is described by the “ventricular myocardial band  theory”. In the early stages of the disease, the myocardium compensates  to maintain LVEF, making it less reliable for detecting subtle changes.  However, LVEF measurement is more valuable for evaluating patients with advanced  heart failure (HF) because, at this stage, the compensatory capacity of the  myocardium may have become depleted and a more pronounced decrease in LVEF can be  observed.
Research indicates that approximately one-third of deaths among  patients with DCM may be caused by SCD or ventricular arrhythmia (VA) events. As a critical complication of DCM, SCD events refer to the rapid occurrence  of unexpected death or cardiac arrest caused by cardiovascular causes, which  occur outside of the hospital or in the emergency room, whereas ventricular  fibrillation resulting from ventricular tachycardia is the most common mechanism  leading to SCD events. Myocardial fibrosis, characterized  by replacement, interstitial, and perivascular fibrosis, constitutes a pivotal  histological foundation for arrhythmias. Numerous studies have convincingly  reported that replacement or interstitial fibrosis alters cardiac  electrophysiology by impeding the propagation rate of action potential,  augmenting ectopic automaticity, initiating re-entrant rhythm, and facilitating  after-depolarization, thereby triggering the aforementioned arrhythmias.
Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) based on cardiovascular magnetic resonance  (CMR) is a noninvasive imaging technique that enables multiplane and  multiparameter imaging for qualitative and quantitative evaluation of replacement  myocardial fibrosis. The working principle of this technique lies in the  selective accumulation of gadolinium in the extracellular space, whereas necrosis  or fibrotic areas increase extracellular volume, prolonging the clearance time  for the contrast agent within these regions. Consequently, when imaging is  performed at a specific time after the clearance of the contrast agent from the  healthy myocardium, enhanced features are observed in fibrotic areas due to their  non clearance.
Although observed in approximately 30%–40% of patients with DCM,  observational data have shown that patients with LGE have a very high mortality  rate, which has been identified as a strong and independent predictor of SCD, VA,  cardiac mortality, and all-cause mortality. Therefore,  assessing patients for LGE, including comprehensive analysis of its extent,  location, and pattern, is a critical determinant of prognosis in DCM because this  information has recently received significant attention as an approach for  enhancing our understanding of the implications of LGE  positivity.
However, in approximately 60% of patients with DCM, LGE negativity on CMR  should not be considered indicative of the absence of myocardial fibrosis.  Previous studies have demonstrated that interstitial myocardial fibrosis may  indeed occur at an early stage of DCM, even in the absence of LGE. This  form of fibrosis, characterized by the accumulation of collagen fibers in the  interstitial spaces of the myocardium, can precede the development of more  severe, irreversible fibrotic changes. Therefore, early detection and  treatment of interstitial fibrosis are crucial for preventing disease progression  and improving outcome.
The native T1 value of the myocardium can be visually analyzed  using the T1 mapping technique, which enables direct measurement of each voxel’s  T1 value. Furthermore, by assessing pre- and post-enhancement myocardial and  blood T1 relaxation times and calculating the extracellular volume fraction  (ECV), evaluation of interstitial fibrosis within the extracellular matrix  becomes possible. Studies have shown a strong correlation between native  T1 values (which refer to the time constant known as longitudinal relaxation time, commonly used to assess tissue water content, structural characteristics, etc.), ECV, and histological manifestations of extracellular space.  These parameters reliably differentiate diffuse fibrotic myocardium from healthy  tissues, thereby reducing the reliance on endocardial biopsy and serving as a  valuable complement to LGE.
This study comprehensively reviewed recent research advancements in the LGE and  T1 mapping techniques, with the aim of providing valuable insights into  identifying high-risk patients and deploying early intervention strategies.

2. Correlation of Replacement Fibrosis with Risk Stratification and  Prognosis

2.1 Presence of LGE
Approximately one-third of  patients with DCM exhibit replacement myocardial fibrosis, and numerous  previous studies have consistently shown a correlation between replacement  myocardial fibrosis and various adverse outcomes, highlighting its independent  predictive value for adverse events, such as cardiac events, all-cause mortality,  and arrhythmic events (e.g., SCD, ventricular fibrillation, ventricular  tachycardia). The LGE technique can effectively distinguish between  normal and fibrotic myocardia, making it the gold standard for the noninvasive  assessment of replacement myocardial fibrosis widely employed in clinical  practice.
Several studies have shown that the presence of LGE is a  robust prognostic indicator of adverse outcomes in patients with DCM,  particularly in terms of SCD events. Moreover, Di Marco et  al. observed that LGE exhibited superior predictive efficacy for  arrhythmia events, particularly in patients without significant LVEF decline  (hazard ratio [HR]: 10.4; p  0.001). This is a particularly  noteworthy finding because it challenges the traditional reliance on LVEF as the  primary indicator of risk in patients with DCM. The superior predictive power of  LGE in this context suggests that LGE imaging can identify high-risk patients who  may not be captured by LVEF alone.
In patients with significant LVEF decline, the left ventricle undergoes  substantial remodeling, resulting in tissue instability at a critical level. The  cascade of acute electrical instability and mechanical failure can ultimately  lead to SCD. However, in cases where the left ventricle is not extensively  remodeled, myocardial fibrosis may be a primary contributor to VA and SCD.  Reduced normal cardiomyocytes within fibrotic areas lead to altered  electrophysiological properties, typically characterized by low weighted unipolar  voltages. These changes affect myocardial conduction and excitability, increasing  the risk of VA and SCD. Additionally, the altered electrical activity may be  incongruous with the original neural innervation, potentially further influencing  the occurrence of VA and SCD.
Since the initial study in 2006 that evaluated the prognostic significance of  LGE in DCM, several investigations on LGE in DCM have been conducted.  These studies generally corroborated that LGE can serve as an indicator of  adverse outcomes. However, the predictive capability of LGE across  different studies has been substantially inconsistent, particularly concerning  various clinical endpoints. In particular, this variability may manifest  as a HR of 1.45 for composite endpoint events and reach as high as 14 for  arrhythmic events. These observations suggest that relying on LGE alone  is not sufficient to achieve the desired accuracy of risk stratification.  Therefore, incorporating more detailed LGE-related indicators is crucial for  enhancing the effectiveness of LGE in predicting adverse outcomes. These refined  indicators will enable a more accurate assessment of patient condition and risk  stratification, facilitating the implementation of precise risk stratification  strategies. (The brief summary of the cited article is shown in Table 1 (Ref.  )).
The brief summary of the cited article in the review.
First author (Ref. #)	Year	Type of study	Patients enrolled	Endpoint	 	Presence of LGE	 		Gulati 	2013	Prospective	472	Primary end point (all-cause mortality), secondary end points (cardiovascular mortality or cardiac transplantation; an arrhythmic composite of SCD or aborted SCD; and a composite of HF death, HF hospitalization, or cardiac transplantation).	 		Becker 	2018	Meta-Analysis	4554	Cardiovascular mortality, major ventricular arrhythmic events (appropriate ICD therapy, rehospitalization for HF, and left ventricular reverse remodeling).	 		Alba 	2020	Retrospective	1672	Composite primary end point (all-cause mortality, heart transplantation, or left ventricular assist device implant), secondary arrhythmic end point (SCD or appropriate ICD shock).	 		Halliday 	2019	Prospective	874	All-cause mortality and SCD.	 		Di Marco 	2021	Retrospective	1165	Combined arrhythmic endpoint (appropriate ICD therapies, sustained VT, resuscitated cardiac arrest, and SCD).	 		Di Marco 	2017	Meta-Analysis	2948	Arrhythmic endpoint (sustained VA, appropriate ICD therapy, or SCD).	 		Assomull 	2006	Prospective	101	Primary combined end point (all-cause death and hospitalization for a cardiovascular event), secondary outcome (SCD or VT).	 		Klem 	2021	Prospective	1020	All-cause and cardiac death, SCD.	 		Buss 	2015	Prospective	210	Composite endpoint: cardiac events together with the occurrence of hospitalization due to congestive HF.	 		Lehrke 	2011	Prospective	184	Composite endpoint: cardiac death, hospitalization for decompensated HF, or appropriate ICD discharge.	 		Yamada 	2014	Prospective	57	Composite endpoint: cardiac death, hospitalization for decompensated HF, or documented lethal arrhythmia, including VT and VF.	 		Perazzolo 	2014	Prospective	137	Arrhythmic events: SCD, cardiac arrest due to VF, sustained VT, or appropriate ICD intervention.	 		Tateishi 	2015	Prospective	207	Composite endpoint: cardiac death, cardiac transplantation, LV assist device implantation, appropriate ICD discharge for VT or VF, and rehospitalization for HF.	 		Neilan 	2013	Prospective	162	Composite endpoint: cardiovascular death and appropriate ICD therapy; arrhythmic events: ATP, ICD discharge, and non-heart failure cardiovascular death.	 	Extent of LGE	 		Li 	2023	Retrospective	466	Primary end point (SCD or aborted SCD), secondary end point (all-cause mortality, heart transplant, or hospitalization for HF).	 		Barison 	2020	Prospective	183	Composite endpoint: appropriate ICD shock and cardiac death; arrhythmic events: appropriate ICD shock.	 		Halliday 	2019	Prospective	874	All-cause mortality and SCD.	 		Di Marco 	2021	Retrospective	1165	Combined arrhythmic endpoint (appropriate ICD therapies, sustained VT, resuscitated cardiac arrest, and SCD).	 		Puntmann 	2016	Prospective	637	All-cause mortality.	 		Li 	2022	Retrospective	659	Primary endpoints (cardiac-related death and heart transplantation). Secondary endpoints (hospitalization for HF, VA, and ICD or cardiac resynchronization therapy implantation).	 		Romano 	2018	Prospective	1012	All-cause death.	 		Behera 	2020	Retrospective	112	Composite endpoint: all-cause mortality, resuscitated cardiac arrest, sustained VT/appropriate ICD shock, HF hospitalization.	 	LGE locations	 		Claver 	2023	Retrospective	1165	Primary endpoint (appropriate defibrillator therapies, sustained VT, resuscitated cardiac arrest, or sudden death), secondary outcome (HF hospitalizations, heart transplant, left ventricular assist device implantation, and end-stage HF death).	 		Barison 	2020	Prospective	183	Composite endpoint: appropriate ICD shock and cardiac death; arrhythmic events: appropriate ICD shock.	 		Halliday 	2019	Prospective	874	All-cause mortality and SCD.	 		Di Marco 	2021	Retrospective	1165	Combined arrhythmic endpoint (appropriate ICD therapies, sustained VT, resuscitated cardiac arrest, and SCD).	 		Behera 	2020	Retrospective	112	Composite endpoint: all-cause mortality, resuscitated cardiac arrest, sustained VT/appropriate ICD shock, HF hospitalization.	 		Xu 	2021	Prospective	412	Composite endpoint: all-cause mortality and HF readmission; all-cause mortality.	 	LGE patterns	 		Alba 	2020	Retrospective	1672	Composite primary end point (all-cause mortality, heart transplantation, or left ventricular assist device implant), secondary arrhythmic end point (SCD or appropriate ICD shock).	 		Halliday 	2019	Prospective	874	All-cause mortality and SCD.	 		Di Marco 	2021	Retrospective	1165	Combined arrhythmic endpoint (appropriate ICD therapies, sustained VT, resuscitated cardiac arrest, and SCD).	 		Behera 	2020	Retrospective	112	Composite endpoint: all-cause mortality, resuscitated cardiac arrest, sustained VT/appropriate ICD shock, HF hospitalization.	 		Xu 	2021	Prospective	412	Composite endpoint: all-cause mortality and HF readmission; all-cause mortality.	 		Gulati 	2019	Prospective	100	Not applicable.	 		Li 	2022	Retrospective	39	Cardiac death or transplant, and more major adverse cardiovascular events.	 	Integrated LVEF strata with LGE status	 		Li 	2023	Retrospective	466	Primary endpoint (SCD or aborted SCD), secondary end point (all-cause mortality, heart transplant, or hospitalization for HF).	 		Di Marco 	2021	Retrospective	1165	Combined arrhythmic endpoint (appropriate ICD therapies, sustained VT, resuscitated cardiac arrest, and SCD).	 	T1 and ECV mapping	 		Nakamori 	2018	Retrospective	36	Not applicable.	 		Li 	2022	Retrospective	659	Primary endpoints (cardiac-related death and heart transplantation). Secondary end points (hospitalization for HF, VA, and ICD or cardiac resynchronization therapy implantation).	 		Kitagawa 	2022	Retrospective	45	Combined cardiac events (cardiac death, VT/VF, HF hospitalization).	 		Nakamori 	2020	Prospective	115	Primary endpoint (composite of appropriate ICD therapy and SCD).	 		Vita 	2019	Prospective	241	Major adverse cardiac events (HF hospitalizations and deaths).	 		Li 	2023	Prospective	858	SCD-related events (SCD, appropriate ICD shock, and resuscitation after cardiac arrest).
Note: LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; VT, ventricular tachycardia; 
VF, ventricular fibrillation; HF, heart failure; ICD, implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator; SCD, sudden cardiac death; LV, left ventricular; 
LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction. ATP, anti-tachycardia pacing; ECV, 
extracellular volume fraction; VA, ventricular arrhythmias.

2.2 Extent of LGE
Considering  the high prevalence of LGE, reliance on the presence of LGE only as an indication  of adverse events may not be sufficient. The multiplane and multiparameter  characteristics of CMR enable quantitative evaluate LGE extent. Several studies  have explored the prognostic value of the extent of LGE, revealing that each 1%  increase in LGE extent can be a predictor of adverse outcomes.  Furthermore, a study focusing on patients with LVEF 50% reported that each  1% increase in LGE extent was notably correlated with a heightened risk of  mortality by approximately 3%. Therefore, this correlation may stem from an  enhanced susceptibility to re-entrant arrhythmias as the extent of LGE increases  , highlighting the importance of the accurate quantification of LGE using  CMR.
However, Halliday  et al. and Behera et al. noted a nonlinear  relationship between LGE extent and prognosis. They revealed that the risk of  mortality increases with LGE extent; however, this increase was not monotonic.  For instance, the HRs for SCD events were found to be 1.59 for the 0%–2.55%  LGE extent group, 1.56 for the 2.55%–5.10% group, and 2.31 for the 5.10%  group. Despite the increase in risk with increasing LGE extent, the increase  rate is not uniform, and the increase rate of HRs for all-cause mortality varies.  Consequently, modeling LGE extent as a linear predictor may underestimate the  risk in most patients and overestimate the risk in those with the most extensive  LGE. Notably, in Halliday et al.’s study, the LGE extent that was most predictive of  adverse outcomes was found to be 1.29%, with a corresponding C-statistic of 0.70.
Furthermore, a recent study revealed the interaction between LGE extent and LVEF  for predicting outcomes. In particular, the study revealed that in patients with  LVEF 35%, the predictive value of LGE for adverse events becomes  particularly pronounced when LGE extent exceeds 7.1%. In these patients, the  risk of SCD or aborted SCD was 4.4 times higher (HR = 4.4; 95% CI: 2.4–8.3;  p  0.001). This finding suggests that the combination of LGE  extent and LVEF provides a more nuanced approach to risk stratification,  emphasizing the importance of identifying the specific threshold of LGE extent  that correlates with increased risk.
However, the current method for measuring LGE extent using CMR  primarily reflects the percentage of the LGE area that occupies the left  ventricular myocardial mass without considering the heterogeneity of regional  LGE. The limitations of this method may lead to inaccurate assessment of cardiac  structure and function. Research suggests that elements influencing the nonlinear  relationship between LGE extent and prognosis include the fact that the critical  isthmus sites of VA are located in tissue heterogeneity zones, which lie between  myocardial fibrosis and healthy tissue. Additionally, as the spatial extent  and degree of heterogeneity of LGE increase, the heterogeneity of electrical  conduction within cardiac tissue also rises, making it more likely for reentrant  circuits to form and thereby increasing the probability of inducing arrhythmias.  It is also important to note that the timing of arrhythmia induction is primarily  determined by the level of local maximum fibrosis. This is because the activation  patterns of arrhythmias exhibit a high degree of periodicity and regularity, and  the regions with the highest degree of fibrosis will dictate the interval between  arrhythmia episodes. Moreover, previous studies  investigating the impact of LGE extent did not adequately consider the potential  effects of different LGE patterns. Di Marco et al. found that  epicardial and transmural LGE were significantly associated with a higher  proportion of adverse outcomes than mid-wall LGE. However, whether epicardial and  transmural LGE still maintain their high-risk characteristics at the same extent  of LGE lesions remains to be clarified through further research.
The aforementioned studies have indicated that placing greater emphasis on the  composition of LGE indicators rather than its volume is essential. However, there  is currently a lack of consensus on the measurement methods and parameters for  quantifying LGE, necessitating urgent standardization of LGE quantification  methods before their use as decision-making tools. A brief summary of the cited  article is shown in Table 1 (Ref.).

2.3 LGE Locations
The localization of LGE in patients with  idiopathic DCM predominantly occurs in the septum caused by specific pathological  mechanisms, whereas LGE in DCM caused by viral myocarditis is predominantly  observed in the free wall. This disparity may be because cardiotropic  viruses causing viral myocarditis mainly enter through the bloodstream, leading  to direct exposure of the free wall to inflammatory factors present in the blood  due to its contact with the pericardium. The microstructural characteristics  of fibrosis may differ depending on DCM etiology, thereby influencing its  prognostic significance.
Previous  studies have primarily focused on septal LGE and identified associations between  all-cause mortality, VA events, and composite endpoints. With  the advancement and maturation of CMR technology, attention has gradually shifted  toward LGE in other myocardial regions. Some investigations have focused on LGE  within the free wall; however, there remains a debate regarding whether free wall  LGE is a protective or detrimental factor, with conflicting findings from these  studies (HR: 0.77 and HR: 5.42). This ambiguity highlights the need for  further research to delineate the clinical implications of free wall LGE.  Furthermore, studies exploring LGE in the inferior wall of the free wall have  uniformly revealed a notable link between inferior wall LGE and adverse outcomes  , reinforcing the importance of considering the specific LGE location in  the context of cardiac disease management.
Although the prognostic assessment of isolated free wall LGE  in patients with DCM remains questionable, the presence of free wall and septal  LGE often indicates poor prognosis. Previous studies have investigated the impact  of LGE at different locations on patient prognosis and found a significant  correlation between the multiple locations (both septal and free wall) of LGE and  adverse outcomes in patients with DCM. Particularly in Halliday et al.’s  research, the HR for SCD events reached 5.82 when LGE was present in both  the septum and free wall. This finding supports the hypothesis that prognosis  deteriorates when LGE occurs at multiple locations within the same patient due to  the potential indication of greater extent and higher LGE heterogeneity.
In a recent multicenter cohort study involving 1165 consecutive patients with  DCM, the presence of LGE at right ventricular insertion points was  associated with comparable outcomes to LGE-negative patients, while significantly  reducing the risk of VA and sudden death compared with cases with left  ventricular LGE. When analyzing LGE, particularly when quantifying LGE extent,  distinguishing between LGE at the right ventricular insertion point and LGE at  other locations in the left ventricle is advisable. The brief summary of the  cited article is shown in Table 1 (Ref.).

2.4 LGE Patterns
The mid-wall pattern,  which is the most common manifestation of LGE, has gained widespread recognition.  Concurrently, subepicardial, subendocardial, and transmural LGE patterns have  also been research spotlights, drawing considerable attention (all LGE patterns  are shown in Fig. 1). In particular, numerous studies have definitively  highlighted subepicardial myocardial fibrosis as a key LGE pattern that indicates  poor prognosis, making this a significant area of focus.  Furthermore, de Frutos et al. demonstrated that the distribution of  LGE patterns in DCM is gene-specific. In particular, LGE-negative patients  exhibited a higher frequency of mutations in the TNNT2, RBM20,  and MYH7 genes, whereas those with subepicardial LGE demonstrated a  greater prevalence of DMD, DSP, and FLNC gene  mutations. These findings enable effective screening of high-risk families and  provision of prognostic guidance.
Schematic illustration of different LGE patterns and 
corresponding MRI images. (A) Normal heart. (B) The mid-wall pattern of LGE 
located in septum. (C) The focal pattern of LGE located in right ventricular 
insertion point. (D) The subepicardial pattern of LGE located in free wall. (E) 
The subendocardial pattern of LGE located in septum. (F) The transmural pattern 
of LGE located in both septum and free wall. LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; 
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Previous studies have demonstrated that subendocardial and  transmural LGE patterns indicate previous myocardial infarction. However,  some studies have identified subendocardial and transmural LGE patterns that are  inconsistent with the distribution of coronary arteries and have confirmed their  predictive value for adverse outcomes. These findings imply that these  two LGE patterns cannot be simply classified as ischemic lesions. Although the  etiology remains unclear and most patients with these LGE types are associated  with microcirculatory disturbances and abnormal myocardial perfusion, it is  also plausible that viral infections and other nonischemic mechanisms contribute  to these patterns. Consequently, it is essential to direct more attention to  these neglected LGE subtypes.
However, current research shows there is controversy regarding  whether the focal LGE pattern serves as a protective or adverse factor because  their HR values were 3.16 and 0.21, respectively. This discrepancy may  be attributed to the limited number of patients exhibiting this specific pattern.  Furthermore, due to the thin myocardial walls in patients with DCM,  distinguishing focal LGE from other patterns, such as subepicardial and  subendocardial LGE, is challenging.
Similar to LGE location, diverse LGE patterns can be observed within the same  patient, each exhibiting variations in fibrosis structure. The literature shows  that the presence of multiple LGE patterns (the combination of mid-wall,  subepicardial, and focal) is correlated with worse outcomes.  Note that Alba et al.  demonstrated a gradient response in the coexistence of multiple LGE patterns,  with an elevated risk that increases as the number of patterns present  increases. This trend was manifested with a HR of 1.24 with 1  pattern, 2.07 with 2 patterns, and 4.76 with 2 patterns, indicating a  progressive correlation between the complexity of LGE patterns and the risk of  adverse outcomes. The brief summary of the cited article is shown in Table 1  (Ref.).

2.5 Integrated LVEF Strata with LGE Status
Furthermore, recent studies have integrated LVEF strata with LGE status, which  has significantly enhanced the accuracy of risk stratification in patients with  DCM, providing incremental valuable insights for the improvement of risk  stratification. Di Marco et al. identified high-risk LGE in  patients with DCM, including epicardial, transmural, and combined septal and free  wall LGE. Considering the differences in annual event rates among patients with  different LVEF categories, the study divided LVEF values into three strata  (20%, 21%–35%, and 35%). Combining LGE characteristics with LVEF  strata, the researchers developed a risk model for patients with DCM and  classified these patients into seven risk categories. Based on this model,  patients with negative LGE and an LVEF 35% exhibited the lowest risk of SCD  and VA events, with an annual event rate of 0.07%. In contrast, patients  presenting with LGE and an LVEF 20% encounter a notably increased risk, with  an annual event rate of 8.1%.
Building upon these findings, the subsequent step involves subdividing each  parameter (i.e., extent, location, and pattern) of LGE and  integrating them with specific cardiac function information (i.e., LVEF and  myocardial deformation) or clinical indicators to potentially refine risk  stratification. The brief summary of the cited article is shown in Table 1 (Ref.  ).

2.6 T1 and ECV Mapping
In a normal myocardium, the extracellular  volume comprises intravascular compartments containing blood, and the stroma of  the myocardium contains signaling molecules, such as fibrillary collagen and  proteoglycans. However, in patients with cardiomyopathy, the presence of  extracellular or interstitial edema, replacement fibrosis, or invasive fibrosis  can increase interstitial component levels. This subsequently increases  extracellular volume, prolongs myocardial T1 relaxation time, and is associated  with native T1 values.
Native T1 values, which do not require the administration of  contrast agents during imaging examinations, can serve as a complementary or  alternative method for assessing LGE, particularly for patients with severe renal  insufficiency or those who cannot tolerate contrast-enhanced examinations.  However, technical factors, such as magnetic field strength, variations in T1  mapping techniques, and non-resonant artifacts, can introduce errors when  assessing native T1 values. Furthermore, most cardiomyopathies exhibit relatively  subtle changes in native T1 values, which may pose challenges for detection. ECV,  representing the proportion of extracellular stromal volume in the entire  myocardium, is calculated based on pre- and post-enhancement myocardial T1  values. It reflects changes in extracellular stroma and is strongly associated  with extracellular matrix, as confirmed by biopsy. This technique is a  noninvasive method for evaluating structural changes and provides a deeper  understanding of the underlying pathology of DCM. The combination of native T1  values and ECV allows for a comprehensive evaluation of interstitial myocardial  fibrosis in patients with DCM. Although current research is limited, the T1 and  ECV mapping techniques have shown promising prospects for prognostic evaluation  of DCM.
Kitagawa et al. demonstrated native T1 values as a predictor of  left ventricular reverse remodeling and cardiac events in DCM patients. This  finding is consistent with the results of another study that found native T1  values to be as predictive of arrhythmia events. Complementing this,  research has shown the ability of the ECV to forecast outcomes, such as HF in DCM  . Furthermore, a separate study demonstrated that native T1 and ECV could  predict cardiac mortality and heart transplantation in patients with DCM without  LGE.
In Li’s group, native T1 936 ms and ECV 25.9% were confirmed to be  independent predictors of adverse outcomes. Two other studies have discovered  that per 10-ms increase in native T1 and per 3% increase in ECV were correlated  with SCD events, and the number of abnormal ECV locations was also found to be  linearly related to the annual major adverse cardiac events rate.  Therefore, although T1 and ECV mapping show great promise for predicting the  prognosis of patients with DCM, the evaluation metrics in each study varied, and  the standardized threshold values for the relevant parameters were not  determined. Furthermore, the optimal critical values for identifying high-risk  individuals may differ according to different patient populations and imaging  platforms. These are all issues related to T1 and ECV mapping that require  attention. To address these issues, further studies using larger datasets and  different patient populations are required.
The latest research has revealed that compared with using LGE or LVEF alone,  models that combine LGE with native T1 or ECV are more effective in stratifying  the risk of SCD in patients with DCM, highlighting a superior predictive ability  . Therefore, exploring the predictive value of T1 and ECV mapping in  combination with other imaging markers, such as LGE and LVEF, along with further  sublevel indicators, including the location and pattern of LGE, could improve  risk stratification and provide a more comprehensive assessment of the underlying  cardiac pathology. This multifaceted approach can help clinicians identify  high-risk patients more accurately and tailor personalized management strategies  to improve outcomes in this challenging patient population. The  brief summary of the cited article is shown in Table 1 (Ref.  ).

3. Conclusions
Echocardiography and CMR can assess DCM; however, echocardiography is more  commonly employed in clinical practice because of its simplicity and low cost.  However, CMR offers a more precise measurement of atrial and ventricular volumes,  enabling a more accurate calculation of the ejection fraction and assessment of  cardiac function. A previous study demonstrated that in the same population,  CMR measurements yielded higher left ventricular volumes and a lower LVEF  compared to echocardiography. Moreover, the CMR-based model for predicting  major adverse cardiovascular events outperformed the echocardiography-based model  in their study. Therefore, using CMR to identify subgroups of patients with  echocardiography-LVEF near the threshold can help prevent the missing indications  of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.
Furthermore, the histological features obtained by CMR are crucial for patient  prognosis. Detected fibrosis is persistent and dynamic, with some patients  developing new fibrosis or seeing existing fibrosis progress. Therefore,  echocardiography alone may miss high-risk patients, and patients should be  followed, regardless of the presence of LGE on the CMR.
LVEF remains a key parameter in HF treatment, despite not  being an optimal predictor of SCD. It helps to categorize patients into  different subgroups for tailored treatments, significantly improving the  prognosis for patients. Furthermore, combining LVEF with LGE enhances predictive  capabilities. By integrating LVEF with other markers, its predictive power can be  enhanced even further.
The LGE, T1 mapping, and ECV mapping techniques derived from  CMR exhibited significant prognostic value in predicting adverse outcomes among  patients with DCM. Furthermore, this study performed in-depth comparisons and  analyzed the emerging indicators of LGE (e.g., extent, location, and pattern) and  reviewed recent research advancements in the integrated application of myocardial  fibrosis-related risk indicators, providing a novel perspective for optimizing  the risk stratification model. Note that no comprehensive studies have focused on  the assessment of perivascular fibrosis, indicating a significant potential for  further exploration in this field. Furthermore, studies have shown that  Sodium-Glucose Linked Transporter 2 inhibitors not only treat diabetes but also  inhibit cardiac fibrosis, and research is needed to see if CMR can detect their  effects on myocardial fibrosis, potentially aiding in drug therapy assessment  .
Publisher’s Note: IMR Press stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author Contributions
XYF conceived the study, participated in the design of the study, and drafted  the manuscript. YCZ, YXY, WFH, and FY were involved in the study design and  critically revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. HFY, CPL,  XXX, and LLW contributed to the literature search, selection of studies for the  review, and provided substantial advice on the study design and manuscript  preparation. RL played a key role in verifying the information from the selected  studies and critically reviewed the manuscript for important intellectual  content. All authors contributed to editorial changes in the manuscript. All  authors read and approved the final manuscript. All authors have participated  sufficiently in the work and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of the  work.

Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate
Not applicable.

Funding
This study was supported by the Research Grant of the National Natural Science  Foundation of China, No. 81801674; the Research Grant of the Natural Science  Foundation of Guangxi, No. 2021GXNSFAA196062; Sichuan Province Science and  Technology Support Program, No. 2021YJ0242.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References
Epidemiology of cardiomyopathies and incident heart failure in a population-based cohort study
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Personalizing Risk Stratification for Sudden Death in Dilated Cardiomyopathy: The Past, Present, and Future
2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA Focused Update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure Society of America
2016 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure: The Task Force for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC)Developed with the special contribution of the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the ESC
Cardiac MRI Risk Stratification for Dilated Cardiomyopathy with Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction of 35% or Higher
Association of fibrosis with mortality and sudden cardiac death in patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Myocardial torsion and cardiac fulcrum
The myocardial band
Beyond ejection fraction: an integrative approach for assessment of cardiac structure and function in heart failure
Feature-Tracking Global Longitudinal Strain Predicts Mortality in Patients With Preserved Ejection Fraction: A Multicenter Study
Sudden death in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
Prophylactic defibrillator implantation in patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
The spectrum of epidemiology underlying sudden cardiac death
Cardiac fibrosis
Activation delay after premature stimulation in chronically diseased human myocardium relates to the architecture of interstitial fibrosis
Cardiac fibrosis and arrhythmogenesis: the road to repair is paved with perils
Cardiac Fibrosis and Arrhythmogenesis
Cardiac MRI in cardiomyopathies
Prognostic impact of late gadolinium enhancement at the right ventricular insertion points in non-ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Differentiation of heart failure related to dilated cardiomyopathy and coronary artery disease using gadolinium-enhanced cardiovascular magnetic resonance
Delayed enhancement cardiovascular magnetic resonance assessment of non-ischaemic cardiomyopathies
Association Between Midwall Late Gadolinium Enhancement and Sudden Cardiac Death in Patients With Dilated Cardiomyopathy and Mild and Moderate Left Ventricular Systolic Dysfunction
The Diagnosis and Evaluation of Dilated Cardiomyopathy
The extent and location of late gadolinium enhancement predict defibrillator shock and cardiac mortality in patients with non-ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Native T1 Mapping and Extracellular Volume Mapping for the Assessment of Diffuse Myocardial Fibrosis in Dilated Cardiomyopathy
T1 mapping in dilated cardiomyopathy with cardiac magnetic resonance: quantification of diffuse myocardial fibrosis and comparison with endomyocardial biopsy
Diffuse myocardial fibrosis: mechanisms, diagnosis and therapeutic approaches
Myocardial fibrosis: biomedical research from bench to bedside
Cardiac T1 mapping: Techniques and applications
The Prognostic Value of Late Gadolinium-Enhanced Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Review and Meta-Analysis
Myocardial electrical propagation in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
Endocardial and epicardial radiofrequency ablation of ventricular tachycardia associated with dilated cardiomyopathy: the importance of low-voltage scars
Prognostic Value of Late Gadolinium Enhancement for the Prediction of Cardiovascular Outcomes in Dilated Cardiomyopathy: An International, Multi-Institutional Study of the MINICOR Group
Outcome in Dilated Cardiomyopathy Related to the Extent, Location, and Pattern of Late Gadolinium Enhancement
Improved Risk Stratification for Ventricular Arrhythmias and Sudden Death in Patients With Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Late Gadolinium Enhancement and the Risk for Ventricular Arrhythmias or Sudden Death in Dilated Cardiomyopathy: Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
What causes sudden death in patients with chronic heart failure and a reduced ejection fraction?
Ventricular Arrhythmia Substrate Distribution and Its Relation to Sympathetic Innervation in Nonischemic Cardiomyopathy Patients
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance, fibrosis, and prognosis in dilated cardiomyopathy
Relationship of LVEF and Myocardial Scar to Long-Term Mortality Risk and Mode of Death in Patients With Nonischemic Cardiomyopathy
Assessment of myocardial deformation with cardiac magnetic resonance strain imaging improves risk stratification in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy
Use of cardiovascular magnetic resonance for risk stratification in chronic heart failure: prognostic value of late gadolinium enhancement in patients with non-ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Prognostic impact of combined late gadolinium enhancement on cardiovascular magnetic resonance and peak oxygen consumption in ambulatory patients with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Impact of the presence and amount of myocardial fibrosis by cardiac magnetic resonance on arrhythmic outcome and sudden cardiac death in nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy
Objective criteria for septal fibrosis in non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy: validation for the prediction of future cardiovascular events
Prognostic impact of blood pressure response plus gadolinium enhancement in dilated cardiomyopathy
CMR quantification of myocardial scar provides additive prognostic information in nonischemic cardiomyopathy
T1-Mapping and Outcome in Nonischemic Cardiomyopathy: All-Cause Mortality and Heart Failure
T1 Mapping and Extracellular Volume Fraction in Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Prognosis Study
Feature-Tracking Global Longitudinal Strain Predicts Death in a Multicenter Population of Patients With Ischemic and Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy Incremental to Ejection Fraction and Late Gadolinium Enhancement
Prognostic value of late gadolinium enhancement in cardiac MRI of non-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy patients
Prognostic value of left ventricular remodelling index in idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
Microvascular Dysfunction in Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Quantitative Stress Perfusion Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Study
Subendocardial Involvement as an Underrecognized Cardiac MRI Phenotype in Myocarditis
Native Myocardial T1 Value in Predicting 1-Year Outcomes in Patients with Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy Experiencing Recent Heart Failure
T1 Mapping Tissue Heterogeneity Provides Improved Risk Stratification for ICDs Without Needing Gadolinium in Patients With Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Comparing CMR Mapping Methods and Myocardial Patterns Toward Heart Failure Outcomes in Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Cardiac MRI to Predict Sudden Cardiac Death Risk in Dilated Cardiomyopathy
The critical isthmus sites of ischemic ventricular tachycardia are in zones of tissue heterogeneity, visualized by magnetic resonance imaging
Effects of Heterogeneous Diffuse Fibrosis on Arrhythmia Dynamics and Mechanism
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance assessment of human myocarditis: a comparison to histology and molecular pathology
Presentation, patterns of myocardial damage, and clinical course of viral myocarditis
Late gadolinium enhancement distribution patterns in non-ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy: genotype-phenotype correlation
Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction (2018)
Diagnostic Role of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Imaging in Dilated Cardiomyopathy
Prognostic Benefit of Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Over Transthoracic Echocardiography for the Assessment of Ischemic and Nonischemic Dilated Cardiomyopathy Patients Referred for the Evaluation of Primary Prevention Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator Therapy
Progression of Myocardial Fibrosis in Nonischemic DCM and Association With Mortality and Heart Failure Outcomes
2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management of Heart Failure: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
SGLT2 inhibitor dapagliflozin attenuates cardiac fibrosis and inflammation by reverting the HIF-2α signaling pathway in arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy
Dapagliflozin alleviates right heart failure by promoting collagen degradation by reducing ROS levels