Evaluation of pharyngeal airway changes & velopharyngeal function following Le-fort I osteotomy in cleft lip and palate patients- a systematic review & meta analysis
Background
Le-Fort I osteotomy is commonly performed in cleft lip and palate patients to correct maxillary discrepancies, potentially influencing pharyngeal airway dimensions and velopharyngeal function. Thus, the review aims to evaluate the effects on pharyngeal airway and velopharyngeal function following Le-Fort I osteotomy in cleft lip and palate patients.
Method
This systematic review followed the guidelines outlined in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA). A comprehensive electronic search in databases of Scopus, EBSCO, PubMed, Cochrane, CINAHL, ScienceDirect and Google Scholar was performed to identify studies published from inception to August 2024 with language restricted to English. The critical appraisal using NIH quality assessment tool and data extraction processes were carried out independently by two reviewers. A meta-analysis was conducted to determine the effects of Le-Fort I on nasopharyngeal, oropharyngeal and hypopharyngeal airway depth before and after the intervention. Quality was evaluated using GRADE.
Results
Twelve articles were included in this review. Le-Fort I maxillary advancement significantly increases pharyngeal airway dimensions, particularly in the nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal regions, with most studies reporting improved airway space postoperatively. However, velopharyngeal function outcomes were variable: some patients experienced transient increases in nasalance or hypernasality, while others showed no significant adverse effects. Notably, preoperative hypernasality may predict postoperative velopharyngeal insufficiency.
Conclusion
Le-Fort I maxillary advancement increases pharyngeal airway volume; particularly in the nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal regions; thereby improving breathing function, especially during sleep. However, the degree of airway expansion varies depending on the extent of surgery and preoperative airway conditions. While the procedure often enhances velopharyngeal closure by improving anatomical alignment and muscle coordination, it also carries a risk of worsening velopharyngeal insufficiency if the maxilla is advanced beyond a certain limit, which differs among individuals.

Introduction
One of the most prevalent congenital craniofacial abnormalities is cleft lip and palate (CLP), which is characterised by an incomplete fusion of the lip and/or palate during embryonic development. This condition causes functional deficiencies such as speech impairment, feeding problems, and limited airway patency in addition to aesthetic and dental issues. One of the characteristic anatomical manifestations in CLP patients is maxillary hypoplasia, which results from surgical scarring, altered growth patterns, and intrinsic developmental anomalies. A concave facial profile, dental malocclusion, and possible airway compromise are frequently caused by this skeletal disparity, necessitating surgical intervention to restore both form and function.
Le-Fort I orthognathic surgery and maxillary distraction osteogenesis are two surgical techniques for advancing the maxilla in adults with severe maxillary insufficiency, both with and without CLP. By mobilising the maxilla, surgeons can three-dimensionally reposition the maxilla, resulting in enhanced occlusal relationships, facial aesthetics, and overall skeletal harmony. Anatomically repositioning the maxilla leads to changes in spatial relationships between the pharyngeal airway and velopharyngeal port, both of which are necessary for normal respiratory and speech functioning. Greco et al. and Heliövaara et al. in their studies found that following maxillary advancement, there was an increase in both the nasopharyngeal and hypopharyngeal airway spaces.
Velopharyngeal insufficiency (VPI) results from inadequate closure of the velopharynx, a functional unit composed of the musculus uvulae, palatoglossus, tensor veli palatini, levator veli palatini and palatopharyngeus muscles. During speech, common symptoms of VPI include nasal air emissions and hypernasal resonance. This is significant because airflow from the lungs, directed into the oral cavity and modulated by the vocal folds, is essential for producing all speech sounds except the nasal consonants (m, n, and ng). Postoperatively, patients are at risk of developing VPI due to the inability of the soft palate muscles to adequately occlude the expanded pharyngeal space created by Le-Fort I advancement.
The relationship between maxillary advancement and velopharyngeal competence is complex and multifaceted. While forward movement of the maxilla can improve airway dimensions by repositioning soft tissue structures away from the posterior pharyngeal wall, it can additionally disrupt the delicate balance required for velopharyngeal closure, especially in patients with pre-existing anatomical or functional deficits. As a result, understanding these impacts is crucial not just for surgical planning but also for postoperative recovery, which includes speech therapy and airway management.
Despite its therapeutic significance, the literature provides varying results about the precise impact of Le -Fort I osteotomy on pharyngeal airway space and velopharyngeal function, particularly in CLP patients. Some research indicate that maxillary advancement causes a significant increase in airway dimensions, while others highlight the risk of VPI and speech impairment after surgery. This variation highlights the importance of conducting a systematic review to clarify these effects. Therefore, the present study aims to evaluate the effects of Le-Fort I osteotomy on pharyngeal airway dimensions and velopharyngeal function in patients with CLP. Understanding these post-operative changes is critical for improving surgical outcomes and providing complete care to this specific patient population.

Materials and methods

Review question
What is the effect of Le-Fort I maxillary advancement on pharyngeal airway & velopharyngeal function in adult cleft lip and palate patients?

Inclusion criteria
The eligible studies for the systemic review were selected on the basis of PICO (problem, intervention, control, outcome).
Problem- Cleft lip/palate patients.
Intervention- Le-fort I maxillary advancement surgery.
Outcome- Pre and post changes in pharyngeal airway dimensions evaluated using 2D/3D analysis and velopharyngeal function, Secondary outcome: stability of changes after one year.

Exclusion criteria
Syndromic CLP patients
Patients who had underwent bi-jaw surgery, rhinoplasty.
This systematic review followed PRISMA guidelines and the protocol was registered on PROSPERO under the registration number CRD42024547545.

Search strategy
Search strategies.
Table 1
DATABASE	SEARCH TERM.	YEILD	 	PubMed	#1	“cleft lip" [All Fields] OR “cleft lip" [MeSH Terms] OR “Cleft Palate" [All Fields] OR “Cleft Palate" [MeSH Terms] OR “Cleft lip and palate" [All Fields] OR “cleft lip with or without cleft palate nonsyndromic 8" [Supplementary Concept] OR “CLP" [All Fields]		 	#2	“Le fort I surgery" [All Fields] OR “Maxillary advancement surgery" [All Fields] OR “osteotomy, le fort" [MeSH Terms] OR “Le fort I Osteotomy" [All Fields] OR ((“maxilla" [MeSH Terms] OR “maxilla" [All Fields] OR “maxillary" [All Fields] OR “maxillaries" [All Fields] OR “maxillaris" [All Fields]) AND (“anterior" [All Fields] OR “anteriors" [All Fields] OR “anteriorization" [All Fields] OR “anteriorized" [All Fields] OR “anteriors" [All Fields]) AND (“advance" [All Fields] OR “advanced" [All Fields] OR “advancement" [All Fields] OR “advancements" [All Fields] OR “advances" [All Fields] OR “advancing" [All Fields])) OR “Maxillary orthognathic surgery" [All Fields]	 	#3	“sleep apnea, obstructive" [MeSH Terms] OR “airway obstruction/diagnostic imaging" [MeSH Terms] OR “Airway" [All Fields] OR “Upper airway" [All Fields] OR “Pharyngeal airway" [All Fields] OR “Oropharyngeal airway" [All Fields] AND “Velopharyngeal insufficiency" [All Fields] OR “Speech " [All Fields]	 			#1 AND #2 AND #3	18	 	Google Scholar	Allintitle: airway changes “Cleft lip and palate patients” OR “cleft” OR “cleft lip” OR cleft lip” OR “cleft palate” OR “non syndromic” AND “Lefort I advancement” OR “maxillary advancement” NOT “Distraction osteogenesis” AND “speech” OR “velopharyngeal function”Allintitle: speech “Cleft lip and palate patients” OR “cleft” OR “cleft lip” OR cleft lip” OR “cleft palate” OR “non syndromic” AND “Lefort I advancement” NOT “Distraction"	47	 	Scopus	pharyngeal AND airway AND change AND cleft AND lip OR cleft AND palate AND maxillary AND advancement	270	 	Cochrane	Airway change OR pharyngeal airway change AND speech OR Velopharyngeal function AND lefort I advancement OR maxillary advancement AND cleft lip OR cleft palate NOT syndromic cleft patients	6	 	EBSCO Discovery (MEDLINE, CINAHL)	Airway change OR pharyngeal airway change AND speeh OR Velopharyngeal function AND lefort I advancement OR maxillary advancement AND cleft lip OR cleft palate NOT syndromic cleft patients	11	 	ScienceDirect	airway AND change AND speech OR velopharyngeal function AND cleft lip and palate patients AND maxillary advancement NOT distraction osteogenesis NOT syndromic cleft	150
Specific search strategies were developed and carefully assessed for each database, considering differences in controlled vocabulary and syntax limitations. An initial basic search was conducted to identify relevant MeSH terms. A more advanced search was then performed using Boolean operators and pertinent keywords. The bibliographic databases Scopus, EBSCO, PubMed, Cochrane, CINAHL, and ScienceDirect were searched by the host up to August 2024. Furthermore, the first ten pages of Google Scholar (with ten results per page) were manually searched for any further references. Examining these initial pages aids in identifying the most relevant studies on the subject, increasing the possibility of swiftly locating high-quality sources. This approach has been widely used in prior reviews. The search strategy used is detailed in Table 1.

Study selection and data extraction
PRISMA flowchart.
Fig. 1
All references were imported to Covidence systematic review tool. Screening was conducted by two reviewers independently. The search for articles produced 504 articles, Scopus (n = 270), Science Direct (n = 150), Google Scholar (n = 47), PubMed (n = 18), MEDLINE (n = 8), Cochrane (n = 8), CINAHL (n = 3). Titles and abstracts of 504 articles underwent screening for this review. The articles chosen were all in English. Among the articles collected, majority consisted of prospective and retrospective studies. After removing duplicates and applying the predetermined inclusion and exclusion criteria, 36 articles were initially selected. Following consensus and full-text review, 12 articles were included in the final qualitative analysis. The excluded articles and the reasons for exclusion are detailed in the supplementary table. The PRISMA flowchart is presented in Fig. 1. Data extraction was done by two independent reviewers and a third reviewer assisted in resolving disagreement in selection of articles.

Assessment of risk of bias and study quality
With regard to the type/quality of included studies, NIH quality assessment tool (Quality Assessment Tool for Before-After (Pre-Post) Studies with No Control Group) was done by two reviewers to assess the risk of bias in the studies. Studies with significant risk of bias in more than one domain was classified as poor-quality, whereas those with a severe risk of bias in one domain was classed as fair-quality. The quality of research with low risk of bias across all categories was assessed as good. The overall quality of evidence for outcomes was rated using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluations (GRADE) approach.

Data synthesis
The analysis included studies that utilized the same intervention, follow-up duration, and method for evaluating the pharyngeal airway. Measurements of the pharyngeal airway dimensions (nasopharyngeal, oropharyngeal and hypopharyngeal) before and after the intervention were incorporated into the meta-analysis. The mean difference (MD) with a 95% confidence interval was calculated. Statistical analyses were performed using JBI SUMARI software. Heterogeneity among the studies was assessed using the I2 statistic and Cochrane's Q test. A fixed-effects model was applied.

Results

Characteristics of the included studies
Characteristics of included studies.
Table 2
Study	Study design	Sample size	Mean age (years)	Cleft types	Intervention	Outcome assessment	Conclusion	 	Acharya SS et al.	Retrospective	30 (15M,15F)	19.13 ± 4.7	22 UCLP8 BCLP	Le Fort I	Pharyngeal airway, stability-lateral cephalogramsVelopharyngeal function-nasometer, nasopharyngoscopy	The degree of maxillary advancement and nasopharyngeal depth were positively correlated.	 	Helal MS et al.	Prospective	9 (4M,5F)	18.6	5 BCLP1 UCLP, 1UCL 2 BCL	Le Fort I	Velopharyngeal function-Auditory speech assessmentNasometry, nasoendoscopy	All patients had hypernasality before and after the operation	 	Heliövaara A et al.	Retrospective	37 (27M, 10F)	23.8	37 UCLP	Le Fort I	Pharyngeal airway-lateral cephalograms ii)Velopharyngeal function-Perceptual speech assessment	In patients with UCLP, moderate maxillary advancement causes notable alterations in the nasopharyngeal airway.	 	Heliövaara A et al.	Retrospective	50	25	UCLP 30BCLP 9CP 11	Le Fort I	Pharyngeal airway-lateral cephalogramsVelopharyngeal function-Perceptual speech assessment	One year post operatively significant increase in nasopharyngeal airway depth but not at oropharyngeal level.	 	Idso S et al.	Retrospective	30 (13M,17F)	17–20	UCLP	Le Fort I	Pharyngeal airway- CBCT	The retropalatal, retroglossal, and total airways increased significantly with maxillary advancement.	 	Pragnesh KJ et al.	Retrospective	20	–	20 CLP	Le Fort I	Pharyngeal airway- lateral cephalograms	Significant increase in upper pharyngeal airway space post maxillary advancement surgery.	 	Kudo K et al.	Retrospective	10	18.1	1 CP7 UCLP2BCLP	Le Fort I	Velopharyngeal function-nasometer, perceptual speech assessmentDepth of pharyngeal space- lateral cephalogram	Following surgery, cleft patients nasalance score was shown to momentarily worsen but recovered within six months. Also, the depth of pharyngeal space increased post-operatively.	 	McComb et al.	Retrospective	65 (35M, 30F)	18	32 UCLP31 BCLP2 CP	Le Fort I	Velopharyngeal function-perceptual speech assessment, nasopharyngoscopyPharyngeal depth-lateral cephalograms	Statistically significant results indicated that a short palate and deep pharynx are important predictors of VPI risk than the magnitude of sagittal maxillary advancement.	 	Phillips JH et al.	Retrospective	26	19.5	16UCLP9BCLP1CP	Le Fort I	Velopharyngeal function-nasopharyngoscopy, Nasometry, perceptual speech assessment	Preoperative nasopharyngoscopy in twelve patients showed questionable or no closure, which suggested a higher chance of velopharyngeal insufficiency after surgery.	 	Sell D et al.	Prospective	16(6M,10F)	19.11	16 CP	Transpalatal Le-fort I	Velopharyngeal function- perceptual speech assessment, flexible video-nasopharyngoscopy	Maxillary advancement does not adversely affect speech or velopharyngeal closure function.	 	Tekin U et al.	Retrospective	10 (7M,3F)	20.5	10 CLP	Quadrangular Le Fort I	Pharyngeal airway -lateral cephalograms	Following maxillary advancement with the QLF-I osteotomy, the depth and size of the nasopharyngeal, velopharyngeal, and total pharyngeal airway spaces increased.	 	Watzke I et al.	Prospective	24 (15M, 9F)	17.1	4 BCP20 UCP	Le Fort I	Velopharyngeal orifice area-aerodynamics, lateral cephalograms	23 % demonstrated deterioration of velopharyngeal function following maxillary advancement. No relationship between amount of maxillary advancement and change in velopharyngeal orifice size.
•CLP- cleft lip and palate, CP- Cleft palate, UCLP- unilateral cleft lip and palate, BCLP- bilateral cleft lip and palate, VPI- velopharyngeal insufficiency, QLF-1- Qudrangular Le-fort I osteotomy, BCP-bilateral cleft palate, UCP- unilateral cleft palate, M-male, F-female.
A total number of 12 studies were included in this review of which 9 studies were retrospective and 3 were prospective studies. Amongst these, 9 studies assessed the velopharyngeal function and 8 studies assessed pharyngeal airway changes. Lateral cephalograms were used for the airway assessment in 7 studies whereas only 1 included study used CBCT. The study characteristics are included in Table 2.

Methodological quality
Methodological quality assessment.
Table 3
The result of quality assessment (Table 3) revealed 1 study with poor quality and 11 studies of fair quality. None of the studies reported data on domains 8, 9 and 12 of NIH risk of bias tool. Nevertheless, all the studies clearly outlined the study objectives, eligibility criteria, interventions administered to patients, and the outcome measures.

Review findings

Pharyngeal airway
Studies utilizing lateral cephalometric records employed various methods to evaluate pharyngeal airway dimensions. In this review, nasopharyngeal airway depth was defined as the distance between the posterior pharyngeal wall and the posterior nasal spine, measured along a line parallel to the Frankfort horizontal plane. Oropharyngeal depth was assessed at the uvula level, while hypopharyngeal depth was measured at the epiglottis level.
Acharya et al. reported a significant increase in the depth of the nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal regions following surgery, with no notable changes observed in hypopharyngeal airway depth. In contrast, the study by Idso et al. demonstrated a statistically significant expansion in the volume of the retropalatal and retroglossal airways, along with increases in total volumetric and sagittal airway measurements using CBCT. Tekin et al. evaluated outcomes at three distinct time points, concluding that nasopharyngeal airway dimensions significantly increased post-surgery and remained stable during long-term follow-up. However, maxillary advancement did not significantly impact oropharyngeal or hypopharyngeal airway depths.
Results related to Pharyngeal airway.
Table 4
Study	Documentation	Parameters	T0 (pre-operative)	T1 (post-operative < 1year)	T2 (long term ≥1year post operative)	 	Acharya SS(2018)	Lateral Cephalogram	Nasopharyngeal depth (mm)	20.45 ± 3.02	34.23 ± 3.10	31.0 ± 3.0	 	Oropharyngeal depth (mm)	15.83 ± 3.11	18.43 ± 4.11	16.33 ± 4.59	 	Hypopharyngeal depth (mm)	15.40 ± 3.12	18.43 ± 4.11	12.56 ± 3.74	 	Heliövaara A(2002)	Lateral Cephalogram	Nasopharyngeal depth (mm)	20.1 ± 4.4	–	24.1 ± 4.1	 	Oropharyngeal depth (mm)	14.2 ± 4.3	14.3 ± 3.7	 	Heliövaara A(2004)	Lateral Cephalogram	Nasopharyngeal depth (mm)Oropharyngeal depth (mm)	CP22.6 ± 3.214.6 ± 5BCLP22.4 ± 3.814.3 ± 5.4UCLP20.1 ± 4.414.2 ± 4.3	–	CP26.3 ± 2.912.4 ± 3.9BCLP26.2 ± 4.915.2 ± 4.7UCLP24.1 ± 4.114.3 ± 3.7	 	Idso S(2023)	Cone Beam Computed Tomography	Retropalatal airway (mm3)	9574 ± 4573	10,472 ± 4767	–	 	Retroglossal airway (mm3)	9736 ± 5314	11,358 ± 6588	 	Total airway (mm3)	19,121 ± 8480	21,750 ± 10,078	 	Minimum cross-sectional area (mm2)	173 ± 115	272 ± 129	 	Kudo K(2014)	Lateral cephalogram	Nasopharyngeal depth (mm)	25.8 ± 1.3	28.0 ± 3.9	–	 	McComb(2011)	Lateral cephalogram	Pharyngeal depth	Post-operative pharyngeal depth increased and was statistically significant (p = 0.03)	 	Pragnesh KJ(2022)	Lateral Cephalogram	Nasopharyngeal airway space (mm)	16.6 ± 3.9	18.1 ± 3.1	–	 	Tekin U(2022)	Lateral cephalogram	Nasopharyngeal depth (mm)	21.4 ± 3.4	31.8 ± 7.1	28.5 ± 6.7	 	Oropharyngeal depth (mm)	8.7 ± 3.2	9.2 ± 3.1	9.1 ± 3.3	 	Hypopharyngeal depth (mm)	8.4 ± 3.6	10.1 ± 3.3	9.6 ± 2.9	 	Total airway space area (mm2)	615.6 ± 185.7	842.2 ± 249.5	803.6 ± 197.5
∗CP- cleft palate, UCLP-unilateral cleft lip and palate, BCLP-bilateral cleft lip and palate.
Most studies consistently reported an increase in nasopharyngeal depth following Le Fort I advancement. Heliövaara et al. examined airway changes in UCLP, BCLP, and CP patients, revealing substantial cephalometric improvements in the nasopharyngeal region, while oropharyngeal measurements remained largely unchanged. Notably, among CP patients, a reduction in hypopharyngeal airway dimensions was observed one year after surgery. Results of individual studies are detailed in Table 4.

Velopharyngeal function
Results related to Velopharyngeal function/speech.
Table 5
Study	Documentation	Parameters	Results	 	Acharya SS(2018)	NasometerNasopharyngoscopy	Nasalance score	Significant increase in mean nasalance score. The amount of forward skeletal movement correlated significantly with post operative hypernasality. (p < 0.01)	 	Helal MS(2024)	VideofluroscopyNasoendoscopyNasometerPerceptual speech evaluation	Nasalance score	All patients had hypernasality before and after the operation. In the nasoendoscopic evaluation, all patients showed almost no change in their closure patterns before and after the operation. This was the same with the video fluoroscopic findings.	 	Heliövaara A8(2002)	Perceptual speech assessmentNasometer	Perceptual ratingNasalance	13 % needed velopharyngeal flap surgery to improve speech.	 	Heliövaara A19(2004)	Perceptual speech assessmentNasometer	Perceptual rating	In addition to preoperative velopharyngeal function and amount of horizontal advancement, the amount of vertical lengthening, and the length of maxilla, may be of importance for post operative velopharyngeal incompetence in patients with CP and UCLP.	 	Kudo K20(2014)	NasometerPerceptual speech assessment	Nasalance score	Nasalance score was found to temporarily worsen after surgery, but recovered within six months. In some patients, abnormal articulations were also detected which recovered within six months.	 	McComb(2011)	NasoendoscopyPerceptual speech assessment	Resonance statusNasoendoscopic findings	There was no significant relationship between any of the speech related variable and post-operative outcomes.	 	Phillips J.H22(2005)	Perceptual Speech assessmentNasometryNasopharyngoscopy	Nasalance score	Twelve patients had preoperative nasopharyngoscopy (borderline or no closure) that indicated an increased risk of velopharyngeal insufficiency postoperatively. Nine of these patients had postoperative hypernasality.All no-closure patients developed velopharyngeal insufficiency; six of nine borderline patients developed velopharyngeal insufficiency	 	Sell D23(2002)	Perceptual speech assessment, flexible video-nasopharyngoscopy	Perceptual rating scales	There was no significant difference or clinical difference between pre and post operative speech variables or on nasopharyngoscopy examination.	 	Watzke I(1990)	Aerodynamics	Velopharyngeal function	The mean change in velopharyngeal orifice size was 0.094 ± 0.017 cm2.No relationship between amount of maxillary advancement and velopharyngeal function was observed.
∗CP- cleft palate, UCLP- unilateral cleft lip palate, BCLP- bilateral cleft lip palate.
The studies evaluating velopharyngeal function assessed by nasometry, rhinomanometry which uses pressure flow dynamics, nasopharyngoscopy and perceptual assessment. Helal utilized videofluroscopy along with perceptual speech assessment. The reviewed studies collectively examine the effects of maxillary advancement on velopharyngeal function and speech outcomes. Acharya et al. reported a significant postoperative increase in nasalance scores, associating greater skeletal movement with hypernasality. Helal observed persistent hypernasality and no notable changes in velopharyngeal closure patterns after surgery. Heliövaara found that 13 % of patients required secondary surgery to improve speech, while the 2004 study emphasized the role of vertical maxillary lengthening and anatomical features in postoperative velopharyngeal competence. Kudo et al. noted a temporary decline in nasalance and articulation, both resolving within six months. McComb et al. identified no significant relationship between speech outcomes and surgical intervention. Phillips highlighted preoperative closure status as a strong predictor of postoperative velopharyngeal insufficiency. Sell et al. found no significant differences in speech or nasopharyngoscopic findings pre- and post-surgery. Watzke er al reported minimal changes in velopharyngeal orifice size, unrelated to maxillary advancement. These findings indicate varied outcomes, with preoperative anatomy and closure status being key predictive factors (Table 5).

Effect on stability
Regarding stability, Tekin et al. reported that although the relapse was statistically significant, the depth at the end of the follow-up period remained substantially greater than the preoperative values. In contrast, Acharya et al. found no discernible relapse in function, nasopharyngeal measurements, or maxillary position during follow-up. Other included studies did not record the post-operative stability after one year.

Results of data synthesis

Nasopharyngeal airway depth (Fig. 2)
Forest plot showing changes in nasopharyngeal airway depth.
Fig. 2
The forest plot for nasopharyngeal airway depth changes in pre and within 1year post Le fort I was assessed (Fig. 2) from the studies of Acharya et al., Kudo et al., Tekin et al. and Pragnesh et al. showed increased post value with standard mean difference of −1.48 [−1.89,-1.06], heterogeneity of I2 = 94 and p value = 0. Even though the p value showed no statistical significance between pre and post values, an increase in the post-surgery airway is evident from the values.
The forest plot for nasopharyngeal airway depth changes in pre and post-Lefort I (>1year) by 3 studies and showed increased post value with standard mean difference of −1.63 [−2.03,-1.23], I2 = 93 % which was statistically insignificant.

Oropharyngeal airway depth (Fig. 3)
Forest plot showing changes in oropharyngeal airway depth.
Fig. 3
The forest plot for oropharyngeal airway depth change in pre and post-Lefort I (<1year) (Fig. 3) from the studies of Tekin et al. and Acharya et al. showed increase in oropharyngeal pharyngeal airway depth with standard mean difference of −0.56 [−1.01,-0.11] with heterogeneity of I2 = 11 and significant p value of 0.014.
The forest plot for oropharyngeal airway depth change in pre and post-Lefort I (more than 1year) (Fig. 3) from the studies of Acharya et al., Heliӧvaara et al. and Tekin et al. and showed increase in oropharyngeal pharyngeal airway depth with standard mean difference of −0.08 [−0.41,0.25] with heterogeneity of I2 = 0 and p value of 0.631.

Hypopharyngeal airway depth (Fig. 4)
Forest plot showing changes in hypopharyngeal airway depth.
Fig. 4
The forest plot for hypopharyngeal airway depth changes in pre and post-surgery (<1year) (Fig. 4) from the studies of Tekin et al. and Acharya et al. showed a standard mean difference of −0.73 [−1.18, −0.28] a with heterogeneity of I2 = 0 and was statistically significant (p = 0.002).
The forest plot for hypopharyngeal airway depth changes in pre and post le-fort I surgery (>1year) (Fig. 4) from the studies of Tekin et al. and Acharya et al. showed a standard mean difference of 0.51 [0.06, 0.96] with heterogeneity of I2 = 80 and p = 0.028.

Certainty of evidence
Summary of findings.
Fig. 5
The quality of evidence for pooled outcomes was evaluated using GRADE. Given the before-and-after research design, the evidence was lowered by one point for each outcome. Outcomes like nasopharyngeal airway depth post-surgery within 1year and >1year, hypopharyngeal airway depth post-surgery >1 year were graded as “very low”. Oropharyngeal airway depth post-surgery within 1 year and >1year, hypopharyngeal airway depth within 1year was graded as “low”. Detailed in Fig. 5.

Discussion
The studies included in this review assessed the effects of Le Fort I maxillary advancement surgery on the pharyngeal airway and velopharyngeal insufficiency in adult CLP patients. Acharya et al. reported significant changes in the sagittal and vertical positions of the maxilla following surgery. Both the oropharynx and nasopharynx showed considerable widening. This increase in depth may be attributed to the forward displacement of the posterior nasal spine and soft palate along with the maxilla during the Le -Fort I osteotomy. Heliövaara et al. asserted that the dimensions and shape of the nasopharyngeal airway space are largely determined by the bony architecture, and that forward advancement of the maxilla affects this space. Their study demonstrated a significant increase in airway dimensions, particularly in the nasopharyngeal region. However, no discernible changes were observed in the oropharyngeal airway at the levels of the uvula or gonion. Study of Tekin et al. showed no significant changes in hypopharyngeal space as described by Heliövaara. This may be due to the fact the soft tissue stretching and airway expansion diminish as the distance from the maxilla increases. The study also supported the fact that bony structure dictates the shape of pharyngeal air space and thereby advancement of maxilla inadvertently improves the airway. A relapse in pharyngeal airway was noted by the investigators as it was the most commonly faced problems in surgical correction of class III skeletal pattern. The scar tissue left over from earlier CLP repairs may be the cause of its relapse. McCarthy highlighted that from early infancy to early adulthood (ages 1 to 17), the vertical height of the nasopharynx doubles, reflecting the displacement of the maxilla from the cranial base. Furthermore, the depth of the nasopharynx also increases during this developmental period. McCarthy also demonstrated that nasopharyngeal depth significantly increases following maxillary advancement, consistent with findings from other studies included in the review.
Idso et al. utilized cone beam computed tomography for assessment of treatment outcome which provided three dimensional evaluation which is superior to lateral cephalograms which only provides two dimensional (2D) analysis. Additionally, lateral cephalograms are limited in evaluating airway volume, as their two-dimensional nature cannot capture facial asymmetry or provide accurate volumetric analysis, potentially leading to errors in interpretation. Considerable changes in most cephalometric parameters were noted, in addition to considerable increases in the retroglossal airway, retropalatal airway, and total airway volume. This study also demonstrated that pharyngeal airway space can be increased in patients with unilateral CLP through Le-Fort I maxillary advancement. However, due to the inherent asymmetry associated with unilateral clefts, further research is needed to determine whether airway responses to maxillary advancement are symmetrical or asymmetrical, as well as to evaluate long-term outcomes.
The use of modified variations of the Le-Fort I procedure, such as the extended Le-Fort I osteotomy described by Tekin et al. and the transpalatal Le-Fort I employed by Sell et al., is driven by specific anatomical and functional considerations. The extended Le-Fort I osteotomy allows for greater multidimensional movement of the maxilla, enabling more effective correction of complex maxillofacial deformities. This modification is particularly advantageous for addressing vertical discrepancies and expanding the maxillary arch, which can contribute to improved facial symmetry and enhanced airway patency. In contrast, the transpalatal Le-Fort I osteotomy involves additional osteotomies along the palate, facilitating transverse expansion of the maxilla. This approach is beneficial for patients with transverse maxillary deficiencies or narrow palatal arches, conditions often seen in individuals with cleft palate or craniofacial syndromes. Thus, these modifications bring more substantial skeletal and airway improvements optimizing both structural alignment and respiratory function.
Velopharyngeal insufficiency is one of the extensively studied effects in literature. The studies included in this review has assessed the VPI/function/speech using diverse diagnostic devices and techniques such as nasopharyngoscopy, cephalometric records, nasometer and perceptual speech assessment by phonetician or speech pathologist. There is a substantial positive relationship between maxillary forward movement and worsening hypernasality and increased pharyngeal depth. This is due to the expansion of the velopharyngeal opening after maxillary advancement, which causes partial closure and sometimes impaired speech function.
Watzke et al. reported a deterioration in velopharyngeal function in 23 % of patients following maxillary advancement. Interestingly, one of these patients demonstrated improvement without undergoing pharyngeal flap surgery. Moreover, an increased amount of maxillary advancement did not consistently result in the expected changes in the velopharyngeal orifice area. This highlights the varying compensatory mechanisms individuals with cleft palate may employ in response to anterior displacement of the soft palate. The velopharyngeal mechanism functions as a valve, but in the population with cleft palate, its compensating reserve is limited and varies, and even small disruptions can have a major impact on velopharyngeal performance in a particular person. Restriction in mandibular opening that frequently occurs in the initial days/months after surgery, particularly following the maxillomandibular fixation's removal, may be the cause of the notable rise in nasalance seen at the first postoperative test. The acoustic energy that is diverted to the nasal cavity during speaking and the ensuing increase in nasalance noted in the majority of the individuals evaluated at the initial postoperative evaluation may also be explained by the oral cavity's increased impedance over an extended period following surgery.
Preoperative VP function appears to be a key predictor of outcome. Among patients with preoperative nasopharyngoscopic findings of borderline or no closure, a high rate of postoperative VP insufficiency was observed. All patients with no closure developed VP insufficiency, while two-thirds of those with borderline closure were similarly affected. This highlights the importance of thorough preoperative assessment in identifying high-risk individuals. Overall, while maxillary advancement can affect VP function, particularly in patients with compromised preoperative closure, most patients retain stable or recoverable speech function. The findings support individualized surgical planning based on detailed preoperative VP assessment and recognition of anatomical variability and compensatory capacity.

Limitations
All of the studies of except Idso et al. used lateral cephalograms which recorded the outcome measurements in two dimensions. As the pharyngeal airway may not be symmetrical, three-dimensional measurements would be precise. Thus, to enhance measurement accuracy and anatomical representation, utilization of three-dimensional imaging modalities such as Cone-Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT), which provide volumetric data and better reflect airway asymmetries is recommended.
The studies which used nasometry and nasopharyngoscopy relied on investigators and participants perceptions and scorings which cannot be standardized as it can vary with individuals. Since nasometry cannot differentiate between velopharyngeal incompetence and velopharyngeal insufficiency the interpretation of the values without adjunct diagnostic techniques are questionable. Regarding the subjective nature of nasometry and nasopharyngoscopy, incorporating objective adjunct diagnostic tools such as dynamic MRI or videofluoroscopy, where feasible, to validate findings and improve diagnostic precision. Standardizing protocols for subjective assessments and involving multiple blinded evaluators may also reduce inter-observer variability and enhance reproducibility.
Further research is necessary due to the limited availability of high-quality studies and the variability in imaging modalities and airway assessment methods reported in the existing literature. Also, future research should explore the relationship between structural measures and functional outcomes to develop more accurate biomechanical and physiological models of airway dynamics. This would allow for a better understanding of how specific anatomical alterations correlate with clinical symptoms and treatment responses, thereby helping in the development of personalised interventions and prediction frameworks in clinical practice.

Conclusion
In reviewing the effect of Le-Fort I maxillary advancement on pharyngeal airway and velopharyngeal changes in patients with CLP, most studies reviewed reported a significant increase in the upper airway volume following Le-Fort I maxillary advancement. This enlargement is primarily seen in the nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal regions, which are directly impacted by the forward positioning of the maxilla. The surgical intervention alleviates airway obstructions commonly observed in CLP patients, resulting in enhanced breathing function, particularly during sleep. However, the extent of airway expansion varies and is influenced by factors such as the magnitude of maxillary advancement, the preoperative airway condition, and the inclusion of any additional corrective procedures.
Postoperative outcomes of Le-Fort I advancement on velopharyngeal function are more complex. In many cases, maxillary advancement has been shown to improve velopharyngeal closure due to changes in the anatomy that facilitate better muscle coordination during speech. However, in some cases, there is a risk of worsening VPI, particularly if the maxilla is advanced too far forward, disrupting the delicate balance needed for proper closure during speech production. Long-term follow-ups showed a mixed response in speech outcomes, indicating that while there can be improvements in some patients, others may require additional speech therapy or secondary surgeries to correct residual VPI.

Patient's/guardian's consent
Since this was a systematic review of peer-reviewed articles, the study did not require consent.

Author contributions
i) Eldo Babu-designing the analysis, data collection, data extraction, performing the analysis, manuscript Preparation.
ii) Parvathy Ghosh-designing the analysis, data collection, data extraction, performing the analysis, Review and editing manuscript.
iii) Sarika K- data extraction, review and editing the manuscript
iv) Anju James- Data synthesis and editing the manuscript
v) Sapna Varma NK- designing the analysis, review and editing the manuscript
vi) Ajith VV- designing the analysis, review and editing the manuscript.

Availability of data
Data will be available on request.

Systematic review registration number
PROSPERO CRD42024547545.

Ethical clearance
Since this was a systematic review of peer reviewed articles the study did not require an ethical clearance.

Funding support
The authors declare that they have received no funding support for this study.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
Gene/environment causes of cleft lip and/or palate
Cleft of lip and palate: a review
Maxillary distraction osteogenesis versus orthognathic surgery for cleft lip and palate patients
Maedica-a journal of clinical medicine MAEDICA-a journal of clinical medicine the changes in upper airway volume after orthognathic surgery evaluated by individual segmentation on CBCT images
Effects of orthognathic surgery on speech and breathing of subjects with cleft lip and palate: acoustic and aerodynamic assessment
Pharyngeal airway space changes and stability following an extended LeFort-I osteotomy advancement in cleft lip and palate and non-cleft lip and palate patients: a long term comparison study
Long-term airway space and soft palate changes with maxillary osteotomies
Cephalometric pharyngeal changes after Le Fort I osteotomy in patients with unilateral cleft lip and palate
Speech after repair of isolated cleft palate and cleft lip and palate
Velopharyngeal configuration changes following le fort I osteotomy with maxillary advancement in patients with cleft lip and palate: A cephalometric study
Cephalometric changes in nasopharyngeal area after anterior maxillary segmental distraction versus le Fort i osteotomy in patients with cleft lip and palate
The well-built clinical question: a key to evidence-based decisions
What are ‘Integrated Landscape Approaches’ and how effectively have they been implemented in the tropics: a systematic map protocol
Oral appliance therapy for the management of obstructive sleep apnea in adults: an umbrella review
Methodological quality (risk of bias) assessment tools for primary and secondary medical studies: what are they and which is better?
GRADE guidelines: 1. Introduction—GRADE evidence profiles and summary of findings tables
Evaluation of velopharyngeal changes and mechanisms in upper airway following maxillary advancement by LeFort I osteotomy in patients with cleft: a retrospective study
Speech characteristics of cleft lip and palate patients after orthognathic surgery
Cephalometric pharyngeal changes after Le Fort I osteotomy in different types of clefts
Evaluation of speech and morphological changes after maxillary advancement for patients with velopharyngeal insufficiency due to repaired cleft palate using a nasometer and lateral cephalogram
Predictors of velopharyngeal insufficiency after le Fort i maxillary advancement in patients with cleft palate
Predictors of velopharyngeal insufficiency in cleft palate orthognathic surgery
A pilot study of the effects of transpalatal maxillary advancement on velopharyngeal closure in cleft palate patients
Alterations in velopharyngeal function after maxillary advancement in cleft palate patients
Airway changes in patients with unilateral cleft lip/palate (UCL/P) after maxillary advancement
Cephalometric evaluation and comparison of upper pharyngeal airway space in cleft lip and cleft palate patients treated with maxillary advancement and camouflage
Velopharyngeal function following maxillary advancement
Transpalatal modified Le Fort I osteotomy for correction of maxillary hypoplasia in cleft lip and palate patients: a preliminary clinical application
Three-dimensional analysis of the airway with cone-beam computed tomography

Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobcr.2025.06.001.