Contemporary Approach for Traumatic Dental Injuries in the Primary Dentition
ABSTRACT
Management of traumatic dental injuries (TDI) is very complex, even under ideal circumstances. Children in the primary dentition have unique needs, and it is important that the diagnosis and treatment choices are offered to parents. The prevalence of TDI in the primary dentition is far greater than for any other age group. Education of parents and caregivers in prevention and emergency management of oral injuries is essential. When injuries occur, the dental professionals must also respond appropriately to establish correct diagnosis of the injuries and assist parents in making decisions for management while communicating realistic expectations for the future. Progress has been made in the diagnosis and management of dental injuries in the primary dentition based on the biological healing response of oral tissues following injury over time. Several factors influence critical decisions that must be made based on basic principles and guidelines to improve successful outcomes for the child. Managing co‐operation must be balanced with the benefit of anticipated treatment need. The current evidence challenges previous dental interventions. The IADT guidelines updated the approach to management of TDI in children in the primary dentition. Encouraging a positive attitude to the dental setting early in the life course prepares the child to be a motivated dental attendee throughout their lifetime. This manuscript aimed to outline the critical issues and clinical choices for injuries to the primary dentition and to summarise recent guidance from the International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT).

Prevalence of TDI in the Primary Dentition and Prevention
Oral injury ranks as the second most common injury after hand/arm injury in the under 6 years age group. Oral injuries have been reported to account for 5% of all bodily injuries but this increases to 17% in the preschool age. Most traumatic dental injuries (TDI) occur as a result of a fall in the home environment, even where active supervision was provided. The predominant risk factors in this young age cohort include developing co‐ordination and compromised protective reflexes with a lack of awareness of danger as mobility increases and supervision may be more relaxed.
Nonaccidental injury (NAI) must be considered and ruled out for every injury in this vulnerable age group.
TDI in the primary dentition have a reported global pooled prevalence of 22.7%. This is similar to the reported prevalence of 24.2% in the same age group following a review using 24 studies. Enamel fractures and luxation injuries are the most common injuries reported in the primary dentition. It is known that many parents fail to report TDI in children, especially if the injury is minor, or there has been no luxation or soft tissue involvement. Soares et al. reported that the pursuit of emergency care was influenced by the presence of soft tissue injuries, with 56% of children with soft tissue injuries being brought to the dentist within 2 weeks. Delayed presentation may also occur where barriers to access exist, for example, cost, service scarcity and personal health literacy. Very often the dental professional will observe signs of previous trauma, where tooth discoloration or infection precipitated the need for a dental visit. The prevalence of TDI increased when radiographs are used compared to a clinical examination alone. Several dental risk factors have been identified in this age group. An increased risk of dental trauma is associated with increased overjet, anterior overbite and incompetent lips in primary teeth. A systematic review of 41 articles reports that children aged 0–6 years, with an increased overjet (> 3 mm) will have a 3.37 increased odds of experiencing TDI (95% CI 1.36–8.38, p = 0.0009). It is well established that children with pacifier habits and digit sucking habits tend to develop anterior open bite and increased OJ.

Prevention
Prevention is the most effective intervention and the medical establishment has continually emphasised educational campaigns to reduce injury in young children. Jullien has summarised the current guidelines on the prevention of falls in children under 5 years of age recommending interventions such as safe equipment, use of protective equipment and advice to eliminate the use of baby walkers. The key factor in preventing injuries must be achieved through education and awareness campaigns reaching all adults responsible for the health and safety of children. In this young age group, this includes general safety measures such as adequate supervision, safe environment and protective equipment such as bicycle helmets.
The dental team should take the opportunity at routine dental visits to educate parents in prevention of oral trauma. Every dentist should be aware of the recent guidance for the prevention of oral injury. For dental injuries, this will include early elimination of pacifier and digit sucking habits, limiting risk of contact with individuals or equipment while in play and also establishment of a dental home by age 1 year of age. Children and parents are more likely to access immediate dental care if they are already known to a dental practitioner and where familiarity and comfort for the parents is likely to support calm, effective communication. Unfortunately for many children aged 0–6 years, the TDI emergency visit is the first dental encounter.
Dental professionals should be aware that IADT has recently published a series of articles on prevention, written for lay persons and suitable to be distributed to all interested parties. These publications should assist communicating the importance of prevention of trauma. Knowledge of first aid management when a trauma occurs is another key strategy as early appropriate management improves outcomes. Tooth SOS is a free App, developed by IADT for distribution to the public. It is downloadable to any phone and delivers practical advice on first aid following a TDI.

Challenges on the Initial Visit
When an injury occurs, parents should have access to a dentist to establish the extent of the injury and the best pathway for appropriate care. All dentists should be able to respond to an emergency dental trauma in a young child and offer immediate advice. Many dentists express a lack of confidence in their skills to manage an emergency TDI in a young child. However, dental professionals should be able to offer a tentative diagnosis and an outline of the action required, even if care cannot be delivered. The current guidelines recognise this by stating that ‘often no treatment is the most appropriate option in an emergency situation but only where there is a potential for a rapid referral to a child oriented team’. This statement identifies that the well‐being of the child is paramount and that a negative experience in addition to the TDI may be detrimental for the child. There is very limited evidence on the impact of TDI on the oral health‐related quality of life (OHRQoL) in preschool children. Borges et al. carried out a systematic review with 10 articles and concluded that dental injury impacted negatively on OHRQoL of preschool children, while acknowledging that better data is required. Reassurance, empathy and support for both parents and child are essential in the immediate aftermath of an injury.
There are many unique challenges for the dental profession when oral and dental trauma occurs in patients under 6 years of age. A combination of anatomic, physiologic and metabolic factors leads to unique injury patterns with approaches and responses to treatment that can differ compared with injury in the permanent dentition. Other factors complicate the delivery of dental care such as co‐operation, resources and expertise. Parents are often unable/unwilling to consider options where facial appearance may be altered, for example, extraction, intrusion and stress about future implications on speech and function and aesthetics. These factors combined with the young age, issues with consent, delivery of care and the potential loss of integrity of the primary dentition all contribute to the clinical decision on how to manage the injury. Planning the management of the injury to the parents must prioritise the well‐being of the young child.

Biology of the Primary Dentition
The anatomy, structure and physiology of an intact primary tooth is similar to a permanent tooth. There are two major differences in the primary dentition (1) Physiological resorption and exfoliation and (2) Presence of permanent successor. These two factors will influence decisions on management of the injuries to the anterior primary teeth. Upper and lower primary incisors usually erupt within the first year of life. The apex of the primary tooth will be immature until deposition of dentin and cementum creates convergence and closure of the apical foramen by 2–3 years of age. The root to crown ratio is greater than in permanent teeth. Resorption of the roots of primary teeth is a synchronised event that accompanies the eruptive movement of the permanent successors. The developing permanent tooth is lingual and apical to the primary upper anterior teeth so that the physiological resorption site is located at the apical third of the lingual surface of the primary tooth. The root becomes shorter as the permanent tooth progresses towards eruption. Most of the variation in the root of incisor teeth occurs in the buccolingual plane during resorption and is not visible on dental radiographs. The extent of resorption and the apical anatomy will indicate the life expectancy of a traumatised primary incisor and will inform management options for the tooth.

Diagnosis of Injury
The terminology used for TDI is the same in both dentitions, with nine fractures, six luxations, in any tooth, in either dentition with various degrees of apical maturity. While numerous classification systems have been used in previous literature, the Andreasen classification has been accepted by WHO and should be used for future data collection. Agreement and use of a single classification will enhance the ability to develop large data bases to provide additional evidence for new guidance. There are four major factors outlined in Table 1 that will have an impact on critical decisions for the management of the child and the oral injury in both primary and permanent dentition. These factors have been used by the IADT in their guidelines for the management of TDI in primary dentition.
Diagnosis.
Injuries to hard tissue and pulp	Luxation injuries	Soft tissue injuries	Apical status	 	Enamel fracture	Concussion	Abrasion	Open	 	Enamel dentin fracture	Subluxation	Contusion	Diverging	 	Uncomplicated crown root fracture	Lateral Luxation	Laceration	Converging	 	Complicated crown root fracture	Extrusive Luxation	Avulsion	Closed	 	Root fracture	Intrusive Luxation			 	Apical	 	Midroot	 	Cervical	 	Alveolar fracture	Avulsion
Accurate diagnosis may require a radiograph and limiting the radiation exposure of the child must be considered. A radiograph should be taken only when there is a reasonable expectation of achieving a readable image that will impact on the decision for management, using ALARA principles. Practice in positioning of the child and the film is recommended before any exposure is attempted to maximise the quality of the image exposed. Management based on clinical examination alone may be necessary where a radiograph is not possible. Ideally a paralleling technique is used but due to the child's small size and shallow palate, use of an occlusal view using a Size 2 film is often achievable and adequate for diagnosis. CBCT is rarely indicated for TDI in this age group.
Radiographic interpretation is required to confirm diagnosis but as mentioned previously, the radiographs can present challenges, for example, large variation of patterns of physiological resorption as well as complexity of the follicle of permanent incisors overlapping area of interest. There may be radiographic evidence of previous trauma. As resorption occurs, establishment of the tooth dimensions and position and extent of apical foramen relative to the anatomical apex may be difficult to establish and differentiate from pathological changes. Radiographical interpretation is also complicated by the proximity of the follicle of the permanent successor. Decisions on appropriate interpretation may be complicated due to these unique factors in the primary dentition (Figure 1).
Various conditions that may complicate interpretation of radiographs in the primary dentition. (A) physiologic resorption; (B) atypical resorption; (C) Overlap with permanent successor; (D) pathology.
All soft tissue injuries (intra and extraoral) should be recorded. It is not yet known how soft tissue injuries affect the healing response of the associated traumatised teeth. The failure to record and monitor soft tissue injuries contributes to limited data. The lack of evidence means that ST injuries are not yet included in the IADT guidelines. There are four categories of soft tissue injuries (Table 1). The Modified Eden Baysal Index (MEBDTI: Table 2) is an index that can be used to record the dental and associated soft tissue injury or injuries in both primary and permanent dentitions in a standardised manner. This index generates a unique patient‐specific digital code suitable for computer registration for each tooth injury. Such an index would support prospective data collection to explore the effect of intraoral soft tissue injury on the outcome of dental trauma in children.
Modified Eden Baysal Dental Trauma Traumatic Dental Index. Patient‐specific information is captured using numerical values representing the essential diagnostic factors for the injury.
Tooth number (FDI)	1st digit crown fracture	2nd digit root fracture	3rd digit luxation injury	4th digit apex maturity	5th digit alveolar process fracture	Soft tissue injury	 	In parenthesis	0–5	0–3	Capital first letter	Small first letter	+or−	Superscript 0–8	 	0 = None1 = Enamel fracture2 = Uncomplicated crown fracture3 = Complicated crown fracture4 = Uncomplicated crown root fracture5 = Complicated crown root fracture	0 = None1 = Apical 1/32 = Mid 1/33 = Cervical 1/3	N = NoneC = ConcussionS = SubluxationL = Lateral luxationE = Extrusive luxationI = Intrusive luxationA = Avulsion	i = Immaturem = Maturer = Resorbed	+ = Fracture− = no fracture	0 = None1 = Skin/lip abrasion2 = Skin/lip laceration3 = Skin/lip contusion4 = Skin/lip avulsion5 = Intraoral abrasion6 = Intraoral laceration7 = Intraoral contusion8 = Intraoral avulsion
The use of photographic records is useful to document soft tissue and hard tissue changes over time, thereby avoiding radiographs unless there is justification for an exposure. Images are particularly useful to document soft tissue injuries and healing as well as monitoring the re‐emergence of intruded primary teeth and for discoloration over time (Figure 2).
Re‐emergence of a severely intruded primary tooth over a 6 month period without need for any intervention in a 21‐month‐old child.

Healing Response
Optimal healing response in injured tissue requires knowledge of the cellular and physiological events in the inflammatory process and repair. The type and location of injury will predict the healing response of the injured tissue. Healing responses are more favourable in children with faster wound healing in general especially for soft tissue injury. All soft tissue injuries (intra and extraoral) should be stabilised with good tissue apposition, which may require sutures for the child. Hygienic wound care is also encouraged to facilitate rapid healing.
In the absence of evidence to the contrary, dentists should assume similar molecular healing mechanisms in the dentin–pulp complex of the primary incisors as in the permanent teeth following trauma, assuming there is no decay in the primary incisors. Unlike in caries, the pulp in TDI is usually healthy before the accident and the possibility of healing is greater than in chronic disease.
Histologically, pulp exposure in traumatised primary incisors showed that the inflammation was localised to the pulp chamber similar to that in permanent teeth. The host defence initially is an inflammatory response and formation of reactionary dentine by existing odontoblasts would be expected following injury to dentine with or without pulp exposure. Bone remodelling factors are well known and have a very high turnover especially in younger children.
IADT does not recommend replantation of avulsed primary incisors, regardless of the extraoral time based on possible damage to the unerupted dental tooth bud. It is also not in the best interest of the child as it will increase the need for future intervention without any real gain for the child. Favourable healing is evident in luxation injuries. The management for most lateral luxations in primary teeth is to monitor for spontaneous correction when there is no effect on occlusion. Luxated teeth can be stabilised for comfort and to promote healing using any of the splint types used in permanent dentition. It has been shown that the outcome for teeth with root fractures is fourfold greater after splinting than teeth that were not splinted.
A major difference between primary and permanent teeth occurs in the healing after an intrusion injury. This prompted the change in IADT guidelines in 2020 which now recommends that all intruded primary teeth be monitored over time, regardless of the extent of intrusion. There is ample evidence that intruded primary teeth will re‐emerge over time, and elective pulp therapy is not required, thereby avoiding unnecessary intervention for the child (Figure 2). There is no evidence for the use of systemic antibiotics in the management of luxation injuries in the primary dentition. Antibiotic use remains at the discretion of the clinician and should be considered on a risk analysis of the child and the injury.
The risk of healing complications following injury to the primary teeth depends on the extent of the initial injury. Teeth with concussion or subluxation had a low risk of pulp necrosis or premature tooth loss. Teeth with lateral luxation that were not repositioned had a high healing potential and 95% of the teeth subsequently realigned and 24.2% of primary teeth became necrotic over 3 years. The prognosis of extruded teeth depends on the extent of extrusion. Many extruded teeth interfere with the occlusion and are extracted on the emergency visit and only 15.6% of the remaining teeth became necrotic after 3 years.
In many co‐operative children age 2–6 years, pulp therapy is less invasive than extraction and have many potential benefits such as tooth survival until exfoliation. There is a growing awareness that preferences for facial attractiveness emerge during childhood. In the modern world, many children are aware of their own appearance. Tooth loss may be devastating for some children so individual circumstances must be considered.

Co‐Operation
Dentists often feel ill equipped to manage the behavioural challenges of the child and their parents arriving on an emergency visit following trauma. In an ideal world, these children would receive care from a suitably trained child oriented dental team. It is important that all usual behaviour management techniques are used to comfort the child, while assessing the injury. Parents are often very helpful in encouraging co‐operation. It is often very positive and productive to actively involve the parent and child in simple tasks within the visit. It is important to avoid making the experience any more traumatic as it is known that early negative dental experiences have been linked to development of dental anxiety in later life. Parents must consent to any intervention. In all cases, the well‐being and safety of the child should be paramount in the decisions presented to the parent.
Depending on the child, the initial approach should be performed without separating the child from the parent. Assuming no other more critical injuries, the examination should start extraorally as soft tissue injuries are very distressing. Skin and mucosal wounds can be cleaned and haemostasis obtained and is often achieved by simple instruction to the parent. Extraoral photographs provide excellent documentation and requires minimal co‐operation from the young child.
It is important for the dentist to assess the oral soft tissues and dentition including the opposing arch. The use of the knee‐to‐knee and tell‐show‐do approach is universally used for clinical examination in children, with stabilisation of the child where necessary. Parents can often support the child, or permission can be sought to provide active stabilisation by the dental nurse or dentist for the examination. When a radiograph is indicated, limitation of radiation exposure of the child must be considered as mentioned previously. Use of the tell‐show‐do technique for both parent and child will maximise chance of a successful image.
The intraoral examination, obtaining radiographs and providing treatment of a child who cannot or is unwilling to co‐operate complicates decisions for clinical management. It may be necessary to plan without a radiograph for some children. Cultural differences exist about the acceptance of various behavioural management techniques so each clinician must explain their suggested approach and provide details to the parents for each option offered with alternatives. Sedation or general anaesthesia is often requested but may not available in many regions on an emergency basis. If there is no risk to the child, deferment of any treatment may be possible. Where urgent treatment is required for the comfort of the child, for example, extrusive luxation interfering with occlusion, emergency measures may be required. Stabilisation, for example, holding, use of biteblock and swaddle must have parental consent, should be introduced gently and in an age‐appropriate manner and the planned procedure should be of minimal duration.

Management Options
Every healthcare professional should be able to perform first aid and make an initial diagnosis to establish the most appropriate location for treatment for children in the primary dentition. The 2020 IADT guidelines dedicated an entire paper to the management of primary teeth and is an essential reference for the diagnosis and management of TDI in the primary dentition. Luxation injuries and crown fractures are the most common injuries in the primary dentition, many of which will not require immediate treatment. The IAPD guidelines support the position that luxated teeth can be allowed to spontaneously reposition, when not interfering with the occlusion. In addition, the decision on management is often simplified when the traumatised tooth is close to exfoliation. Other treatment may not be time‐dependent and referral is appropriate when it is possible for the child to be seen in a child‐oriented clinic within a few days for management.
Similar to permanent teeth, the dental pulp of primary teeth has a large potential to heal following traumatic injury. Pulp preservation techniques are successful in traumatised primary teeth and should be considered to retain the tooth in the oral cavity. A healthy pulp should be encouraged to heal by reducing inflammation and providing a sealed restoration. Similar to permanent incisors, pulpotomy (both partial and coronal) can be provided for traumatised primary teeth using nonstaining calcium silicate cements. There is limited evidence for pulpectomy success in traumatised primary teeth. Primary incisor pulpectomy success rates do not appear to be different if the tooth is treated due to trauma or caries after 12 months, and best success is obtained using a resorbable paste such as iodoform and calcium hydroxide combined.
The decision to retain the tooth using pulp therapy should be in the best interest of the child and the child should be able to cope with the intervention and follow on care, ideally without sedation or general anaesthesia.
Extraction is often chosen as the best option for the child. This may be because of the extent of injury or because of lack of co‐operation for treatment. Extraction is a rapid procedure and good behaviour management and appropriate analgesia is required for patient comfort. When tooth fracture or a luxation occurs, it is reasonable to stabilise or remove the mobile fragments to avoid ingestion or inhalation. Usually, no attempt is made to remove small root fragments due to the potential of disturbing the permanent tooth. The decision to retain or extract the remaining root depends on the many factors including the restorability of the injured tooth and/or the ability of the child to cope with any planned procedure. On an emergency basis, an intentional partial extraction can be performed where the mobile pieces are extracted on the emergency visit, delaying the subsequent decision to allow the root to remain in situ or to provide an extraction in more controlled circumstances. No treatment is provided for larger root fragments that contain pulp tissue where soft tissue healing occurs around the retained portion (Figure 3). The periodontal ligament is usually intact around the remaining root. Normal exfoliation of these roots has been observed with no subsequent infection; however, data are limited to case reports.
Use of intentional partial extraction on an emergency visit to allow healing to commence on day of trauma. Subsequent successful outcome without active intervention.
Tooth replacement is usually only indicated for aesthetic reasons and the child's well‐being should be considered. Aesthetic issues can start in childhood and can have significant effect on the psychosocial well‐being of children and their families in both their emotional and social development, self‐esteem and interaction with their peers. Honest communication with parents is required on an individual basis. Primary tooth loss as a result of trauma does not appear to be associated with changes in arch perimeter.
A common sequelae in the primary dentition is tooth discoloration. This can be transitory with dark discoloration lasting for a few weeks before return to original colour, or it can be more long term. Previously, it was believed that persistent dark discoloration of a primary teeth was a sign of necrotic pulp requiring endodontic therapy. Holan reported that there was no difference in outcome of dark teeth between pulpectomised teeth and those that received no treatment. Endodontic treatment or extraction are not indicated unless there are signs of pathology. A yellow discoloration is most often due to pulp canal obliteration and is considered a healing response.

Sequelae in Permanent Teeth
All types of traumatic injury to the primary dentition can cause sequelae in permanent teeth. These effects range from white/yellow discoloration of enamel to arrested tooth formation and dilaceration. The most common reported defect is discoloration and/or hypoplasia since the injury involves the developing tooth. The younger the child at the time of injury, the more frequent and more severe the damage to the permanent successor. The severity and type of injury in the primary dentition can be related to the type of injury to the developing permanent tooth.
All dentists have a role in mediating risk for dental injury in their young patients. Education of parents, creches/preschools and sports clubs is required to boost confidence for the general public to prevent and manage dental injuries appropriately when they occur. Dental professionals should be available to manage the emergency TDI in children in the primary dentition. Familiarisation with the IADT Guidelines and good communication skills provides reassurance and support to the parents. Specialists may be required due to the complexity of the injury or due to behavioural concerns in the provision of care. Evidence is scarce in many areas or trauma to young children. Current research informs guidance and is based on the biological healing response of oral tissues following injury over time. Research is needed for additional data to inform future guidance in the appropriate management of TDI in young children.

Conclusions
Every dentist should be able to provide emergency assessment and first aid for traumatic dental injuries in children in the primary dentition.
Every opportunity should be taken to promote education in prevention in the wider community and first aid when an injury occurs.
Non accidental injury must be considered in all cases.
IADT guidelines should be used when making decisions on injury management.
Management decisions must prioritise the well‐being of the child.

Author Contributions
This invited manuscript is based on the presentation given at the World Congress of Dental Traumatology and is the idea, and work of the sole author.

Ethics Statement
The author has nothing to report.

Conflicts of Interest
The author declares no conflicts of interest.

Data Availability Statement
The author has nothing to report.

References
Traumatic Oral Versus Non‐Oral Injuries
World Traumatic Dental Injury Prevalence and Incidence, a Meta‐Analysis‐One Billion Living People Have Had Traumatic Dental Injuries
The Prevalence of Traumatic Dental Injuries in Primary Teeth: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Traumatic Injuries in the Primary Dentition
Radicular Maturity Level of Primary Teeth and Its Association With Trauma Sequelae
Prevalence of Soft Tissue Injuries in Pediatric Patients and Its Relationship With the Quest for Treatment
The Association Between Traumatic Dental Injuries and Atypical External Root Resorption in Maxillary Primary Incisors
Traumatic Dental Injuries and Their Association With Malocclusion in the Primary Dentition of Irish Children
Radiographic Evidence of Traumatic Injuries to Primary Incisors Without Accompanying Clinical Signs
The Association of Overjet Size and Traumatic Dental Injuries‐A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
The Association Between Nutritive, Non‐Nutritive Sucking Habits and Primary Dental Occlusion
WHO Fact Sheet: Step Safely
Education of Parents in the Use of Car Seats and Enforcement of the Law Has Been Successful in Reducing Mortality and Morbidity in Road Traffic Accidents
Prevention of Unintentional Injuries in Children Under Five Years
Introducing the Revised IADT Guidelines for the Management of Traumatic Dental Injuries
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 4: Faceshields for the Prevention of Dental and Oral Trauma
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 7: Orthodontics for the Prevention of Dental and Oral Trauma
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 3: Mouthguards for the Prevention of Dental and Oral Trauma
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 1: General Introduction
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 2: Primary Prevention of Dental Trauma Across the Life Course
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 6: Education
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 10: First Aid Education
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 5: Secondary Prevention of Dental Injuries
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 8: ToothSOS App
The International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT) and the Academy for Sports Dentistry (ASD) Guidelines for the Prevention of Traumatic Dental Injuries: Part 9: Role of Dental Professionals
. Available www.iad‐tdental trauma.org.
International Association of Dental Traumatology Guidelines for the Management of Traumatic Dental Injuries: 1. Fractures and Luxations
International Association of Dental Traumatology Guidelines for the Management of Traumatic Dental Injuries: 3. Injuries in the Primary Dentition
International Association of Dental Traumatology Guidelines for the Management of Traumatic Dental Injuries: 2. Avulsion of Permanent Teeth
International Association of Dental Traumatology Guidelines for the Management of Traumatic Dental Injuries: General Introduction
Impact of Traumatic Dental Injuries on Oral Health‐Related Quality of Life of Preschool Children: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
A Histological Study of the Exfoliation of Human Deciduous Teeth
NA0D—The New Traumatic Dental Injury Classification of the World Health Organization
Best Clinical Practice Guidance for Prescribing Dental Radiographs in Children and Adolescents: An EAPD Policy Document
Extension of a Novel Diagnostic Index to Include Soft Tissue Injuries: Modified Eden Baysal Dental Trauma Index
Exposed Human Pulp Caused by Trauma and/or Caries in Primary Dentition: A Histological Evaluation
A Retrospective Study of Traumatic Dental Injuries in Primary Dentition: Treatment Outcomes of Splinting
The Risk of Healing Complications in Primary Teeth With Concussion or Subluxation Injury‐A Retrospective Cohort Study
The Risk of Healing Complications in Primary Teeth With Extrusive or Lateral Luxation—A Retrospective Cohort Study
Dental Fear/Anxiety and Dental Behaviour Management Problems in Children and Adolescents: A Review of Prevalence and Concomitant Psychological Factors
A Clinical Report on Partial Pulpotomy and Capping With Calcium Hydroxide in Permanent Incisors With Complicated Crown Fracture
Histological Appearance of Pulps After Exposure by a Crown Fracture, Partial Pulpotomy, and Clinical Diagnosis of Healing
Use of Non‐Vital Pulp Therapies in Primary Teeth
Premature Loss of Primary Anterior Teeth and Its Consequences to Primary Dental Arch and Speech Pattern: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Dental Arch Perimeter Changes as a Result From Premature Loss of Primary Anterior Teeth due to Trauma: A Case Series in Infant and Pre‐School Children
Long‐Term Effect of Different Treatment Modalities for Traumatized Primary Incisors Presenting Dark Coronal Discoloration With No Other Signs of Injury
How Does Orofacial Trauma in Children Affect the Developing Dentition? Long‐Term Treatment and Associated Complications
Trauma in Primary Teeth and Its Effect on the Development of Permanent Successors: A Controlled Study