Ocular manifestations of the genetic causes of focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis
Genetic forms of focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) often have extra-renal manifestations. This study examined FSGS-associated genes from the Genomics England Renal proteinuria panel for reported and likely ocular features. Thirty-two of the 55 genes (58%) were associated with ocular abnormalities in human disease, and a further 12 (22%) were expressed in the retina or had an eye phenotype in mouse models. The commonest genes affected in congenital nephrotic syndrome (NPHS1, NPHS2, WT1, LAMB2, PAX2 but not PLCE1) may have ocular manifestations . Many genes affected in childhood–adolescent onset FSGS (NPHS1, NPHS2, WT1, LAMB2, SMARCAL1, NUP107 but not TRPC6 or PLCE1) have ocular features. The commonest genes affected in adult-onset FSGS (COL4A3–COL4A5, GLA ) have ocular abnormalities but not the other frequently affected genes (ACTN4, CD2AP, INF2, TRPC6). Common ocular associations of genetic FSGS include cataract, myopia, strabismus, ptosis and retinal atrophy. Mitochondrial forms of FSGS (MELAS, MIDD, Kearn’s Sayre disease) are associated with retinal atrophy and inherited retinal degeneration. Some genetic kidney diseases (CAKUT, ciliopathies, tubulopathies) that result in secondary forms of FSGS also have ocular features. Ocular manifestations suggest a genetic basis for FSGS, often help identify the affected gene, and prompt genetic testing. In general, ocular abnormalities require early evaluation by an ophthalmologist, and sometimes, monitoring or treatment to improve vision or prevent visual loss from complications. In addition, the patient should be examined for other syndromic features and first degree family members assessed.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00467-023-06073-y.

Introduction
Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a histopathological diagnosis characterised by sclerosis of less than half the glomerular tuft in fewer than half the glomeruli in a kidney biopsy.
FSGS is commonly classified into primary, secondary or genetic forms. Primary autoimmune FSGS typically presents with the nephrotic syndrome (NS), responds to immunosuppression (‘steroid-sensitive’ , SSNS) and recurs after transplantation. The genetic forms of FSGS frequently manifest with lower levels of proteinuria, and neither respond to steroid treatment (‘steroid-resistant’ nephrotic syndrome, SRNS) nor recur post transplantation. Secondary FSGS results from hyperfiltration after nephron loss. Each disease type has implications for management and prognosis.
An accurate and timely diagnosis is critical in providing effective treatment, advising other family members of the risk of being affected and in avoiding the complications of steroid treatment. However, identification of individual genetic forms of FSGS is generally not possible with biopsy alone and requires genetic testing.
There are however clues to the likelihood of a genetic basis for FSGS. These include a positive family history, a young age at onset, SRNS and no other obvious cause. The association with extra-renal features, such as a hearing loss, skeletal, cardiac or ocular anomalies, is also important.
More than 70 genes have been implicated in FSGS, and inheritance is mainly autosomal recessive (AR) in children but often autosomal dominant (AD) in adults, as well as X-linked (XL) or mitochondrial. The commonest genes associated with nephrotic syndrome differ at birth (NPHS1, NPHS2, WT1, LAMB2, PAX2, PLCE1), in childhood or adolescence (NPHS1, NPHS2, WT1, LAMB2, SMARCAL1, NUP107, TRPC6, PLCE1) and in adults (COL4A3-COL4A5, GLA, ACTN4, CD2AP, INF2, TRPC6).
Overall, the commonest genes affected in FSGS are COL4A5 (XL Alport syndrome) and COL4A3 and COL4A4 (usually AD rather than the rare AR Alport syndrome) INF2, TRPC6 and ACTN4. Most of these genes code for proteins that are found in the glomerular podocyte or adjacent extracellular matrix. There is also overlap with genes that result in other kidney phenotypes including some forms of congenital abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT), cystic kidney diseases, renal ciliopathies and tubulopathies. These include Dent disease (CLCN5, OCRL), AD tubulointerstitial kidney disease (ADTKD due to UMOD variants), nephronophthisis (TTC21B, NPHP4), Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome 1 (CUBN) and papillorenal syndrome (PAX2). Finally, some mitochondrial diseases (mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS), maternally inherited diabetes and deafness (MIDD), and Kearns-Sayre syndrome) are associated with FSGS.
Some of these diseases are suspected on the basis of their extra-renal features. Ocular abnormalities are particularly common in genetic kidney disease and while these may not severely affect vision, they are helpful indicators of the genetic nature of the underlying disease. The association between kidney and eye disease is attributable to developmental, structural and physiological similarities between the kidney and the eye. Both the kidney and the eye are ‘paired’ organs that share some transcription factors; and the glomerular filtration barrier resembles the retina with epithelial cells overlying a basement membrane of mainly collagen IV α3α4α5 and a capillary endothelium. Other similarities occur in the microcirculation with a localised renin–angiotensin system in both the glomerular and retinal vasculature.
The presence of ophthalmological abnormalities in a person with FSGS suggests a genetic basis and encourages genetic testing. It also facilitates early ophthalmological evaluation and monitoring to prevent vision loss. It may also provide insights into genetic kidney disease pathogenesis.
This review characterises the ocular associations of the individual genes affected in FSGS that may be useful in indicating an underlying genetic disorder and, in some cases, the specific gene affected.

Methods
The genes for FSGS from the Renal Proteinuria panel were down-loaded from the Genomics England Panel App in October 2020 (v2.77, green and amber genes).
Genomics England uses a traffic light system where ‘green’ genes have a high level of evidence for an association with a disease (having been reported in 3 unrelated families or 2 families with further strong evidence) as decided by an expert panel. These represent the genes that should be examined in a diagnostic genetic laboratory. ‘Amber’ genes have borderline levels of evidence and 'red' genes have low levels for a disease association.
Genes associated with FSGS were then searched in Medline (OVID), Embase and the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews with the terms (eye* or ocular or retina* or lens or cornea* or vision or ophthalm*) and ‘gene name’ to identify all reports of ocular manifestations. All manuscripts in English likely to include ocular manifestations of FSGS based on their abstracts were read. Full-text articles that did not report FSGS or ocular findings, and those where only the abstract was available or were a conference proceeding were excluded. Additional references from studies were hand- searched. In addition, Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM: https://www.omim.org/) was used to identify renal, extra-renal and further ocular features in October 2022.
Since some genes were reported in only a few individuals who had not necessarily undergone a complete ophthalmological examination, two further databases were studied to determine whether ophthalmic features were likely. These were the Human Protein Atlas (https://www.proteinatlas.org/) which was examined for mRNA expression in the retina and the Mouse Genome Informatics database (http://www.informatics.jax.org/) which was examined for an ocular phenotype in mouse models. Searches were undertaken August–September 2020 and reviewed October 2022.
In addition to the Renal Proteinuria panel, the genes associated with secondary FSGS (CLCN5, OCRL, CUBN, PAX2) and the common FSGS-associated mitochondrial diseases (MELAS, MIDD, Kearns Sayre disease) were searched.

Results
PRISMA flow diagram for the selection of studies
In all, 4702 records were identified from the databases and a further 179 from hand searching. After duplicates were removed, 3417 abstracts were screened to yield 774 full texts, and after review, 303 records were examined (Fig. 1).
Genes associated with FSGS, ocular features, retinal expression, and ocular phenotypes in mouse models
Gene (OMIM)	Disease (OMIM)	Function	Kidney features	Extrarenal features (OMIM)	Ocular features	Retinal mRNA expression in Human Protein Atlas	Ocular phenotype in mouse model	 	ACTN4 (604638) (GE- green)	FSGS-1 (603278) AD	Cytoskeleton	FSGS	None reported	Retinal venular tortuosity (GWAS)	26.0 TPM	Abnormal eye muscle, lens, optic cup, retina	 	AMN (605799) (GE- amber)	Imerslund–Grasbeck syndrome 2 (618882) AR	Trans-membrane protein	Mild proteinuria	Malabsorption of vitamin B12, megaloblastic anaemia	Anterior polar cataract, posterior subcapsular cataract	0 TPM	Microphthalmia	 	ANLN (616027) (GE- amber)	FSGS-6 (616032) AD	Cytoskeleton	FSGS	None reported	None reported	0.3 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	ARHGDIA (601925) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 8 (615244 (AR)	Rho-GDP dissociation inhibitor	Proteinuria, FSGS	Hearing loss, intellectual disability	None reported	14.6 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	CD151 (602243) (GE- amber)	Epidermolysis bullosa simplex 7, with nephropathy and deafness (609057) AR	Trans-membrane protein	Kidney agenesis, proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome	Hearing loss, pretibial bullae	Bilateral lacrimal duct stenosis	9.6 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	CD2AP (604241) (GE-amber)	FSGS-3 (607832) AR	Slit diaphragm complex	FSGS	None reported	None reported	6.9 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	CLCN5 (300008) (GE- green)	Dent disease 1 (300009); Proteinuria (308990) XL	Proximal renal tubular defect	Decreased phosphate reabsorption; stones, proteinuria	Rickets, osteomalacia	Cataract	3.4 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	COL4A3 (120070) COL4A4 (120131)	Alport syndrome XL, AR	Glomerular basement membrane and receptors, cell matrix	Haematuria, proteinuria, FSGS	Sensorineural hearing loss	Myopia, recurrent corneal erosions, posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy, corneal arcus, pigment dispersion syndrome, anterior lenticonus, cataract, anterior polar cataract, posterior lenticonus, central fleck retinopathy, peripheral retinopathy, bull’s eye maculopathy, macular holes, temporal retinal thinning, retinal lozenge, vitelliform maculopathy	52.9 TPM; 8.4 TPM; 6.1 TPM	Abnormal lens, abnormal eye physiology; irregularly shaped pupil; cataract	 	COL4A5 (303630) (GE- all green)	(COL4A5 variants only) Leiomyomata in trachea, bronchi, female genitalia; aortic, cerebral and coronary artery aneurysms	 	COQ2 (609825) (GE- green)	Coenzyme Q10 deficiency, primary, 1 (607426) AR	Mitochondrial function	FSGS, collapsing glomerulopathy crescentic glomerulonephritis	Cerebellar ataxia, myoglobinuria, progressive muscle weakness, lactic acidaemia, encephalopathy, hypotonia, psychomotor delay, seizures, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy	Optic atrophy, Inherited retinal degeneration	4.0 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	COQ6 (614,647) (GE- green)	Coenzyme Q10 deficiency, primary, 6 (614650) AR	Mitochondrial function	FSGS, diffuse mesangial sclerosis	Seizures, ataxia, facial dysmorphism, sensorineural hearing loss	Bilateral optic nerve atrophy, exotropia with nystagmus	5.8 TPM	Abnormal cornea, abnormal vitreous	 	COQ8B (615,567) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 9 (615573) (AR)	Mitochondrial function	FSGS, collapsing FSGS	Mild intellectual disability, seizures, thoracic aortic aneurysm	Inherited retinal degeneration	1.3 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	CRB2 (609720) (GE- green)	FSGS-9 (616220) AR	Slit diaphragm complex	FSGS, cysts	Ventriculomegaly, aqueductal stenosis, cerebellar hypoplasia, seizures, quadrigeminal cysts, atrial or ventricular septal defect, scimitar syndrome	Myopia, optic atrophy, pale retina, macular pit	8.1 TPM; high in limiting membrane	Retinal degeneration	 	CUBN (602997) (GE- green)	Imerslund–Grasbeck syndrome 1 (261100), AR	Intestinal receptor for Intrinsic factor	Proteinuria	B12 malabsorption, megaloblastic anaemia	None reported	3.0 TPM	Fused cornea and lens, iris synechiae, abnormal iris morphology	 	DGKE (601440) (GE-amber)	Nephrotic syndrome type 7 (615008) AR	Intracellular lipid kinase	Nephrotic syndrome, atypical haemolytic uremic syndrome (in some)	Haemolytic anaemia, thrombocytopenia in some patients	None reported	34.5 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	DLC1 (604258) (GE- green)	SSNS and SRNS, AR	Rho GTPase	Proteinuria	None reported	None reported	1.5 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	EMP2 (602,334) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 10 (615861) AR	Tetraspaninin protein	Proteinuria	None reported	None reported	2.0 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	FAT1 (600976) (GE- green)	Proteinuria	Cadherin-like protein	Glomerulo-tubular nephropathy	None reported	None reported	3.4 TPM	Aniridia, aphakia, microphthalmia, inherited retinal degeneration, abnormal retinal vasculature	 	FN1 (135600) (GE-amber)	Glomerulopathy with fibronectin deposits 2 (601894) AD	Glycoprotein on cell surface and in fluids	Proteinuria, kidney failure	None reported	None reported	6.0 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	GLA (300644) (GE–amber list)	Fabry disease (301500) XL	Galactosidase	Fabry disease	Angiokeratomas; acroparaesthesia; cardiac hypertrophy; hypohydrosis, mitral valve prolapse; episodic diarrhoea; abdominal pain; cerebro-vascular disease; dysmorphic facial and extremity features	Conjunctival lymphangiectasia, reduced lacrimal secretions, upper lid vessel tortuosity, corkscrew arterioles on conjunctivae, corneal verticillate, fine brown subepithelial corneal lines, anterior capsule lens opacification, wedge-shaped lens opacities, branching spoke-like posterior subcapsular cataract, optic neuritis, corkscrew tortuosity of retinal vessels, retinal capillary micro and macroaneurysms, retinal oedema, central retinal artery occlusion, macular choroidal neovascularisation, blind spot enlargement	6.9 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	INF2 (610982) (GE- green);	Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease,	Cytoskeleton, mitochondrial function	FSGS	‘Claw hand’ deformities, symmetrical muscle atrophy, peripheral nerve dysfunction, moderate-severe muscle weakness, sensorineural hearing loss	None reported	3.3 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	INF2 (610982) (GE- green)	FSGS-5 (613237)			 	ITGA3 (605025) GAPB3 (GE- green)	Interstitial lung disease, nephrotic syndrome, and epidermolysis bullosa, congenital (614748) AR	Glomerular basement membrane and receptors	FSGS	Skin fragility; blisters; sparse scalp hair, eyebrows and eyelashes; nail dystrophy; distal onycholysis following mild trauma; respiratory distress; diffuse interstitial lung disease; epidermolysis bullosa; mitral insufficiency	None reported	4.4 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	ITSN1 (602442) (GE- green)	Steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome, AR		Proteinuria	None reported	None reported	28.5 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	KANK2 614610 (GE- amber)	Nephrotic syndrome type 16 (617783) AR	Regulate actin polymerisation	Nephrotic syndrome, steroid sensitive	None or with palmoplantar keratoderma and woolly hair (616,099)	None reported	19.0 TPM	 Abnormal eye morphology	 	LAGE3 (300060) (GE- green)	Galloway–Mowat syndrome (301006) XL	Not known	Nephrotic syndrome, SSNS, kidney failure	Microcephaly, intellectual disability, seizures	Nystagmus	4.6 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	LAMA5 (601033) (GE – amber)	Nephrotic syndrome 26 (620049) AR	Component of glomerular basement membrane	Nephrotic syndrome, kidney failure	Scarring of the skin, muscle weakness, ligamentous laxity, malabsorption and hypothyroidism	Night blindness	0.6 TPM	Microphthalmia, anophthalmia	 	LAMB2 (150325) (GE- green);	Nephrotic syndrome type 5 (614199) AR	GBM and receptors, cell matrix	FSGS	Delayed motor milestones, severe proximal limb muscle weakness, scoliosis	Ptosis, myopia, hypopigmented retina, hypoplastic macular areas, poor foveal reflex, small pupils, limited external ocular movements, nystagmus, strabismus	11.7 TPM	Abnormal retina	 	LAMB2 (150325) (GE- green)	Pierson syndrome (609049) AR	GBM and receptors, cell matrix	FSGS, diffuse mesangial sclerosis, minimal change disease, membranous glomerulo-nephritis	Neurodevelopmental delay, hypotonia, progressive microcephaly, scoliosis, genu varum	Microphthalmia, high myopia, posterior staphyloma, microcornea, megalocornea, clouded cornea, band keratopathy, anterior segment dysgenesis, shallow anterior chamber, iris hypoplasia, enlarged iris vessels, posterior synechiae, ectropion uvea, remnants of pupillary membranes, spherophakia, posterior lenticonus, cataract, microphakia, hypoplastic optic nerve, hypopigmented fundus, macular hypoplasia, retinal detachment, tortuous retinal vessels, inherited retinal degeneration, vitreoretinal adhesions and traction, atrophic choriocapillaris, microcoria, nystagmus, strabismus	 	LCAT (606967) (GE- amber)	Norum disease (245900) AR	Enzyme	Proteinuria, kidney failure	Haemolytic anaemia	Corneal lipid deposits, corneal opacities	2.8 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	LMX1B (602575) (GE- green)	Nail-patella syndrome (161200) AD	DNA repair, transcription, nuclear transport	Diffuse hyaline thickening of GBM, FSGS, FSGS without extrarenal involvement	Nail anomalies, triangular lunulae, swan neck deformity of fingers, absent creases on dorsal distal interphalangeal joints of fingers, scoliosis, patellofemoral joint anomalies, elbow anomalies, pelvis anomalies, sensorineural hearing loss; weak, crumbling teeth; epilepsy hypertelorism, epicanthal folds	Ptosis, microcornea, sclerocornea, keratoconus, corneal oedema, microphakia, congenital cataract, cloverleaf hyperpigmentation around the central iris (Lester’s sign), anterior synechiae, glaucoma, ocular hypertension, multiple iris processes, heterochromia, pigment dispersion syndrome, anisocoria, strabismus	0 TPM	Abnormal iris, abnormal cornea, corneal ulcers, abnormal lens, microphthalmia	 	MAGI2 (606382) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 15 (61,609)	Cell junction organisation	Nephrotic syndrome	None reported	None reported	11.6 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	MYH9 (160775) (GE- green)	Macrothrombo-cytopenia, granulocyte inclusions with or without nephritis or sensorineural hearing loss (155100) AD	Cytoskeleton	FSGS	Thrombocytopaenia, giant platelets, high frequency sensorineural hearing loss	Congenital cataract, presenile cataract, neovascularisation, retinal haemorrhage, vitreous haemorrhage, peripheral retinal pigmentary changes	9.7 TPM	Abnormal cornea, abnormal lens	 	MYO1E (601479) (GE- green)	FSGS-6 (614,131) AR	Slit diaphragm complex, cytoskeleton	FSGS	None reported	None reported	9.9 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	NPHS1 (602716) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 1 (256300) AR	Slit diaphragm complex	FSGS, minimal change glomerulo-nephritis	Pyloric stenosis	Myopia, high hyperopia, bilateral posterior subcapsular cataract, strabismus, amblyopia	0.7 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	NPHS2 (604766) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 2 (600995) AR	Slit diaphragm complex	FSGS	None reported	Myopic astigmatism, cataract, anisometropic amblyopia, exotropia	0 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	NUP85 (170285) NUP75 (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 17 (618176) AR	Nuclear proteins and transcription factors	FSGS	Intellectual disability, short stature	None reported	11.2 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	NUP93 (614351) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 12 (616892) AR	Nuclear proteins and transcription factors	FSGS diffuse mesangial sclerosis	None reported	None reported	31.7 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	NUP107 (607617) (GE-green)	Galloway–Mowat syndrome 7 (618348) AR; Nephrotic syndrome, type 11 (616730) AR	Nuclear proteins and transcription factors	FSGS, IgA nephropathy; FSGS, minimal change nephrotic syndrome, diffuse mesangial sclerosis	Mild-moderate intellectual disability, developmental delay, microcephaly, sloping forehead, bitemporal narrowing, smooth philtrum, micrognathia, simian crease, clinodactyly, right brachial plexopathy, bifid thumb, cubitus valgus, hallux valgus, pectus excavatum, kyphoscoliosis, short stature; cleft lip, cleft palate	Hypertelorism (OMIM)	14.7 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	NUP133 (607613) (GE-green)	Galloway–Mowat syndrome 8 (618349) AR	Nuclear proteins and transcription factors	FSGS	Psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, microcephaly, bilateral thumb deviation, enamel hypoplasia, atopic dermatitis, epilepsy, talipes calcaneus, equinus foot	Convergent strabismus	19.1 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	OCRL (300535) (GE- green)	Dent disease 2; Lowe syndrome, XL	Membrane trafficking	Proximal tubular defect; amino-aciduria; nephron-calcinosis, kidney failure	Developmental delay, intellectual impairment	Cataracts present at birth, glaucoma, microphthalmia, impaired visual acuity, (Lowe syndrome)	9.9 TPM	Abnormal eye	 	OSGEP (610107) (GE-green)	Galloway–Mowat syndrome 3 (617729) AR		Nephrotic syndrome, kidney failure	Microcephaly, micrognathia, arachnodactyly, intellectual disability	Microphthalmia, strabismus, hypertelorism, impaired vision	4.1 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	PAX2 (167409) (GE-green)	FSGS-7 (616002) AD	DNA repair, transcription, nuclear transport	Adult onset FSGS	Mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, microcephaly, cryptorchidism	Optic nerve coloboma; optic disc coloboma, optic disc pit, optic nerve atrophy, glaucomatous cupping	1.2 TPM	Coloboma, abnormal retina, abnormal blood vessels	 	PDSS2 (610564) (GE- green)	Coenzyme Q10 Deficiency, Primary, 3 (614652) AR	Mitochondrial function	Susceptibility to FSGS	Hypotonia, seizures	Cortical blindness, Leigh syndrome	6.0 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	PLCE1 (608414) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 3 (610725) AR	Cell signalling slit diaphragm	FSGS, diffuse mesangial sclerosis	None reported	Glaucoma	7.3 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	PODXL (602632) (GE- green)	AR	Cell membrane associated protein	FSGS	None reported	None reported	67.8 TPM	Abnormal retinal pathology	 	PTPRO 600579 (GE-amber)	Nephrotic syndrome type 6 (614196) AR	Podocyte tyrosine phosphatase	FSGS	None reported	None reported	7.5 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	SCARB2 (602257) (GE- green)	Epilepsy, progressive myoclonic 4, with or without kidney failure (254900) AR	Lysosome	FSGS	Progressive fine tremor, action myoclonus, convulsive seizures, ataxia, dysarthria, slight cognitive impairment, rapid eye movement sleep disorder	Slowed horizontal saccades	53.2 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	SGPL1 (603729) (GE-green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 14 (617575) AR	Metabolic and cytosolic	FSGS, diffuse mesangial sclerosis	Primary adrenal insufficiency, hyperpigmentation, ichthyosis, primary hypothyroidism, neurodevelopmental delay, ataxia, cognitive decline, sensorineural deafness, seizures, lymphopaenia, hypocalcaemia, hypoglycaemia, dyslipidaemia, cryptorchidism, micropenis, microcephaly, hypotonia, peripheral neuropathy	Bilateral cataracts, salt and pepper retinopathy, ptosis, esotropia, amblyopia, strabismus	10.8 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	SMARCAL1 (606622) (GE- green)	Schimke immunoosseous dysplasia (242900) AR	DNA repair, transcription, nuclear transport	FSGS	Lymphopenia. multiple lentigines, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, cerebral infarcts	Astigmatism, corneal opacity, myopia	5.8 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	TBC1D8B (301027) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 20 (301028) XL	Metabolic and cytosolic	FSGS, kidney failure	None reported	None reported	9.6 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	TPRKB (608680) (GE–amber)	Galloway–Mowat syndrome 5 (617731) AR	Part of KEOPS complex	FSGS, kidney failure	Microcephaly, delayed psychomotor development, demyelination	Hypertelorism, epicanthal folds	16.1 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	TNS2 (607717) (GE- green)	Nephrotic syndrome type 22	Binds to actin	Minimal change diffuse mesangial sclerosis	None reported	None reported	6.0 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	TP53RK (608679) (GE- green)	Galloway–Mowat syndrome 4 (617730) AR	DNA repair, transcription	FSGS, diffuse mesangial sclerosis	Primary microcephaly, seizures, developmental delay, cognitive impairment, hypotonia, spasticity, facial dysmorphism, short stature, tapered fingers, feeding difficulties, multiple hypo- and hyperpigmented macules	Hypertelorism, visual impairment	6.4 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	TRPC6 (603652) (GE- green)	FSGS-2 (603965) AD	Cell signalling, slit diaphragm	FSGS, minimal change disease, kidney failure	None reported	None reported	0.3 TPM	Abnormal eye physiology	 	WDR73 (616144) (GE- green)	Galloway–Mowat syndrome 1 (251300) AR	DNA repair, transcription, nuclear transport	FSGS diffuse mesangial sclerosis	Microcephaly, hiatus hernia, hypotonia, abnormal skull, flat occiput, seizures, developmental delay, bilateral club feet, micrognathia, close-set eyes, large ears, small midface, aqueductal stenosis, epicanthal folds, broad nasal bridge, hypertelorism, congenital hypothyroidism, contractures, bilateral simian crease, thyroid dysplasia, adrenal hypoplasia, hypertonia, spastic quadriplegia, short stature, dystonia, ataxia, hirsutism, hip dysplasia	Myopia, optic atrophy, optic neuropathy, retinopathy, abnormal visual evoked potentials, strabismus, nystagmus, oculomotor apraxia	3.4 TPM	No eye pathology noted	 	WT1 (607102) (GE- green)	WT1 diseases, FSGS-4 (256370) AD	DNA repair, transcription, nuclear transport	Wilms tumour FSGS-4, diffuse mesangial sclerosis	Congenital hemihypertrophy, genitourinary abnormalities,intellectual disability, diaphragmatic hernia, hypomyelinating leukodystrophy	Bilateral ptosis, hazy cornea, nuclear and foetal cataracts, anterior polar cataracts, posterior subcapsular cataracts, increased intraocular pressure, aniridia, bilateral optic atrophy	0 TPM	 No eye pathology noted
References for the ocular features are provided in the Supplementary file
AD autosomal dominant, AR autosomal recessive, XL X-linked, CAKUT congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract, FSGS focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. GE-, gene is from the Genomics England panel for Renal proteinuria. These panels use a traffic light system where ‘green’ genes have the best evidence for an association with the disease (pathogenic variants have been reported in at least 3 families or two families with other evidence) or ‘amber’ where the evidence is less than this as assessed by an expert panel
Common mitochondrial diseases causing FSGS, ocular features, retinal expression and ocular phenotypes in mouse models
Disease (OMIM)	Genes (OMIM)	Kidney features	Extrarenal features	Ocular features	 	Myopathy, Encephalopathy, Lactic Acidosis, Stroke (MELAS) syndrome	MT-TL1 and other genes	FSGS, tubulointerstitial nephropathy, kidney failure	Stroke, seizures, lactic acidosis, dementia, short stature, hearing loss, learning disability, myoclonus, cerebellar signs, congestive heart failure, Wolff–Parkinson–White, cardiac conduction block, diabetes mellitus, peripheral neuropathy, gait disturbance depression, bipolar disorder, ragged red fibres on muscle biopsy	Ptosis, cataracts, optic atrophy, optic neuropathy, progressive external ophthalmoplegia, inherited retinal degeneration	 	Maternally-inherited Diabetes and Deafness (MIDD) syndrome (520000)	MT-TL1, MT-TE, MT-TK and other genes	FSGS; kidney failure	Sensorineural hearing loss and diabetes in adulthood; seizures dysarthria	Inherited retinal degeneration, macular dystrophy, external ophthalmoplegia	 	Kearns–Sayre syndrome (530000)	Mutations in various mitochondrial genes	FSGS; Fanconi syndrome, renal tubular acidosis, kidney failure	Sensorineural hearing loss, cardiomyopathy, heart conduction defects	Inherited retinal degeneration, ophthalmoplegia, ptosis
References for the ocular features are provided in the Supplementary file
Common ocular manifestations in genetic forms of FSGS
Ophthalmic feature	Detail	Genes	Disease name	 	Hypermetropia		NPHS1	Nephrotic syndrome type 1	 	Myopia		COL4A3-COL4A4	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 		CRB2	FSGS-9	 		LAMB2	Pierson syndrome	 		NPHS1	Nephrotic syndrome type 1	 		NPHS2	Nephrotic syndrome type 2	 		WDR73	Galloway-Mowat syndrome 1	 	Congenital size anomaly	Buphthalmos	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Microphthalmia	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Megalocornea	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Microcornea	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	Coloboma	Optic disc coloboma	PAX2	FSGS-7	 	Orbit	Hypertelorism	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	WDR73	Galloway-Mowat syndrome 1	 	Lids	Ptosis	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	Mito	MELAS, MIDD and Kearns-Sayre syndrome	 	SGPL1	Nephrotic syndrome type 14	 	WT1	WT1 diseases	 	Corkscrew conjunctival arterioles	GLA	Fabry disease	 	Cornea	Recurrent corneal erosions	COL4A3- COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 	Posterior polymorphous corneal dystrophy	COL4A3- COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 	Corneal verticillata	GLA	Fabry disease	 	Corneal clouding	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Hazy cornea	WT1	WT1 disease	 	Posterior embryotoxon	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Sclerocornea	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	Keratoconus	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy	KANK4 (GWAS)	 FSGS	 	Anterior segment malformations	Iris malformations	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Pigment dispersion syndrome	COL4A3-COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 		LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	Ectropion uvea	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Lester’s sign	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	Aniridia	WT1	WT1 diseases	 	Lens	Anterior lenticonus	COL4A3-COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 	Posterior lenticonus	COL4A3-COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 		LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Cataract	COL4A3-COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 	GLA	Fabry disease	 	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	Mito	MELAS syndrome	 	MYH9	Macrothrombocytopenia and granulocyte inclusions with or without nephritis or sensorineural hearing loss	 	NPHS1	Nephrotic syndrome type 1	 	NPHS2	Nephrotic syndrome type 2	 	SGPL1	Nephrotic syndrome type 14	 	WT1	WT1 diseases	 	Spherophakia	COL4A3- COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Microphakia	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	Optic disc	Glaucoma	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	PAX2	FSGS-7	 	PLCE1	Nephrotic syndrome type 3	 	WT1	WT1 diseases	 	Optic atrophy	COQ2	Coenzyme Q10 deficiency, primary, 1	 	COQ6	Coenzyme Q10 deficiency, primary, 6	 	CRB2	FSGS-9	 	Mito	MELAS syndrome	 	NUP93	Nephrotic syndrome type 12	 	PAX2	FSGS-7	 	WDR73	Galloway-Mowat syndrome 1	 	WT1	WT1 diseases	 	Hypoplastic optic nerve	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Optic neuropathy	Mito	MELAS syndrome	 		WDR73	Galloway-Mowat syndrome 1	 	Optic disc pit	PAX2	FSGS-7	 	Macula	Macular hole	COL4A3- COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 	Macular pit	CRB2	FSGS-9	 	Macular choroidal neovascularisation	GLA	Fabry disease	 	Macular hypoplasia	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Vitelliform maculopathy	COL4A3- COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 	Mito	MELAS syndrome	 	Retina	Central and peripheral retinopathy	COL4A3- COL4A5	XL and AR Alport syndrome	 	Retinitis pigmentation/Inherited Retinal Degeneration	COQ2	Coenzyme Q10 deficiency, primary, 1	 	COQ8B	Nephrotic syndrome type 9	 	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Mito	MELAS, MIDD, Kearns Sayre syndrome	 	Pale retina	CRB2	FSGS-9	 	Microaneurysms	G6PC	Glycogen storage disease Ia	 	GLA	Fabry disease	 	Tortuous retinal vessels	ACTN4	FSGS-1	 	GLA	Fabry disease	 	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Central retinal artery occlusion	GLA	Fabry disease	 	Central retinal vein occlusion	GLA	Fabry disease	 	Retinal detachment	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	Retinal haemorrhage	G6PC	Glycogen storage disease Ia	 	MYH9	Macrothrombocytopenia and granulocyte inclusions with or without nephritis or sensorineural hearing loss	 	Neuro-ophthalmic	Strabismus	COQ6	Coenzyme Q10 deficiency, primary, 6	 	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	NPHS1	Nephrotic syndrome type 1	 	NPHS2	Nephrotic syndrome type 2	 	NUP133	Galloway-Mowat syndrome 8	 	SGPL1	Nephrotic syndrome type 14	 	WDR73	Galloway-Mowat syndrome 1	 	Pupil disorders	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	LMX1B	Nail-patella syndrome	 	Nystagmus	COQ6	Coenzyme Q10 deficiency, primary, 6	 	LAMB2	Pierson syndrome; nephrotic syndrome type 5	 	WDR73	Galloway-Mowat syndrome 1	 	Progressive external ophthalmoplegia	Mito	MELAS syndrome, MIDD, Kearns-Sayre syndrome
Ocular features associated with genetic causes of FSGS demonstrating a congenital cataract; b inferior coloboma; c microphthalmia with inferior coloboma in partner eye of (b); d retinal profile on optical coherence tomography in Pierson syndrome presenting in adulthood; e retinal profile in X-linked Alport syndrome demonstrating the resemblance; f cherry red spot macula typical of many metabolic diseases including Fabry disease; and g optical coherence tomography profile of the retina with accumulation at the level of the external limiting membrane
Ocular features associated with XL or AR Alport syndrome demonstrating a perimacular fleck retinopathy; b subtle perimacular fleck retinopathy that must be distinguished from the normal retinal sheen seen in young people; c black and white image of (b) demonstrating the fleck retinopathy more clearly; d black and white image demonstrating the margins of a large macular hole; e maculopathy; f typical profile on optical coherence tomography demonstrating the > 10% temporal retinal atrophy; and g retinal profile on optical coherence tomography demonstrating a lamellar macular hole
Ocular features associated with FSGS due to mitochondrial diseases demonstrating a MELAS with focal atrophy in the right eye and generalised perifoveal thinning; b red-free photograph with more extensive areas of foveal atrophy; c optical coherence tomography scan with areas of atrophy confirming the foveal defects in the outer retina and retinal pigment epithelium; d MIDD demonstrating normal fovea surrounded by extensive atrophy; and e optical coherence tomography demonstrating parafoveal atrophy of the outer retinal layer
Fifty-five genes from the Genomics England Renal proteinuria panel were studied. Thirty-two (58%) had ocular manifestations reported in human disease (Tables 1, 2 and 3; Figs. 2, 3 and 4).
Most of the genes commonly associated with congenital nephrotic syndrome have reported ocular manifestations (NPHS1, NPHS2, WT1, LAMB2, PAX2, PLCE1). Many genes associated with childhood–adolescent FSGS also have ocular abnormalities (NPHS1, NPHS2, WT1, LAMB2, SMARCAL1, NUP107, PLCE1 but not TRPC6). The commonest genes associated with adult-onset FSGS (COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5) have ocular abnormalities as does GLA (Fabry disease), but not ACTN4, CD2AP, INF2 or TRPC6. LMX1B and MYH9 are infrequent causes of FSGS but ocular features are common.
Mitochondrial diseases that result in FSGS (MELAS, MIDD, Kearn’s Sayre disease) typically result in inherited retinal degeneration and retinal atrophy (Table 2, Fig. 4).
The Renal proteinuria gene list corresponded to some genetic kidney diseases (CAKUT, tubulopathies, ciliopathies) that result in secondary FSGS such as Dent disease (CLCN5, OCRL), nephronophthisis (TTC21B, NPHP4), ADTKD-UMOD and Imerslund-Grasbeck syndrome 1 (CUBN). Of these, Dent disease and nephronophthisis both have ocular features.
Of the 55 genes studied, 51 (93%) had transcripts expressed in the retina, but only 16 (29%) had more than 10 transcripts per million, expression was not examined in other parts of the eye and protein levels were not quantitated. Twenty-seven of these genes (49%) were associated with an ocular phenotype in a mouse model. This meant that a further 12 genes (22%) had > 10 transcripts per million in the retina or an ocular phenotype in a mouse model, suggesting that an uncommon or milder ocular phenotype, even if not recognised to date, might still be found in human disease.

Common ocular abnormalities in genetic forms of FSGS
The ocular manifestations associated with the largest number of FSGS-causing genes in this search were ptosis, myopia, strabismus, cataract, retinal atrophy and inherited retinal degeneration (Table 3).
Some ocular features were found only associated with one gene and were common and highly specific . These included Pierson syndrome (LAMB2 variants resulting in microphthalmia); MELAS and MIDD ( mitochondrial variants with inherited retinal degeneration); papillorenal syndrome (PAX2, with abnormal disc vasculature); and the Wilm’s tumour, Aniridia, genitourinary anomalies and impaired intellectual development (WAGR) syndrome (, WT1, with aniridia); Alport syndrome (COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5, with lenticonus and fleck retinopathies, temporal retinal thinning, maculopathy and macular hole); and Fabry disease (GLA, with corneal verticillata, and tortuous vessels) (Figs. 2, 3 and 4).
Inherited retinal degeneration and retinal atrophy occurred with pathogenic variants in LAMB2 and with mitochondrial variants (COQ2, COQ8B, MELAS, MIDD, Kearns–Sayre disease) (Fig. 4). Inherited retinal degeneration is a heterogenous group of diseases characterised by premature loss of photoreceptors (rods, cones, or both ) or the underlying choroid. Clinical features include night blindness, loss of peripheral vision and subsequent loss of central vision. In general, there is no effective treatment but gene therapy has been recently approved for some of these diseases .

Pierson syndrome (LAMB2)
LAMB2 mutations cause both the more severe disease, Pierson syndrome, as well as nephrotic syndrome type 5. Pierson syndrome presents with congenital nephrotic syndrome that progresses to kidney failure. It is associated with neurodevelopmental delay, and kidney biopsies typically demonstrate diffuse mesangial sclerosis. Individuals with FSGS due to LAMB2 missense variants have a milder phenotype with a slower progression to kidney failure, no neurodevelopmental abnormalities and fewer and milder ocular features.
Anophthalmia and microphthalmia are characteristic of Pierson syndrome. Microcoria may be present from birth and characterised by fixed pupils unresponsive to mydriatics. This is likely attributable to iris stroma hypoplasia which appears as a flat, featureless, transilluminable iris, as well as uveal ectropion. Management may require pupilloplasty to improve vision.
Other abnormalities also affect vision. Shallow anterior chambers predispose to glaucoma from angle closure or anterior segment dysgenesis. Retinal detachment, scarring and subretinal fibrosis may result in visual loss.
Nephrotic syndrome type 5 or FSGS resulting from milder LAMB2 variants and presenting in later childhood or adolescence is associated with more subtle ocular abnormalities often with no visual consequences.

Papillorenal syndrome (PAX2)
Pathogenic variants in PAX2 commonly result in the papillorenal syndrome which more typically manifests as CAKUT with ocular anomalies. However, certain PAX2 variants are also associated with SRNS, and adult-onset FSGS rather than CAKUT.
Affected individuals may have unilateral or bilateral optic disc anomalies that vary from an optic disc pit to a chorioretinal coloboma. The characteristic feature is the emergence of the retinal vessels from the periphery rather than the centre of the optic disc. Reduced visual acuity correlates with the degree of foveal involvement. The anomaly may vary in each eye and in different affected family members. The visual consequences also vary. Refractive error is common. Complications include perifoveal splitting, optic nerve atrophy and bilateral glaucomatous cupping. There is no treatment.

WAGR (WT1)
WT1 mutations result in FSGS (nephrotic syndrome type 4), as well as the WAGR, Denys–Drash and Frasier syndromes. These are very rare diseases that present with proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome in the first years of life, as well as extra-renal features.
Aniridia also occurs in the WAGR syndrome that is associated with hemizygosity for the PAX6 gene and deletions of 11p13 including WT1. Affected individuals have photophobia and reduced visual acuity. Diagnosis of the syndrome is important because of the risk of Wilm’s tumour.

Alport syndrome (COL4A3, COL4A4, COL4A5)
Pathogenic variants in COL4A3, COL4A5 and COL4A5 result in XL (COL4A5) and AR Alport syndrome (where there are two COL4A3 or COL4A4 variants) which are characterised by kidney failure, sensorineural hearing loss and lenticonus, recurrent corneal erosions and a fleck retinopathy, retinal thinning and macular holes. Proteinuria and FSGS are present in the most boys with XL Alport syndrome and boys and girls with AR disease. AD Alport syndrome with heterozygous COL4A3 or COL4A4 variants typically results in haematuria, and sometimes FSGS but without a hearing loss or ocular abnormalities.
Corneal erosions occur unilaterally or bilaterally, causing ocular pain or irritation, lacrimation and photophobia. Posterior polymorphous dystrophy is very rare and demonstrated with slit lamp examination. Lesions typically occur on the posterior corneal surface as clear vesicles surrounded by a thickened Descemet’s membrane.
Anterior lenticonus is pathognomonic for Alport syndrome and identified on slit lamp examination since the anterior axial projection of the central lens produces an ‘oil droplet’ appearance of the red reflex. Sometimes, a cataract forms after rupture of the lens capsule. Affected individuals have difficulty focusing and reduced visual acuity. Treatment is lens extraction and replacement. Lenticonus does not recur and posterior lenticonus is less common.
A fleck retinopathy is the commonest ocular finding in males and females with XL or AR Alport syndrome. The central retinopathy is characterised by multiple white flecks that spare the fovea and is evident on ophthalmoscopy and retinal imaging. The macular reflex may be absent. A peripheral retinopathy appears as larger coalescing lesions that spare the retinal vessels. Visual acuity is not affected, and no treatment is required.
Temporal retinal thinning (> 10% of average nasal thickness) is typical on optical coherence tomography in males with XL and in males and females with AR Alport syndrome. Sometimes multiple lamellar holes coalesce to form a ‘giant’ macular hole with loss of central vision. Surgical repair is generally difficult and the patient is typically left with a permanent visual loss.
Boys with XL Alport syndrome may have no ocular manifestations, but those who develop kidney failure at a young age will often have a central and peripheral retinopathy, and both lenticonus and temporal retinal thinning have been reported in childhood. Girls with XL Alport syndrome usually have no ocular manifestations. Boys and girls with AR Alport syndrome may have the retinopathy and temporal retinal thinning.

Fabry disease (GLA)
Fabry disease is an XL disorder caused by pathogenic variants in GLA which encodes α-galactosidase. The subsequent accumulation of glycosphingolipids leads to end-organ damage. FSGS manifests as proteinuria but kidney failure usually occurs in adulthood. Extrarenal features include acroparaesthesiae, hypohydrosis and abdominal pain from childhood, angiokeratomas, cardiac hypertrophy and cerebrovascular disease. Uncommonly, FSGS occurs without extrarenal features.
Ocular abnormalities are more common in hemizygous males than heterozygous females. Lacrimal secretions are sometimes reduced and potentially contribute to complaints of sore dry eyes. Bilateral conjunctival and retinal vessel tortuosities occur in nearly all affected males and many females. Corkscrew arterioles with irregular dilatations, constrictions and microaneurysms are seen, especially in the inferior conjunctivae. The presence of conjunctival tortuosity correlates with increased disease severity, as measured by the Fabry Outcome Survey-Mainz Severity Score Index (FOS-MSSI), and affected individuals have a more rapid decline in kidney function and increase in cardiac size with age. Tortuous vessels also occur on the upper eyelids. Enzyme replacement therapy may prevent progression of conjunctival and upper lid tortuosity and slow the development of kidney and cardiac disease.
Corneal verticillata are subtle, fine, subepithelial streaks running from the centre of the cornea in whorls to the periphery. They develop early in life, are usually located inferiorly and vary from creamy white to golden brown. A brownish, grey or white subepithelial corneal haze may be seen. These corneal changes progress and become more evident with time. Visual acuity is preserved but there may be reduced night vision and increased glare. These features are highly specific for Fabry disease after pharmacological causes such as amiodarone, chloroquine, and chlorpromazine use have been excluded. The verticillata do not correlate with disease progression and may regress with enzyme replacement therapy.
A granular anterior capsular lens opacity frequently occurs bilaterally in the inferior quadrants. These are usually wedge-shaped, with bases towards the equator and apices towards the centre of the anterior capsule. Posterior lens anomalies are less common, but a cataract with thin, branching, spoke-like opacities radiating from the centre of the posterior capsule is pathognomonic for Fabry disease and may be the only ocular manifestation. Cataracts continue to develop despite enzyme replacement therapy.
Retinal vascular changes are also more frequent in hemizygotes. Arterioles appear narrowed with arteriovenous nicking at the peripheries; and capillary micro- and macro-aneurysms occur throughout the retina. Corkscrew tortuosity, especially of the veins, is also seen at the posterior pole. These changes continue to worsen despite enzyme treatment.
Further serious ocular complications include central retinal artery occlusion, anterior ischemic optic neuropathy and central retinal vein occlusion.

Nail-patella syndrome (LMX1B)
Pathogenic variants in LMX1B result in the Nail-patella syndrome which is associated with haematuria, and sometimes kidney failure as well as cataract, hearing loss, limb and pelvic skeletal abnormalities. Interestingly, however, many individuals with Nail-patella syndrome have only kidney manifestations, and, in particular, no ocular features.

Ocular abnormalities in mitochondrial causes of FSGS

MELAS and MIDD
These diseases result from various pathogenic variants in mitochondrial DNA and are not detected with whole exome sequencing (Table 3).
The m.3242A > G variant is responsible for many individuals with MELAS. The characteristic features have an onset prior to age 40, typically with stroke, seizures, lactic acidosis and ragged red fibres on muscle biopsy. FSGS presents in adulthood and varies from non-nephrotic range proteinuria to SRNS progressing to kidney failure requiring haemodialysis or transplantation. The most common ocular manifestation is a progressive, bilateral macular dystrophy at the level of the retinal pigment epithelium. Lesions first become obvious in adulthood and are graded on ophthalmoscopy and fundus autofluorescence findings. On fundoscopy, mild pigmentary abnormalities initially occur in the central fundus. With disease progression, isolated or multifocal whitish-yellow or hyperpigmented subretinal deposits are seen at the posterior pole. Discontinuous areas of pronounced chorioretinal atrophy develop circumferentially around the fovea and coalesce over time. Finally, the central fovea is also affected by extensive chorioretinal atrophy. Visual features include blind spots, impaired night vision and photophobia. Vision deteriorates over time but is relatively preserved if the fovea is spared. Proteinuria precedes the macular dystrophy by years.
The bilateral vitelliform macular lesions may develop areas of retinal pigment atrophy over a decade. There is no specific treatment for mitochondrial disease but exercise, reduced alcohol intake, smoking cessation and vitamin supplementation are often used although without much evidence for efficacy.
MIDD is a mitochondrial disorder characterised by hearing loss and type 2 diabetes in adulthood. There may be additional features such as cardiomyopathy, myopathy, FSGS or other kidney disorders and neuropsychiatric features. MIDD accounts for up to 1% of all new cases of diabetes. It results from a pathogenic variant that impairs oxidative phosphorylation and ATP production.
The ocular features include ptosis and inherited retinal degeneration which occur in almost all the patients.

Kearns–Sayre syndrome
This is another mitochondrial disease with variable features including FSGS or renal tubulopathy, short stature, microcephaly, myopathy, cardiomyopathy, cardiac conduction defect, hearing loss and cerebellar ataxia. The typical ocular abnormalities include progressive external ophthalmoplegia, ptosis and inherited retinal degeneration.

Discussion
Thirty-two of the 55 genes from the Genomics England Renal proteinuria panel were associated with an ocular phenotype in human disease. A further 12 genes were expressed in the retina or the corresponding mouse models had ocular features, suggesting that additional ocular manifestations might still be identified. Thus, at least 44 of the 55 genes (80%) currently recognised to be affected in genetic forms of FSGS may have ocular abnormalities.
The commonest reported ocular associations of genetic FSGS genes are cataracts, myopia, strabismus, ptosis, retinal atrophy and inherited retinal degeneration, but these features are often found infrequently. In contrast, some ocular abnormalities are associated with only one gene, but the diseases themselves are relatively common causes of genetic FSGS. These abnormalities include the optic disc anomalies with papillorenal syndrome, the fleck retinopathy in Alport syndrome and the corneal verticillata and vascular tortuosity with Fabry disease. In the mitochondrial diseases, inherited retinal dystrophy and retinal atrophy are often present but the kidney manifestations including FSGS, tubulopathies and cysts are more variable.
In general, it is not possible to deduce how often ocular abnormalities occur in individual cases of genetic forms of FSGS. The likelihood of ocular abnormalities depends on the age of the individual, the gene affected and the variant type, that is, whether it is a nonsense or missense change. The ocular features a may be different in other affected family members. In addition, the demonstration of an ocular abnormality will depend on a thorough ophthalmic examination. Mild or early manifestations may be obvious only with a formal ophthalmic review or investigations such as optical coherence tomography (OCT) or peripheral retinal imaging.
Structural ocular abnormalities such as coloboma, optic disc anomaly or microphthalmia are typically present from birth, and treatment is not usually possible. Strabismus becomes obvious early. The ocular features of Fabry disease may not be present at the time of kidney disease diagnosis, but develop over time, and treatment slows progression. With pathogenic variants in the mitochondrial genome, the kidney disease often precedes the onset of atrophy or inherited retinal degeneration.
Many of the genetic kidney diseases previously considered to be paediatric are now also diagnosed for the first time in adults but the ocular manifestations may be less pronounced than those seen in disease with a childhood onset. Thus, Pierson syndrome may manifest with anophthalmia or microphthalmia in neonates but with renal-limited FSGS in adolescents or adults. Nevertheless, it is important for paediatric nephrologists to understand how ocular manifestations in genetic kidney disease differ with increasing age because they may be able to make the diagnosis in an older family member.
The presence of ocular abnormalities may also indicate more severe kidney disease. In Pierson syndrome, severe ocular phenotypes are associated with earlier onset kidney failure. In Alport syndrome, the more severe genetic variants are associated more often with lenticonus, more severe central retinopathy and temporal atrophy, and earlier onset kidney failure. In Fabry disease, the presence of retinal and conjunctival vessel tortuosity correlates with a more rapid decline in kidney and cardiac function.
Ocular phenotypes are still not described for some of the FSGS-associated genes, even where there is retinal expression or a mouse ocular phenotype. However, many of these diseases are very rare, patients may not have undergone formal ophthalmological review; the reporting laboratory may not have had access to the clinical examination findings; the association with the ocular abnormality may not have been recognised; and sometimes, conversely, the reported ocular features are coincidental.
This study has tested for ocular abnormalities as indicators of extrarenal disease that suggest a genetic basis for FSGS, but other organ systems, such as the hearing, heart, skeleton and brain, are commonly affected too. These abnormalities may be more obvious than the ocular features. Nevertheless, a basic ophthalmic examination is inexpensive and non-invasive, and some ocular abnormalities affect vision and must be treated or monitored for complications.
Some ocular features such as coloboma and optic atrophy are obvious to the renal physician and their association with FSGS suggests a genetic cause. In such cases, it is worthwhile seeking a family history of kidney disease and undertaking genetic testing. An early assessment by an interested ophthalmologist where ocular involvement is suspected is important. Even where the abnormality is present at birth and does not typically progress, complications such as strabismus, cataract, glaucoma and retinal detachment can occur. The ophthalmologist is best placed to assess how often the ophthalmic features should be monitored and any treatment required, such as surgery for strabismus or retinal detachment. The patient must be assessed for other syndromic features and first degree relatives also examined.
The strengths of this study were the examination of the Genomics England Renal proteinuria panel which is widely used in testing for the genetic cause of FSGS, and the systematic approach to identifying ocular abnormalities from OMIM and the literature as well as examining retinal expression and the effect in mouse models. Genes associated with FSGS will continue to be identified, and some of these will have ocular features. However, the aim of this study was not to identify all the FSGS genes with an ocular association, but rather to determine whether ocular features were common enough to identify a genetic cause, and the gene itself, whether they indicated more severe disease and whether they affected vision.
The study’s major limitations were that the Renal proteinuria panel did not include some genes that might be considered pathogenic. In addition,some reports of genetic FSGS were rare; the ophthalmic examinations often absent or incomplete; and sometimes a gene was not only associated with FSGS but also with CAKUT, a tubulopathy or cystic kidney disease. Finally, there was little data on how often the ocular manifestations were present in affected children and adults and the age by which features had developed if not apparent at birth.
In conclusion, ocular abnormalities are common in genetic forms of FSGS, suggest their genetic nature and often a specific diagnosis, and may predict renal disease severity. Importantly, some genetic forms of FSGS are associated with ocular features that must be monitored and treated to avoid complications and to maintain vision.

Supplementary Information
Publisher's note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and its Member Institutions

Data Availability
All data used in this study is available in the manuscript or the Supplementary file.

Declarations

Conflict of interest
VZ, TH, and DW were medical students who undertook this research project during a COVID lockdown. HGM has received research funding from Retinal Australia and Honoraria from Novartis. The other authors have no financial or non-financial conflicts of interest to declare.

References
Causes and pathogenesis of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Focal segmental glomerular sclerosis in adults: presentation, course, and response to treatment
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis in nephrotic adults: presentation, prognosis, and response to therapy of the histologic variants
Absence of hypoalbuminemia despite massive proteinuria in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis secondary to hyperfiltration
Differentiating primary, genetic, and secondary FSGS in adults: a clinicopathologic approach
Approach to diagnosis and management of primary glomerular diseases due to podocytopathies in adults: core curriculum 2020
Thin basement membrane nephropathy
Collagen (COL4A) mutations are the most frequent mutations underlying adult focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Genomic and clinical profiling of a national nephrotic syndrome cohort advocates a precision medicine approach to disease management
Identification of genetic causes for sporadic steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome in adults
Identification of disease-causing variants by comprehensive genetic testing with exome sequencing in adults with suspicion of hereditary FSGS
Monogenic causes of chronic kidney disease in adults
Genetic testing in the diagnosis of chronic kidney disease: recommendations for clinical practice
Integration of genetic testing and pathology for the diagnosis of adults with FSGS
Genetic causes of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis: implications for clinical practice
Monogenic focal segmental glomerulosclerosis: a conceptual framework for identification and management of a heterogeneous disease
Clinical and pathologic features of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) gene mutation
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis associated with maternally inherited diabetes and deafness: clinical pathological analysis
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis associated with chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia and mitochondrial DNA A3243G Mutation
Retinal abnormalities characteristic of inherited renal disease
Ocular features in Alport syndrome: pathogenesis and clinical significance
The eye, the kidney, and cardiovascular disease: old concepts, better tools, and new horizons
The dynamic nature of Bruch's membrane
The retinal renin–angiotensin system: roles of angiotensin II and aldosterone
Retinal dystrophies, genomic applications in diagnosis and prospects for therapy
Recessive missense mutations in LAMB2 expand the clinical spectrum of LAMB2-associated disorders
Neurodevelopmental deficits in Pierson (microcoria-congenital nephrosis) syndrome
Congenital nephrosis, mesangial sclerosis, and distinct eye abnormalities with microcoria: an autosomal recessive syndrome
Ophthalmological aspects of Pierson syndrome
Ocular findings in a case of Pierson syndrome with a novel mutation in laminin s2 gene
A syndrome comprising childhood-onset glomerular kidney disease and ocular abnormalities with progressive loss of vision is caused by mutated LAMB2
A novel mutation of LAMB2 in a multigenerational mennonite family reveals a new phenotypic variant of Pierson syndrome
Pierson syndrome in an adolescent girl with nephrotic range proteinuria but a normal GFR
Diverse renal phenotypes observed in a single family with a genetic mutation in paired box protein 2
A new mutation in the PAX2 gene in a Papillorenal Syndrome patient
Dominant PAX2 mutations may cause steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome and FSGS in children
Clinical and genetic variability of PAX2-related disorder in the Japanese population
A novel truncating PAX2 mutation in a boy with renal coloboma syndrome with focal segmental glomerulosclerosis causing rapid progression to end-stage kidney disease
Predicting visual acuity in children with colobomas involving the optic nerve
Combination of WAGR and Potocki-Shaffer contiguous deletion syndromes in a patient with an 11p11.2-p14 deletion
Aniridia: current pathology and management
Hereditary familial congenital haemorrhagic nephritis
Rare hereditary COL4A3/COL4A4 variants may be mistaken for familial focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Clinico-pathological correlations in 127 patients in 11 large pedigrees, segregating one of three heterozygous mutations in the COL4A3/COL4A4 genes associated with familial haematuria and significant late progression to proteinuria and chronic kidney disease from focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Recurrent corneal epithelial erosions in Alport's syndrome
Posterior polymorphous dystrophy and Alport syndrome
Novel corneal phenotype in a patient with alport syndrome
Ocular defects associated with familial renal disease and deafness: case reports and review of literature
Ocular manifestations of Alport's syndrome: a hereditary disorder of basement membranes?
Anterior capsule rupture and subsequent cataract formation in Alport syndrome
Lens capsule abnormalities in Alport's syndrome
The ultrastructure of the lens capsule abnormalities in Alport's syndrome
Lenticonus anterior and Alport's syndrome
Ocular manifestations of autosomal recessive Alport syndrome
Macular lesions in Alport's disease
Alport's syndrome with bilateral macular hole
Giant macular hole in Alport syndrome
Bilateral giant macular holes: a rare manifestation of Alport syndrome
Clinical features of Fabry's disease in Australian patients
Ophthalmological manifestations of Fabry disease: a survey of patients at the Royal Melbourne Fabry Disease Treatment Centre
Ocular manifestations in Fabry disease: a survey of 32 hemizygous male patients
Fabry disease: a survey of visual and ocular symptoms
Sodi A, Ioannidis AS, Mehta A, Davey C, Beck M, Pitz S (2007) Ocular manifestations of Fabry's disease: data from the Fabry outcome survey. Br J Ophthalmol 91:210–4
Vascular tortuosities of the upper eyelid: a new clinical finding in fabry patient screening
Longitudinal study on ocular manifestations in a cohort of patients with Fabry disease
Angiokeratoma corporis diffusum (universale) Fabry, as a sign of an unknown internal disease; two autopsy reports
Fabry's disease Its ocular manifestations
The ocular manifestations in Fabry's disease
Fabry keratopathy: manifestations and changes over time
Quantitative evaluation of visual function in patients with cornea verticillata associated with Fabry disease
Ocular side effects of amiodarone
Ocular signs correlate well with disease severity and genotype in Fabry disease
Ophthalmic experience over 10 years in an observational nationwide Danish cohort of Fabry patients with access to enzyme replacement
Prominent regression of corneal deposits in Fabry disease 16 years after initiation of enzyme replacement therapy
Fabry's disease (angiokeratoma corporis diffusum universale). An unusual syndrome with multisystem involvement and unique skin manifestations
Central retinal artery occlusion complicating Fabry's disease
Fabry's disease and cornea verticillata. A report of 3 cases
Ischemic optic neuropathy in a female carrier with Fabry's disease
A case of anterior ischemic optic neuropathy associated with Fabry's disease
Retinal vein occlusion in a woman with heterozygous Fabry's disease
Nail patella syndrome: a review of the phenotype aided by developmental biology
Genotype-phenotype studies in nail-patella syndrome show that LMX1B mutation location is involved in the risk of developing nephropathy
LMX1B mutations cause hereditary FSGS without extrarenal involvement
LMX1B-Associated nephropathy with type III collagen deposition in the glomerular and tubular basement membranes
Nail-patella-like renal disease masquerading as Fabry disease on kidney biopsy: a case report
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and scheduled pretransplant plasmapheresis: a timely diagnosis of Nail-Patella syndrome avoided more futile immunosuppression
Steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome as the initial presentation of nail-patella syndrome: a case of a de novo LMX1B mutation
Mitochondrial encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes: basic concepts, clinical phenotype, and therapeutic management of MELAS syndrome
Hirano M, Ricci E, Koenigsberger MR, Defendini R, Pavlakis SG, DeVivo DC, DiMauro S, Rowland LP (1992) MELAS: an original case and clinical criteria for diagnosis. Neuromuscul Disord 2:125–135
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis associated with mitochondrial cytopathy
The spectrum of systemic involvement in adults presenting with renal lesion and mitochondrial tRNA(Leu) gene mutation
Mitochondrial tRNALeu(UUR) mutation in a patient with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
Macular pattern retinal dystrophy, adult-onset diabetes, and deafness: a family study of A3243G mitochondrial heteroplasmy
Pigmentary retinal dystrophy and the syndrome of maternally inherited diabetes and deafness caused by the mitochondrial DNA 3243 tRNA(Leu) A to G mutation
Mitochondrial retinal dystrophy associated with the m.3243A>G mutation
Macular dystrophy associated with the A3243G mitochondrial DNA mutation: distinct retinal and associated features, disease variability, and characterization of asymptomatic family members
Characterisation of the macular dystrophy in patients with the A3243G mitochondrial DNA point mutation with fundus autofluorescence
A new phenotype of macular dystrophy associated with a mitochondrial A3243G mutation
The neuro-ophthalmology of mitochondrial disease
Diagnosis and management of mitochondrial disease: a consensus statement from the Mitochondrial Medicine Society
Maternally transmitted diabetes and deafness associated with a 10.4 kb mitochondrial DNA deletion
Clinical features, diagnosis and management of maternally inherited diabetes and deafness (MIDD) associated with the 3243A>G mitochondrial point mutation
Maternally inherited diabetes and deafness: a multicenter study
Alport retinopathy results from "severe" COL4A5 mutations and predicts early renal failure
Temporal retinal thinning and the diagnosis of Alport syndrome and Thin basement membrane nephropathy
Collagen IV gene mutations in adults with bilateral renal cysts and CKD
Mouse genome database (MGD) 2019