Metabolic state-driven nutrient-based approach to combat bacterial antibiotic resistance
To combat antibiotic resistance, one innovative approach, known as the metabolic state-driven approach, exploits the fact that exogenous nutrient metabolites can stimulate uptake of antibiotics. The most effective nutrient metabolites are identified by comparing metabolic states between antibiotic-sensitive and -resistant bacteria. When bacteria are exposed to the specific nutrient metabolites, they undergo a form of metabolic reprogramming. This review summarizes the recent progress on the metabolic state-driven approach.

Introduction
The recent rapid emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria has created a global public health crisis that can be attributed to the misuse and overuse of antibiotic drugs in medical, veterinary, and agricultural practice and food products. During 2019 alone, antibiotic-resistant microorganisms were responsible for 4.95 million human fatalities in 204 countries and territories. By the year 2050, as many as 10 million deaths per year could be caused by antibiotic-resistant microorganisms, if no effective measures are developed in the interim. The infectious Diseases Society of America (ISDA) called attention to the six so-called multidrug-resistant ESKAPE pathogens, Enterococcus faecium, Staphylococcus aureus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Acinetobacter baumannii, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Enterobacter species. They are considered to be the most critical deadly antibiotic-resistant pathogens threatening human health, while acknowledging that other emergent multidrug-resistant bacteria are concerning, if less concerning than the ESKAPE pathogens. Although the search for novel antibiotic drugs is ongoing, avenues of research that proceed conventionally are expected to produce drugs which will eventually become ineffective due to ongoing evolution of drug-resistant strains. Although we expect to eventually prevent or reduce the socioeconomic burden due to the ongoing spread of antibiotic-resistant microbes, the research on unconventional antibacterial agents or strategies is limited and progressed far too slowly. Therefore, innovative strategies and effective agents must be rapidly approved and brought to market, because they are urgently needed to stem the emergent healthcare crisis and prevent massive human suffering caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
Antibiotic-resistant metabolic state is reprogrammed into antibiotic-sensitive metabolic state to be susceptible for antibiotic-mediated killing.
Antibiotic-resistant and -sensitive bacteria have respective specific metabolic profiles, designated as antibiotic-resistant and -sensitive metabolic states, which are responsible for low and high antibiotic uptake, respectively. The antibiotic-resistant metabolic state can be reverted into an antibiotic-sensitive metabolic state by metabolic reprogramming mediated by metabolic reprogramming agents to increase membrane permeability. On the other hand, antibiotic resistance is attributed to diverse mechanisms including decreased membrane permeability, expression of chromosomal β-lactamase, high rate of active drug efflux, or mutations that prevent or block antibiotic-mediated inactivation of its intracellular target. The combined impact on drug uptake, degradation, and efflux determines the net effect on the steady-state intracellular drug concentration. High uptake, which rate exceeds the combined rate of drug degradation and efflux, causes high intracellular drug concentration that is lethal to antibiotic-resistant bacteria, whereas low uptake, which rate is a bit higher than the combined rate of drug degradation and efflux, leads to low intracellular concentration that is nonlethal to them. Because of the high uptake, bacterial survival decreases dramatically at or above the MIC of the selected antibiotic. Therefore, antibiotic-mediated killing is greatly elevated. Green, sensitive metabolic state; Pale red, resistant metabolic state.
Recently, a promising novel strategy on nutrient metabolites has emerged that is based on either improved understanding of bacterial metabolism or the antibiotic-resistant metabolome/metabolic state; they are known as “metabolite-driven” and “metabolic state-driven” approaches, respectively. The metabolite-driven approach relies on empirical data showing that specific exogenous nutrient metabolites potentiate the lethal effects of known antibiotic drugs. The metabolic state-driven is typically based on metabolome profiling/metabolic state to characterize the antibiotic-resistant metabolome/metabolic state, identify putative metabolic mechanisms underlying antibiotic-resistance, and select critical nutrient metabolites as metabolic reprogramming agents. The major difference between the ‘metabolite-driven’ and ‘metabolic state-driven’ approaches is how to determine the metabolic reprogramming agents. This knowledge is then used to develop a protocol for normalizing or reprogramming the antibiotic-resistant metabolome/metabolic state, which potentiates the lethal effects of antibiotic drugs. Both of these approaches increase the permeability of the bacterial membrane, stimulate drug uptake, increase the achievable intracellular concentration of antibiotic drugs and thereby increase bactericidal efficacy (See Fig. 1). It is worth noting that this strategy potentiates the efficacy of known antibiotics, including β-lactam antibiotics, but the mechanism is very different from the mechanism by which β-lactamase inhibitors potentiate cell killing (i.e. by inhibiting β-lactamase-mediated cleavage of the β-lactam ring of the drugs). This review discusses recent progress in developing metabolic state-driven reprogramming in combination with known antibiotic agents, as an effective approach for restoring susceptibility in multidrug-resistant bacteria, while also providing an overview of metabolite-driven approach.

Rationale for metabolic state-driven as an approach for restoring susceptibility in multidrug-resistant pathogens
Recent findings demonstrate that the local environment modulates bacterial drug uptake and other aspects of bacterial metabolism. For example, the abundance of cellular indole, adenosine monophosphate, and nutrient metabolites influences transmembrane proton motive force (PMF), drug and nutrient uptake, and bacterial survival in the presence of antibiotic drugs. It is well-recognized that exogenous sugars or other bacterial carbon sources stimulate uptake and potentiate the bactericidal effects of aminoglycosides on both gram-negative (Escherichia coli) and gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus) persisters and biofilms. Therefore, metabolic reprogramming agents from the empirical data can be effective against antibiotic-resistant bacteria, which is different from metabolic state-driven approach that is based on the systemic analysis of global metabolic state.
Metabolic state-driven approach involves identifying and quantifying intracellular metabolites and the anabolic and catabolic biochemical pathways by which they are interconverted and interrelated. Because of the degree to which metabolic pathways are inter-connected, overabundance or scarcity of a crucial metabolite can profoundly alter the metabolic state of a unicellular organism. However, this also means that, in some cases, metabolic imbalances can readily be identified and corrected, simply by appropriate forms of complementation. As it turns out, an abundant exogenous source of a single nutrient can in some cases restore metabolic balance, normalize metabolic defects, and revert the antibiotic-resistant phenotype to antibiotic sensitivity. In practice, the metabolic state-driven approach is carried out by metabolic reprogramming that involves four consecutive steps. First, metabolome profiles are determined and analytical molecular biological and biochemical analyses are performed to characterize and compare bacterial metabolomes and their correlation with the phenotype(s) of interest, in this case antibiotic-resistance or antibiotic-sensitivity. Second, crucial metabolites linked to the phenotype are identified and their potential as biomarkers and/or metabolic reprogramming agents is tested. Third, the nutrient metabolites are fully characterized, in this case, for their capacity and efficacy in restoring antibiotic susceptibility to a drug-resistant bacterial pathogen. Finally, metabolic reprogramming mechanisms are revealed. Therefore, the metabolic state-driven approach identifies metabolic reprogramming agents by systemic analysis of the global metabolic state and thereby highly effective metabolic reprogramming agents can be determined.
Conceptually, a metabolic reprogramming agent potentiates the efficacy of an antibiotic in the same manner as an adjuvant potentiates the immunogenicity of an antigen. Interestingly, some membrane permeabilizing detergents, surfactants, and chelating agents act as antibiotic adjuvants, demonstrating potent synergistic effects against several bacterial pathogens. However, these membrane permeabilizing agents are not nutrient metabolites, play no essential metabolic role, and in fact they typically impair membrane function. Therefore, these membrane permeabilizing agents are not discussed further in this review.

Evidence for the efficacy of metabolic state-driven approach to revert antibiotic resistance
In a report published in 2011, James Collins’ and colleagues showed that specific nutrient carbon sources potentiate the lethal effects of aminoglycosides on gram-negative (E. coli) and gram-positive (S. aureus) persisters and biofilms in vitro and in vivo, with a reported 100-10,000-fold increase in killing efficiency in vitro. Since the report from Collins’ laboratory, evidence has continued to accumulate showing that bacterial metabolic environment can antagonize or synergize with small molecule antibiotic drugs, decreasing or increasing their bactericidal efficacy, respectively. This phenomenon, known as metabolite-driven approach, can be effected by carbon-containing nutrient metabolites. Until now, the tested carbon-containing nutrient metabolites include amino acids, sugars, nucleotides, and peptides. Amino acids threonine, glycine, and glutamine potentiate aminoglycosides to kill methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), while arginine, leucine, and lysine promote gentamicin, sarafloxacin, tetracycline, and β-lactam, respectively, against gram-negative bacteria. Sugar D-ribose/nucleotides (uracil adenosine monophosphate) and peptide glutathione are demonstrated to have the similar potentiation through sensitizing aminoglycosides and meropenem, respectively. Fatty acids also modulate the efficacy of aminoglycosides. Supplementation of stationary-phase cultures of E. coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and Mycobacterium smegmatis with glucose and a suitable terminal electron acceptor to stimulate respiratory metabolism is sufficient to sensitize cells to quinolone killing. Recent studies also show that NO-releasing polymeric substrates and silver nanomaterials with petal-like structures promote uptake of aminoglycosides and/or norfloxacin. The metabolism of the gut microbiome can also modulate antibiotic efficiency, as noted in high-fat diet-fed mice, such that the tryptophan metabolite indole-3-acetic acid promotes antibiotic efficacy against persisters. In summary, metabolite-driven approach appears to be a promising approach for improving the efficacy of antibiotics against multidrug-resistant strains of bacteria.
Metabolic state-driven approach is an efficient strategy for identifying metabolic imbalances and nutrient metabolites that have potential as metabolic reprogramming agents. This is because metabolic state determines antibiotic resistance and sensitivity. In some cases, a high extracellular concentration of a crucial metabolite is sufficient to restore antibiotic sensitivity to antibiotic-resistant cells and stimulate drug uptake. Peng et al. reported GC-MS data showing that low intracellular glucose and alanine are biomarkers of kanamycin resistance in Edwardsiella tarda. Furthermore, exposure to exogenous alanine, glucose, fructose, and alanine/glucose restored susceptibility of multidrug-resistant E. tarda to kanamycin by a mechanism involving activation of the pyruvate cycle (the P cycle), increased NADH production and PMF, and increased drug uptake. This pioneering research has laid the foundation for reprogramming metabolomics/metabolic state. Other reports document successful metabolic reprogramming of antibiotic-resistant pathogenic bacteria. Zhang et al. demonstrated that intracellular glucose, redox state, membrane potential, ROS, and drug uptake are suppressed in gentamicin-resistant Vibrio alginolyticus relative to control cells. However, exogenous glucose reprogramed these cells and stimulated/promoted the P cycle, NADH, PMF, ROS, and gentamicin uptake, reverting the phenotype of gentamycin-resistance to gentamycin-sensitivity. In addition, reduced uptake of gentamicin in a manner of the Na+-NQR system was normalized in a cAMP/CRP complex-dependent manner in the presence of exogenous alanine. Similarly, Li et al. determined that colistin resistance is associated with reduction of central carbon metabolism and energy metabolism; however, exposure to metabolites in the P cycle promoted the P cycle and the Na+NQR system, increased PMF and biosynthesis of LPS, and promoted binding of colistin to cells. Furthermore, the metabolic state-driven approach has been successfully adopted in combating antibiotic-resistant pathogens that are seriously harmful to humans. Kuang et al. demonstrated that inactivation of the P cycle, reduced nitric oxide biosynthesis, and reduced nitric oxide, nitrite and NADH are linked to cefoperazone-sulbactam resistance in naturally and artificially evolved strains of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. However, the antibiotic-resistant phenotype reverted to antibiotic-sensitivity in the presence of exogenous fumarate, NADH, nitrate, nitrite, or sodium nitroprusside (a nitric oxide donor). Tang et al. also showed that glucose potentiates killing of cefoperazone/sulbactam-resistant P. aeruginosa by activating glucose transport and glucose-mediated downstream metabolism, increasing PMF and stimulating uptake of amikacin. Similarly, exogenous fumarate reverted aminoglycoside-tolerance in P. aeruginosa PAO1, while ATP/ADP sensitized carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii to meropenem.
Metabolic reprogramming promotes both antibiotic uptake and ROS level that in turn potentiates antibiotic killing in multidrug-resistant E. tarda, carbapenem-resistant P. auroginosa, E. coli, K. pneumonia, and MRSA.
Metabolic reprograming agents modulate metabolism to promote antibiotic uptake and increase intracellular drug concentration by promoting porine abundance and proton motive force (purple). On the other hand, the modulated metabolism elevates ROS production (dark yellow) and inhibits ROS degradation to increase ROS concentration (black), which in turn potentiates antibiotic killing (red). Specifically, activation of the pyruvate cycle (the P cycle), electron transport chain, phosphate pentose pathway (PPP), and riboflavin metabolism increases ROS production, while the pyruvate-flux from the P cycle promotes glycine production that inhibits glutathione reductase (GR). This inhibition affects the reduction of glutathione disulfide (GSSG) to glutathione (GSH), causing GSH decrease and GSSG accumulation. When the decreased GSH is not oxidized to GSSG, the accompanying ROS clearance could not proceed. The increased ROS production and reduced ROS clearance together elevate ROS level to potentiate antibiotic killing.
Other data suggest that the efficacy of ROS-dependent antibiotics such as cefoperazone-sulbactam depends on the cellular redox state, and that reactive metabolites increase antibiotic efficacy under anaerobic conditions. Non-targeted metabolomic data from Salmonella show that citrulline, glutamine, and fructose levels are suppressed in apramycin/gentamicin-resistant Salmonella and that exogenous citrulline, glutamine or fructose activates the TCA cycle, increases NADH, raises the PMF, stimulates drug uptake, and restores sensitivity to apramycin/gentamicin. Metabolic reprogramming of the glutathione biosynthesis modulates the resistance of ceftriaxone-resistant Salmonella. The metabolic state-driven approach is also successfully utilized in gram-positive ampicillin-resistant Streptococcus agalactiae that is reprogrammed by fructose to be sensitive to ampicillin. A recent report showed that intracellular glutamine is low in clinical multidrug-resistant strains of Escherichia coli and that exogenous glutamine increases cell death in the presence of β-lactam-, aminoglycoside-, quinolone-, and tetracycline-antibiotics. Exogenous glutamine also increases the efficacy of ampicillin against multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa, A. baumannii, Klebsiella peneumoniae, E. tarda, V. alginolyticus, and V. parahaemolyticus in vitro and against multidrug-resistant E. coli, P. aeruginosa, A. baumannii, and K. peneumoniae in vivo. Glucose delays the transition from ampicillin tolerance to resistance in E. coli and E. tarda. Pyruvate reverses fluoroquinolone tolerance induced by benzaldehyde in company with decreased ROS level in E. coli. A pyruvate-cysteine-glutathione system/glycine-ROS metabolic pathway is identified as the most key pyruvate-boosting metabolic pathway to increase ROS level that potentiates gentamicin killing in several bacterial pathogens. The underlying mechanism includes that glycine abundance is elevated to inhibit glutathione reductase and thereby ROS level is increased. Therefore, metabolic reprogramming is a proven and valuable strategy for stimulating drug uptake and promoting ROS to mitigate the consequences of infection by antibiotic-resistant bacteria, persisters, and biofilms. Importantly, a positive correlation between ROS level and killing efficiency of antibiotics including aminoglycosides and β-lactams is determined. Therefore, metabolic reprogramming not only increases intracellular drug concentration but also elevates ROS level that in turn promotes antibiotic killing (Fig. 2). Collectively, metabolic reprogramming agents are among the most promising strategies for stopping the spread of antibiotic-resistant bacterial pathogens.
It was recently shown that nutrient metabolite-enabled killing of antibiotic-resistant pathogens is a successful strategy in mice, an important advance in the field. More specifically, mannitol improved outcomes following treatment of chronic E. coli biofilm infections with gentamycin in a mouse model for urinary tract infections and indole-3-acetic acid and ciprofloxacin synergistically promoted survival of high-fat diet-fed mice infected with persistent methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Similarly, when pathogenic E. tarda EIB202 and ATCC15947 biofilms were seeded via catheter into the urinary tracts of mice, kanamycin plus alanine and/or glucose or fructose more effectively inhibited infection of mouse urinary tract and kidneys than kanamycin alone. Pyruvate, citrulline, and glutamine plus aminoglycosides more effectively inhibited infection of mouse blood, liver, and spleen by gentamicin-resistant V. alginolyticus or apramycin-resistant Salmonella than antibiotic alone. Extending these in vivo observations to another species, glucose, pyruvate, or fructose plus gentamicin synergistically inhibited bacterial infections in zebrafish or chicken and were more effective than gentamicin alone. More importantly, a combined antibacterial agent with an antibiotic and glutamine, which is identified by metabolic state-driven approach, is being developed by Guangdong Litai Pharmaceutical Co., LTD., China. These data support future clinical applications using synergistic combinations of metabolites and antibiotics to prevent or mitigate infections with antibiotic-resistant bacterial pathogens. Notably, nutrient metabolites exceeding bacterial physiological doses need to be used to achieve high-efficiency antibacterial.

Increasing intracellular antibiotic by increasing uptake to overcome the degradation and efflux
Conventional dogma is that there are four distinct mechanisms by which bacteria acquire resistance to small molecule antibiotics: i) non-specific decrease in bacterial membrane permeability; ii) increase in capacity to degrade, destabilize or inactivate an antibiotic or a class of similar antibiotics (e.g., induction of chromosomal beta-lactamase); iii) increase in efflux pump capacity; and iv) genetic mutations that render the bacteria resistant to the antibiotic (e.g., acquired capacity to express an isoform of the target molecule with low or no affinity for an antibiotic or a class of antibiotics). The combined impact via mechanisms i, ii and/or iii on drug uptake, degradation, and efflux must be considered together, to determine the net effect on the steady-state intracellular drug concentration (see Fig. 1). Unfortunately, little progress has been made in understanding and manipulating bacterial membrane permeability, and this impasse is largely responsible for limited progress in the field.
The metabolic state-driven approach is a promising therapeutic approach that could potentially overcome limited uptake of antibiotics by drug-resistant bacteria. The elevated intracellular drug concentrations are quantified using commercial kits or LC-MS analysis. For example, Peng et al. and Su et al. demonstrated that exogenous alanine, glucose, or fructose plus kanamycin stimulated drug uptake several-fold more than needed to compensate for 9.5 ng/mL lower intracellular steady-state kanamycin in kanamycin-resistant E. coli than in kanamycin-sensitive E. coli. Furthermore, fumarate stimulated respiratory activity and uptake of tobramycin, which lowered viability of drug-tolerant Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In the presence of glucose, uptake of amikacin by cefoperazone/sulbactam-resistant P. aeruginosa increased 1.5-fold and uptake of gentamicin by gentamicin-resistant V. alginolyticus increased 2-fold. D-ribose also increased drug uptake approximately 2-fold and increased the lethality of gentamicin in drug-resistant Salmonella spp. Endogenous succinate and glutamate from lung epithelial cells also stimulated uptake of aminoglycosides by drug-resistant clinical pathogens and triclosan inhibited biosynthesis of fatty acids and stimulated uptake of ciprofloxacin by P. aeruginosa. In E. coli, glutamine and other metabolites such as inosine promoted uptake of several classes of drugs including penicillins (ampicillin), cephalosporins (ceftriaxone), aminoglycosides (gentamicin), quinolones (balofloxacin), and tetracyclines (tetracycline); Succinate and inosine promoted intracellular ciprofloxacin or/and tigecycline concentration. These reports suggest that clinically common classes of antibacterials are included in the nutrient metabolites-potentiated drug uptake. Therefore, the nutrient metabolites-potentiated drug uptake is effective approach to combat antibiotic resistance.
Glutamine reprograms the metabolic state and reverts the antibiotic-resistant phenotype to antibiotic-sensitivity in E. coli.
Antibiotic-resistant bacteria have antibiotic-resistant metabolic state, whereas antibiotic-sensitive bacteria have antibiotic-sensitive metabolic states. They, respectively, refuse and accept uptake of extracellular antibiotics. Exogenous glutamine reprograms the antibiotic-resistant metabolic state to an antibiotic-sensitive metabolic state, elevates membrane permeability, and increases drug uptake. When extracellular concentration of antibiotics is higher than MIC, more drugs are pumped out and hydrolyzed in the presence than absence of glutamine. However, the resulting high rate of drug influx exceeds the combined rate of drug degradation by β-lactamase and drug efflux, thereby elevating intracellular drug concentration to kill the antibiotic-resistant bacteria. Mechanistically, glutamine is converted to inosine via promoting purine biosynthesis and in turn promotes phosphorylation of CpxA and dephosphorylation of CpxR, which upregulates OmpF, an outer membrane channel for antibiotic uptake. Blue, inactivation; Red, activation.
The above findings demonstrate that exogenous nutrient metabolites can be used to stimulate drug uptake; however, not all studies compare the steady-state intracellular concentration of drug in the presence or absence of exogenous metabolites. This question was addressed in a recent study on metabolic state-driven nutrient based approach using ATCC35218, a β-lactamase–producing strain of E. coli, to demonstrate that exogenous glutamine clearly increases the intracellular concentration of ampicillin. This study used a commercial kit to quantify intracellular ampicillin. It demonstrated that 47.2, 96.7, and 141.5 nM intracellular ampicillin conferred 50, 90, and 99% loss in cell viability, and these endpoints were achieved when E. coli culture media contained 5.2, 15.1, and 24.3 mM ampicillin in the absence of glutamine, while the same drug efficacy was observed when cells were cultured in 0.5, 1.2, and 2.8 mM ampicillin in the presence of glutamine, respectively. At the same time, the velocity of β-lactamase hydrolysis (Vh, nmol/mg per second) of ampicillin increased approximately 2-fold and the rate of drug efflux (Ve, nmol/mg per second) increased 30%. At the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), the velocity of influx (Vin, nmol/mg per second) was approximately equal to 4 (Ve + Vh). Therefore, exogenous glutamine can stimulate drug uptake to the point where uptake outpaces the combined rates of β-lactamase–dependent drug degradation and drug efflux, such that the intracellular concentration of antibiotic exceeds the threshold required to kill the cell. This is likely mediated by activation of the glutamine-inosine-CpxA/R-OmpF pathway (see Fig. 3), suggesting that nutrient metabolite-manipulated two-component system-porine plays a key role in promoting drug uptake. Very recently, the relationship between gentamicin influx (Vin) and efflux (Ve) is also established in gentamicin-resistant V. alginolyticus through comparison in medium with or without pyruvate. Pyruvate leads to a 7.21-fold increase in intracellular gentamicin. Therefore, pyruvate promotes gentamicin influx and thereby reverses gentamicin resistance. These progresses support the call that the next generation of antimicrobials should promote antimicrobial uptake based on nutrient metabolites.
Besides porin channels, antibiotic transport is also regulated by metabolites. For example, UhpT is an inducible transporter for fosfomycin that potentiates fosfomycin-mediated killing of Escherichia, Citrobacter, Enterobacter, or Klebsiella species in the presence of glucose-6-phosphate. On the other hand, fructose, phosphoenolpyruvate, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate increase fosfomycin efficacy in Stenotrophomonas maltophilia strains that lack UhpT, suggesting that membrane permeability can be modulated by a specific metabolite. In the latter case, the presence of the metabolite leads to a rate of drug influx that exceeds the combined rates of drug degradation and efflux.

Metabolic reprogramming agents slow down the development of antibiotic resistance
β-lactam antibiotics and β-lactamase inhibitors are increasingly used simultaneously (i.e., as combination therapy) to treat infections caused by pathogens that express β-lactamase. However, cross-resistance to β-lactam antibiotics and β-lactamase inhibitors has been documented, which makes such combination therapy ineffective. Furthermore, β-lactamase inhibitors do not inhibit all known β-lactamase enzymes. Because metabolic reprogramming agents are typically essential nutrients, it is difficult for bacteria to restrict their uptake/transport across the bacterial membrane, and this is not expected to change over time. For example, three antibiotic-sensitive and three antibiotic-resistant E. coli strains were propagated in M9 medium containing increasing concentrations of ampicillin with or without 20 mM glutamine for 30 days at 1 cycle/day, during which time the MIC increased due to gradual emergence of acquired resistance to ampicillin. However, the increase in MIC was approximately four-fold lower in the presence than in the absence of glutamine. These bacteria remained sensitive to ampicillin plus glutamine after being injected into mice and the efficacy of glutamine plus ampicillin was retained over five treatment cycles. These results suggest that the bacteria acquired resistance to ampicillin plus glutamine more slowly than to ampicillin alone. This argues strongly in favor metabolic state-driven approach as a strategy to fight antibiotic-resistant bacteria and to increase and prolong the efficacy of antibiotic drugs.

Conclusions and perspectives
Successful use of the metabolic state-driven nutrient-based strategy to combat antibiotic resistance depends on in-depth understanding of bacterial metabolism and the ability to assess normal vs altered bacterial metabolic states. When metabolome profiling reveals specific downregulation of a metabolite (or several metabolites from the same pathway) in antibiotic-resistant vs. antibiotic-sensitive bacteria, those metabolites are likely candidates for use as metabolic reprogramming agents. In many cases, by providing an exogenous source of the downregulated metabolite(s) and complementing the apparent deficit, the metabolic profile can be remodeled and normalized, while at the same time, the antibiotic-resistant phenotype reverts to a phenotype of antibiotic sensitivity. This is because antibiotic-sensitive and -resistant bacteria have antibiotic-sensitive and -resistant metabolic states, respectively, which is highly related to antibiotic killing efficiency. On the hand, the metabolic reprogramming agents overcomes membrane permeability barrier to promote drug uptake. The increased uptake exceeds the combined rates of enzyme–dependent drug degradation and drug efflux, leading high intracellular drug and thereby causing a high killing. A typical example is the activation of the glutamine-inosine-CpxA/R-OmpF pathway. On the other hand, antibiotic killing efficiency is related to metabolites’ transformation products such as ROS. The higher ROS concentration, the greater the bactericidal efficiency of aminoglycosides and β-lactams. Therefore, metabolic reprogramming agents can effectively promote antibiotic killing.
Metabolism-based intervention is a simple, straightforward way to effectively increase membrane permeability and stimulate uptake of an antibacterial drug. The phenotype of antibiotic resistance often correlates with downregulation of membrane porin channels that facilitate influx of nutrients and small molecule drugs. This is consistent with the fact that exogenous metabolites often upregulate transcription factors and two-component systems that stimulate porin biosynthesis and mobilization. However, questions remain about how metabolites exert their downstream effects. Furthermore, the expression of antibiotic class-specific influx channels and their functional overlap, and the fact that many metabolites impact several metabolic pathways, complicate the design of effective interventions targeting membrane permeability. A thorough understanding of how different metabolite fluxes intersect and influence each other’s impact on drug uptake and antibiotic resistance is needed in order to exploit the full potential of metabolic reprogramming and facilitate development of successful metabolism-based strategies to combat antibiotic resistance.
Because many bacterial metabolites are safe and non-toxic human nutrients, it is unlikely that pilot or cohort studies in human subjects will be delayed due to safety concerns. As this research moves forward, we suggest that metabolites could be delivered for clinical use via at least three distinct routes: i) clinical grade nutrients could be prepared by an independent process and then used with antibiotic drugs; ii) nutrients and antibiotics could be prepared as a compound drug for clinical use, iii) nutrients and antibiotics could be chemically crosslinked and treated essentially as distinct pharmaceuticals for clinical use.
Finally, translating the concept into novel therapies appears easy and straightforward, but massive hurdles exist. This is because clinical applications must be carried out based on drugs that have already been approved. Overcoming these hurdles is essential for implementing this strategy. In any case, developing new drugs is a prerequisite for achieving the translating. However, developing new drugs based on the new theory involves various stakeholders such as the government, venture capital, pharmaceutical companies, hospitals, and patients. This requires them to truly understand that metabolic state determines the bactericidal efficiency of antibiotics, nutritional metabolites are more beneficial than inhibitors for human beings, and increasing the uptake of antibiotics is preferable to the inhibition of drug enzymatic hydrolysis. Additionally, economic considerations are necessary. Nutritional metabolites are much cheaper than inhibitors, thus offering profit potential. While addressing these understanding issues, it is essential in clinical trials to determine the optimal concentration of reprogrammed metabolites, the best antibiotic ratios, the most effective administration times and routes, the most suitable types of antibiotic-resistant bacteria, and the ideal patient conditions. Notably, in some countries such as China, the use of previously approved drugs for a new implication allows to explore. Thus, an alternative approach can speed up the clinical applications when nutrient metabolites are drugs themselves, such as glucose and inosine. This can be requested by interested doctors and implemented after approval from the hospital’s ethics committee.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contributions
B.P.: writing – original draft; writing – review and editing. H.L.: Figure creation; writing – original draft. X. P.: Conceptualization; funding acquisition; writing – review and editing; writing – review and editing.

Data availability
No datasets were generated or analyzed during the current study.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Global threat of carbapenem-resistant gram-negative bacteria
Antibiotic resistant bacteria: current situation and treatment options to accelerate the development of a new antimicrobial arsenal
Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase variants: the new threat to global public health
Global burden of bacterial antimicrobial resistance in 2019: a systematic analysis
O’Neill J. Review on Antimicrobial Resistance. Tackling drug-resistant infections globally (2016). Available from: https://amr-review.org/sites/default/files/160525_Final%20paper_with%20cover.pdf (Accessed December 17, 2024).
Bad bugs, no drugs: no ESKAPE! An update from the Infectious Diseases Society of America
The global preclinical antibacterial pipeline
Call for next-generation drugs that remove the uptake barrier to combat antibiotic resistance
Metabolite-enabled eradication of bacterial persisters by aminoglycosides
Exogenous alanine or/and glucose plus kanamycin kills antibiotic-resistant bacteria
Functional metabolomics: From biomarker discovery to metabolome reprogramming
Glutamine promotes antibiotic uptake to kill multidrug-resistant uropathogenic bacteria
Boosting bacterial metabolism to combat antibiotic resistance
Reduced redox-dependent mechanism and glucose-mediated reversal in gentamicin-resistant Vibrio alginolyticus
β-lactam antibiotics: An overview from a medicinal chemistry perspective
Lethality of MalE-LacZ hybrid protein shares mechanistic attributes with oxidative component of antibiotic lethality
Antibiotic efficacy – context matters
Antibiotic-induced changes to the host metabolic environment inhibit drug efficacy and alter immune function
Synergistic interactions of indole-2-carboxamides and β-lactam antibiotics against Mycobacterium abscessus
Combined influence of nitric oxide and surface roughness in biofilm reduction across bacteria strains
Synthesis of novel nitroreductase enzyme-activated nitric oxide prodrugs to site-specifically kill bacteria
Surface-catalyzed nitric oxide release via a metal organic framework enhances antibacterial surface effects
Biogenic ammonia modifies antibiotic resistance at a distance in physically separated bacteria
Exogenous L-Alanine promotes phagocytosis of multidrug-resistant bacterial pathogens
The pyruvate cycle increases aminoglycosides efficacy and provides respiratory energy in bacteria
Glycine, serine and threonine metabolism confounds efficacy of complement-mediated killing
Succinate and inosine coordinate innate immune response to bacterial infection
Exogenous glycine promotes oxidation of glutathione and restores sensitivity of bacterial pathogens to serum-induced cell death
Reduced ROS-mediated antibiotic resistance and its reverting by glucose in Vibrio alginolyticus
Current status of endolysin-based treatments against gram-negative bacteria
Antibiotic adjuvants: A promising approach to combat multidrug resistant bacteria
Strategies to overcome antimicrobial resistance (AMR) making use of non-essential target inhibitors: A review
Microbial environments confound antibiotic efficacy
Reactive oxygen species induce antibiotic tolerance during systemic Staphylococcus aureus infection
Mechanisms of antibiotic resistance in bacteria mediated by silver nanoparticles
From the soil to the clinic: the impact of microbial secondary metabolites on antibiotic tolerance and resistance
The multifaceted bacterial cysteine desulfurases: From metabolism to pathogenesis
Indole reverses intrinsic antibiotic resistance by activating a novel dual-function importer
Effect of three different amino acids plus gentamicin against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
L-glutamine sensitizes Gram-positive-resistant bacteria to gentamicin killing
Alkaline arginine promotes the gentamicin-mediated killing of drug-resistant Salmonella by increasing NADH concentration and proton motive force
L-leucine increases the sensitivity of drug-resistant Salmonella to sarafloxacin by stimulating central carbon metabolism and increasing intracellular reactive oxygen species level
Enhancement of β-Lactam-mediated killing of gram-negative bacteria by lysine hydrochloride
Adenosine monophosphate as a metabolic adjuvant enhances antibiotic efficacy against drug-resistant bacterial pathogens
Exogenous D-ribose promotes gentamicin treatment of several drug-resistant Salmonella
Uracil restores susceptibility of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus to aminoglycosides through metabolic reprogramming
Exogenous glutathione reverses meropenem resistance in carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae
Host polyunsaturated fatty acids potentiate aminoglycoside killing of Staphylococcus aureus
Understanding and sensitizing density-dependent persistence to quinolone antibiotics
Our evolving understanding of the mechanism of quinolones
Silver nanoflowers coupled with low dose antibiotics enable the highly effective eradication of drug-resistant bacteria
Gut microbiome alterations in high-fat-diet-fed mice are associated with antibiotic tolerance
Alpha-Ketoglutarate downregulates thiosulphate metabolism to enhance antibiotic killing
Fructose restores susceptibility of multidrug-resistant Edwardsiella tarda to kanamycin
Exogenous citrulline and glutamine contribute to reverse the resistance of Salmonella to apramycin
Na+-NQR confers aminoglycoside resistance via the regulation of L-alanine metabolism
Metabolic mechanism of colistin resistance and its reverting in Vibrio alginolyticus
Inactivation of nitrite-dependent nitric oxide biosynthesis is responsible for overlapped antibiotic resistance between naturally and artificially evolved Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Glucose-potentiated amikacin killing of cefoperazone/sulbactam resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Carbon sources tune antibiotic susceptibility in Pseudomonas aeruginosa via tricarboxylic acid cycle control
Metabolomics method in understanding and sensitizing carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii to meropenem
Combating antibiotic tolerance through activating bacterial metabolism
Modulating the evolutionary trajectory of tolerance using antibiotics with different metabolic dependencies
Peng B66. Alanine enhances aminoglycosides-induced ROS production as revealed by proteomic analysis
Nitrite promotes ROS poduction to ptentiate cfoperazone-slbactam-mdiated elimination to lab-evolved and clinical-evolved. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Reactive metabolic byproducts contribute to antibiotic lethality under anaerobic conditions
Fructose-enabled killing of antibiotic-resistant Salmonella enteritidis by gentamicin: insight from reprogramming metabolomics
Metabolic reprogramming of the glutathione biosynthesis modulates the resistance of Salmonella derby to ceftriaxone
Fructose promotes ampicillin killing of antibiotic-resistant Streptococcus agalactiae
Ampicillin-controlled glucose metabolism manipulates the transition from tolerance to resistance in bacteria
The food additive benzaldehyde confers a broad antibiotic tolerance by modulating bacterial metabolism and inhibiting the formation of bacterial flagella
Pyruvate abundance confounds aminoglycoside killing of multidrug-resistant bacteria via glutathione metabolism
pts promoter influences antibiotic resistance via proton motive force and ROS in Escherichia coli
Exogenous pyruvate promotes gentamicin uptake to kill antibiotic-resistant Vibrio alginolyticus
Outer membrane disruption overcomes intrinsic, acquired, and spontaneous antibiotic resistance
Function and inhibitory mechanisms of multidrug efflux pumps
The antibiotic darobactin mimics a β-strand to inhibit outer membrane insertase
Antibiotic resistance by enzymatic modification of antibiotic targets
Platforms for antibiotic discovery
The science of antibiotic discovery
Understanding metabolic resistance strategy of clinically isolated antibiotic-resistant bacteria by proteomic approach
Host metabolites stimulate the bacterial proton motive force to enhance the activity of aminoglycoside antibiotics
Enhanced biosynthesis of fatty acids contributes to ciprofloxacin resistance in Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Inosine reverses multidrug resistance in Gram-negative bacteria carrying mobilized RND-type efflux pump gene cluster tmexCD-toprJ
A Dietary source of high level of fluoroquinolone tolerance in mcr-carrying gram-negative bacteria
A genome-wide analysis of Escherichia coli responses to fosfomycin using TraDIS-Xpress reveals novel roles for phosphonate degradation and phosphate transport systems
Frequency and mechanisms of spontaneous fosfomycin nonsusceptibility observed upon disk diffusion testing of Escherichia coli
Glucose-6-phosphate reduces fosfomycin activity against Stenotrophomonas maltophilia
Interplay between β-lactamases and new β-lactamase inhibitors
Ceftolozane/tazobactam resistance and mechanisms in carbapenem-nonsusceptible Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Escape mutations circumvent a tradeoff between resistance to a beta-lactam and resistance to a beta-lactamase inhibitor
Resistance to ceftazidime-avibactam and underlying mechanisms
Evolutionary trajectories toward high-level β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor resistance in the presence of multiple β-lactamases
Efforts towards the inhibitor design for New Delhi metallo-beta-lactamase (NDM-1)