Evaluation of Risk of Bias in Neuroimaging-Based Artificial Intelligence Models for Psychiatric Diagnosis
This systematic review assesses the clinical applicability and reporting quality of available artificial intelligence models in psychiatry.
Key Points
Question
Are there potential risks to translating neuroimaging-based artificial intelligence (AI) models into direct clinical applications, such as psychiatric diagnosis?
Findings
In this systematic review of 517 studies presenting 555 neuroimaging-based AI models for psychiatric diagnostics, most models had a high overall risk of bias and had poor clinical applicability. All articles provided incomplete reports for validation.
Meaning
Findings of this study suggest that, in their current form, neuroimaging-based AI models for psychiatric diagnosis need to address risk of bias before use in clinical practice.
Importance
Neuroimaging-based artificial intelligence (AI) diagnostic models have proliferated in psychiatry. However, their clinical applicability and reporting quality (ie, feasibility) for clinical practice have not been systematically evaluated.
Objective
To systematically assess the risk of bias (ROB) and reporting quality of neuroimaging-based AI models for psychiatric diagnosis.
Evidence Review
PubMed was searched for peer-reviewed, full-length articles published between January 1, 1990, and March 16, 2022. Studies aimed at developing or validating neuroimaging-based AI models for clinical diagnosis of psychiatric disorders were included. Reference lists were further searched for suitable original studies. Data extraction followed the CHARMS (Checklist for Critical Appraisal and Data Extraction for Systematic Reviews of Prediction Modeling Studies) and PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses) guidelines. A closed-loop cross-sequential design was used for quality control. The PROBAST (Prediction Model Risk of Bias Assessment Tool) and modified CLEAR (Checklist for Evaluation of Image-Based Artificial Intelligence Reports) benchmarks were used to systematically evaluate ROB and reporting quality.
Findings
A total of 517 studies presenting 555 AI models were included and evaluated. Of these models, 461 (83.1%; 95% CI, 80.0%-86.2%) were rated as having a high overall ROB based on the PROBAST. The ROB was particular high in the analysis domain, including inadequate sample size (398 of 555 models [71.7%; 95% CI, 68.0%-75.6%]), poor model performance examination (with 100% of models lacking calibration examination), and lack of handling data complexity (550 of 555 models [99.1%; 95% CI, 98.3%-99.9%]). None of the AI models was perceived to be applicable to clinical practices. Overall reporting completeness (ie, number of reported items/number of total items) for the AI models was 61.2% (95% CI, 60.6%-61.8%), and the completeness was poorest for the technical assessment domain with 39.9% (95% CI, 38.8%-41.1%).
Conclusions and Relevance
This systematic review found that the clinical applicability and feasibility of neuroimaging-based AI models for psychiatric diagnosis were challenged by a high ROB and poor reporting quality. Particularly in the analysis domain, ROB in AI diagnostic models should be addressed before clinical application.

Introduction
Given the lack of biomarkers to guide psychiatric diagnoses, machine learning has been increasingly applied to develop brain-based hallmarks. Thus, neuroimaging-based artificial intelligence (AI) models have proliferated rapidly during the past 3 decades. Rather than enabling a clinician-based diagnosis of discrete symptoms, neuroimaging-based AI models enable an objective, symptom-centered, individualized and neurobiologically explicable estimate of psychiatric conditions. In this vein, these models show considerable potential to be translated for use in early diagnosis, treatment development, and clinical decision-making. However, lack of an evidence-based systematic appraisal of AI models impedes stakeholder enthusiasm for applying them in clinical practice.
Systematic appraisals of clinical AI models may provide solid evidence to validate their reliability in medical practice. For instance, despite global efforts to develop AI diagnostic models for COVID-19, these models built either through traditional multivariable analysis or imaging-based AI technique were found to have poor clinical implications due to a high risk of bias (ROB). Furthermore, systematic appraisals revealed the high ROB in clinical models across all medical specialties, especially in psychiatric diagnoses. During the past 3 decades, advances in neuroimaging-based techniques opened radically new venues for psychiatric diagnosis by providing potentially more reliable and sensitive brain biomarkers in AI prediction models. Despite their strengths, the absence of systematic appraisals for biomarker-based AI models leaves a gap between the experimental proof-of-concept models and clinical applicability.
In addition, poor reporting quality impedes the establishment of better practices in AI-based psychiatric diagnosis. Despite the developments of multifarious benchmarks for reporting clinical prediction models (eg, STARD [Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy], DECIDE-AI [Early-Stage Clinical Evaluation of Decision Support Systems Driven by Artificial Intelligence], and TRIPOD [Transparent Reporting of a Multivariable Prediction Model for Individual Prognosis or Diagnosis]), the reporting quality in current publications still needs to be improved, with approximately 80% of articles providing incomplete information and less than 50% of contents following the TRIPOD guideline, limiting clinical potential and contributing to research waste. Even after 3 decades of neuroimaging-based AI model developments, it remains unclear whether the reports of such developments are unbiased and complete enough to warrant translation into clinical practice for psychiatric diagnosis.
In this study, we sought to systematically assess the ROB and reporting quality of neuroimaging-based AI models for psychiatric diagnosis that were developed in the past 3 decades. To this end, we used the Prediction Model Risk of Bias Assessment Tool (PROBAST) and modified Checklist for Evaluation of Image-Based Artificial Intelligence Reports (CLEAR) benchmarks.

Methods
The study protocol was registered at PROSPERO (CRD42022340624) and followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) reporting guideline (Figure 1). The Chinese Army Medical University Institutional Review Board officially censored the study and deemed it exempt from approval and the requirement for informed consent given that no original human or animal participants were involved.
Evidence Review Pipeline Based on PRISMA 2020 Guideline
DSM indicates Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.
aOf the 555 artificial intelligence (AI) models, 469 were tested at the internal sample and 86 at the independent external sample, including intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, bipolar disorder, major depressive disorder, social anxiety disorder, unspecified anxiety disorder, general anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, somatic symptom disorder, anorexia nervosa, binge-eating disorder, insomnia disorder, conduct disorder, antisocial personality disorder, other or unknown substance use disorder, alcohol use disorder, opioid use disorder, borderline personality disorder, disruptive behavior disorders, and social anxiety disorder.
bEighty-six AI models were tested at the independently external sample.

Retrieval Strategy
Following retrieval benchmarks, we conducted a literature search in PubMed in June 2022 using Boolean codes and RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feeds (eMethods 1 in Supplement 1). We initially included studies that (1) were published between January 1, 1990, and March 16, 2022; (2) were peer-reviewed, full-length original articles published in journals or conference proceedings; and (3) developed or validated neuroimaging-based AI models for diagnosing psychiatric diseases that were defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fifth Edition).
We screened studies from the initial literature pool by following these inclusion criteria: (1) at least 1 algorithm was used to build the AI model for psychiatric diagnosis; (2) training features were limited to neuroimaging-based biomarkers (eg, [functional] magnetic resonance imaging, electroencephalogram, and functional near-infrared spectroscopy); and (3) minimum fundamental information for the AI model was reported. Reference lists were further searched for suitable original studies. Exclusion criteria were articles that (1) were not peer-reviewed original research (eg, preprint, review, meta-analysis, or comments), (2) involved non–neuroimaging-based features (eg, behavioral factors or blood and genes) or nonhuman participants, (3) used nondiagnostic AI models (eg, prognostic model) for unclassified psychiatric disorders, and (4) used discriminatory AI algorithm that differentiated cohorts rather than diagnosed psychiatric conditions.

Data Extraction and Analysis
Data extraction adhered to the CHARMS (Checklist for Critical Appraisal and Data Extraction for Systematic Reviews of Prediction Modeling Studies) and PRISMA guidelines. We used a closed-loop cross-sequential design for quality control on data extraction and screening (5 assessors). Details on data extraction are provided in eMethods 2 and 3 in Supplement 1.
We built on a global geospatial model to illustrate the distribution of the sample population for these AI models. Sample population was defined according to information in the original article if applicable (eMethods 3 in Supplement 1). Global geospatial map was constructed by first fine-grained classification, which included 251 countries or regions. Geospatial source data were adjusted by the United Nations Statistics Division M49 codes and EasyShu team.
The PROBAST was used to assess the ROB of the neuroimaging-based AI models for psychiatric diagnosis. The PROBAST encompassed 20 signaling questions covering 4 ROB domains: participants, predictors, outcome, and analysis. Each question may be answered by yes, probably yes, no, probably no, or no information. Answering no or probably no to a signaling question indicated a potential high ROB. Overall ROB was rated high if a no or probably no answer was given for any signaling question. Overall low ROB was defined as answering all of the signaling questions with a yes or probably yes. The PROBAST criterion was modified to assess its applicability to each included study by adding 1 signaling question for the first 3 ROB domains (participants, predictors, and outcome) (eMethods 4 in Supplement 1)
We adopted the modified 25-item CLEAR statement to evaluate the reporting quality (ie, feasibility) of the included studies, which included 4 domains (data, technique, technical assessment, and applications). To ensure applicability to neuroimage-based AI models, we removed 3 items (eMethods 5 in Supplement 1). The eligible 22 items were transformed for signaling questions to form the modified CLEAR statement (eTable 1 in Supplement 1). The CLEAR criteria for assessing the overall reporting quality of these studies were fully in line with the PROBAST.
To ensure adequate assessment validity, 5 independent assessors with multidisciplinary expertise were involved, including a clinical psychiatrist (Y.Y.), research fellows for psychiatry (X.L.) and AI (K.M.), a neuroscientist (Z.G.), and a psychologist (Z.C.). We built a closed-loop cross-sequential framework for validating assessment quality. Furthermore, another independent assessor (C.L.) was invited to validate assessment quality (eMethods 6 in Supplement 1).

Statistical Analysis
Geospatial models were built using R packages, version 4.0.5 (R Core Team). Interactive interfaces for sample population map were generated from EasyShu, version 2.4 (EasyShu) and coded with C++. Bootstrapping simulation (n = 2000) was performed to estimate 95% CIs for proportions using MATLAB (MathWorks Inc). Cohen κ test was also conducted to quantify the reliability of assessment quality across these 5 subsets. A prior 2-sided significance level for these statistics was set as P = .05.

Results
A total of 517 studies presenting 555 development-purpose AI models were eligible for inclusion in the analysis from the 50 916 records that were retrieved from the PubMed search in June 2022. Of the 555 models, 469 (84.5%) were for internal-sample validation and 86 (15.5%) were for external-sample validation (Figure 1). Based on the United Nations Statistics Division classification, the samples for training or testing these models covered 15.5% (39 of 251) of countries or areas globally (Figure 2), with 97.5% (38 of 39) of samples located in high-income or upper-middle-income areas.
Geospatial Model for Sample Population
Total sample sizes for countries were geologically mapped into corresponding location in the global map. To improve readability, original total sample size underwent log-transformation.
Nearly half of the models (48.3% [268 of 555]) were found in studies authored by those with academic training in computers and data science (eTable 2 in Supplement 1). Schizophrenia (25.4% [141 of 555 models]) and autism spectrum disorder (21.4% [119 of 555 models]) were the most common psychiatric diseases to be diagnosed with these models (eTable 3 in Supplement 1). Full technical details are provided in eTables 3 to 9 in Supplement 1. Assessor reliability quality was found to be satisfied, with an acceptable Cohen κ coefficient mean of 0.68 (median [range], 0.96 [0.02-1.00]) across 5 subset pools (eMethods 6 in Supplement 1).

Overall ROB for AI Models
In total, 461 of 555 AI models (83.1%; 95% CI, 80.0%-86.2%) were rated as having high overall ROB. Two of 555 models (0.4%; 95% CI, 0.00%-0.01%) were rated with high overall ROB in the participants domain. Overall, the ROB in the participants domain remained low for existing neuroimaging-based AI diagnostic models.
In the predictors domain, 187 of 555 models (33.7%; 95% CI, 29.9%- 37.6%) were rated with high ROB (Table 1). Defining predictors by knowing the outcome of these models was the unique source of the high ROB in this domain (ie, signaling question 2.2: were predictor assessments made without knowledge of outcome data?). In the outcome domain, high ROB was scored for 198 of 469 models (35.7%; 95% CI, 31.8%-39.7%) (Table 1). These models had a high ROB because the outcome knowledge of testing data sets was leaked into the predictors of the training set (ie, signaling question 3.3: were predictors excluded from the outcome definition?).
ROB Assessment for All Included AI Models Using the PROBAST (N = 555)
Signaling questiona	Answers, No. (%)	 	Yes or probably yes	No information	No or probably no	 	Domain 1: participants	 	Were appropriate data sources used (eg, cohort, RCT, or nested case-control study data)?	555 (100.0)	0 	0 	 	Were all inclusions and exclusions of participants appropriate?	553 (99.6)	0 	2 (0.4)	 	Domain 2: predictors	 	Were predictors defined and assessed in a similar way for all participants?	555 (100.0)	0	0 	 	Were predictor assessments made without knowledge of outcome data?	368 (66.3)	0	187 (33.7)	 	Were all predictors available at the time the model was intended to be used?	555 (100.0)	0	0 	 	Domain 3: outcome	 	Was the outcome determined appropriately?	555 (100.0)	0	0 	 	Was a prespecified or standard outcome definition used?	555 (100.0)	0	0 	 	Were predictors excluded from the outcome definition?	357 (64.3)	0	198 (35.7)	 	Was the outcome defined and determined in a similar way for all participants?	555 (100.0)	0	0 	 	Was the outcome determined without knowledge of predictor information?	358 (64.5)	0	197 (35.5)	 	Was the time interval between predictor assessment and outcome determination appropriate?	555 (100.0)	0	0 	 	Domain 4: analysis	 	Was there a reasonable number of participants with the outcome?	157 (28.2)	0 	398 (71.7)	 	Were continuous and categorical predictors handled appropriately?	555 (100.0)	0 	0 	 	Were all enrolled participants included in the analysis?	393 (70.9)	0 	162 (29.1)	 	Were participants with missing data handled appropriately?	44 (7.9)	37 (6.6)	474 (85.5)	 	Was selection of predictors based on univariable analysis avoided?	355 (63.9)	0 	200 (36.1)	 	Were complexities in the data (eg, censoring, competing risks, and sampling of control participants) accounted for appropriately?	0 	5 (0.9)	550 (99.1)	 	Were relevant model performance measures evaluated appropriately?	0 	0 	555 (100.0)	 	Were model overfitting and optimism in model performance accounted for?	497 (89.5)	16 (2.8)	42 (7.7)	 	Did predictors and their assigned weights in the final model correspond to the results from the reported multivariable analysis?	53 (9.6)	0 	502 (90.4)
Abbreviations: AI, artificial intelligence; PROBAST, Prediction Model Risk of Bias Assessment Tool; RCT, randomized clinical trial; ROB, risk of bias.
The criteria for answering the signaling questions largely adhered to the PROBAST but were slightly modified to fit the current study (eMethods 4 in Supplement 1).
In the analysis domain, most models were rated as having high overall ROB (461 of 555 [83.1%; 95% CI, 80.0%-86.2%]). Inadequate sample size (398 of 555 [71.7%; 95% CI, 68.0%-75.6%]), poor model performance examination (with 100% of models lacking calibration examination), and lack of handling data complexities (550 of 555 [99.1%; 95% CI, 98.3%-99.9%], with the majority of models undergoing no adjustment on data complexities [eg, signal question 4.6: were complexities in the data, such as censoring, competing risks, and sampling of control participants, accounted for appropriately?]) all contributed to the potential high ROB of these AI models in the analysis domain (Table 1). Although almost all of the models were rated with high ROB on calibration and data complexities issues, 52 models were still rated with low overall ROB in the analysis domain because these issues were judged as having limited implications for the models.

Clinical Applicability Concerns in AI Models
In total, by using the PROBAST, a third of the models were assessed for high concerns about their clinical applicability in the predictors and outcome domains. High concern for clinical applicability in the participants domain was found for 2 of 555 models (0.4%; 95% CI, 0.00%-0.01%). Furthermore, high concerns regarding clinical applicability were found for 199 of 555 models (35.9%; 95% CI, 31.9%-39.9%) in the predictors domain and for 217 of 555 models (39.1%; 95% CI, 35.0%-43.2%) in the outcome domain. In addition, none of these AI models were perceived to be applicable to clinical practice to date.

Reporting Quality of AI Models
Overall, all models were assessed for poor reporting quality based on the modified CLEAR statement. Reporting completeness (ie, number of reported items/number of total items) for these AI models was found to be insufficient at 61.2% (95% CI, 60.6%-61.8%). Full results for reporting quality are presented in Table 2.
Reporting Quality for All Included AI Models Using the Modified CLEAR (N = 555)
Signaling questiona	Answers, No. (%)	 	Yes or probably yes	No information	No or probably no	 	Domain 1: data	 	Were neuroimaging types reported?	555 (100.0)	0	0 	 	Was how to handle neuroimaging artifacts reported?	177 (31.9)	0	378 (68.1)	 	Were technical acquisition details reported?	532 (95.9)	0 	23 (4.1)	 	Were preprocessing procedures reported?	501 (90.0)	0 	54 (10.0)	 	Was synthetic neuroimaging made public if used?	17 (3.1)	0 	538 (96.9)	 	Were public neuroimages referenced adequately?	188 (33.9)	0 	367 (66.1)	 	Were patient-level metadata reported enough (eg, geographic location, sex and gender distribution, and race and ethnicity), and how it was extracted?	362 (65.2)	0 	193 (34.8)	 	Were potential biases from using patient information and metadata reported?	356 (64.2)	0 	199 (35.8)	 	Were data set partition methods reported?	555 (100.0)	0 	0 	 	Were sample sizes for subsets (ie, training, validation, and test) reported?	555 (100.0)	0 	0 	 	Were external test sets reported?	87 (15.7)	0 	468 (84.3)	 	Were class distributions and balance processes reported?	364 (65.6)	0 	191 (34.4)	 	Were out-of-distribution neuroimages reported?	0 	0 	555 (100.0)	 	Domain 2: technique	 	Were labeling methods reported appropriately?	555 (100.0)	0 	0 	 	Were references to common/accepted diagnostic labels reported?	555 (100.0)	0 	0 	 	Were details for algorithm development reported?	297 (53.5)	0 	258 (46.5)	 	Domain 3: technical assessment	 	Was how to publicly evaluate algorithm reported?	11 (2.0)	0 	544 (98.0)	 	Were model performance measures reported?	555 (100.0)	0 	0 	 	Were benchmarking, technical comparison, and novelty discussed?	322 (58.0)	0 	233 (42.0)	 	Were bias assessments discussed?	0 	0 	555 (100.0)	 	Domain 4: applications	 	Were use cases and target conditions discussed?	529 (95.3)	0 	26 (4.7)	 	Were potential impacts on the health care team and patients introduced?	405 (73.0)	0 	150 (27.0)
Abbreviations: AI, artificial intelligence; CLEAR, Checklist for Evaluation of Image-Based Artificial Intelligence Reports; PROBAST, Prediction Model Risk of Bias Assessment Tool.
All items were translated from modified CLEAR statements into signaling questions that adhered to the PROBAST. Based on the PROBAST rating criteria, each domain was rated as poor reporting quality if 1 or more items were answered with no or probably no. Overall reporting quality was determined by rating for each item, with 1 or more items answered by no or probably no being poor reporting quality.
All of the models showed overall poor reporting quality in the data domain across 13 signaling questions. Lack of reporting for how to handle out-of-distribution images was the main source of the poor reporting quality rating in the data domain. In addition, 378 of 555 models (68.1%; 95% CI, 64.2%-72.0%) lacked reports for quality control (eg, signaling question: was how to handle neuroimaging artifacts reported?), incurring a low reporting quality rating. Overall, a mean 58.9% (95% CI, 58.0%-59.7%) of models required contents in the data domain.
Approximately half of the models (258 of 555 [46.48%; 95% CI, 42.3%- 50.6%]) were assessed for poor reporting quality in the technique domain across 3 signaling questions. The unique source for the degraded reporting quality in this domain was the absence of algorithmic details, which limited reproducibility (eg, signaling question: were details for algorithm development reported?). The mean reporting completeness for these models in the technique domain was satisfied (84.5%; 95% CI, 83.1%-85.8%).
All models were rated for poor reporting quality in the technical assessment domain across 4 signaling questions. Of the 555 models, 544 (98.0%; 95% CI, 96.9%-99.2%) lacked reports for how to evaluate AI performance publicly. Additionally, the absence-of-bias assessment was associated with degraded reporting quality in this domain (eg, signaling question: were bias assessments discussed?). Thus, the overall reporting completeness for these AI models was the poorest in the technical assessment domain (39.9%; 95% CI, 38.8%-41.1%).
One-hundred fifty of 555 models (27.0%; 95% CI, 23.3%-30.7%) were rated with poor reporting quality in the applications domain across 2 signaling questions. Lacking intrinsic reports or discussions of the clinical implications of these models was the main source of the poor rating in this domain (eg, signaling question: were use cases and target conditions discussed?). The mean overall reporting completeness in the applications domain was found to be favorable (84.6%; 95% CI, 81.8%-86.5%).

Discussion
Despite the tremendous potential for neuroimaging-based AI models in psychiatric research and clinical translation, the present study showed a high ROB that was associated with barriers to translation of the models into clinical application. To our surprise, the majority of models exhibited a high ROB. These models further exhibited low potential for both clinical and health care applicability based on the PROBAST. Thus, optimistic claims with respect to reliable AI-based psychiatric diagnosis should be considered with caution. Furthermore, poor reporting quality (with a mean reporting completeness of 61.2%) was found to be associated with additional barriers to clinical and practical translation of these models. Despite their high potential, the AI models presented to date do not fulfill the criteria for being recommended for use in psychiatric diagnostics, and several challenges remain on the way to translation.
In this study, we found that 83.1% of existing AI models exhibited a high ROB for psychiatric diagnosis. These findings align with results of a multivariable statistical model (eg, clinical prediction model [CPM]) for diagnosing both somatic and psychiatric disorders that showed 98% and 94% of the models, respectively, had a high ROB in diagnosis. In addition, high ROB was observed for prognostication of oral health (75% of models) and cardiovascular health (81% of models). Thus, compared with traditional statistical models, the current AI models did not fulfill the promise of superior technical (statistical) model merits (ie, unbiased prediction) in clinical practice. In addition, unlike neurological or physiological diseases with clear nosological landmarks, neuroimaging-based AI models may outperform traditional clinical models for psychiatric diagnosis only if these neuromarkers were associated with apparently differentiable actionability. This situation may be an additional source of high ROB in these models.
The main reason for incurring high ROB in these AI models was found in the analysis domain, especially the sample size and model configurations. Inadequate sample size represented a long-debated concern leading to inflated model performance in neuroimaging-based AI. Despite the ongoing debate, a sample of more than 200 participants for building AI models is increasingly becoming commonly acceptable. However, about 80% of AI models for psychiatric diagnosis were trained on far smaller samples, leading to a high ROB and resulting in poor generalizability. On the other hand, model configurations, including data leakage, performance optimization, and absence of handling data complexities, represented key challenges to increasing model ROB. Data leakage, for instance, referred to the role that knowledge of outcome played in feature selection in the training set. Compared with traditional statistical models, the number of neuroimaging-based features (eg, voxel and functional connectivity) was large. For dimension reduction, univariate analysis was consistently used for feature selection in the whole data set, which made testing the data set no longer independent. In addition, unlike CPM, the data structure for AI models allows for a substantial variation in optimizing and turning parameters to manipulate performance. Fine-tuning the models may thus improve diagnostic performance, but such tailor-built configurations sacrifice generalizability for unseen patients. On balance, a high ROB in the analysis domain should be addressed to prompt clinical applications in future AI models.
Standardized and transparent reports for a clinical diagnostic model are increasingly advocated to improve clinical applicability and unbiased practice. However, we found that the reporting completeness following a benchmark assessment was only 61.2%, critically limiting replicability and applicability. The finding of insufficient reporting resonated with the study by Heus et al that found low overall reporting completeness (ie, 44%) for CPM across clinical domains. With regard to AI models for other clinical diseases, the reporting completeness was still approximately 50%. Going forward, complete and transparent reporting quality is imperative for applicable and feasible AI diagnostic models in clinical practice.
Taken together, a concise guideline that consists of 3 aspects is proposed in this study: (1) adopt appropriate reporting guidelines (eg, CLEAR) and benchmarks (eg, PROBAST-AI) before building models; (2) increase attention on the quality of models (eg, adequate sample size, rigorous calibration examination, and controls for data complexities); and (3) propel translational or accessible diagnostic models (eg, report more details for technical assessments and access enough model materials for clinical validations or applications).

Limitations
This study has limitations. One limitation is the potential overestimation of ROB due to the lack of a suitable benchmark. Despite the extension of the PROBAST to AI models, the applicable version is pending. Results of the current study could be validated by the PROBAST-AI when it becomes available. Similarly, the findings regarding the reporting quality of these models could be enriched by the development of a psychiatry-specific image-based AI model reporting checklist. A second limitation is the rating heterogeneity of the benchmarks we used. Although it had acceptable reliability, a certain assessment was found to have heterogeneity by assessors with specific expertise, especially in different assessment domains (eMethods 6 in Supplement 1). Thus, it would be highly beneficial if experts with interdisciplinary scientific training validated the findings by rating the AI models. A third limitation is that we did not test the models’ clinical performance; thus, it is prudent for future studies to examine these models in clinical practice to determine their applicability.

Conclusions
In this systematic review of risks for available neuroimaging-based AI models for psychiatric diagnosis, most AI models had an overall high ROB, especially in the analysis domain. Furthermore, the overall reporting quality was poor, and the mean reporting completeness for these models was 61.2%. Existing AI models may not be as mature for direct clinical applications as is claimed given their high ROB and poor reporting quality. In the analysis domain, ROB in of AI diagnostic models should be addressed before clinical application.

References
Neuroimaging-based individualized prediction of cognition and behavior for mental disorders and health: methods and promises
Single subject prediction of brain disorders in neuroimaging: Promises and pitfalls
Tech giants enter mental health
Machine learning: Trends, perspectives, and prospects
A support vector machine model provides an accurate transcript-level-based diagnostic for major depressive disorder
Early brain development in infants at high risk for autism spectrum disorder
Individual deviations from normative models of brain structure in a large cross-sectional schizophrenia cohort
Machine learning with neuroimaging: evaluating its applications in psychiatry
Assessing and tuning brain decoders: Cross-validation, caveats, and guidelines
Common pitfalls and recommendations for using machine learning to detect and prognosticate for COVID-19 using chest radiographs and CT scans
Prediction models for diagnosis and prognosis of Covid-19: systematic review and critical appraisal
Risk of bias in studies on prediction models developed using supervised machine learning techniques: systematic review
Clinical prediction models in psychiatry: a systematic review of two decades of progress and challenges
Translational machine learning for psychiatric neuroimaging
Machine learning for precision psychiatry: opportunities and challenges
Reporting guideline for the early-stage clinical evaluation of decision support systems driven by artificial intelligence: DECIDE-AI
Towards complete and accurate reporting of studies of diagnostic accuracy: the STARD initiative
Transparent Reporting of a Multivariable Prediction Model for Individual Prognosis or Diagnosis (TRIPOD): the TRIPOD statement
Assessment of adherence to reporting guidelines by commonly used clinical prediction models from a single vendor: a systematic review
Reducing waste from incomplete or unusable reports of biomedical research
Prediction models for cardiovascular disease risk in the hypertensive population: a systematic review
Artificial intelligence versus clinicians: systematic review of design, reporting standards, and claims of deep learning studies
Checklist for evaluation of image-based artificial intelligence reports in dermatology: CLEAR Derm consensus guidelines from the International Skin Imaging Collaboration Artificial Intelligence Working Group
PROBAST: a tool to assess the risk of bias and applicability of prediction model studies
Auditory repetition suppression alterations in relation to cognitive functioning in fragile X syndrome: a combined EEG and machine learning approach
Brain regions with abnormal network properties in severe epilepsy of Lennox-Gastaut phenotype: multivariate analysis of task-free fMRI
Applying tensor-based morphometry to parametric surfaces can improve MRI-based disease diagnosis
Neuroanatomical differences in toddler boys with fragile x syndrome and idiopathic autism
Disease prediction using graph convolutional networks: application to autism spectrum disorder and Alzheimer’s disease
Robust disruptions in electroencephalogram cortical oscillations and large-scale functional networks in autism
Diffusion based abnormality markers of pathology: toward learned diagnostic prediction of ASD
Brain MRI analysis using a deep learning based evolutionary approach
Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder based on complex network features
Supervised machine learning for diagnostic classification from large-scale neuroimaging datasets
Diagnosing autism spectrum disorder using brain entropy: a fast entropy method
Improving the detection of autism spectrum disorder by combining structural and functional MRI information
Fractality and a wavelet-chaos-neural network methodology for EEG-based diagnosis of autistic spectrum disorder
Multimodal neuroimaging based classification of autism spectrum disorder using anatomical, neurochemical, and white matter correlates
Autism spectrum disorder diagnostic system using HOS bispectrum with EEG signals
Multi-view learning-based data proliferator for boosting classification using highly imbalanced classes
. Identifying sub-populations via unsupervised cluster analysis on multi-edge similarity graphs. In: Ayache N, Delingette H, Golland P, Mori K, eds. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention—MICCAI 2012. MICCAI 2012. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol 7511. Springer; 2012:254-261.
Ensemble learning with 3D convolutional neural networks for functional connectome-based prediction
A novel transfer learning approach to enhance deep neural network classification of brain functional connectomes
A general prediction model for the detection of ADHD and autism using structural and functional MRI
Classification of autism spectrum disorder based on sample entropy of spontaneous functional near infra-red spectroscopy signal
Identifying individuals with autism spectrum disorder based on the principal components of whole-brain phase synchrony
Population graph-based multi-model ensemble method for diagnosing autism spectrum disorder
Extracting biomarkers of autism from MEG resting-state functional connectivity networks
Extracting multiscale pattern information of fMRI based functional brain connectivity with application on classification of autism spectrum disorders
Interpretable learning approaches in resting-state functional connectivity analysis: the case of autism spectrum disorder
Surface-based shared and distinct resting functional connectivity in attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and autism spectrum disorder
Identification of autism spectrum disorder using deep learning and the ABIDE dataset
Predicting autism spectrum disorder using domain-adaptive cross-site evaluation
Multi-task feature selection via supervised canonical graph matching for diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder
Investigating the predictive value of whole-brain structural MR scans in autism: a pattern classification approach
White matter connectome edge density in children with autism spectrum disorders: potential imaging biomarkers using machine-learning models
. Multiple-network classification of childhood autism using functional connectivity dynamics. In: Golland P, Hata N, Barillot C, Hornegger J, Howe R, eds. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention—MICCAI 2014. MICCAI 2014. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol 8675. Springer, Cham; 2014:177-184.
A robust DWT-CNN-based CAD system for early diagnosis of autism using task-based fMRI
Diagnostic classification of intrinsic functional connectivity highlights somatosensory, default mode, and visual regions in autism
Functional connectivity magnetic resonance imaging classification of autism
Salience network-based classification and prediction of symptom severity in children with autism
Multisite functional connectivity MRI classification of autism: ABIDE results
Distributed intrinsic functional connectivity patterns predict diagnostic status in large autism cohort
The effect of gender on the neuroanatomy of children with autism spectrum disorders: a support vector machine case-control study
Female children with autism spectrum disorder: an insight from mass-univariate and pattern classification analyses
Machine learning approach to identify a resting-state functional connectivity pattern serving as an endophenotype of autism spectrum disorder
Gray matter alterations in young children with autism spectrum disorders: comparing morphometry at the voxel and regional level
Ensemble deep learning on large, mixed-site fMRI datasets in autism and other tasks
Extra-axial cerebrospinal fluid in high-risk and normal-risk children with autism aged 2-4 years: a case-control study
Diagnosis of autism through EEG processed by advanced computational algorithms: a pilot study
Ambivert degree identifies crucial brain functional hubs and improves detection of Alzheimer’s disease and autism spectrum disorder
Using functional or structural magnetic resonance images and personal characteristic data to identify ADHD and autism
Identifying disease-related subnetwork connectome biomarkers by sparse hypergraph learning
Divide and conquer: sub-grouping of ASD improves ASD detection based on brain morphometry
Decreased interhemispheric functional connectivity rather than corpus callosum volume as a potential biomarker for autism spectrum disorder
Using resting state functional MRI to build a personalized autism diagnosis system
Cortical surface architecture endophenotype and correlates of clinical diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder
Resting state functional magnetic resonance imaging and neural network classified autism and control
Classification of autism spectrum disorder using supervised learning of brain connectivity measures extracted from synchrostates
Whole brain white matter connectivity analysis using machine learning: an application to autism
Automated image quality evaluation of structural brain MRI using an ensemble of deep learning networks
Enhancing the representation of functional connectivity networks by fusing multi-view information for autism spectrum disorder diagnosis
Functional connectivities are more informative than anatomical variables in diagnostic classification of autism
Diagnostic model generated by MRI-derived brain features in toddlers with autism spectrum disorder
Multiple functional networks modeling for autism spectrum disorder diagnosis
Metric learning with spectral graph convolutions on brain connectivity networks
Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders in young children based on resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging data using convolutional neural networks
Screening of autism based on task-free fMRI using graph theoretical approach
Hippocampus and amygdala radiomic biomarkers for the study of autism spectrum disorder
EEG-based computer aided diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder using wavelet, entropy, and ANN
A small number of abnormal brain connections predicts adult autism spectrum disorder
Recurrence quantification analysis of resting state EEG signals in autism spectrum disorder: a systematic methodological exploration of technical and demographic confounders in the search for biomarkers
Multivariate classification of autism spectrum disorder using frequency-specific resting-state functional connectivity: a multi-center study
Identifying autism from neural representations of social interactions: neurocognitive markers of autism
Combination of rs-fMRI and sMRI data to discriminate autism spectrum disorders in young children using deep belief network
EEG signal analysis for diagnosing neurological disorders using discrete wavelet transform and intelligent techniques
Slower binocular rivalry in the autistic brain
Autism spectrum disorder and childhood apraxia of speech: early language-related hallmarks across structural MRI study
The diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder based on the random neural network cluster
Functional connectivity networks in the autistic and healthy brain assessed using Granger causality
Robust features for the automatic identification of autism spectrum disorder in children
A three-stage teacher, student neural networks and sequential feed forward selection-based feature selection approach for the classification of autism spectrum disorder
Automated detection of autism spectrum disorder using a convolutional neural network
Multisite autism spectrum disorder classification using convolutional neural network classifier and individual morphological brain networks
Attentional connectivity-based prediction of autism using heterogeneous rs-fMRI data from CC200 atlas
Large-scale brain functional network integration for discrimination of autism using a 3-D deep learning model
Identifying autism spectrum disorder from resting-state fMRI using deep belief network
A study on EEG feature extraction and classification in autistic children based on singular spectrum analysis method
ASD-SAENet: a sparse autoencoder, and deep-neural network model for detecting autism spectrum disorder (ASD) using fMRI data
Identification of autism spectrum disorder based on short-term spontaneous hemodynamic fluctuations using deep learning in a multi-layer neural network
Single stimulus fMRI produces a neural individual difference measure for autism spectrum disorder
Single volume image generator and deep learning-based ASD classification
Prediction in autism by deep learning short-time spontaneous Hemodynamic fluctuations
Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders using regional and interregional morphological features
An autoencoder-based deep learning classifier for efficient diagnosis of autism
Domain adaptation using a three-way decision improves the identification of autism patients from multisite fMRI data
The importance of anti-correlations in graph theory based classification of autism spectrum disorder
Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder based on functional brain networks with deep learning
Predictive models of autism spectrum disorder based on brain regional cortical thickness
Differential deactivation during mentalizing and classification of autism based on default mode network connectivity
Characterizing and predicting autism spectrum disorder by performing resting-state functional network community pattern analysis
Support vector machines, multidimensional scaling and magnetic resonance imaging reveal structural brain abnormalities associated with the interaction between autism spectrum disorder and sex
ASD-DiagNet: a hybrid learning approach for detection of autism spectrum disorder using fMRI data
Autism classified by magnetic resonance imaging: a pilot study of a potential diagnostic tool
Topological properties of resting-state fMRI functional networks improve machine learning-based autism classification
Diagnosing autism spectrum disorder from brain resting-state functional connectivity patterns using a deep neural network with a novel feature selection method
Classifying autism spectrum disorder using the temporal statistics of resting-state functional MRI data with 3D convolutional neural networks
BrainGNN: interpretable brain graph neural network for fMRI analysis
Autistic spectrum disorder detection and structural biomarker identification using self-attention model and individual-level morphological covariance brain networks
A CNN deep local and global ASD classification approach with continuous wavelet transform using task-based FMRI
Automatic classification of autism spectrum disorder in children using cortical thickness and support vector machine
Automated ASD detection using hybrid deep lightweight features extracted from EEG signals
Autism spectrum disorder diagnosis using graph attention network based on spatial-constrained sparse functional brain networks
The role of diffusion tensor MR imaging (DTI) of the brain in diagnosing autism spectrum disorder: promising results
Extended invariant information clustering is effective for leave-one-site-out cross-validation in resting state functional connectivity modeling
Application of machine learning techniques to detect the children with autism spectrum disorder
Multi-site clustering and nested feature extraction for identifying autism spectrum disorder with resting-state fMRI
Diagnosing autism spectrum disorder in children using conventional MRI and apparent diffusion coefficient based deep learning algorithms
Deep transfer learning for cerebral cortex using area-preserving geometry mapping
Identifying boys with autism spectrum disorder based on whole-brain resting-state interregional functional connections using a boruta-based support vector machine approach
Classification of ASD based on fMRI data with deep learning
TE-HI-GCN: an ensemble of transfer hierarchical graph convolutional networks for disorder diagnosis
Involvement of the habenula in the pathophysiology of autism spectrum disorder
Accurate assessment of low-function autistic children based on EEG feature fusion
The altered pattern of the functional connectome related to pathological biomarkers in individuals for autism spectrum disorder identification
GAT-LI: a graph attention network based learning and interpreting method for functional brain network classification
Detection of an autism EEG signature from only two EEG channels through features extraction and advanced machine learning analysis
EEG characteristics of children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
Shared and distinct resting functional connectivity in children and adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
EEG/ERP-based biomarker/neuroalgorithms in adults with ADHD: Development, reliability, and application in clinical practice
Learning a phenotypic-attribute attentional brain connectivity embedding for ADHD classification using rs-fMRI
ADHD classification by dual subspace learning using resting-state functional connectivity
Multimodal alterations of directed connectivity profiles in patients with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders
Linking ADHD and behavioral assessment through identification of shared diagnostic task-based functional connections
Deep learning based on event-related EEG differentiates children with ADHD from healthy controls
DeepFMRI: end-to-end deep learning for functional connectivity and classification of ADHD using fMRI
Discrimination of ADHD subtypes using decision tree on behavioral, neuropsychological, and neural markers
Functional EEG connectivity is a neuromarker for adult attention deficit hyperactivity disorder symptoms
Identifying ADHD individuals from resting-state functional connectivity using subspace clustering and binary hypothesis testing
Differentiating boys with ADHD from those with typical development based on whole-brain functional connections using a machine learning approach
Locally linear embedding and fMRI feature selection in psychiatric classification
Fusion of fMRI and non-imaging data for ADHD classification
Phase space reconstruction of EEG signals for classification of ADHD and control adults
A multichannel deep neural network model analyzing multiscale functional brain connectome data for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder detection
Exploring attentive task-based connectivity for screening attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder children: a functional near-infrared spectroscopy study
Multimodal neuroimaging-based prediction of adult outcomes in childhood-onset ADHD using ensemble learning techniques
Diagnostic model for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder based on interregional morphological connectivity
Extreme learning machine-based classification of ADHD using brain structural MRI data
Applied machine learning method to predict children with ADHD using prefrontal cortex activity: a multicenter study in Japan
Multi-modal, multi-measure, and multi-class discrimination of ADHD with hierarchical feature extraction and extreme learning machine using structural and functional brain MRI
Diagnostic utility of brain activity flow patterns analysis in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
The brain anatomy of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in young adults: a magnetic resonance imaging study
Evaluation of pattern recognition and feature extraction methods in ADHD prediction
Classifying adolescent attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) based on functional and structural imaging
Identifying ADHD children using hemodynamic responses during a working memory task measured by functional near-infrared spectroscopy
Network-based classification of ADHD patients using discriminative subnetwork selection and graph kernel PCA
Identifying individuals with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder based on temporal variability of dynamic functional connectivity
Pattern classification of response inhibition in ADHD: toward the development of neurobiological markers for ADHD
Classification of ADHD children through multimodal magnetic resonance imaging
Deep spatio-temporal representation and ensemble classification for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder
Altered regional homogeneity patterns in adults with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder
Kernel principal component analysis for dimensionality reduction in fMRI-based diagnosis of ADHD
Diagnostic value of resting electroencephalogram in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder across the lifespan
Fisher discriminative analysis of resting-state brain function for attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder
ADHD diagnosis from multiple data sources with batch effects
Brainstem abnormalities in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder support high accuracy individual diagnostic classification
Regularized Spatial Filtering Method (R-SFM) for detection of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) from resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI)
ADHD classification by a texture analysis of anatomical brain MRI data
Aiding diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder and its subtypes: discriminant function analysis of event-related potential data
Abnormal functional resting-state networks in ADHD: graph theory and pattern recognition analysis of fMRI data
Psychoradiologic utility of MR imaging for diagnosis of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a radiomics analysis
Classification of ADHD patients on the basis of independent ERP components using a machine learning system
Individual classification of ADHD patients by integrating multiscale neuroimaging markers and advanced pattern recognition techniques
Wavelet-synchronization methodology: a new approach for EEG-based diagnosis of ADHD
Decision support algorithm for diagnosis of ADHD using electroencephalograms
Insights into multimodal imaging classification of ADHD
Discriminating between ADHD adults and controls using independent ERP components and a support vector machine: a validation study
Additional brain functional network in adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: a phase synchrony analysis
Age dependent electroencephalographic changes in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
Multiclass classification for the differential diagnosis on the ADHD subtypes using recursive feature elimination and hierarchical extreme learning machine: structural MRI study
Predictive neurofunctional markers of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder based on pattern classification of temporal processing
Classification of ADHD subgroup with recursive feature elimination for structural brain MRI
Fully connected cascade artificial neural network architecture for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder classification from functional magnetic resonance imaging data
Functional neuroimaging of visuospatial working memory tasks enables accurate detection of attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder
Diagnose ADHD disorder in children using convolutional neural network based on continuous mental task EEG
The blessing of dimensionality: feature selection outperforms functional connectivity-based feature transformation to classify ADHD subjects from EEG patterns of phase synchronisation
Disorder-specific predictive classification of adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) relative to autism using structural magnetic resonance imaging
Machine-based classification of ADHD and nonADHD participants using time/frequency features of event-related neuroelectric activity
Automated detection of conduct disorder and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder using decomposition and nonlinear techniques with EEG signals
Effects of spectral features of EEG signals recorded with different channels and recording statuses on ADHD classification with deep learning
Aiding diagnosis of childhood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder of the inattentive presentation: discriminant function analysis of multi-domain measures including EEG
Exploiting the brain’s network structure in identifying ADHD subjects
Exploring characteristic features of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: findings from multi-modal MRI and candidate genetic data
Machine learning approach for classification of ADHD adults
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder diagnosis using non-linear univariate and multivariate EEG measurements: a preliminary study
The utility of a computerized algorithm based on a multi-domain profile of measures for the diagnosis of attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder
Prefrontal activation during inhibitory control measured by near-infrared spectroscopy for differentiating between autism spectrum disorders and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in adults
Separated channel attention convolutional neural network (SC-CNN-Attention) to identify ADHD in multi-site Rs-fMRI dataset
Estimating biological accuracy of DSM for attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder based on multivariate analysis for small samples
Attributed graph distance measure for automatic detection of attention deficit hyperactive disordered subjects
Electroencephalography as a clinical tool for diagnosing and monitoring attention deficit hyperactivity disorder: a cross-sectional study
Entropy-based quantitative electroencephalogram analysis for diagnosing attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in girls
Use of deep learning to detect personalized spatial-frequency abnormalities in EEGs of children with ADHD
Automated and ERP-based diagnosis of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder in children
Quantifying patterns of brain activity: distinguishing unaffected siblings from participants with ADHD and healthy individuals
Classification of ADHD with fMRI data and multi-objective optimization
Towards interpretable machine learning models for diagnosis aid: a case study on attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder
Functional brain dynamic analysis of ADHD and control children using nonlinear dynamical features of EEG signals
Neural activities classification of human inhibitory control using hierarchical model
Multimodal MR images-based diagnosis of early adolescent attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder using multiple kernel learning
Deep learning enabled diagnosis of children’s ADHD based on the big data of video screen long-range EEG
ADHD classification using auto-encoding neural network and binary hypothesis testing
Detection of ADHD from EEG signals using different entropy measures and ANN
A dynamic graph convolutional neural network framework reveals new insights into connectome dysfunctions in ADHD
A 3D multiscale view convolutional neural network with attention for mental disease diagnosis on MRI images
Diagnosing developmental dyscalculia on the basis of reliable single case FMRI methods: promises and limitations
Dyslexia detection using 3D convolutional neural networks and functional magnetic resonance imaging
Multi-parameter machine learning approach to the neuroanatomical basis of developmental dyslexia
EEG connectivity analysis using denoising autoencoders for the detection of dyslexia
Comparison of extreme learning machine and K-nearest neighbour performance in classifying EEG signal of normal, poor and capable dyslexic children
Neural biomarkers for dyslexia, ADHD, and ADD in the auditory cortex of children
Disrupted white matter connectivity underlying developmental dyslexia: a machine learning approach
Automatic classification of dyslexic children by applying machine learning to fMRI images
Anomalous gray matter patterns in specific reading comprehension deficit are independent of dyslexia
Gaussian smoothing and modified histogram normalization methods to improve neural-biomarker interpretations for dyslexia classification mechanism
Selecting the most relevant brain regions to classify children with developmental dyslexia and typical readers by using complex magnocellular stimuli and multiple kernel learning
A neuroimaging biomarker for striatal dysfunction in schizophrenia
Diagnosing schizophrenia with network analysis and a machine learning method
Machine-learning classification using neuroimaging data in schizophrenia, autism, ultra-high risk and first-episode psychosis
Detecting abnormal brain regions in schizophrenia using structural MRI via machine learning
Automated detection of schizophrenia using nonlinear signal processing methods
Discriminative analysis of symptom severity and ultra-high risk of schizophrenia using intrinsic functional connectivity
Machine learning classification of first-episode schizophrenia spectrum disorders and controls using whole brain white matter fractional anisotropy
Reproducible grey matter patterns index a multivariate, global alteration of brain structure in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
Multivariate patterns of EEG microstate parameters and their role in the discrimination of patients with schizophrenia from healthy controls
Feature optimization method for machine learning-based diagnosis of schizophrenia using magnetoencephalography
Investigating brain structural patterns in first episode psychosis and schizophrenia using MRI and a machine learning approach
Support vector machine-based classification of schizophrenia patients and healthy controls using structural magnetic resonance imaging from two independent sites
Dynamic thresholding networks for schizophrenia diagnosis
Multisite machine learning analysis provides a robust structural imaging signature of schizophrenia detectable across diverse patient populations and within individuals
Aberrant posterior cingulate connectivity classify first-episode schizophrenia from controls: a machine learning study
Patient, interrupted: MEG oscillation dynamics reveal temporal dysconnectivity in schizophrenia
Identifying a neuroanatomical signature of schizophrenia, reproducible across sites and stages, using machine learning with structured sparsity
Multivariate patterns of gray matter volume in thalamic nuclei are associated with positive schizotypy in healthy individuals
Differences between schizophrenic and normal subjects using network properties from fMRI
Convergent and divergent functional connectivity patterns in schizophrenia and depression
Multi-center machine learning in imaging psychiatry: a meta-model approach
Diagnostic value of structural and diffusion imaging measures in schizophrenia
Multivariate classification of schizophrenia and its familial risk based on load-dependent attentional control brain functional connectivity
Discriminative analysis of schizophrenia using support vector machine and recursive feature elimination on structural MRI images
Discrimination of schizophrenia auditory hallucinators by machine learning of resting-state functional MRI
Machine learning identifies unaffected first-degree relatives with functional network patterns and cognitive impairment similar to those of schizophrenia patients
Disrupted pathways from limbic areas to thalamus in schizophrenia highlighted by whole-brain resting-state effective connectivity analysis
Multivariate neuroanatomical classification of cognitive subtypes in schizophrenia: a support vector machine learning approach
Automatic schizophrenic discrimination on fNIRS by using complex brain network analysis and SVM
Non-negative discriminative brain functional connectivity for identifying schizophrenia on resting-state fMRI
Functional, anatomical, and morphological networks highlight the role of basal ganglia-thalamus-cortex circuits in schizophrenia
Recognition of schizophrenia with regularized support vector machine and sequential region of interest selection using structural magnetic resonance imaging
Abnormalities in the effective connectivity of visuothalamic circuitry in schizophrenia
Can we accurately classify schizophrenia patients from healthy controls using magnetic resonance imaging and machine learning? a multi-method and multi-dataset study
Shared atypical default mode and salience network functional connectivity between autism and schizophrenia
Support vector machine-based classification of first episode drug-naïve schizophrenia patients and healthy controls using structural MRI
Multi-site diagnostic classification of schizophrenia using discriminant deep learning with functional connectivity MRI
Dysregulated brain dynamics in a triple-network saliency model of schizophrenia and its relation to psychosis
Differences in atypical resting-state effective connectivity distinguish autism from schizophrenia
Abnormal neural activity as a potential biomarker for drug-naive first-episode adolescent-onset schizophrenia with coherence regional homogeneity and support vector machine analyses
Disease definition for schizophrenia by functional connectivity using radiomics strategy
Using deep autoencoders to identify abnormal brain structural patterns in neuropsychiatric disorders: a large-scale multi-sample study
Transdiagnostic differences in the resting-state functional connectivity of the prefrontal cortex in depression and schizophrenia
Can structural MRI aid in clinical classification? a machine learning study in two independent samples of patients with schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and healthy subjects
Nodal centrality of functional network in the differentiation of schizophrenia
Connectivity of the anterior insula differentiates participants with first-episode schizophrenia spectrum disorders from controls: a machine-learning study
Whole brain resting state functional connectivity abnormalities in schizophrenia
Abnormal regional homogeneity as a potential imaging biomarker for adolescent-onset schizophrenia: a resting-state fMRI study and support vector machine analysis
Classifying schizophrenia using multimodal multivariate pattern recognition analysis: evaluating the impact of individual clinical profiles on the neurodiagnostic performance
Accuracy of diagnostic classification algorithms using cognitive-, electrophysiological-, and neuroanatomical data in antipsychotic-naive schizophrenia patients
Using deep belief network modelling to characterize differences in brain morphometry in schizophrenia
Deep neural network with weight sparsity control and pre-training extracts hierarchical features and enhances classification performance: Evidence from whole-brain resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia
Resting-state connectivity biomarkers of cognitive performance and social function in individuals with schizophrenia spectrum disorder and healthy control subjects
Accurate classification of schizophrenia patients based on novel resting-state fMRI features
Discriminating schizophrenia using recurrent neural network applied on time courses of multi-site FMRI data
Multisite generalizability of schizophrenia diagnosis classification based on functional brain connectivity
Functional connectivity-based signatures of schizophrenia revealed by multiclass pattern analysis of resting-state fMRI from schizophrenic patients and their healthy siblings
A robust sparse-modeling framework for estimating schizophrenia biomarkers from fMRI
Grey matter volume patterns in thalamic nuclei are associated with familial risk for schizophrenia
Discriminative analysis of resting-state functional connectivity patterns of schizophrenia using low dimensional embedding of fMRI
A correlative classification study of schizophrenic patients with results of clinical evaluation and structural magnetic resonance images
Advanced signal processing methods for characterization of schizophrenia
Identification of voxel-based texture abnormalities as new biomarkers for schizophrenia and major depressive patients using layer-wise relevance propagation on deep learning decisions
Predictors of schizophrenia spectrum disorders in early-onset first episodes of psychosis: a support vector machine model
Characterization of groups using composite kernels and multi-source fMRI analysis data: application to schizophrenia
Diagnostic classification of schizophrenia patients on the basis of regional reward-related FMRI signal patterns
Identification of patterns of gray matter abnormalities in schizophrenia using source-based morphometry and bagging
Automatic bayesian classification of healthy controls, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia using intrinsic connectivity maps from fMRI data
Automated classification of fMRI during cognitive control identifies more severely disorganized subjects with schizophrenia
Computer aided diagnosis of schizophrenia on resting state fMRI data by ensembles of ELM
. On classifying disease-induced patterns in the brain using diffusion tensor images. In: Metaxas D, Axel L, Fichtinger G, Székely G., eds. Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention—MICCAI 2008. MICCAI 2008. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol 5241. Springer; 2008:908-916.
Selection of spectro-temporal patterns in multichannel MEG with support vector machines for schizophrenia classification
Parallel principal component neural networks for classification of event-related potential waveforms
On the use of pairwise distance learning for brain signal classification with limited observations
Temporal lobe and “default” hemodynamic brain modes discriminate between schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
Single-subject classification of schizophrenia using event-related potentials obtained during auditory and visual oddball paradigms
Abnormal neural oscillations in schizophrenia assessed by spectral power ratio of MEG during word processing
A machine learning approach using P300 responses to investigate effect of clozapine therapy
Classification of schizophrenia using feature-based morphometry
Classification of schizophrenia patients through empirical wavelet transformation using electroencephalogram signals
Mapping relationships among schizophrenia, bipolar and schizoaffective disorders: a deep classification and clustering framework using fMRI time series
Identifying commonality and specificity across psychosis sub-groups via classification based on features from dynamic connectivity analysis
Classification of schizophrenia and normal controls using 3D convolutional neural network and outcome visualization
Support vector machine-based schizophrenia classification using morphological information from amygdaloid and hippocampal subregions
Multimodal discrimination of schizophrenia using hybrid weighted feature concatenation of brain functional connectivity and anatomical features with an extreme learning machine
ISOMAP and machine learning algorithms for the construction of embedded functional connectivity networks of anatomically separated brain regions from resting state fMRI data of patients with schizophrenia
Multikernel capsule network for schizophrenia identification
Effects of brain atlases and machine learning methods on the discrimination of schizophrenia patients: a multimodal MRI study
Structural and diffusion MRI based schizophrenia classification using 2D pretrained and 3D naive convolutional neural networks
EEG microstate features for schizophrenia classification
Multimodal integration of brain images for MRI-based diagnosis in schizophrenia
Deep neural network to differentiate brain activity between patients with first-episode schizophrenia and healthy individuals: a multi-channel near infrared spectroscopy study
Deep learning based automatic diagnosis of first-episode psychosis, bipolar disorder and healthy controls
A hybrid machine learning method for fusing fMRI and genetic data: combining both improves classification of schizophrenia
Towards artificial intelligence in mental health by improving schizophrenia prediction with multiple brain parcellation ensemble-learning
Functional connectivity combined with a machine learning algorithm can classify high-risk first-degree relatives of patients with schizophrenia and identify correlates of cognitive impairments
Anatomical brain images alone can accurately diagnose chronic neuropsychiatric illnesses
Differentiation of schizophrenia by combining the spatial EEG brain network patterns of rest and task P300
Classification of schizophrenia by combination of brain effective and functional connectivity
Identification of major psychiatric disorders from resting-state electroencephalography using a machine learning approach
Integrating machining learning and multimodal neuroimaging to detect schizophrenia at the level of the individual
EEG source network for the diagnosis of schizophrenia and the identification of subtypes based on symptom severity-a machine learning approach
Machine learning of schizophrenia detection with structural and functional neuroimaging
Transfer learning with deep convolutional neural network for automated detection of schizophrenia from EEG signals
Supervised, multivariate, whole-brain reduction did not help to achieve high classification performance in schizophrenia research
The progression of disorder-specific brain pattern expression in schizophrenia over 9 years
An integrated machine learning framework for a discriminative analysis of schizophrenia using multi-biological data
Learning stable and predictive network-based patterns of schizophrenia and its clinical symptoms
Sparse deep neural networks on imaging genetics for schizophrenia case-control classification
Identifying schizophrenia using structural MRI with a deep learning algorithm
Spectral features based convolutional neural network for accurate and prompt identification of schizophrenic patients
A hybrid deep neural network for classification of schizophrenia using EEG data
Classification of schizophrenia and depression by EEG with ANNs*
Machine learning identification of EEG features predicting working memory performance in schizophrenia and healthy adults
Distinguishing hypochondriasis and schizophrenia using regional homogeneity: a resting-state fMRI study and support vector machine analysis
A computerized method for automatic detection of schizophrenia using EEG signals
Machine learning-based electroencephalographic phenotypes of schizophrenia and major depressive disorder
Diagnosis of schizophrenia based on deep learning using fMRI
Fusing multimodal neuroimaging data with a variational autoencoder
Automatic classification of schizophrenia patients using resting-state EEG signals
Automatic diagnosis of schizophrenia in EEG signals using CNN-LSTM models
A self-learned decomposition and classification model for schizophrenia diagnosis
Evaluating the performance of machine learning models for automatic diagnosis of patients with schizophrenia based on a single site dataset of 440 participants
A hybrid learning pipeline for automated diagnosis of first-episode schizophrenia utilizing T1-weighted images
Deep feature extraction for resting-state functional MRI by self-supervised learning and application to schizophrenia diagnosis
Automated detection of schizophrenia using optimal wavelet-based l1 norm features extracted from single-channel EEG
Identification of autism subtypes based on wavelet coherence of BOLD fMRI signals using convolutional neural network
Improving the predictive potential of diffusion MRI in schizophrenia using normative models-towards subject-level classification
Detection of functional and structural brain alterations in female schizophrenia using elastic net logistic regression
A novel event-related fMRI supervoxels-based representation and its application to schizophrenia diagnosis
Feature and decision-level fusion for schizophrenia detection based on resting-state fMRI data
Detection of schizophrenia cases from healthy controls with combination of neurocognitive and electrophysiological features
A fusion-based technique with hybrid swarm algorithm and deep learning for biosignal classification
A hybrid decision support system for automatic detection of schizophrenia using EEG signals
Cortical thickness distinguishes between major depression and schizophrenia in adolescents
Identification of bipolar disorder using a combination of multimodality magnetic resonance imaging and machine learning techniques
White matter microstructure in pediatric bipolar disorder and disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
Automated cortical thickness and skewness feature selection in bipolar disorder using a semi-supervised learning method
Distinctive neuroanatomical substrates for depression in bipolar disorder versus major depressive disorder
Towards person-centered neuroimaging markers for resilience and vulnerability in Bipolar Disorder
Distinct multivariate brain morphological patterns and their added predictive value with cognitive and polygenic risk scores in mental disorders
Assessing neural tuning for object perception in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder with multivariate pattern analysis of fMRI data
Predictive classification of pediatric bipolar disorder using atlas-based diffusion weighted imaging and support vector machines
Prediction of pediatric bipolar disorder using neuroanatomical signatures of the amygdala
Pattern of neural responses to verbal fluency shows diagnostic specificity for schizophrenia and bipolar disorder
Classification of schizophrenia and bipolar patients using static and dynamic resting-state fMRI brain connectivity
Task modulations and clinical manifestations in the brain functional connectome in 1615 fMRI datasets
Pattern recognition analyses of brain activation elicited by happy and neutral faces in unipolar and bipolar depression
Identification and individualized prediction of clinical phenotypes in bipolar disorders using neurocognitive data, neuroimaging scans and machine learning
Differential abnormal pattern of anterior cingulate gyrus activation in unipolar and bipolar depression: an fMRI and pattern classification approach
Characterizing thalamo-cortical disturbances in schizophrenia and bipolar illness
Discovering Alzheimer’s disease and bipolar disorder white matter effects building computer aided diagnostic systems on brain diffusion tensor imaging features
Detecting brain structural changes as biomarker from magnetic resonance images using a local feature based SVM approach
Abnormal functional connectivity within the reward network: a potential neuroimaging endophenotype of bipolar disorder
Classification of bipolar disorder using basal-ganglia-related functional connectivity in the resting state
Classification of ADHD and BMD patients using visual evoked potential
Using minimal-redundant and maximal-relevant whole-brain functional connectivity to classify bipolar disorder
Individualized prediction and clinical staging of bipolar disorders using neuroanatomical biomarkers
Altered fractional amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation in major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder
Automatic diagnosis of bipolar disorder using optical coherence tomography data and artificial intelligence
Generalizable brain network markers of major depressive disorder across multiple imaging sites
Multimodal fusion of structural and functional brain imaging in depression using linked independent component analysis
Machine-learning-based classification between post-traumatic stress disorder and major depressive disorder using P300 features
Visualizing functional network connectivity difference between healthy control and major depressive disorder using an explainable machine-learning method
Major depressive disorder classification based on different convolutional neural network models: deep learning approach
Multivariate machine learning analyses in identification of major depressive disorder using resting-state functional connectivity: a multicentral study
Detection of depression and scaling of severity using six channel EEG data
Machine learning classifier using abnormal brain network topological metrics in major depressive disorder
Resting-state functional network scale effects and statistical significance-based feature selection in machine learning classification
Machine learning approaches for integrating clinical and imaging features in late-life depression classification and response prediction
Development and evaluation of a multimodal marker of major depressive disorder
Fractality analysis of frontal brain in major depressive disorder
Subcortical volumes differentiate major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, and remitted major depressive disorder
Automatic classification of major depression disorder using arterial spin labeling MRI perfusion measurements
Individualized diagnosis of major depressive disorder via multivariate pattern analysis of thalamic sMRI features
Whole-brain resting-state functional connectivity identified major depressive disorder: a multivariate pattern analysis in two independent samples
Functional connectivity of major depression disorder using ongoing EEG during music perception
Major depression detection from EEG signals using kernel Eigen-filter-bank common spatial patterns
Sparse network-based models for patient classification using fMRI
Evaluating the diagnostic utility of applying a machine learning algorithm to diffusion tensor MRI measures in individuals with major depressive disorder
Structural MRI-based predictions in patients with treatment-refractory depression (TRD)
Classification of different therapeutic responses of major depressive disorder with multivariate pattern analysis method based on structural MR scans
Identifying major depressive disorder using Hurst exponent of resting-state brain networks
Anatomical biomarkers for adolescent major depressive disorder from diffusion weighted imaging using SVM classifier
Machine-learning classifier for patients with major depressive disorder: multifeature approach based on a high-order minimum spanning tree functional brain network
Unsupervised classification of major depression using functional connectivity MRI
Increased cortical-limbic anatomical network connectivity in major depression revealed by diffusion tensor imaging
Decreased integration of the frontoparietal network during a working memory task in major depressive disorder
Aberrant functional connectivity for diagnosis of major depressive disorder: a discriminant analysis
Identifying major depression using whole-brain functional connectivity: a multivariate pattern analysis
Accuracy of automated classification of major depressive disorder as a function of symptom severity
Characterization of major depressive disorder using a multiparametric classification approach based on high resolution structural images
Multi-centre diagnostic classification of individual structural neuroimaging scans from patients with major depressive disorder
Functional network connectivity (FNC)-based generative adversarial network (GAN) and its applications in classification of mental disorders
Dynamic functional-structural coupling within acute functional state change phases: evidence from a depression recognition study
Cross-network interaction for diagnosis of major depressive disorder based on resting state functional connectivity
Diagnostic classification of unipolar depression based on resting-state functional connectivity MRI: effects of generalization to a diverse sample
Abnormal hubs of white matter networks in the frontal-parieto circuit contribute to depression discrimination via pattern classification
Diagnosis of major depressive disorder using whole-brain effective connectivity networks derived from resting-state functional MRI
Automated diagnosis of major depressive disorder using brain effective connectivity and 3D convolutional neural network
Brain functional networks based on resting-state EEG data for major depressive disorder analysis and classification
Classifying major depressive disorder using fNIRS during motor rehabilitation
Multivariate classification of major depressive disorder using the effective connectivity and functional connectivity
Elucidating brain connectivity networks in major depressive disorder using classification-based scoring
Quantitative identification of major depression based on resting-state dynamic functional connectivity: a machine learning approach
Enhancing multi-center generalization of machine learning-based depression diagnosis from resting-state fMRI
Support vector machine classification of major depressive disorder using diffusion-weighted neuroimaging and graph theory
Sleep disturbance-related neuroimaging features as potential biomarkers for the diagnosis of major depressive disorder: a multicenter study based on machine learning
Machine learning approaches for MDD detection and emotion decoding using EEG signals
Major depressive disorder diagnosis based on effective connectivity in EEG signals: a convolutional neural network and long short-term memory approach
Abnormal early dynamic individual patterns of functional networks in low gamma band for depression recognition
Altered anatomical patterns of depression in relation to antidepressant treatment: evidence from a pattern recognition analysis on the topological organization of brain networks
EEG power, frequency, asymmetry and coherence in male depression
Neuroanatomy of verbal working memory as a diagnostic biomarker for depression
Predicting depression based on dynamic regional connectivity: a windowed Granger causality analysis of MEG recordings
Disease state prediction from resting state functional connectivity
Deep-asymmetry: asymmetry matrix image for deep learning method in pre-screening depression
Differential association of default mode network connectivity and rumination in healthy individuals and remitted MDD patients
Graph theory analysis of directed functional brain networks in major depressive disorder based on EEG signal
A machine learning framework involving EEG-based functional connectivity to diagnose major depressive disorder (MDD)
Classification of adolescent major depressive disorder via static and dynamic connectivity
A major depressive disorder classification framework based on EEG signals using statistical, spectral, wavelet, functional connectivity, and nonlinear analysis
Establishment of effective biomarkers for depression diagnosis with fusion of multiple resting-state connectivity measures
Resting-state EEG signal for major depressive disorder detection: a systematic validation on a large and diverse dataset
Abnormal fractional amplitude of low-frequency fluctuation as a potential imaging biomarker for first-episode major depressive disorder: a resting-state fMRI study and support vector machine analysis
MDD-TSVM: a novel semisupervised-based method for major depressive disorder detection using electroencephalogram signals
An end-to-end depression recognition method based on EEGNet
Classifying social anxiety disorder using multivoxel pattern analyses of brain function and structure
Diagnostic prediction for social anxiety disorder via multivariate pattern analysis of the regional homogeneity
Multivariate classification of social anxiety disorder using whole brain functional connectivity
Classification of social anxiety disorder with support vector machine analysis using neural correlates of social signals of threat
Predicting depression, anxiety, and stress levels from videos using the facial action coding system
Anxiety and depression diagnosis method based on brain networks and convolutional neural networks
Aberrant functional network connectivity as a biomarker of generalized anxiety disorder
Modeling essential connections in obsessive-compulsive disorder patients using functional MRI
Multivariate classification of drug-naive obsessive-compulsive disorder patients and healthy controls by applying an SVM to resting-state functional MRI data
Structural neuroimaging biomarkers for obsessive-compulsive disorder in the ENIGMA-OCD consortium: medication matters
A neural marker of obsessive-compulsive disorder from whole-brain functional connectivity
Support vector machine classification of obsessive-compulsive disorder based on whole-brain volumetry and diffusion tensor imaging
Multivariate pattern analysis of obsessive-compulsive disorder using structural neuroanatomy
Investigating the predictive value of different resting-state functional MRI parameters in obsessive-compulsive disorder
Classification of obsessive-compulsive disorder from resting-state fMRI
The relevance of feature selection methods to the classification of obsessive-compulsive disorder based on volumetric measures
Multivariate pattern analysis of DTI reveals differential white matter in individuals with obsessive-compulsive disorder
A comparative analysis of functional connectivity data in resting and task-related conditions of the brain for disease signature of OCD
Temporal variability of regional intrinsic neural activity in drug-naïve patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder
Disrupted pathways from frontal-parietal cortex to basal ganglia and cerebellum in patients with unmedicated obsessive compulsive disorder as observed by whole-brain resting-state effective connectivity analysis: a small sample pilot study
Decreased nucleus accumbens connectivity at rest in medication-free patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder
Identifying differences in the P600 component of ERP-signals between OCD patients and controls employing a PNN-based majority vote classification scheme
Classification of obsessive compulsive disorder by EEG complexity and hemispheric dependency measurements
Diagnostic and predictive neuroimaging biomarkers for posttraumatic stress disorder
Machine learning multivariate pattern analysis predicts classification of posttraumatic stress disorder and its dissociative subtype: a multimodal neuroimaging approach
Multivariate classification of earthquake survivors with post-traumatic stress disorder based on large-scale brain networks
Classifying heterogeneous presentations of PTSD via the default mode, central executive, and salience networks with machine learning
PTSD and its dissociative subtype through the lens of the insula: anterior and posterior insula resting-state functional connectivity and its predictive validity using machine learning
Using deep learning to classify pediatric posttraumatic stress disorder at the individual level
Neural connectome prospectively encodes the risk of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) symptom during the COVID-19 pandemic
Hyperparameter-tuned prediction of somatic symptom disorder using functional near-infrared spectroscopy-based dynamic functional connectivity
Identifying neuroanatomical signatures of anorexia nervosa: a multivariate machine learning approach
Cortical thickness patterns as state biomarker of anorexia nervosa
Altered global brain network topology as a trait marker in patients with anorexia nervosa
Diagnosing different binge-eating disorders based on reward-related brain activation patterns
Multitask fMRI and machine learning approach improve prediction of differential brain activity pattern in patients with insomnia disorder
Network physiology in insomnia patients: assessment of relevant changes in network topology with interpretable machine learning models
Classification of pure conduct disorder from healthy controls based on indices of brain networks during resting state
Multivoxel pattern analysis of structural MRI in children and adolescents with conduct disorder
Distinguishing adolescents with conduct disorder from typically developing youngsters based on pattern classification of brain structural MRI
Identifying individuals with antisocial personality disorder using resting-state FMRI
Altered spontaneous activity in antisocial personality disorder revealed by regional homogeneity
Identification of psychopathic individuals using pattern classification of MRI images
Classifying and characterizing nicotine use disorder with high accuracy using machine learning and resting-state fMRI
Support vector machine-based multivariate pattern classification of methamphetamine dependence using arterial spin labeling
Using machine-learning approach to distinguish patients with methamphetamine dependence from healthy subjects in a virtual reality environment
Successful classification of cocaine dependence using brain imaging: a generalizable machine learning approach
Novel machine learning identifies brain patterns distinguishing diagnostic membership of human immunodeficiency virus, alcoholism, and their comorbidity of individuals
A multimodal neuroimaging classifier for alcohol dependence
A novel approach for automated alcoholism detection using Fourier decomposition method
Random forest based classification of alcohol dependence patients and healthy controls using resting state MRI
An EEG-based functional connectivity measure for automatic detection of alcohol use disorder
Alcoholism detection by data augmentation and convolutional neural network with stochastic pooling
Predicting alcohol use disorder remission: a longitudinal multimodal multi-featured machine learning approach
Automated network analysis to measure brain effective connectivity estimated from EEG data of patients with alcoholism
Support vector machine and fuzzy C-mean clustering-based comparative evaluation of changes in motor cortex electroencephalogram under chronic alcoholism
Effective connectivity in default mode network for alcoholism diagnosis
An EEG-based machine learning method to screen alcohol use disorder
Predicting alcohol dependence from multi-site brain structural measures
Bi-dimensional approach based on transfer learning for alcoholism pre-disposition classification via EEG signals
Alcoholism identification based on an AlexNet transfer learning model
Alcoholic EEG signal classification with correlation dimension based distance metrics approach and modified Adaboost classification
A combination of support vector machine and voxel-based morphometry in adult male alcohol use disorder patients with cognitive deficits
Binomial logistic regression and artificial neural network methods to classify opioid-dependent subjects and control group using quantitative EEG power measures
Borderline personality disorder classification based on brain network measures during emotion regulation
Classification of borderline personality disorder based on spectral power of resting-state fMRI
Structural features related to affective instability correctly classify patients with borderline personality disorder: a supervised machine learning approach
Multimodal ensemble deep learning to predict disruptive behavior disorders in children
PRISMA 2020 explanation and elaboration: updated guidance and exemplars for reporting systematic reviews
Meta-analysis of observational studies in epidemiology: a proposal for reporting. Meta-analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) group
Critical appraisal and data extraction for systematic reviews of prediction modelling studies: the CHARMS checklist
Large-scale validation of the prediction model risk of bias assessment tool (PROBAST) using a short form: high risk of bias models show poorer discrimination
Evaluating risk prediction models for adults with heart failure: a systematic literature review
Examining bias and reporting in oral health prediction modeling studies
Cross-validation failure: small sample sizes lead to large error bars
Making individual prognoses in psychiatry using neuroimaging and machine learning
Quantifying performance of machine learning methods for neuroimaging data
Establishment of best practices for evidence for prediction: a review
Systematic misestimation of machine learning performance in neuroimaging studies of depression
Choosing multiple parameters for support vector machines
Tricks from deep learning
Understanding deep learning (still) requires rethinking generalization
Presenting machine learning model information to clinical end users with model facts labels
Poor reporting of multivariable prediction model studies: towards a targeted implementation strategy of the TRIPOD statement
Machine learning prediction models in orthopedic surgery: a systematic review in transparent reporting
Reporting of prognostic clinical prediction models based on machine learning methods in oncology needs to be improved
Protocol for development of a reporting guideline (TRIPOD-AI) and risk of bias tool (PROBAST-AI) for diagnostic and prognostic prediction model studies based on artificial intelligence