CircRNA-based AntimiR therapy: A novel approach to hypertension treatment
The increasing recognition of the types and functions of non-coding RNAs has opened new avenues for their use as novel therapeutic strategies in the treatment of chronic diseases such as hypertension. While most preclinical and clinical studies on hypertension focus on prognosis and treatment, there are still no specific therapeutic approaches for primary and essential hypertension. Modest efficacy and reduced long-term adherence to treatment underscore the need for novel, mechanism-based strategies to address the underlying molecular mechanisms. AntimiRs, as synthetic RNA molecules, and circular RNAs (circRNAs), as naturally occurring RNA species that function as microRNA sponges, could play a crucial role in regulating the renin-angiotensin system (RAS). These non-coding RNAs hold significant potential as innovative approaches for managing primary and essential hypertension. This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of circRNA-miRNA interactions involved in hypertension regulation via modulation of the RAS, their mechanisms of action, therapeutic advantages, and the major translational challenges, including delivery efficiency, off-target effects, and safety concerns. Optimization of the delivery systems, validating long-term efficacy, and navigating regulatory pathways to bring these promising ncRNA-based therapies closer to preclinical and clinical research of antimiR-based therapies are addressed. Furthermore, this review highlights the potential of these new RNA targets to fill the current therapeutic void and contribute to the advancement of precision medicine in hypertension and related cardiovascular diseases treatment.

Introduction: a new Frontier in cardiovascular therapy
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are covalently closed RNA structures that regulate gene expression and influence the translation of regulatory proteins by acting as decoys for microRNAs or RNA-binding proteins. These non-coding RNAs play crucial roles in various physiological processes. Due to their unique circular structure, circRNAs are resistant to exonuclease degradation and are highly expressed in specific tissues. Their diverse types and distinct tissue distributions enable them to participate in essential cellular and molecular processes. Since their discovery, the primary function attributed to circRNAs has been their ability to act as sponges for microRNAs, with miR-7 being the first identified target. They can bind to RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), regulating and modulating the transcription and alternative splicing of genes. On the other hand, some circRNAs can produce proteins that have regulatory roles. Further understanding of these molecular entities may provide better insights into the pathogenesis, prognosis, and treatment of diseases. Over the past decade, studies have shown that circRNAs are highly expressed in neuromuscular disorders, cancers, and cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) and hold potential as therapeutic targets. It has been shown that circRNAs, as competitive endogenous RNAs (ceRNAs), can adjust mRNA expression and affect the occurrence and development of hypertension by recruiting miRNAs. CVDs are a leading cause of human mortality, with hypertension being its primary risk factor. It has become a global public health concern, imposing both health and economic burdens on patients. Most preclinical and clinical studies on hypertension focus on prognosis and treatment. However, there are still no specific therapeutic approaches for primary and essential hypertension. Essential Hypertension is one of the most important risk factors for cardiovascular diseases and despite the numerous medications available to control it, a significant percentage of patients still do not have adequate control over their blood pressure. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), about 1.28 billion people worldwide have high blood pressure, 46 % of whom are unaware of their condition and only 42 % of patients are treated. Current treatments for hypertension have some limitations. For example, many commonly used drugs, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE inhibitors) or angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), have significant side effects, including chronic cough, hyperkalemia, renal failure, and severe hypotension. These side effects occur more frequently in patients with severe medical conditions or those being treated with multiple classes of drugs. Therefore, recent studies have shown that about 20–30 % of patients are resistant to standard treatments and require novel approaches to blood pressure control. Novel approaches to blood pressure control could include circRNA-based anti-miR therapy, which could provide a new therapeutic strategy by regulating microRNAs at the epigenetic level. In recent decades, circRNA-based therapeutic strategies have gained significant attention from researchers in the field of CVDs. As mentioned earlier, these circRNAs are involved in various cellular and molecular events and are able to regulate the expression of genes involved in CVD such as hypertension, ischemic heart disease, cardiac fibrosis, atherosclerosis, cardiomyopathy, and so on by silencing key microRNAs (miRNAs). This review explores the interplay between circRNAs and miRNAs in CVDs and hypertension, with a particular focus on the renin-angiotensin system (RAS) as a key regulatory pathway in blood pressure control. Additionally, it examines the application of anti-miRNA therapy in CVDs and various strategies for targeting miRNAs as potential therapeutic approaches.

Mechanisms of interaction between circRNAs/miRNAs and other types of non-coding RNAs
Interactions among circRNAs, miRNAs, and mRNAs play pivotal roles in regulating RAS, thereby influencing blood pressure and the development of hypertension. Certain miRNAs target molecules like ACE2, which helps lower blood pressure. Inhibiting these miRNAs using antagomiRs or employing circRNAs that act as molecular sponges to sequester them can restore ACE2 expression, offering potential therapeutic strategies for hypertension. Conversely, some miRNAs target molecules such as AT1R, which promote vasoconstriction and increases blood pressure. Enhancing the activity of these miRNAs through agomirs or miRNA mimics may help reduce hypertension. Thus, modulating the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA network presents promising avenues for the treatment of hypertension and CVDs.
Fig. 1
CircRNA or lncRNA can interact with miRNA through various mechanisms, including acting as miRNA-absorbing sponges, competing with miRNA for mRNA, regulating RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), and lncRNAs that act as miRNA precursors. The most common mechanisms between circRNA and miRNA include sponge uptake, storage and transport, and interference with expression. One of the best methods to regulate miRNA is by sponge absorption by circRNA and lncRNA. More recently, miRNA sponges that influence miRNA expression have drawn attention. A large number of miRNAs are absorbed by miRNA sponges as the typical miRNA sponge consists of four to ten miRNA binding sites, each of which is mismatched at intermediate positions to avoid being affected by the activity of endoribonuclease Argonaute 2 (Ago2). The suppressive effects of complementary sponges are similar to small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and are sensitive to degradation. These miRNA sponges can target a specific miRNA or several different miRNAs with a common seed region. MiRNA sponges expressed by type II promoters are of great interest because they contain polyadenosine (polyA) tails and are present for a longer period, thus providing a more stable inhibitory effect than inhibitors. MiRNA sponges also have no promoter selection bias and can overcome the problem of the inability to express type III promoters in certain cells that have repressor codon sequences. LncRNA compete with miRNA through complementary base pairing of miRNA recognition elements (MREs) to reduce the inhibitory effect of miRNA on mRNA and affect gene regulation by indirectly inhibiting miRNA. For instance, PTENP1 and PTEN, located on chromosome 9 and 10 respectively, are direct targets of miRNA miR-21 and have a 3′-UTR sequence to which miR-21 is able to bind, hence causes post-transcriptional down-regulation of PTEN and PTENP1. MiRNAs can target lncRNAs and reversely control them through the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC). For example, miRNA-21 controls the transcription of growth arrest-specific lncRNA 5 (GAS5), when ceRNA expression is silenced, mRNAs are degraded in response to miRNA-RISC. Subsequently, activation of ceRNA expression by binding to the RISC complex can decrease the repressive function of miRNAs and control gene expression. Therefore, miRNA-21 not only suppresses protein-coding genes but also regulates GAS5. MiRNAs can actively target and regulate lncRNAs, thereby reducing the relative amount of miRNAs involved in controlling downstream mRNAs and weakening their regulatory effect on mRNAs. A circRNA can interact with miRNAs to induce their silencing, but compared to siRNAs, it is structurally more stable and less prone to nuclear degradation. The competitive binding of circRNA to miRNA via MRE with miRNA downstream mRNA of leads to sponge recruitment and regulation of mRNAs. For example, circGFRAI inhibits the pro-apoptotic effect of miR-188-3p by competitively binding miR-188-3p and promoting the proliferation of non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tissues. Moreover, miRNAs can exert their regulatory role by being transported by circRNA to new locations. CircRNAs can interact with miRNAs and are cyclic intronic RNAs (ciRNAs), also known as circular interfering RNAs. In this regard, Zhang et al. found that after miR-3880 was silenced by circRNA13761, Elf2 gene expression increased. Following activation of this axis, the PI3K/mTOR/S6K1 pathway was activated and lactation in dairy goats increased. Another type of ncRNAs, called small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA), are found in all eukaryotes (with length of 60–300 nt) and a subset of archaea and participate in the modification and processing of ribosomal RNA as well as other small noncoding RNAs, particularly miRNAs. SnoRNAs are primarily divided into two categories: C/D box snoRNAs, involved in methylation, and H/ACA box snoRNAs, which play a role in pseudouridylation. The majority of snoRNAs are derived from intronic sequences within coding and non-coding genes. Accumulating evidence indicates that snoRNAs participate in diverse biological mechanisms, including ac4C modification, alternative splicing modulation, and miRNA-like gene regulation, expanding their known functional repertoire. Some snoRNAs serve as precursors for miRNAs, exhibiting sequence, structural, and functional characteristics of snoRNAs. Among these snoRNA-derived miRNA precursors are well-characterized and validated miRNAs, such as let-7g, miR-140, miR-215, and miR-28. These examples highlight compelling cases where a single molecule can function as both snoRNA and miRNA, supporting the dual roles of these noncoding RNAs. Emerging evidence suggests that snoRNAs may have non-canonical functions, such as influencing alternative splicing. For instance, the snoRNA HBII-52 (SNORD115) has been shown to regulate splicing of trans gene transcripts. The circRNA-miRNA-mRNA interactions are illustrated in Fig. 1.

AntimiRs: advanced strategies for miRNA inhibition

Regulation of MicroRNA by antagomirs
Modern gene therapy is now focusing more on using different types of AntimiRs to specifically turn off certain genes. Since certain miRNAs play a crucial role in regulating key genes associated with specific diseases, designing targeted AntimiRs for these genes presents a promising approach for precision gene therapy. This strategy holds significant potential for treating chronic cardiovascular diseases, including hypertension. Among the most significant AntimiRs are AntagomiRs, which are chemically modified single-stranded RNA molecules designed to specifically bind to their complementary miRNA sequences, thereby inhibiting their activity. In the most advanced versions of AntagomiRs, the first three nucleotides at the 5′ end and the last five nucleotides at the 3′ end are phosphorylated to enhance stability and prevent degradation in various biological fluids. Additionally, substituting the 2′ hydroxyl group of ribose with a methyl group (2′-OMe RNAs) further increases stability by extending their half-life. Furthermore, AntagomiRs can be conjugated with cholesterol molecules, which enhance membrane permeability, facilitating efficient cellular uptake and enabling effective delivery across biological barriers such as the blood-brain barrier and exosomal membranes.

Locked nucleic acid (LNA)
Another significant AntimiR is the Locked Nucleic Acid (LNA), which incorporates chemically modified nucleotides to enhance binding affinity and specificity for target miRNAs. LNAs demonstrate improved stability and resistance to enzymatic degradation, making them highly effective in therapeutic applications. Structurally, some LNAs feature modifications at the 2′ and 4′ positions of the ribose sugar, with the C-4 and C-2 positions conventionally linked by a methyl group. This methylation transforms LNAs into high-affinity antisense oligonucleotides, positioning them as promising antisense drugs. Importantly, no evidence of LNA-AntimiR toxicity or histopathological alterations has been reported in animal studies, further establishing them as a safe and promising approach in next-generation gene therapy.

Tough decoy (TuD)
Tough Decoy (TuD)-antimiRs are engineered RNA molecules designed to contain multiple miRNA-binding sites, thereby enhancing their binding efficiency and functional activity. They act as competitive decoys, sequestering targeted miRNAs and reducing their availability. Their structure includes miRNA-binding sites connected by a stabilizing hairpin loop, which increases their resistance to nucleases and prevents degradation. Their mechanism of action involves sequestering target miRNAs, thereby preventing their interaction with mRNAs and effectively inhibiting their regulatory functions. This advanced design maximizes their therapeutic potential in gene-silencing applications.

MiRNA-sponges: progress and possibilities
Strategy of action for Different types of antimiRs and their distinct characteristics, including antagomiR, LNA, sponge, bulged sponge, and tough decoy. AntagomiRs have a specific single perfect miRNA target site, while LNAs have shorter complementary sequences that permit binding to miRNA families. Sponge inhibitors also have eight complete miRNA binding sites in a row, and Tough Decoy inhibitors have a hairpin structure that includes two protruding miRNA target sites.
Fig. 2
Another miRNA inhibitor to study the loss of microRNA function is the miR-sponge. Structurally, miR-sponges are designed to be complementary to their target miRNAs, enabling them to bind and effectively inhibit miRNA activity. When expressed at an optimal level, miR-sponges can achieve complete miRNA inhibition. Compared to the knockout method, miR-sponges offer a simpler and more efficient approach for studying miRNA function in transgenic cell and animal models. Additionally, since certain microRNAs belong to seed families (sharing sequence homology within the 5 to 7 nucleotide region), these miRNAs often require individual inhibition. MiR-sponges serve as ideal candidates for targeting entire miRNA families. Furthermore, due to their specific interaction with mature miRNAs, their efficiency and function remain unaffected by the clustering of precursor miRNAs, ensuring precise and stable regulation of gene expression. The use of miR-sponges is important compared to other miRNA inhibitors for several reasons: firstly, these inhibitors are specific only for one miR (due to having a seed sequence); Secondly, in vitro and in vivo, using viral vectors, the sponge transgene can be transferred into the target cell; Third, the use of these antimiRs in transgenic animals causes the target miRNA to be silenced for as long as the cell is alive. Two additional inhibitors, namely Bulged Sponges and TuD, were examined for their effectiveness in modulating miRNA function. These inhibitors possess several unique features, including resistance to degradation by endonuclease enzymes, a high binding affinity for target miRNAs, efficient cellular delivery, and enhanced renal clearance, making them promising tools for miRNA inhibition. The various types of AntimiRs and their characteristics are summarized in Fig. 2.

AntimiRs: innovative tools for miRNA inhibition in pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
When discussing hypertension, the focus is typically on blood pressure regulation within the cardiovascular system. However, our previous research highlights the significant role of the brain's RAS in this regulation. Specifically, the brain RAS, through components like ACE2, influences autonomic functions and baroreflex sensitivity, thereby impacting blood pressure. Disruptions in this system can lead to neurogenic hypertension, underscoring the importance of central mechanisms in blood pressure control. Hypertension also affects the respiratory system, specifically in the form of pulmonary hypertension, which is characterized by elevated blood pressure in the pulmonary arteries. PAH is a severe and progressive disease characterized by pulmonary vascular remodeling. This condition involves medial hypertrophy, intimal proliferation, adventitial thickening, and perivascular inflammatory infiltrates, ultimately leading to increased pulmonary arterial pressure and right ventricular dysfunction. PAH is commonly driven by factors such as pulmonary artery narrowing or hardening, genetic predisposition, and mutations in key genes including BMPR2, ALK1, SMAD9, caveolin-1, and KCNK3. Additionally, certain narcotic drugs have been implicated in the development of PAH. Over the past two decades, extensive research has highlighted the potential of AntimiR-based therapies as a promising strategy for the treatment of this disease. Synthetic antagomirs bind to their complementary miRNA sequences, preventing them from interacting with their target mRNAs and thereby silencing their function. These are also known as blockmiRs and they work well in some tissues such as the lungs, kidneys, liver, heart, muscle, bone marrow, etc., and are connected to miRNA through RISC protein, ultimately leading to their degradation. One of the key contributors to PAH is the resistance of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells (PASMCs) to apoptosis, driven in part by the upregulation of miR-125a-5p. Cai et al. demonstrated that transfection of a miR-125a-5p antagomir into PASMCs effectively improved monocrotaline-induced hypertension by modulating the TGF-β1 and IL6/STAT3 signaling pathways. Brock et al. studied the pulmonary hypertension disease model in vivo and found that following antagomiR-20a transfection, HPASMCs showed stimulated BMPR2 signaling (demonstrated by increased Id-1/Id-2) and significantly inhibited proliferation and hypoxia-induced pulmonary vascular hypertension remodeling did not occur. One of the other causes of increased pulmonary blood pressure is hypertrophy of PASMCs and decreased expression and function of the 1.5v potassium channel induced by miR-1. Transfecting antagomiR-1 into these cells decreased the expression of this channel and increased the expression of Su5416/hypoxia followed by depolarization in the PAH rat model. Liu et al. transfected miR-1 antagomir improved pulmonary arterial blood pressure in rats following inhibition of RV fibrosis and reduced expression of type I and III collagen, α-SMA, and CTGF through the PI3K and AKT signaling pathway. Pullamsetti et al. used miR-21, miR-17, and miR-92a antagomirs in hypoxia-stimulated pulmonary hypertension rats and A-17 (Antagomir-miR-17) in monocrotaline-stimulated hypertensive rats. They found that inhibiting these miRs, decreases heart systolic pressure, decreases p21 protein expression, increases smooth muscle cell proliferation, and improves cardiovascular function in pulmonary hypertension, respectively. Studying vascular dysfunction, Tuo et al. found that Ang II leads to increased expression of miR-140-5p and decreased expression of Bcl-xL in vascular smooth muscle cells. Hence, In vivo suppression of miR-140-5p via antagomir-140-5p administration mitigated mitochondrial uncoupling and ameliorated hypertensive responses in Ang II-treated mice. Additionally, miR-140-5p promotes mitochondrial uncoupling through Bcl-xL targeting in vascular smooth muscle cells, contributing to Ang II-induced hypertension pathogenesis.
Studies conducted on the circRNA-miRNA-mRNA axis in patients and animals with PAH.
Table 1
circRNA	miRNA	Targeting genes by miRNA	Number of patients or animals	Expression type of circRNA	Study results	Refs	 	hsa_circ_0026480	miR-27a-3p	ATXN1	5 patients	UpDown	The role of circRNA biomarker in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension		 	hsa_circ_0046159	miR-1226-3p	ATP2A2	 	mmu_circ_0000790	miR-374c	FOXC1	45 mice	Up	The physiological role of these RNAs in the pulmonary vessels of patients with hypoxic pulmonary hypertension		 	circRNA-0068481	miR-646	EYA3	38 patients	Up	Increased expression of this circRNA in the diagnosis of ventricular hypertrophy in PAH patients		 	miR-570	 	miR-885	 	CircATP2B4	miR-223	ATR	43 patients	Up	Silencing the expression of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells by this circRNA and restoring the level of this miRNA to the original state as a therapeutic strategy		 	m6 A circXpo6m6 A circTmtc3	miR-125a-3p,miR-23a-5p,miR-98-5p,let-7b-5p,let7a-5p,let-7 g-5p,miR-2e05	MAPK3, SMAD4, TGFBR1, and CDKN1B	6 rats	Down	Decreased expression of two m6A circRNAs in hypoxia-associated pulmonary hypertension		 	Hsa_circ_0002062	miR-942-5p	CDK6	6 mice	Up	Increased proliferation and migration of arterial smooth muscle cells through induction with hypoxia and role in pulmonary vascular remodeling		 	circ- Calm4	miR-124-3p	Pdcd6	Mice	Up	The silencing of this circRNA increases the expression of proteins related to pyroptosis through induction with hypoxia and is related to PAH		 	circ_0016070	miR‐340‐5p	TWIST1	32 patients5 rats	Down	Inhibition of circ_0016070 as a therapeutic approach for PAH through induction of TCF4/β-Catenin signaling pathway		 	circSIRT1	miR-145-5p	Akt3	21 patients	Up	Inhibition of proliferation and autophagy of pulmonary smooth muscle cells to improve PAH		 	CircSMOC1	miR-329-3p	PTBP1	Rats	Down	metabolic reprogramming of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells and regulation of pulmonary vascular remodeling in PAH		 	circ_003416andcirc_005372	miR-1244, miR-4747-5p, miR-6755-3p, miR-548an, miR-3194-5p	–	In silico study	DownandUp	Examination of circRNA expression in plasma samples of children with PAH related to CHD		 	miR-548g-3p, miR-365b-5p, miR-365a-5p, miR-216a-5p, and miR-873-5p	 	circGSAP	miR-27a-3p	BMPR2	68 rats	Up	Decreasing the improper function of pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells in people with idiopathic PAH		 	circWDR37_016	hsa-miR-138-5p	–	primary hPASMCs cell line	Up	Regulatory relationship between circRNA and lung smooth muscle cell immune system and inflammation and hypoxia-stimulated proliferation		 	circNFXL1_009	hsa-miR-29b-2-5p	–	Primary hPASMCs cell line	Down	Regulation of Kv2.1 channel function in lung smooth muscle cells of PAH patients induced by hypoxia		 	Circ-Ntrk2	miR-296-5p	TGF-β1	PASMCs from male C57BL/6 mice	Up	Regulation of the function of this circRNA in cells of mice suffering from PAH and its role in vascular remodeling through the TGF-β1/p38 MAPK pathway		 	CircItgb5	miR-96-5p	Uba1	rat primary PASMCs	Up	In vivo experiments revealed that the knockdown of circItgb5 attenuated MCT-induced pulmonary vascular remodeling and right ventricular hypertrophy. In vitro experiments revealed that circItgb5 promoted the transition of PASMCs to synthetic phenotype		 	Circ_0068481	miR-361-3p	KLF5	Primary hPASMCs cell line	Down	Through the Krüppel-like factor 5 pathway, the knockdown of this circRNA leads to improved proliferation and development of pulmonary smooth muscle cells due to stimulation with hypoxia.
LNA oligonucleotides are biologically stable and thermodynamically able to bind to RNA, ssDNA, and dsDNA structures. Wang et al. proved that one of the causes of increased blood pressure and arterial clogging is the deformation of endothelial vascular smooth muscle cells by the release of vesicles containing miR-92a. They concluded that in hypertensive rats that were infused with Ang II, LNA-miR-92a improved factors such as pulse wave velocity (PWV), systolic blood pressure (SBP), diastolic blood pressure (DBP), and serum endothelin-1 (ET-1) and restore the balance between proliferative and contractile genes in Ang II-exposed aortas, counteracting the pathological gene expression profile. In addition to the discussed cases that lead to hypertension, cardiac fibrosis is as one of the auxiliary factors that leads to an increase in blood pressure, Lorenzen et al. found that in patients with cardiac fibrosis, cytokines called osteopontin and miR-21 were significantly elevated. In mice, they showed that while OPN-AAV9-mediated cardiac OPN overexpression potentiated Ang II-driven fibrotic responses, therapeutic targeting of miR-21 with LNA-based inhibitors conferred protective effects against cardiac fibrosis. Li et al. found that in mice infused with Ang II, the expression of miR-130a increased and eventually led to cardiac fibrosis. By using LNA-miR-130a, they were able to reduce the expression of miR-130a, and then protein expression levels of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) were restored to baseline/normal physiological levels following the intervention, and finally the cardiac fibrosis stimulated by Ang II improved. Bernardo et al. identified a connection between miR-154 and cardiac fibrosis in mouse models of pressure overload. Subcutaneous injection of LNA-miR-154 into mice with diseased heart demonstrated that inhibiting miR-154 protected myocardial fibrosis and cardiac dysfunction. This inhibition led to increased expression of the p53 protein, decreased expression of the B-type natriuretic peptide gene, and a subsequent reduction in blood pressure. To date, limited studies have explored the role of alternative antimiRs in the control, diagnosis, or treatment of hypertension. However, a few investigations have focused on their potential therapeutic applications. For instance, Lavenniah et al. examined the role of miRNA inhibitors in mitigating cardiac hypertrophy in mouse model of transverse aortic constriction (TAC). Their findings revealed that the inhibitory effects of miRNAs associated with the bulged-circmiR construct were more pronounced compared to constructs containing a 12-nucleotide sequence, highlighting its potential efficacy in regulating hypertensive cardiac remodeling. Untreated hypertension often leads to heart failure, highlighting the direct relationship between these conditions. Jeong et al. successfully inhibited miR-25 activity both in vitro and in hypertensive mice by utilizing a TuD inhibitor delivered via an AAV9 viral vector. Their findings showed that TuD-mediated inhibition of miR-25 reduced its expression while upregulating the calcium transporter protein SERCA2a, ultimately improving hypertension, heart failure, and cardiac fibrosis. Wang et al. found that injecting a rAAV vector carrying miR-21-3p into hypertensive rats led to increased blood pressure and severe cardiac damage, including hypertrophy and fibrosis. They concluded that treatment with a TuD inhibitor targeting miR-21-3p effectively reversed these pathological effects by reducing the expression of the adrenal α2β-adrenergic receptor (ADRA2B) in vascular smooth muscle cells. Furthermore, the use of AAV viral vectors carrying TuD-miR-22-3p in hypertensive rats resulted in decreased miR-22-3p expression in the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM), leading to an increase in β-arrestin-1, an all-purpose cytoskeletal protein. Collectively, these findings indicate that targeting the miR-22-3p/β-arrestin1 axis reduces adrenaline levels and lowers blood pressure, providing further evidence for the therapeutic potential of TuD inhibitors in hypertension management. Key studies investigating the role of miRNA in PAH are summarized in Table 1.

Unraveling the role of circRNAs in hypertension: molecular mechanisms
Gene therapy holds promise for improving the treatment of cardiovascular diseases and hypertension by targeting the intricate regulatory networks between circRNAs and miRNAs. Since circRNAs act as a sponge for miRNAs, they could be considered potential biomarkers for the diagnostic and treatment of patients with chronic hypertension and PAH diseases. In this regard, Wang et al. using microarray analysis and studying PAH mice stimulated by hypoxia found that the expression of 23 circRNAs was upregulated, while 41 circRNAs were downregulated in the lungs of these mice. Among these, mmu_circRNA_004592 and mmu_circRNA_018351 played an essential role in the pathogenesis of PAH and have been used as biomarkers in the diagnosis and treatment of the disease. As mentioned earlier, since miRNA targeting functional genes is sponged by circRNA, the expression of some target genes increases or decreases.

The crosstalk between circRNAs and miRNAs in the RAS
The potential candidate miRNAs that negatively regulate the RAS and the corresponding antimiRs suitable for inhibiting their function, as referenced in Chhabra et al.. Simplified view of the potential candidate miRNAs and negatively regulate the RAS by the corresponding antimiRs suitable for inhibiting their function. CircRNAs regulate miRNA expression and partially mitigate the inhibitory effects of miRNAs on their target mRNAs. Due to this ability, they function as miRNA sponges, sequestering specific miRNAs and modulating their regulatory activity. Research has shown that both miRNAs and circRNAs are directly involved in the severity and progression of hypertension, as well as in modulating RA system activity. ACE/Ang II/AT1 axis and ACE2/Ang-(1–7)/Mas axis. Circular RNAs (circRNAs); microRNAs (miRNAs); Ang I, angiotensin I; Ang II, angiotensin II; Ang-(1–7), angiotensin-(1–7); Ang-(1–9), angiotensin-(1–9); Mas, Mas receptor; AT1R, Ang II type 1 receptor; AT2R, Ang II type 2 receptor; ACE, angiotensin-converting enzyme; ACE2, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2; APA, aminopeptidase A; APN, aminopeptidase N.
Fig. 3
CircRNAs regulate miRNA expression through a unique mechanism, partially mitigating the inhibitory effects of miRNAs on their target mRNAs. Accordingly, they function as miRNA sponges, sequestering specific miRNAs and modulating their regulatory activity. The RAS, in both its classical and compensatory axes, plays a critical role in regulating blood pressure and systemic vascular resistance. Both miRNAs and circRNAs are directly involved in the severity and progression of hypertension, as well as in modulating RAS activity. Fig. 3 shows the potential candidate miRNAs that negatively regulate the RAS and the corresponding antimiRs suitable for inhibiting their function. For instance, Zhang et al. demonstrated that the upregulation of hsa-circ-0037909 in hypertensive patients functions as a sponge for miR-637, significantly reducing or inhibiting its activity. Wu et al. found that the decrease in the expression of hsa-circ-0005870 in patients with hypertension can act as a molecular sponge for some miRNAs and affect their expression, such as hsa-miR-5095, hsa-miR-1273g-3p, hsa-miR-6807-3p, hsa-miR-619-5p, and hsa-miR-5096. Although limited studies have explored the direct involvement of the RAS in the interplay between miRNAs and circRNAs in hypertension, some reports have provided valuable insights into their regulatory roles. In a study of 106 hypertensive patients, He et al. observed an increase in the expression of certain circRNAs alongside a decrease in specific miRNAs. Their findings highlighted that hsa_circ_0122153/hsa-miR-483-3p and hsa_circ_0025088/hsa-miR-27a-3p acted as key regulators of blood pressure within the RAS and the risk of hypertension. In addition, they showed that the upregulation of these circRNAs was associated with the regulation of aldosterone hormone levels and renin secretion, further emphasizing their role in the pathophysiology of hypertension. By examining the RVLM in the brains of hypertensive rats, Zhang et al. identified a potential mechanism for mitigating stress-induced hypertension. Their study revealed that the expression of the circRNA Galntl6 was significantly reduced in hypertensive rats. This reduction allowed Galntl6 to function as a miRNA sponge for miR-335, targeting the Lig3 protein. Consequently, this interaction led to a decrease in oxidative stress and an improvement in blood pressure regulation. In a similar study, it was demonstrated that hsa-miR-145-5p functions as a sponge, with its expression decreasing in response to the upregulation of hsa-circ-0037897, a diagnostic risk factor for hypertension, in hypertensive patients. Liu et al. demonstrated that the upregulation of circHIPK2 promotes phenotypic changes in vascular smooth muscle cells by sponging miR-145-5p in response to Ang II stimulation. This process subsequently leads to an increased expression of disintegrin and ADAM17. Zheng et al. demonstrated that hsa-circ-9102-5 decreases its expression by sponging miR-150-5p, and therefore, this circRNA can be used as a biomarker of hypertension. Microarray analysis of 178 hypertensive patients revealed that the upregulation of circ-0126991 leads to a decreased expression of miR-10a-5p by acting as its sponge. This interaction has been identified as a potential biomarker for the primary diagnosis of essential hypertension.

Emerging role of circRNAs in AntimiR therapy for hypertension
The development of novel gene therapy approaches targeting non-coding RNAs, particularly miRNAs, has emerged as a promising strategy for treating cardiovascular diseases. These approaches focus on conditions such as fibrosis, hypertrophy, ischemic injury, hypertension, and reperfusion damage. The role of miRNAs as therapeutic targets in these diseases has been well-documented, highlighting their potential for clinical applications. Jiang et al. studied the role of the Circ-Calm4/miR-124-3p/PDCD6 ternary axis in the pyroptosis process by studying hypoxic pulmonary smooth muscle cells and found that the ceRNA called circ-calm4 was able to regulate miR-124-3p, followed by decreased pyroptosis changes. Therefore, following the inhibition of the pdcd6 gene by miR-124-3p, the pyroptosis process is abolished by hypoxia conditions. Additionally, in another study, Yang et al. studied pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells from HPH-infected mice and found that increased expression of mmu_circ_0000790 led to decreased expression of miR-374c, followed by increased expression of FOXC1. Therefore, increased expression of this circRNA led to the induction of pulmonary smooth muscle cell proliferation and inhibition of pyroptosis. The inhibition of miR-21 using LNA-21 has demonstrated therapeutic effects in an animal model of ischemic injury. One-month post ischemia, treatment with antimiR-21 resulted in reduced cardiac fibrosis and hypertrophy by suppressing inflammatory responses and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling, ultimately leading to improved cardiac function. Cardiac hypertrophy occurs following the increase of cardiomyocytes size, and also miRNA-212/132 controls hypertrophy and autophagy through FoxO3 in these cells. Ucar et al. showed that miR-212/132 jointly drives pathological cardiac remodeling by directly inhibiting FoxO3, resulting in calcineurin/NFAT hyperactivation and autophagy impairment. Importantly, antagomir-mediated miR-132 blockade reverses hypertrophy and heart failure in mice, highlighting a promising treatment strategy for cardiac dysfunction (. In another study, overexpression of miR-92a has been observed in mouse models related to studies of cardiovascular tissue damage, and the use of antimiR LNA against miR-92a-3p has caused angiogenesis and tissue repair in these models. In a clinical trial study, Abplanalp et al. were able to target miR-92a-3p using MRG-110 (a type of LNA anti-miR) to study cardiovascular disease and wound healing. Overall, they showed that after reducing the expression of this miR by systemic infusion, the expression of ITGA5 and CD93 genes was increased and miR-92a was derepressed in humans. Another study showed that there is a clear link between some miRs and glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity. In this regard, Rech et al. investigated whether inhibition of miR-103/107 by an antagomir affects cardiac function in mice. They found that in primary cardiomyocytes, suppression of miR-103/107 showed no significant impact on glycolytic activity. However, it led to: (1) diminished mitochondrial spare respiratory capacity, (2) lowered ΔΨm (mitochondrial membrane potential), and (3) disrupted mitochondrial architecture, as observed through real-time cellular imaging. Li et al. showed that lentivirus-mediated application of the loop region of miR-181a (Lenti-siR-miR-181) increased the expression of homeobox A11 (Hox-A11) protein suppressor of differentiation of intracardiac skeletal myoblasts (SKMs) and decreased the expression of miR-181a. As a result, the reduction of arrhythmias was observed after SKM transplantation to the ischemic myocardium of rats. Du et al. showed that circular neuroligin RNA (circNlgn) can bind to inhibitory growth protein 4 (ING4), serum, and glucocorticoid-inducible kinase-3 (C8orf44-SGK3), followed by fibroblast proliferation and regeneration heart tissue can be observed.

Challenges of AntimiR-Based therapy in hypertension
Preclinical studies conducted on various antagomirs in the context of hypertension.
Table 2
AntimiRs types	Study target	Type of antagomir entry into the study target	Targeted miRNAs	Protein or gene targeted by miR	Validation techniques	Study result(s)	Refs	 	LNA	C57BL/6 mice	IV (tail vein)	miR-92a	Fibronectin, osteopontin, and thrombospondin	qRT-PCR and Western-blot	Amelioration of pulse wave velocity (PWV), SBP, DBP, and ET-1 level, and impairment of vasodilation induced by Ang II		 	SS-13BN26 rats and Db/db mice	IP	miR-204-5p	SHP2	qRT-PCR, Western-blot, and IHC	Endogenous miR-204 protects the kidney against chronic injury in hypertension and diabetes		 	Male Sprague-Dawley rats	Transfection	miR-429	PHD2, HIF-1α and HO-1	Western-blot	Blocking the high salt-induced increase of miR-429 to disrupt PHD2-associated adaptive activation of HIF-1α-mediated gene expression in the renal medulla consequently inhibited urinary sodium excretion after chronic sodium overloading, promoted sodium retention, and as a result, produced salt-sensitive hypertension		 	Male C57BL/6 mice	Subcutaneous	miR-154	p15	qPCR, SDS-PAGE, western blot, and gelatin zymography	Inhibition of miR-154 protects against cardiac dysfunction and fibrosis in a mouse model of pressure overload		 	Male Sprague-Dawley rats	IV	miR-145	–	RT-qPCR, and sandwich hybridization assay	microRNA-145 inhibitor improves experimental pulmonary hypertension, repairs pulmonary arteriopathy, and improves RV structure and function		 	Antagomir	Male SD rats	IV	miR-214	MFN2	ELISA, IHC, and IF	miR-214 antagomiR prevented the development of pulmonary vascular remodeling and therefore PAH in monocrotaline-treated rats		 	Hypertensive rats	Stereotaxic	miR-200b-3p	Slit2	RT-qPCR, ELISA, IHC, and Immunoblotting	MiR-200b-3p antagomir attenuated the expressions of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 and increased the activity of GSH-Px and SOD enzymes, and improves working memory in spontaneously hypertensive rats		 	hPASMCs, Hypertensive rats	IV	miR-382-3p	ATG7	qRT-PCR,Western blottingWound healing assays	MiR-382-3p antagomir reversed chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension-induced mean pulmonary artery pressure elevation, thickening of the pulmonary artery wall, and increased expressions of VEGF, PCNA, and autophagy-related proteins in rats		 	C57BL/6J miR-155pl + mice	IV	miR-155	VASH2, FBN2, SLAMF1, and PDGFD	Immunostaining	Inhibition of miR-155 expression eliminates the preeclampsia-like manifestations in the mouse model		 	Male C57/BL6 mice	IV	miR-335-5p	Calumenin	IHC, IF, RT-qPCR, and western blot	Antagomir miR-335-5p attenuates RV remodeling and rescue calumenin downregulation under conditions of hypoxia/su5416 exposure in pulmonary arterial hypertension		 	Male Sprague-Dawley rats	Microinjection	miR-335	Sphk1	Western blot and IF	Inhibition of miR-335 in the rostral ventrolateral medulla reduces the heart rate, arterial blood pressure, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, and mean arterial pressure levels in stress-induced hypertension rats		 	Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells	Transfection	miR-505	IL1B and TNFA	IHC, RT-qPCR, western blot, and ELISA	miR-505 antagomir attenuates TNF-α-induced upregulation of IL1B and TNFA in hypertension-associated endothelial cells		 	Trophoblast cell HTR-8/SVneo	Transfection	miR-148a	XBP1	RT-PCR and western blot	miR-148a directly targets XBP1, contributing to the regulation of trophoblast apoptosis induced by endoplasmic reticulum stress in preeclampsia		 	C57 mice	IV	miR-140-5p	Bcl-xL	Western blot	AntagomiR-140-5p treatment decreased the blood pressure in Ang II-treated mice and it improved the vascular smooth muscle function		 	Male mice	IV	miR-214	Smad7	RT-qPCR, Immunoblotting	MiR-2014 antagomir abolishes Ang II-induced hypertension and vascular remodeling		 	Male Sprague-Dawley rats	IV	miR-1	Collagen I, collagen III, α-SMA and CTGF	RT-PCR and western blot	miR-1 antagomiR resulted in the inhibition of increased expression of collagen I, collagen III, α-SMA, and CTG proteins in the right ventricle of pulmonary arterial hypertension model rats		 	Male Wistar rats	Intratracheal nebulization	miR-138-5p	KCNK3 and SLC45A3	RT-qPCR, western blot, IHC, and IF	Inhibition of miR-138-5p reduces the development of pulmonary hypertension in experimental monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension		 	Human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell (PASMC)	Transfection	miR-149	BMP9	RT-qPCR, ELISA, and dual-luciferase reporter assay	PASMC cell lines transfected with rs3740297 -C allele construct, miR-149 mimic, and antagomir miR-149 showed the more sensitive change of the relative expression level of BMP9		 	Primary Human pulmonary artery endothelial cell line (hPAEC)	Transfection	miR410	Nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT)	RT-qPCR, western blot, and IF	MiR410 inhibition via antagomirs leads to stimulation of basal and VEGF-induced proliferation, and migration and also promotes apoptosis of hPAECs.		 	Mesenchymal stem cells	Transfection	miR-191	BMPR2	RT-PCR, western blot, and IHC	Following transfection with anti-miR, low exosomal miR-191 expression inhibited human pulmonary artery endothelial cells proliferation		 	Male Wistar rats	Transfection	miR-1	Kv1.5	Luciferase activity assays, RT-PCR, IHC, and western blot	Antagomir-1 prevents Kv1.5 channel downregulation and the depolarization induced by hypoxia/Su5416 exposition and decreases pulmonary hypertension		 	Human pulmonary endothelial cells	Transfection	miR-190a-5p	KLF15	qRT-PCR, luciferase activity assays, and western blot	In the mouse model of pulmonary hypertension, antagomir-190a-5p reduced right ventricular systolic pressure and enhanced the KLF15 expression levels in lung tissue		 	Male Sprague-Dawley rat Vascular smooth muscle cells	Transfection	miR-155	p27	Luciferase reporter gene assay, qRT-PCR, and western blot	Antagomir-155 injection markedly decreased systolic and diastolic pressures, elevated p27 and α-SMA expressions in media, and reduced the thickness of tunica media		 	Rat pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells	Nebulizer	miR-125a-5p	STAT3	RT–qPCR, ELISA, and western blot	MiR-125-5p antagomir suppresses monocrotaline-induced pulmonary arterial hypertension by targeting the TGF-β1 and IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathways.		 	Myocardial cells or H9C2 cells	Transfection	miR-19b and miR-16	ADRA1A	Luciferase reporter assay, RT-PCR, western blot, and Masson staining	Antagomir significantly increased the expression of ADRA1A and heart rate (HR) but significantly decreased SBP, artery diastolic blood pressure (ADBP), fibrosis of ventriculus sinister, and cell apoptosis of myocardial tissue induced by Doca		 	C57BL/6 mice	IP	miR-135a	BMPR2	qRT-PCR and western blot	AntagomiR-135a injected mice showed decreased right ventricular systolic pressures (RVSPs), right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH), and the percentage of severely thickened pulmonary arteries		 	Male Sprague-Dawley rats	Perivascular injection	miR-27a	GRK6	Dual luciferase reporter assay, IF, and qPCR	The antagomiR-27a injection significantly decreased the expression of miR-27a in the left CCA and EC proliferation induced by hypertension was also significantly reversed by the antagomiR-27a injection		 	Human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells	Transfection	miR-214	LMOD1 and MEF2C	Luciferase Reporter Assay, qRT-PCR,	AntagomiR-214 abrogated hypoxia-induced suppression of the contractile phenotype and its attendant proliferation and also restored PAH-PASMCs to a contractile phenotype seen during vascular homeostasis.		 	Female Sprague Dawley rats	IV	miR-223	BMPR2 and IGF1R	qPCR	Inhibition of miR-223 did not attenuate monocrotaline-pulmonary arterial hypertension, whereas human prostacyclin synthase overexpression restored miRNA levels in MCT-PAH to levels detected in naïve rats		 	Male Sprague-Dawley rats	Intratracheal instillation	miR-206	VEGFA	qRT-PCR and IHC	miR206 antagomir rescues monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension in rats by improving cardiac and pulmonary structure and function		 	C57BL/6 male mice	IP	miR-29a	PINP, PIIINP, and MMP-9	Masson staining and Immunoblotting	In a mouse model of pressure overload, the antagomir miR-29a was found to significantly suppress the hypertrophy of cardiomyocytes and the expression of ANP and b-MHC, the hypertrophy indices		 	Male BL6 mice	IP	miR-20a	BMPR2	qPCR, IHC, western blot, and morphometric analyses	AntagomiR directed against miR-20a restores functional BMPR2 signaling and prevents vascular remodeling in hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension		 	Rat aortic smooth muscle cell line (RASMC)	Transfection	mir-483-3p	3′-UTR of AGT, ACE-1, ACE-2, and AGTR2	qRT-PCR, luciferase reporter assay, and western blot	Antagomir specific for miR-483-3p significantly rescued the levels of AGT gene, but again had a lesser effect on ACE-1 expression		 	Male Sprague-Dawley rats	IM	miR-126	SPRED-1	Confocal microscopy, IF, qRT-PCR, and western blot	Inhibition of miR-126 in healthy CD31+ cells fully mimicked the pulmonary arterial hypertension phenotype and miR-126 down-regulation in the skeletal muscle of healthy rats decreased muscle capillarity and exercise tolerance		 	Male SHR rats	IP	miR-22	Chromogranin A	qRT-PCR and luciferase reporter assay	Administration of miR-22 antagomir to SHR causes substantial (∼18 mmHg) reductions in blood pressure and has no differential effect on heart rate (HR)		 	Rats	IV	miR-17	p21	Gelatin Zymography, ISH, qRT-PCR, and western blot	A-17 Improves Vessel Muscularization in Hypoxia-induced PH, A-17 Improves Hemodynamic Parameters, and Prevents Right Ventricular Hypertrophy and Improves Vessel Muscularization in monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension		 	Tough Decoy	Male SHR rats	Microinjection	miR-22-3p	β-arrestin-1	Western blot, IF, FISH, qRT-PCR, and dual luciferase reporter assay	miR-22-3p was downregulated in the RVLM using adeno-associated virus with 'tough decoys', which caused a significant increase of β-arrestin-1 expression and decrease of noradrenaline and blood pressure in spontaneously hypertensive rats		 	SHRs and WKYs rats	IV	miR-21-3p	ADRA2B	qRT-PCR	MiR-21-3p Tough Decoy inhibits a persistent attenuation of hypertension in cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis and artery and kidney fibrosis in spontaneously hypertensive rats
The use of anti-miRNA approaches, miRNA mimics, and related molecules has gained increasing attention in the treatment of various diseases, including hypertension. Emerging evidence suggests that the targeted manipulation of specific miRNAs can be an effective strategy for blood pressure regulation. Many miRNAs have been identified in various studies in animal and human models related to hypertension, and identifying these miRNAs and regulating their expression can be a promising therapeutic to target the origin of the disease and avoid potential adverse consequences. In vascular smooth muscle cells, miR-214 is involved in the relationship between Ang II-induced AT1R signaling and TGF-β-induced TGFβRI/Smad signaling. This miR controls the TGF-β/Smad pathway through the downregulation of Smad7. Therefore, the use of antagomir-214 can blunt the hypertension and vascular dysfunction induced by Ang II. Zilebesiran, an investigational RNA interference (RNAi) therapeutic agent, is a novel drug currently in phase II clinical trials for hypertension management. This drug effectively inhibits angiotensinogen and mitigates RAS escape, even in the presence of a compensatory increase in renin levels. As a result, Zilebesiran provides a more sustained and effective inhibition of RAS, offering long-term blood pressure control. Blood pressure treatment with siRNA has the potential to regulate key proteins by removing other important non-hepatic mediators such as renin and endothelin, but there are limitations to the use of these drugs due to the challenges of drug delivery for non-hepatic targets. These authors showed that siRNA therapies help adherence to treatment in hypertensive patients. Zilebesiran is the first therapy in the angiotensinogen-targeted siRNA class, however safety and efficacy evaluations are limited to small clinical trials and require further research. The results of zilebesiran phase I studies (in obese patients) and phase II studies (KARDIA-1 and 2)(Taubel, 2023 #20) are helpful and its effects in high-risk subpopulations with high blood pressure such as people with chronic kidney disease, diabetes, heart failure, obesity and elderly people. Friese et al. demonstrated that miR-22 binds to the Chga 3′-UTR, leading to a reduction in Chga protein expression in the brainstem, which subsequently increases blood pressure. However, the IP injection of a miR-22 antagomir into spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) resulted in antihypertensive effects, highlighting its potential as a therapeutic target for blood pressure regulation. In addition to anti-miR and siRNA-based therapies, some studies have also used circRNAs, which in turn present some challenges. Although most oligonucleotide treatments were applied without an additional delivery vehicle, some unnatural nucleotides such as LNA-modified nucleic acids are harmful and have severe hepatotoxicity. Therefore, the use of natural non-coding RNA like the circRNAs in the sponge of the miRNAs can be more useful. In circRNA studies, it is essential to estimate the number of copies in cells. If the number of circRNA is high and has an enormous number of miRNA binding zones, then it can be an effective sponge for miRNA. Despite the high potential of circular RNAs in diagnosis and treatment, there are challenges, among them the sensitivity and specificity effectiveness of circRNAs. It is better to evaluate the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) to determine whether a circRNA can be used as an effective selection for a disease. Furthermore, another challenge of circRNAs is related to off-target effects in non-targeted cells and tissues, and their specificity in treatment should be increased. Moreover, the expression of circRNAs controls the expression of miRNA, mRNA, or protein, which has a direct relationship with the number of copies of circRNAs and determines their regulatory functions and efficiency. In summary, to increase the efficiency of circRNAs in target cells and proper delivery to cells, the number of copies of circRNAs, the number of miRNA binding sites, and how the delivery systems in vivo play an important role. In a study, using a rat pulmonary hypertenssion model and bioinformatics data related to various genes, Xu et al. were able to identify the pivotal role of circRNA-miRNA-mRNA in blood pressure. They showed that circ-002723, circ-008021, circ-016925, and circ-020581 can control the PDCD4/caspase-3 axis of pulmonary artery endothelial cells (PAECs) in a hypoxic pulmonary hypertension rat model and these results are obtained with the help of miR-23a or miR-21 sponge. Moreover, based on previously published data, circ-Foxo3 expression can act as miRNA sponges and its high expression is observed in non-cancerous cells, and this circRNA plays a role in cell cycle progression. Increased expression and binding of circ-Foxo3 to cyclin-dependent kinase kinase 2 (CDK2) and cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1 (or p21) proteins inhibits cell cycle progression. Another study indicated that decreased expression of some circRNAs in PAECs can lead to the production and release of vasoactive substances and disturb the apoptotic and proliferation activities in these cells. As a result, high blood pressure occurs following these resulting changes, including vasoconstriction, lumen narrowing, and pulmonary artery obstruction. Table 2 provides a summary of preclinical studies conducted on various antagomirs in the context of hypertension. One of the major challenges in translating circRNA-based and AntimiR-based therapies into clinical applications is the efficient and specific delivery of these molecules. RNA-based therapies face multiple problems, including low cellular uptake, rapid degradation by nucleases, immune activation, and off-target effects. These challenges differ in circRNA and AntimiR-based strategies and require tailored solutions. Unlike linear RNAs, circRNAs exhibit enhanced stability due to their closed-loop structure, which protects them from exonuclease degradation. However, their large size and limited membrane permeability hinder efficient cellular uptake. Despite their therapeutic potential, achieving precise target specificity remains a challenge. CircRNAs may interact with unintended miRNAs or RBPs, leading to unexpected effects. In addition, chemically modified AntimiRs (such as 2′-O-methyl and locked nucleic acids) with improved stability may also trigger immune responses or toxicity at high concentrations. To overcome these challenges, several innovative delivery platforms and modifications have been proposed. Nanoparticles (NPs) offer a promising solution for the targeted delivery of both circRNAs and AntimiRs. Various NP formulations, including lipid nanoparticles (LNPs), polymeric NPs, and exosome-based systems, have been developed to enhance cellular uptake and stability. LNPs have been extensively used in mRNA-based vaccines and can be adapted for circRNA and AntimiR delivery. They provide protection from nucleases and facilitate endosomal escape. It has been shown that polyethylenimine (PEI)-based or chitosan-based nanoparticles improve cellular internalization and controlled release. Furthermore, several studies suggested that to enhance specificity and reduce off-target effects, ligand-conjugated delivery systems could be useful for example aptamers conjugated to RNA carriers enable tissue-specific delivery (e.g., liver-targeted GalNAc conjugates for AntimiRs). It has been demonstrated that conjugation of GALNAc to LNA against miR-122 leads to improved pharmacokinetic activity. Cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs) facilitate the intracellular transport of circRNAs and AntimiRs while reducing immune recognition. Recent advancements in CRISPR-Cas9 technology offer a precise mechanism for targeting specific RNA molecules. Engineered RNA-targeting Cas9 variants (e.g., RCas9) can be programmed to enhance the degradation of specific miRNAs or guide therapeutic RNA molecules to precise cellular compartments. Although, AntimiR-based approaches have a well-characterized mechanism of action and multiple preclinical/clinical studies supporting their efficacy, circRNA-based therapies remain in earlier stages of development, necessitating further investigation into their molecular interactions and therapeutic applications. These efforts will provide deeper insights into the feasibility of circRNA-based AntimiR therapy and pave the way for clinical translation.

Conclusion and future perspectives
The growing understanding of non-coding RNAs, particularly circRNAs and miRNAs, has opened new views for precision medicine in the treatment of CVDs and hypertension. CircRNAs, with their stable structure and ability to act as miRNA sponges, present an appealing therapeutic approach to regulate gene networks involved in the RAS, a key system regulating blood pressure. Likewise, AntimiRs-including antagomirs, LNAs, and TuDs-offer specific inhibition of pathological miRNAs, showing efficacy in both preclinical models and early clinical studies. This review highlights the multifaceted mechanisms by which circRNAs interact with miRNAs and other non-coding RNAs to influence cardiovascular function. Although considerable progress has been made in the design and delivery of AntimiR-based therapeutics, challenges such as off-target effects, delivery specificity, and immune responses remain critical barriers to clinical translation. Future research should focus on improving the delivery systems. It seems that with continued advancements, circRNA-based AntimiR therapy holds immense potential to transform hypertension treatment by targeting its molecular roots and enabling more personalized, effective interventions.

CRediT authorship contribution statement
Vahideh Tarhriz: Writing – original draft, Data curation. Kamran Hosseini: Writing – original draft, Investigation. Leila Abkhooie: Formal analysis, Conceptualization. Eric Lazartigues: Writing – review & editing, Supervision.

Data availability
No data was used for the research described in the article.

Funding
This work was supported in part by research grants from the  ( and ) to EL.

Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known financial or personal conflicts of interest that could have influenced the content of this manuscript. No competing interests, financial relationships, or other relationships exist that could inappropriately affect the integrity of this work.

References
The emerging roles and functions of circular RNAs and their generation
Natural RNA circles function as efficient microRNA sponges
Biogenesis and functions of circular RNAs come into focus
Circular RNA translation: novel protein isoforms and clinical significance
Circular RNAs in cardiovascular diseases: regulation and therapeutic applications
Specific expression and functions of circular RNAs
Vildagliptin ameliorates pulmonary fibrosis in lipopolysaccharide-induced lung injury by inhibiting endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition
DOCA-salt hypertension: an update
Effects of renal denervation on the expression profile of circular RNA in the serum of patients with resistant hypertension
Regulation of circular RNAs act as ceRNA in a hypoxic pulmonary hypertension rat model
The global epidemiology of hypertension
Prevalence of uncontrolled hypertension and its associated factors in 50–74 years old Iranian adults: a population-based study
Pathophysiology of cough with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: how to explain within-class differences?
Resistant hypertension: diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment: a scientific statement from the American heart association professional education committee of the council for high blood pressure research
The emerging role of circular RNAs in cardiovascular diseases
Circular RNAs in cardiovascular diseases
Mechanisms of circRNA/lncRNA-miRNA interactions and applications in disease and drug research
Immunohistochemical analysis of the endoribonucleases Drosha, Dicer and Ago2 in smooth muscle tumours of soft tissues
Effective tools for RNA-derived therapeutics: siRNA interference or miRNA mimicry
Role of miRNA sponges in hepatocellular carcinoma
DIANA-miRGen v4: indexing promoters and regulators for more than 1500 microRNAs
Pseudogene PTENP1 functions as a competing endogenous RNA to suppress clear-cell renal cell carcinoma progression
GAS5/miR-21 axis as a potential target to rescue ZCL-082-induced autophagy of female germline stem cells in vitro
Circular RNA interference effector molecules (WO10084371)
Recombinant adeno-associated virus-mediated delivery of microRNA-21-3p lowers hypertension
miRNA‐dependent gene silencing involving Ago2‐mediated cleavage of a circular antisense RNA
A regulatory circuit orchestrated by novel-miR-3880 modulates mammary gland development
Assembly and trafficking of box C/D and H/ACA snoRNPs
Eukaryotic snoRNAs: a paradigm for gene expression flexibility
snoRNAs: functions and mechanisms in biological processes, and roles in tumor pathophysiology
Identification of human miRNA precursors that resemble box C/D snoRNAs
Human miRNA precursors with box H/ACA snoRNA features
From snoRNA to miRNA: dual function regulatory non-coding RNAs
The snoRNA HBII-52 regulates alternative splicing of the serotonin receptor 2C
Silencing of microRNAs in vivo with ‘antagomirs’
Synthesis and biophysical evaluation of 2′, 4′-constrained 2′ O-methoxyethyl and 2′, 4′-constrained 2′ O-ethyl nucleic acid analogues
LNA-mediated microRNA silencing in non-human primates
Pharmacological inhibition of a microRNA family in nonhuman primates by a seed-targeting 8-mer antimiR
RNA accessibility impacts potency of Tough Decoy microRNA inhibitors
MicroRNA sponges: competitive inhibitors of small RNAs in mammalian cells
Improved targeting of miRNA with antisense oligonucleotides
MicroRNA sponges: progress and possibilities
Generation of microRNA-34 sponges and tough decoys for the heart: developments and challenges
Inhibition of microRNA function by antimiR oligonucleotides
Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2: central regulator for cardiovascular function
Effects of chronic nicotine inhalation on systemic and pulmonary blood pressure and right ventricular remodeling in mice
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
MiR-125a-5p ameliorates monocrotaline-induced pulmonary arterial hypertension by targeting the TGF-β1 and IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathways
The genetics of pulmonary arterial hypertension
Clinical differences and outcomes between methamphetamine-associated and idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension in the pulmonary hypertension association registry
Specificity, duplex degradation and subcellular localization of antagomirs
AntagomiR directed against miR-20a restores functional BMPR2 signalling and prevents vascular remodelling in hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension
miR‐1 is increased in pulmonary hypertension and downregulates Kv1. 5 channels in rat pulmonary arteries
Inhibiting miR-1 attenuates pulmonary arterial hypertension in rats
Inhibition of microRNA-17 improves lung and heart function in experimental pulmonary hypertension
Upregulation of miR-140-5p uncouples mitochondria by targeting Bcl-xL in vascular smooth muscle cells in angiotensin II-induced hypertension
Enzymatic incorporation of LNA nucleotides into DNA strands
Endothelial-derived extracellular microRNA-92a promotes arterial stiffness by regulating phenotype changes of vascular smooth muscle cells
Osteopontin is indispensable for AP1-mediated angiotensin II-related miR-21 transcription during cardiac fibrosis
Micro RNA‐130a, a potential antifibrotic target in cardiac fibrosis
Inhibition of miR-154 protects against cardiac dysfunction and fibrosis in a mouse model of pressure overload
Engineered circular RNA sponges act as miRNA inhibitors to attenuate pressure overload-induced cardiac hypertrophy
miR-25 tough decoy enhances cardiac function in heart failure
miR‐22‐3p in the rostral ventrolateral medulla promotes hypertension through inhibiting β‐arrestin‐1
Molecular dissection of the role of ACE2 in glucose homeostasis
Characteristics of circular RNA expression in lung tissues from mice with hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension
Hsa_circ_0046159 is involved in the development of chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
mmu_circ_0000790 is involved in pulmonary vascular remodeling in mice with HPH via microRNA-374c-mediated FOXC1
Up‐regulation of circRNA_0068481 promotes right ventricular hypertrophy in PAH patients via regulating miR‐646/miR‐570/miR‐885
CircATP2B4 promotes hypoxia-induced proliferation and migration of pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells via the miR-223/ATR axis
Transcriptome-wide map of m 6 A circRNAs identified in a rat model of hypoxia mediated pulmonary hypertension
Hsa_circ_0002062 promotes the proliferation of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells by regulating the hsa-miR-942-5p/CDK6 signaling pathway
Circular RNA Calm4 regulates hypoxia-induced pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells pyroptosis via the Circ-Calm4/miR-124-3p/PDCD6 axis
Hsa_circ_0016070/micro‐340‐5p Axis accelerates pulmonary arterial hypertension progression by upregulating TWIST1 transcription via TCF4/β‐catenin complex
Circular RNA Sirtuin1 represses pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell proliferation, migration and autophagy to ameliorate pulmonary hypertension via targeting microRNA-145-5p/protein kinase-B3 axis
Reduced CircSMOC1 level promotes metabolic reprogramming via PTBP1 (polypyrimidine tract-binding protein) and miR-329-3p in pulmonary arterial hypertension rats
Bioinformatic analysis of dysregulated circular RNAs in pediatric pulmonary hypertension linked congenital heart disease
Circular RNAs in pulmonary hypertension: emerging biological concepts and potential mechanism
hsa_circWDR37_016 regulates hypoxia-induced proliferation of pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells
circNFXL1 modulates the Kv2. 1 channel function in hypoxic human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells via sponging miR-29b-2-5p as a competitive endogenous RNA
Circ-Ntrk2 acts as a miR-296-5p sponge to activate the TGF-β1/p38 MAPK pathway and promote pulmonary hypertension and vascular remodelling
CircItgb5 promotes synthetic phenotype of pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells via interacting with miR-96-5p and Uba1 in monocrotaline-induced pulmonary arterial hypertension
Circ_0068481 affects the human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells' progression by miR-361-3p/KLF5 axis
The compensatory renin–angiotensin system in the central regulation of arterial pressure: new avenues and new challenges
Genome-wide profiling reveals atrial fibrillation-related circular RNAs in atrial appendages
Profiling and bioinformatics analyses reveal differential circular RNA expression in hypertensive patients
The potential role of RAAS-related hsa_circ_0122153 and hsa_circ_0025088 in essential hypertension
CircRNA Galntl6 sponges miR-335 to ameliorate stress-induced hypertension through upregulating Lig3 in rostral ventrolateral medulla
Hsa_circ_0037897 may be a risk factor for essential hypertension via hsa-miR-145-5p
CircHIPK2 facilitates phenotypic switching of vascular smooth muscle cells in hypertension
The up‐regulated hsa‐circRNA9102‐5 may be a risk factor for essential hypertension
Microarray profiling of circular RNA identifies hsa_circ_0126991 as a potential risk factor for essential hypertension
mmu_circ_0000790 is involved in pulmonary vascular remodeling in mice with HPH via microRNA-374c-mediated FOXC1
AntimiR-21 prevents myocardial dysfunction in a pig model of ischemia/reperfusion injury
The miRNA-212/132 family regulates both cardiac hypertrophy and cardiomyocyte autophagy
MicroRNA-92a controls angiogenesis and functional recovery of ischemic tissues in mice
Inhibition of microRNA-92a protects against ischemia/reperfusion injury in a large-animal model
Efficiency and target derepression of anti-miR-92a: results of a first in human study
AntagomiR-103 and-107 treatment affects cardiac function and metabolism
Knockdown of microRNA-181 by lentivirus mediated siRNA expression vector decreases the arrhythmogenic effect of skeletal myoblast transplantation in rat with myocardial infarction
A neuroligin isoform translated by circNlgn contributes to cardiac remodeling
Mechanisms and therapeutic potential of microRNAs in hypertension
Vascular smooth muscle cell‐specific miRNA‐214 knockout inhibits angiotensin II‐induced hypertension through upregulation of Smad7
RNA interference with zilebesiran for mild to moderate hypertension: the KARDIA-1 randomized clinical trial
Small Interfering RNA Therapeutics in Hypertension: a Viewpoint on Vasopressor and Vasopressor‐sparing Strategies for Counteracting Blood Pressure Lowering by Angiotensinogen–Targeting Small Interfering RNA
MicroRNA-22 and promoter motif polymorphisms at the Chga locus in genetic hypertension: functional and therapeutic implications for gene expression and the pathogenesis of hypertension
Artificial circular RNA sponges targeting MicroRNAs as a novel tool in molecular biology
A simplified system to express circularized inhibitors of miRNA for stable and potent suppression of miRNA functions
Foxo3 circular RNA retards cell cycle progression via forming ternary complexes with p21 and CDK2
Impact of circGSAP in peripheral blood mononuclear cells on idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension
Role of circular RNA and its delivery strategies to cancer–An overview
Mechanisms and therapeutic implications of gene expression regulation by circRNA-protein interactions in cancer
Anti-miRNA oligonucleotides: a comprehensive guide for design
Advances in nanoparticles for effective delivery of RNA therapeutics
Lipid nanoparticles for delivery of RNA therapeutics: current status and the role of in vivo imaging
RNA aptamers and their therapeutic and diagnostic applications
Highly potent GalNAc-conjugated tiny LNA anti-miRNA-122 antisense oligonucleotides
Emerging landscape of cell-penetrating peptide-mediated nucleic acid delivery and their utility in imaging, gene-editing, and RNA-sequencing
RNA in therapeutics: CRISPR in the clinic
RNA therapeutics history and future perspectives
Endogenous miR-204 protects the kidney against chronic injury in hypertension and diabetes
Inhibition of microRNA-429 in the renal medulla increased salt sensitivity of blood pressure in Sprague Dawley rats
Lipid nanoparticle delivery of a microRNA-145 inhibitor improves experimental pulmonary hypertension
MFN2-dependent mitochondrial dysfunction contributes to Relm-β-induced pulmonary arterial hypertension via USP18/Twist1/miR-214 pathway
Unraveling the role of miR-200b-3p in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and its therapeutic potential in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR)
Overexpressed microRNA (miR)-382-3p promoted vascular remodeling via suppressing autophagy-related protein 7 (ATG7) in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension
Elevated placental microRNA-155 is a biomarker of a preeclamptic subtype
Upregulation of miR‐335‐5p contributes to right ventricular remodeling via calumenin in pulmonary arterial hypertension
Up‐regulation of miR‐335 and miR‐674‐3p in the rostral ventrolateral medulla contributes to stress‐induced hypertension
Circulating microRNA-505 may serve as a prognostic biomarker for hypertension-associated endothelial dysfunction and inflammation
miR-148a targets XBP1 to regulate trophoblast apoptosis induced by plasma reticulum stress in preeclampsia
Inhibiting miR-1 attenuates pulmonary arterial hypertension in rats
In vivo miR-138-5p inhibition alleviates monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension and normalizes pulmonary KCNK3 and SLC45A3 expression
Bone morphogenetic protein 9, and its genetic variants contribute to susceptibility of idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension
MicroRNA410 inhibits pulmonary vascular remodeling via regulation of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase
Function of adipose‐derived mesenchymal stem cells in monocrotaline‐induced pulmonary arterial hypertension through miR‐191 via regulation of BMPR2
miR-190a-5p participates in the regulation of hypoxia-induced pulmonary hypertension by targeting KLF15 and can serve as a biomarker of diagnosis and prognosis in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease complicated with pulmonary hypertension
Effects of miR-155 on hypertensive rats via regulating vascular mesangial hyperplasia
MiR-19b and miR-16 cooperatively signaling target the regulator ADRA1A in Hypertensive heart disease
Elevated microRNA-135a is associated with pulmonary arterial hypertension in experimental mouse model
Secreted miR-27a induced by cyclic stretch modulates the proliferation of endothelial cells in hypertension via GRK6
MEF2C-MYOCD and leiomodin1 suppression by miRNA-214 promotes smooth muscle cell phenotype switching in pulmonary arterial hypertension
Reversal of microRNA dysregulation in an animal model of pulmonary hypertension
Role of miR206 in genistein-induced rescue of pulmonary hypertension in monocrotaline model
Effect of miR-29a inhibition on ventricular hypertrophy induced by pressure overload
Angiotensin II-regulated microRNA 483-3p directly targets multiple components of the renin–angiotensin system
Impaired angiogenesis and peripheral muscle microcirculation loss contribute to exercise intolerance in pulmonary arterial hypertension

Abbreviations
circRNAs
Circular RNAs
CVDs
cardiovascular diseases
miRNAs
microRNAs
RAS
renin-angiotensin system
RBPs
RNA-binding proteins
ceRNAs
competitive endogenous RNAs
siRNAs
small interfering RNAs
polyA
polyadenosine
snoRNAs
Small nuclear RNAs
LNA
Locked Nucleic Acid
TuD
Tough Decoy
PAH
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
RISC
RNA-induced Silencing Complex
PASMCs
pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells
PWV
pulse wave velocity
SBP
systolic blood pressure
DBP
diastolic blood pressure
ET-1
serum endothelin-1
RVLM
rostral ventrolateral medulla
PAECs
pulmonary artery endothelial cells
MAPK
mitogen-activated protein kinase
HIF-1α
hypoxia-inducible factor-1α
SHR
spontaneously hypertensive rats
Peer review under the responsibility of Editorial Board of Non-coding RNA Research.