Alexa, let's train now! — A systematic review and classification approach to digital and home-based physical training interventions aiming to support healthy cognitive aging
Highlights
This systematic review summarized the current state of the literature on the effects of digital and home-based physical training interventions on adults’ cognitive performance.
The overall evidence concerning the effectiveness of digital and home-based physical training interventions on measures of cognitive performance is currently rather mixed.
A detailed analysis suggests that especially home-based interventions using online classes and technology-based exercise devices (i.e., step-based exergames) can be a promising approach to improve cognitive performance in healthy older adults, although this finding needs to be treated cautiously due to the limited number of available studies.
We propose a classification framework for digital and home-based physical training interventions.
We advocate for further high-quality studies evaluating the effectiveness of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance in different cohorts.
Background
There is mounting evidence that regular physical activity is an important prerequisite for healthy cognitive aging. Consequently, the finding that almost one-third of the adult population does not reach the recommended level of regular physical activity calls for further public health actions. In this context, digital and home-based physical training interventions might be a promising alternative to center-based intervention programs. Thus, this systematic review aimed to summarize the current state of the literature on the effects of digital and home-based physical training interventions on adult cognitive performance.
Methods
In this pre-registered systematic review (PROSPERO; ID: CRD42022320031), 5 electronic databases (PubMed, Web of Science, PsycInfo, SPORTDiscus, and Cochrane Library) were searched by 2 independent researchers (FH and PT) to identify eligible studies investigating the effects of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance in adults. The systematic literature search yielded 8258 records (extra 17 records from other sources), of which 27 controlled trials were considered relevant. Two reviewers (FH and PT) independently extracted data and assessed the risk of bias using a modified version of the Tool for the assEssment of Study qualiTy and reporting in EXercise (TESTEX scale).
Results
Of the 27 reviewed studies, 15 reported positive effects on cognitive and motor-cognitive outcomes (i.e., performance improvements in measures of executive functions, working memory, and choice stepping reaction test), and a considerable heterogeneity concerning study-related, population-related, and intervention-related characteristics was noticed. A more detailed analysis suggests that, in particular, interventions using online classes and technology-based exercise devices (i.e., step-based exergames) can improve cognitive performance in healthy older adults. Approximately one-half of the reviewed studies were rated as having a high risk of bias with respect to completion adherence (≤85%) and monitoring of the level of regular physical activity in the control group.
Conclusion
The current state of evidence concerning the effectiveness of digital and home-based physical training interventions is mixed overall, though there is limited evidence that specific types of digital and home-based physical training interventions (e.g., online classes and step-based exergames) can be an effective strategy for improving cognitive performance in older adults. However, due to the limited number of available studies, future high-quality studies are needed to buttress this assumption empirically and to allow for more solid and nuanced conclusions.
Graphical Abstract

Introduction
It is well-documented that higher levels of physical activity (e.g., typically engendered through physical training) and physical fitness (e.g., cardiorespiratory fitness) are associated with better brain health and cognitive performance in adults. Thus, a physically active lifestyle is strongly recommended to prevent or at least delay the onset of age-associated neurological diseases such as dementia. However, though the above-mentioned evidence strongly corroborates the idea that a physically active lifestyle across the lifespan is an important prerequisite for healthy cognitive aging, the practical implementation of regular physical activity (e.g., in form of physical training) remains very challenging, as indicated by the large number of adults who do not achieve the recommended level of regular physical activity. More specifically, almost one-third of the adult population (i.e., the global age-standardized prevalence of ∼27.5%) can be classified as physically inactive since they do not achieve the level of physical activity recommended by the World Health Organization. There is also evidence that the prevalence of physical inactivity increases with age and/or the worsening of cognitive status. Given the high worldwide prevalence of physical inactivity in the adult population, especially among older and cognitively impaired adults, and the substantial societal and economic costs of physical inactivity, there is a need for developing efficient intervention strategies to counteract the detrimental effects of physical inactivity on cognition.
In this context, we propose that home-based interventions utilizing digital technologies to deliver structured forms of physical activity (i.e., physical exercise and physical training) harbor great potential as they combine the strengths that come with both home-based training and the utilization of digital technologies. In particular, home-based physical training interventions offer an advantage in that they circumvent or at least attenuate 2 main barriers that frequently hinder adults, regardless of age or pathologies, from engaging in structured forms of physical activity: lack of opportunity (e.g., no way to access a training facility or health intervention program) and lack of time (e.g., no way to commute to a training facility). Moreover, home-based intervention programs can better reach adults for whom no appropriate intervention program is available based on their specific living conditions (e.g., those who are unable to drive a car), their diseases (e.g., stroke), or due to challenging life situations (e.g., home confinement during a pandemic). This allows them to benefit from the positive effects of physical training interventions, which include benefits to cognitive performance. This idea is reinforced by evidence suggesting that home-based interventions using digital technologies demonstrate a similar effectiveness (with respect to physical outcomes) and are less costly than center-based and face-to-face intervention programs. In this regard, the utilization of digital technologies to remotely deliver a physical training intervention is a crucial element that provides practical advantages compared to non-digital solutions (e.g., written manuals). In particular, digital technologies (a) allow for better visualization of how the exercise should be conducted (e.g., due to video instructions); (b) enable real-time (synchronous) and decoupled (asynchronous) communication with participant(s) (e.g., via videoconference software or video capsules), which is needed to provide adequate feedback (e.g., on proper exercise execution); and (c) allow for a “gamification” of exercise programs, which motivates participants to do physical exercises when they are not being supervised. Furthermore, there is evidence that it is safe and feasible to utilize digital technologies (e.g., videoconference software or Apps) to deliver home-based training interventions to older community-dwelling adults. Moreover, older community-dwelling adults show a high attendance adherence to these interventions (> 85%) and a willingness to participate in such physical training programs in the future.
Taken together, digital and home-based physical training interventions can be a promising alternative to traditional and center-based physical training interventions. However, the literature concerning the effects of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance has not been systematically summarized because available reviews tend to (a) focus on only a single type of home-based physical training intervention (i.e., exergames), (b) investigate only the effects on motor outcomes (i.e., balance and gait) and health-related quality of life, and/or (c) consider only special cohorts (e.g., older adults with neurological diseases). To provide an updated and comprehensive overview of the current state of the literature, the aim of this systematic review was to summarize and discuss studies investigating the effects of digital and home-based physical training interventions on measures of cognitive performance in the adult population (see the Methods section for a more detailed definition and description). In particular, based on a systematic literature search in several electronic databases, this review aimed to (a) evaluate the characteristics of the digital and home-based physical training interventions (e.g., exercise and training variables, and implementation of their delivery), (b) qualitatively analyze the effectiveness of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive outcome measures, (c) assess the safety and feasibility of digital and home-based training interventions by examining intervention-related measures of adherence and the occurrence of adverse events, (d) identify research gaps in the available literature, and (e) provide recommendations for further investigations in this research field.

Methods
This systematic review was conducted in line with the recommended reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analysis (as specified in the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement, see Supplementary material–PRISMA checklist and abstract checklist) and was preregistered in the International Prospective Register Of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO; ID: CRD42022320031). We based the search strategy on the participants, intervention, comparisions, outcomes, and study decision (PICOS) worksheet for systematic reviews.

Search strategy and process
In accordance with established guidelines for systematic reviews, the literature search was conducted by 2 independent researchers (FH and PT) on June 24, 2022 using the following 5 electronic databases (applied filters): PubMed (all fields), Web of Science (title), PsycInfo (all text), SPORTDiscus (all text), and Cochrane Library (all text; category Trials). Thereto, relevant terms were combined to the create a search string. See details in Supplementary material–PICOS worksheet.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
As recommended by established guidelines, we defined standarized inclusion and exclusion criteria based on the following items: Participants, Intervention, Comparisons, Outcomes, and Study design (also referred to as the PICOS-principle). The inclusion and exclusion criteria are provided in more detail in Supplementary material–PICOS worksheet.

Types of digital and home-based physical training interventions
From a conceptual view, digital and home-based physical training interventions can be broadly categorized based on the differences concerning the mode of interaction being influenced by the technical implementation and the degree of supervision inherent to the intervention.
Synchronous refers to an interaction that occurs at the same time (e.g., real-time interaction via videoconference). Thus, synchronous interactions provide the advantage of an immediate exchange of information (e.g., feedback on the correct execution of a specific physical exercise) but on the downside may limit time flexibility.
Asynchronous refers to an interaction that occurs at different times (e.g., decoupled interaction via video recordings). Hence, an asynchronous interaction allows for an time-flexible exchange of information at the convenience of the participating parties (e.g., physical training on demand due to video capsules) but suffers from a disadvantage in that the information might be misinterpreted (e.g., wrong execution of the physical exercises).
The mode of interaction can be differentiated based on proximity to the time of the interaction. Thereto, the terms synchronous and asynchronous (also known as “store-and-forward”) are commonly used in the literature.
Direct supervision refers to the live monitoring of each exercise session either in person or virtually by a health care professional (e.g., via sensors that track movements and physiological changes), which allows for immediate support and feedback on the proper execution of an exercise.
General supervision (also referred to as “facilitated”) is characterized by a regular in-person or virtual contact with a health care professional to support the trainee and/or adopt, if necessary, the exercise and training prescription. However, general supervision does not include direct supervision of each exercise session.
No supervision (also referred to as “unsupervised”) means the trainee has no direct contact with a health care professional throughout the intervention period (except for the pre- and post-assessment).
Also, the literature distinguishes 3 different categories of supervision: direct supervision, general supervision, and no supervision.
Schematic illustration of the proposed classification approach to digital and home-based physical interventions. App = application.
Fig 1
Since the differences concerning the mode of interaction and degree of supervision are both related to technological implementation, we propose that digital and home-based physical training interventions can be broadly categorized into 3 categories: digital databases, online classes, and technology-based exercise devices (Fig. 1). We recommend avoiding use of the term “web-based” without specifying the level of supervision because it is ambiguous and can refer to physical interventions using digital databases (e.g., YouTube—low level of direct supervision) and/or online classes (e.g., via Zoom—relatively high level of direct supervision). Furthermore, we wish to acknowledge that the appropriate level of supervision depends on several factors (e.g., health status, previous experience with physical exercises, and the complexity of the physical exercises). In our classification framework, supervision differentiates between types of digital and home-based physical training interventions and is not a criterion to rate whether a particular type of digital and home-based physical training is suitable for a certain population and/or intervention.
Digital and homed-based physical interventions utilizing digital databases rely on the storage of instructions (e.g., via video capsules) on specific digital media (e.g., smartphone or tablet-based Apps, video capsules on YouTube, Facebook, or DVDs. Digital databases are characterized by a relatively low level of direct supervision but provide advantages in that they can be delivered to a relatively large number of individuals and they allow for on-demand training (i.e., asynchronous interaction).
Online classes cover the digital and home-based physical interventions in which single exercise sessions are provided in real-time by, for instance, an exercise professional (e.g., exercise and sports scientist, physiotherapist) via software that allows for remote communication (e.g., video conference software such as Zoom or Facebook Live). Due to the synchronous interaction (i.e., real-time communication) of the exercise professional and trainee(s) via videoconference software, online classes are characterized by a relatively high level of direct supervision. However, due to the synchronous interaction, online classes are limited with respect to time flexibility and number of attendees (e.g., to ensure an appropriate level of direct supervision).
Technology-based exercise devices refers to a wide range of technology-based and digital solutions, including devices to remind individuals to be physically active (e.g., wearables such as smartwatches) and devices used directly for physical exercises (e.g., virtual-reality-enhanced stationary ergometer). In this review article, we focus on technology-based exercise devices that can be used to conduct and/or prescribe a physical intervention in real-time rather than solely monitor health-related parameters. These devices include but are not limited to exergames (a portmanteau consisting of the terms physical exercise and gaming). In other words, the term exergames (also referred to as active video games or gamercizing) includes technology-driven physical activities in a gaming environment that require participants to become physically active to play the game. Technology-based exercise devices allow for on-demand training, but the level of direct supervision is constrained by technical features (e.g., integration of sensors allowing for the assessment of physiological and/or kinematic data that can be used to provide feedback to the user). A clear allocation of technology-based exercise devices as either “synchronous” or “asynchronous” is somewhat difficult and depends on the interpretation of the terms since from a theoretical point of view, the criteria for both asynchronous interaction (i.e., on-demand training) and synchronous interaction (i.e., immediate feedback due to integrated sensors that can influence the course of the exergame) are fulfilled, although the latter strongly depends on the technological implementation.
What follows are our definitions for the different types of digital and home-based physical interventions, namely, (a) digital databases, (b) online classes, and (c) technology-based exercise devices.

Screening of studies
Flow chart with information about the search, screening, and selection processes that led to the identification of relevant articles included in this systematic review. The figure was created using the template provided by Page et al.
Fig 2
As shown in Fig. 2, 8258 studies were identified from the databases and 17 were retrieved from other sources. Eleven studies were retrieved from websites (e.g., platforms such as ResearchGate), and 6 more were retrieved via a search for further publications by specific authors.
Participants: We excluded studies done in the wrong age range (e.g., children).
Intervention: Studies were excluded if no digital technologies were used to deliver the physical training intervention, if there was only telephone contact, if videoconference software was used for weekly monitoring calls but not to supervise exercise sessions, if there was no home-based physical training intervention, or if there was no physical training intervention.
Comparison: Pilot or feasibility studies without control groups were excluded.
Outcome(s): If there were no cognitive outcomes assessed, studies were excluded.
Study design: We excluded studies if they were not original articles but posters, study protocols, or reviews.
Of the studies identified by the database searches, 98 were excluded after abstract and full-text screening because they did not meet at least 1 of the inclusion criteria.
Intervention: Studies were excluded if no digital technologies were used to deliver the physical training intervention or if there was no physical exercise intervention (only advice on physical activity).
Outcome(s): If there were no cognitive outcomes assessed, studies were excluded.
Study design: We excluded studies that were not original articles (e.g., study protocols).
Of the 17 studied identified by other sources, 14 were excluded based on the exclusion criteria.

Data extraction
In the current systematic review, 2 authors (FH and PT) extracted the following data from relevant studies: (a) first author and year of publication; (b) population characteristics, including cognitive status, age, sex, and demographic information (i.e., body height, body mass, and body mass index); (c) exercise and training characteristics (e.g., type of physical exercise, technical implementation, exercise intensity, exercise duration, training frequency, training density, training duration); (d) completion and attendance adherence or duration adherence, occurrence of adverse events; (e) characteristics of cognitive testing (e.g., tested cognitive domain, used cognitive tests); and (f) main findings related to cognitive performance. The definitions of specific terms (e.g., training density, attendance adherence) are provided in the notes of Supplementary Table 1. The extraction of exercise- and training-related characteristics was oriented on previous reviews. If we were unable to identify and extract a specific piece of information from the original article or if any information of interest to the current systematic review was unclear in the original article, we contacted the authors 3 times via e-mail or social network (i.e., ResearchGate) to request further information.

Risk of bias assessment
Overview of the analysis of the risk of bias of the included studies. A “green plus” indicates a low risk of bias, a “yellow question mark” indicates an unclear risk of bias, and a “red minus” denotes a high risk of bias.
Fig 3:
The risk of bias assessment was conducted by 2 independent evaluators (FH and PT) using a modified version of the Tool for the assEssment of Study qualiTy and reporting in EXercise (TESTEX scale). As shown in Fig. 3, the TESTEX scale evaluates the methodological quality of a study by rating the risk of bias for distinct criteria. In our modified version of the TESTEX scale, we rated the risk of bias as “low”, “high”, or “unclear” (Supplementary material-TESTEX scale), and we refrained from calculating a summary score due to the disadvantages of such an approach. Any discrepancies in the ratings of the risk of bias were resolved by a discussion among the 2 evaluators (FH and PT) and/or consultation of the third author of the review (TG). The risk of bias assessment is summarized in Fig. 3.

Results

Study and sample characteristics
In this systematic review, we recognized 3 types of digital and home-based interventions: (a) digital databases, which were used in 7 studies; (b) online classes, which were used in 4 studies; and (c) technology-based exercise devices (e.g., exergames), which were used in 15 studies (see the Methods section for definitions and Fig. 1 for an overview). One study used both a digital database and online classes to deliver the physical intervention. The reviewed studies investigated the effects of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance in younger adults, adults with multiple sclerosis, adults with Parkinson's disease, adults with cardiovascular diseases, adults suffering from stroke, healthy older adults, older adults with mild cognitive impairment, older adults with mild Alzheimer's disease, and older adults with dementia. A more detailed overview of the general characteristics of the participants is provided in Supplementary Table 1.
All studies except for 1 study were conducted in a parallel-group design and had either a passive control group, an active control group, or both. Furthermore, the majority of studies provided general supervision, meaning that physical exercise sessions were unsupervised but participants were regularly contacted by the healthcare professionals (i.e., the research team) and/or could contact the healthcare professional when they needed assistance. All physical exercise sessions were directly supervised by a healthcare professional in 3 studies, whereas the caregiver was asked to supervise physical exercise sessions in 1 study, and participants’ movements were tracked by a motion sensor in another study. In the other studies, (a) regular in-person group meetings were conducted in which a physical exercise session or a physical exercise session combined with a discussion of health education topics were performed; (b) besides unsupervised home-based exercise sessions, regular online classes were conducted; and (c) a 5-week-long supervised at-facility training was followed by 5 weeks of unsupervised home-based training. In addition, only 4 out of the 27 studies were conducted as a group-based intervention, whereas in the remaining studies participants either trained on their own, conducted both group-based and individual training sessions during the training intervention period, or performed some form of hybrid physical training intervention (i.e., consisting of center- and group-based exercise sessions as well as home-based individual exercise sessions).

Characteristics of the physical training interventions
In the reviewed studies, the following exercise intensities were targeted with respect to the cardiorespiratory demand of the physical exercises: (a) light, (b) light-to-moderate intensity, (c) moderate intensity, (d) moderate-to-vigorous intensity, (e) vigorous intensity, or all-out. Some studies did not explicitly specify exercise intensity. The exercise intensity was operationalized by using (modified) ratings of perceived exertion or indices of heart rate. Please note that we have rated the exercise intensity of the reviewed studies, if possible, according to the classification approach provided by the American College of Sports Medicine. In this context, it was reported that the exercise intensity was (a) set to Level 11, Levels 11–14, or Levels 12–14 of the rate of perceived exertion (RPE) on a 6–20 RPE scale, (b) set to Levels 6–8 on a 0–10 RPE scale, (c) on average, ∼40% of heart rate reserve, (d) set between 60%–70% of the maximum heart rate, (e) set between 60%–80% of heart rate reserve and adapted during the intervention if needed, (f) gradually increased from 50%–70% to 80% of heart rate reserve, or (g) increased from 65% to 70% of heart rate reserve after 3 months. In the remaining studies, a progression was achieved by increasing complexity (level of difficulty) based on the performance changes of participants.
In addition, 2 studies reported that they offered for their participants to freely choose the duration of the exercise sessions (e.g., 15 min, 20 min, 25 min, or 30 min) and stated that total exercise duration per week was progressively increased from 40 min (first 2 weeks of the intervention) to 120 min (from the 9th week of the intervention onwards). Furthermore, 2 studies recommended that their participants perform 120 min of balance exercise and 60 min of resistance exercise or 60 min of step exercises per week. The resistance exercises included knee extension, knee flexion, hip abduction, calf raises, and toe raises. At the beginning of the intervention, 2–3 sets of 10–15 repetitions per resistance exercise (rest periods of 1 min) were performed, and progression was achieved by increasing the number of repetitions, the number of sets, or the load (e.g., via 1–3 kg ankle cuff weights). In 1 study, participants performed 6 elastic band resistance exercises for the upper and lower limbs, consisting of 3 sets of 12–15 repetitions per exercise at a perceived exertion of 5–6 on the omnibus resistance exercise scale. Another study provided a physical intervention oriented according to the recommendations of the World Health Organization, including balance, flexibility, strength, and endurance exercises (e.g., 150 min with moderate-to-vigorous intensity endurance exercises per week in bouts of at least 10 min). A detailed overview of the physical exercise variables and training variables is provided in Supplementary Table 1.

Main findings of the reviewed studies
In the following we will present the main findings of the reviewed studies according to the categories we have proposed to differentiate between different types of digital and home-based physical training interventions (Fig. 1).

Digital databases
With respect to digital and home-based physical training interventions utilizing digital databases, no intervention-related changes in measures of cognitive performance were observed in healthy older adults or in older adults with mild cognitive impairment. In a study utilizing a DVD-based dancing intervention, the dancing group showed a superior performance concerning measures of global cognition and executive function as compared to the Nordic walking group and the passive control group after a 4-week-long intervention period. Another study in healthy older adults observed that 12 weeks of a home-based multicomponent exercise intervention delivered via video can improve some measures of executive functioning but that the improvements in executive functioning were not as pronounced as in the active control group that performed lab-based exergame training. Finally, a study reported improvements in executive functioning (i.e., reaction time in the Simon task) after a 10-week intervention in which healthy older participants received information via a website; however, no statistically significant differences were observed between the active and passive control groups.

Online classes
Concerning digital and home-based physical training interventions that used online classes, we found that (a) in younger adults, executive functions improved after a 2-week-long square-stepping intervention as compared to an active control condition in which stationary walking exercises were performed; (b) in younger adults, global cognitive performance and episodic memory were enhanced after a 6-week-long bodyweight high-intensity training as compared to a passive control group; (c) in younger adults, executive functioning (as measured by choice reaction time and interference tests) was improved after a 10-week-long intervention period, although there were no statistically significant differences between assessments at Week 5 (i.e., the end of facility-based training and start of home-based training) or Week 10 (i.e., the end of home-based training); and (d) in older adults with mild cognitive impairment, 16 weeks of online Tai-chi training leads, at least on a descriptive level, to improvements in executive functions, working memory, and global cognitive performance, although no statistical comparisons were conducted. Finally, in older adults with cognitive impairment no statistically significant changes in cognitive outcomes were noticed in an 8-week-long intervention utilizing both a digital database (via DVD) and online classes to deliver the training program.

Technology-based exercise devices
Regarding digital and home-based physical training interventions that employed technology-based exercise devices, the following intervention-related changes were noticed in the reviewed studies. Two studies in older adults reported an improvement in executive functions and/or working memory in response to an exergame intervention lasting 16 weeks or 24 weeks. One study in older adults reported greater improvements in executive functions after 16 weeks of step-mat training as compared to a training including balance and strength exercises or a passive control group. Compared to a passive control group, 2 studies observed significant changes in performance measures of the choice stepping reaction task in older adults and in older adults with multiple sclerosis after 8 weeks or 12 weeks of exergaming, respectively. Comparable results were noticed when, after a 16-week exergaming intervention, older adults showed improvements in measures of motor performance (i.e., choice stepping reaction time, hand reaction time) and information processing performance as well as visuospatial performance when compared to a passive control group.
In adults with multiple sclerosis, improvements in global cognitive performance, attentional performance, and memory performance were observed after a 6-week-long virtual reality training intervention comprising motor and cognitive exercises, although the between-group comparisons between intervention and control group were not statistically significant. In comparison to a control group that received usual care, adults suffering from stroke showed better memory performance at the follow-up assessment conducted 12 weeks after completion of a 12-week-long intervention comprising motor and cognitive exercises.
Seven studies using technology-based exercise devices did not observe statistically significant intervention-related changes in measures of cognitive performance in older adults, older adults with mild Alzheimer's disease, older adults with dementia, or adults with Parkinson's disease. A more detailed overview of the cognitive tests and intervention-related changes in measures of cognitive performance is provided in Supplementary Table 1.

Adverse events
In 14 studies no serious intervention-related adverse events were reported in younger healthy adults, older adults, adults with multiple sclerosis, older adults with Parkinson's disease, older adults with mild cognitive impairments or probable Alzheimer's disease, older adults with mild Alzheimer's disease, or older adults suffering from stroke. In 6 studies minor intervention-related adverse events were noticed (i.e., new or aggravated symptoms of musculoskeletal pain, dizziness). In addition, 1 non-injurious fall while performing the physical exercises was reported in a study with adults with mild cognitive impairment and a study with adults with Parkinson's disease, respectively. In 1 study investigating the effect of physical training and protein supplementation in older adults, 1 participant had temporary diarrhea due to the protein supplementation. In 1 study adverse events were not assessed, and in another the data has, at least so far, not been analyzed. In 3 studies, there was no information provided (despite repeated requests) on whether or not intervention-related adverse events had occurred.

Risk of bias
A detailed overview of the risk of bias assessment is provided in Fig. 3. The majority of reviewed studies were rated as having a low risk of bias in the following categories: (a) eligibility criteria specified, (b) randomization specified, (c) allocation concealment specified, (d) reporting of group differences at baseline, (e) blinding of the assessor, (g) reporting of attendance adherence, (h) reporting of adverse events, (j) reporting of between-group statistical comparisons, (k) reporting of point measures and measures of variability for all outcomes of interest, (m) progressive increase of exercise intensity (complexity) to maintain the relative exercise intensity constant, and (n) the description of all exercise and training variables.
Regarding completion adherence (f), 15 of the reviewed studies were rated as having a high risk of bias since the completion adherence in those studies was lower than 85%. Furthermore, based on (l) the absence of appropriate monitoring of the level of regular physical activity in the control group, 14 studies were rated as having a high risk of bias in this category. In addition, 13 studies were rated as having a high risk of bias concerning (i) intention-to-treat analysis because those studies did not apply this statistical method to the analysis of their trial data (Fig. 3).

Discussion
The main aim of this systematic review was to summarize and discuss studies investigating the effects of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance in the adult population. We identified 27 studies that met our inclusion criteria, and our systematic review of those studies provided rather mixed evidence for the effectiveness of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance, suggesting that effectiveness is modulated by study-related, population-related, and intervention-related characteristics.

Exercise characteristics and main findings
Overall, our analysis revealed a considerable degree of heterogeneity concerning the exercise and training characteristics and the effectiveness of the interventions. With respect to the latter, the evidence is relatively equivocal as only 15 of 27 studies reported intervention-related improvements in cognitive outcome parameters. However, a closer look at the included studies revealed a mixed effect on measures of cognitive performance in studies using digital databases, a positive effect in studies using online classes, and a mixed effect in studies using technology-based exercise devices (mainly exergames). Further analysis of studies using technology-based exercise devices indicated that effects on cognitive outcomes are influenced by study population. In particular, the available data suggests that technology-based exercise devices (i.e., step-based exergames with general supervision) are a promising instrument for improving cognitive performance in healthy older adults (i.e., 4 studies observed a positive effect while 1 study found no such effect), but they seem not to be effective in adults with Parkinson's disease.
In general, our findings reinforce the ambiguity of evidence in this research field, with some systematic reviews and meta-analyses reporting improvements in cognitive performance after exergame interventions and digital health interventions, and others concluding that the available evidence is not sufficient to draw robust conclusions. The lack of clear evidence concerning intervention-related cognitive performance changes may be caused by a multitude of factors known to influence the effectiveness and robustness of the effects of physical training on cognitive outcomes, such as study-related differences (e.g., sample size, adherence), population-related characteristics (e.g., age, sex, cognitive and health status), and intervention-related characteristics (e.g., exercise and training variables). Physical training programs aiming to positively influence cognitive performance in older adults should be designed to either induce a re-activation of disused or damaged brain regions, or activate compensatory neural reserves. Concerning healthy older adults, there is some evidence suggesting that combined simultaneous motor-cognitive training programs (including coordinative training) might lead to the greatest benefits with respect to neurocognitive outcomes. In such intervention programs, the physical (motor) part should focus on aerobic activities performed at a moderate exercise intensity in an upright (standing) body position that requires weight bearing. Preferably, the integrated cognitive challenges would include multicomponent demands, including working memory and memory-specific training. This assumption is at least partly supported by our findings, which show that in healthy older adults, home-based interventions utilizing online classes and technology-based exercise devices (i.e., step-based exergames) are especially likely to lead to cognitive performance improvements. In general, our observations are in line with the findings of a recent meta-analysis on digital health interventions, which reported that supervised and step-based exergame interventions induce the largest effects on measures of cognitive and physical performance in adults with mild cognitive impairment and dementia. However, our assumptions concerning the effectiveness of different types of digital and home-based physical training interventions should be treated cautiously as (a) none of the reviewed studies directly compared different types of digital and home-based physical training interventions; (b) there are limited studies available concerning digital databases (n = 7) and online classes (n = 4) (note that 1 study used both a digital database and online classes); and (c) there is relatively large heterogeneity among the included studies, especially with regard to study-related, population-related, and intervention-related characteristics (Supplementary Table 1). Therefore, with the research in its current state, it is not possible to draw more nuanced conclusions about the effectiveness of different types of digital and home-based interventions or to determine a dose–response relationship at this time.
This systematic review has contributed important insights into the effects of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance, and it will be complemented by upcoming homed-based physical training studies planning to utilize digital databases and online classes. Nonetheless, additional high-quality studies will be required to obtain a comprehensive and nuanced understanding of the influence of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance outcomes. In particular, more research is needed to address existing gaps in the literature. Future studies should aim to investigate possible dose–response relationships with respect to exercise and training variables (although the optimal dose is yet to be determined and the optimal operationalization of the dose is debated); and directly compare the effectiveness of different types of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance outcomes, as well as compare non-digital and digital home-based physical training interventions. The latter is a promising area for further research given the observation that in adults (regardless of age), digital and home-based physical interventions were found to be as effective as in-person interventions, at least with respect to certain physical and health-related outcomes (e.g., muscular strength or health responsibility). In recognition of the fact that we don't fully understand the neurobiological mechanisms that drive changes in cognitive performance in response to physical training (neither in general nor in digital and homed-based physical training interventions in particular), further studies are advised to consider multiple levels of analysis (i.e., Level 1: changes on molecular and cellular levels (e.g., levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor); Level 2: functional and structural brain changes; and Level 3: socioemotional changes) when they examine the effects of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance. In this context, a mobile laboratory (e.g., in a bus) designed to bring the laboratory equipment to participants’ homes could be a valuable option for assessing changes in parameters that are not easy to quantify remotely (e.g., functional brain activity recorded via functional near-infrared spectroscopy).

Adverse events and risk of bias
Based on the reviewed studies, digital and home-based physical training interventions appear to be a safe alternative to center-based physical training program. In most of the reviewed studies, no serious intervention-related adverse events occurred. Our results are consistent with the findings of a recent systematic review and meta-analysis reporting that (home-based) physical training interventions can be considered safe.
Regarding our risk of bias assessment, 2 major sources of bias emerged that might have confounded the findings of the reviewed studies to some extent and, thus, the findings of this systematic review (Fig. 3). Many of the reviewed studies were rated as having a high risk of bias with respect to completion adherence and monitoring the level of regular physical activity in the control group.
Completion adherence refers in a broad sense to the phenomenon of exercise motivation, which several theories and determinants have aimed at explaining. However, given that (a) the complex underlying mechanisms of exercise motivation, attendance adherence, and completion adherence are not fully understood and (b) exercise motivation, attendance adherence, and completion adherence are important prerequisites for cultivating the positive health effects of regular physical activity (e.g., in form of physical training), further research in this direction is necessary in order to develop effective strategies for increasing exercise motivation and, in turn, fostering attendance and completion adherence. It is worth mentioning that 3 out of 4 interventional studies using online classes with live remote contact between the trainer and trainees reported relatively high attendance and completion adherence rates. This observation fits with the finding of a study in older adults that observed higher mean completion adherence and attendance adherence rates in the online class group (completion adherence: ∼91% and attendance adherence: ∼69%) compared to the digital database group (i.e., those who received the exercises via DVD; completion adherence: ∼55% and attendance adherence: ∼38%). In younger adults, comparable findings have shown that attendance adherence to a 5 week-long digital and home-based physical intervention was slightly higher in the online class group (∼93%) compared to groups that received the intervention program via digital databases (∼86%) or written manuals sent to the smartphone of the participant (∼74%). Furthermore, the idea that (direct) supervision (e.g., providing feedback on proper exercise execution) is necessary to ensure appropriate adherence to physical training interventions, in general, and to home-based physical training interventions, in particular, is supported by the findings of other systematic reviews. However, given that none of the reviewed studies have directly compared different types of home-based and digital training interventions, no solid conclusions on whether measures of adherence vary as a function of the type of home-based and digital training interventions can be drawn. Thus, further research is necessary to explore this phenomenon and its influence on intervention-related changes of cognitive performance outcomes in more detail.
With respect to the monitoring of the level of regular physical activity in the control group, our risk of bias assessment reveals that more than one-half of the reviewed studies failed to appropriately account for this important confounder. Future studies are recommended to assess subjective markers of physical activity levels (e.g., via physical activity questionnaires or logs), objective markers of physical activity level (e.g., via physical activity trackers), or in the optimal case, both subjective and objective markers of physical activity levels during the intervention period in light of recent recommendations concerning the application of these methods.

Strengths and limitations
A major strength of this review is its systematic summary of the current literature on a novel topic (namely, the effectiveness of digital and home-based physical training interventions on cognitive performance in adults) with adherence to established recommendations, ensuring a transparent and reliable identification of relevant research. It is also worth noting that we not only focused on training-related changes in cognitive measures but also analyzed several influencing factors, such as study-related (e.g., sample size, adherence), population-related (e.g., age, sex, cognitive and health status), and intervention-related characteristics (e.g., exercise and training variables). Moreover, our comprehensive overview of the current state of the literature is complemented by the proposal of a theoretical framework for how digital and home-based physical training interventions can be classified. However, despite the several strengths of our systematic review, our findings should be interpreted in light of the following limitation. Only studies published in English were included, thus potentially relevant studies published in other languages were excluded. However, since no potentially eligible articles were excluded due to the language restriction during our screening, it is very unlikely this exclusion criterion substantially biased our results.

Conclusion and outlook
The evidence concerning the effectiveness of digital and home-based physical training interventions is rather mixed, as only 15 of the 27 reviewed studies reported a positive effect on measures of cognitive performance. However, a more detailed analysis suggests that home-based interventions using online classes and technology-based exercise devices (i.e., step-based exergames) are particularly promising approaches for improving cognitive performance in healthy older adults. Based on the limited number and considerable heterogeneity of the reviewed studies, more nuanced conclusions concerning a dose–response relationship cannot currently be drawn. Further high-quality studies are needed to verify the assumption that digital and home-based physical training interventions aimed at improving cognitive performance by providing purposefully developed intervention programs can be a valuable approach to fostering healthy cognitive aging.

Authors’ contributions
FH participated in conceptualization, methodology, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, writing (original draft), visualization, and project administration; PT participated in conceptualization, methodology, validation, formal analysis, investigation, data curation, and writing (review and editing); TG and NK participated in conceptualization, writing (review and editing), and supervision; LZ, EDdB, and LB participated in writing (review and editing); NGM participated in writing (review and editing), resources, supervision, and project administration. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript, and agree with the order of presentation of the authors.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

References
Be smart, exercise your heart: Exercise effects on brain and cognition: Exercise effects on brain and cognition
Systematic review and meta-analysis investigating moderators of long-term effects of exercise on cognition in healthy individuals
Effects of exercise on brain and cognition across age groups and health states
A review of the effects of physical activity and exercise on cognitive and brain functions in older adults
Physical activity for brain health in older adults
Impact of exercise training on physical and cognitive function among older adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Physical activity, cognition, and brain outcomes: A review of the 2018 Physical Activity Guidelines
Does cardiorespiratory fitness influence the effect of acute aerobic exercise on executive function?
Regular Tai Chi practice is associated with improved memory as well as structural and functional alterations of the hippocampus in the elderly
Cognitive benefits of exercise interventions: An fMRI activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis
Superior effects of modified Chen-Style Tai Chi versus 24-Style Tai Chi on cognitive function, fitness, and balance performance in adults over 55
Physical activity and inhibitory control: The mediating role of sleep quality and sleep efficiency
Cognitive benefits of activity engagement among 12,093 adults aged over 65 years
Differential effects of Tai Chi Chuan (motor-cognitive training) and walking on brain networks: A resting-state fMRI study in Chinese women aged 60
Tai Chi training evokes significant changes in brain white matter network in older women
Brain structure, cardiorespiratory fitness, and executive control changes after a 9-week exercise intervention in young adults: A randomized controlled trial
Lifestyle interventions to prevent cognitive impairment, dementia and Alzheimer disease
Does physical activity prevent cognitive decline and dementia? A systematic review and meta-analysis of longitudinal studies
Preventive effects of regular physical exercise against cognitive decline and the risk of dementia with age advancement
The pandemic of physical inactivity: Global action for public health
Worldwide trends in insufficient physical activity from 2001 to 2016: A pooled analysis of 358 population-based surveys with 1.9 million participants
Attacking the pandemic of physical inactivity: What is holding us back?
Global physical activity levels: Surveillance progress, pitfalls, and prospects
World Health Organization 2020 guidelines on physical activity and sedentary behaviour
Worldwide variability in physical inactivity a 51-country survey
Physical inactivity among older adults across Europe based on the SHARE database
Cross-sectional relationships of physical activity and sedentary behavior with cognitive function in older adults with probable mild cognitive impairment
The cost of inaction on physical inactivity to public health-care systems: A population-attributable fraction analysis
A perspective on implementation of technology-driven exergames for adults as telerehabilitation services
The relationship between sports facility accessibility and physical activity among Korean adults
Barriers to participation in physical activity and exercise among middle-aged and elderly individuals
Barriers to high school and university students' physical activity: A systematic review
Perceived barriers to physical activity among older Australians
Barriers to physical activity in older adults in Germany: A cross-sectional study
Motivators and barriers for physical activity in the oldest old: A systematic review
Barriers to and facilitators of sports participation for people with physical disabilities: A systematic review
Understanding low levels of physical activity in people with intellectual disabilities: A systematic review to identify barriers and facilitators
A review of social and environmental barriers to physical activity for adults with intellectual disabilities
Understanding factors that influence participation in physical activity among people with a neuromusculoskeletal condition: A review of qualitative studies
Perceived facilitators and barriers to exercise among older adults with mild cognitive impairment and early dementia
Barriers and facilitators to exercise among stroke survivors
A systematic review of perceived barriers and motivators to physical activity after stroke
Barriers associated with exercise and community access for individuals with stroke
The comparison of telerehabilitation and face-to-face rehabilitation after total knee arthroplasty: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Cost-utility analysis of home-based telerehabilitation compared with centre-based rehabilitation in patients with heart failure
Effectiveness of telerehabilitation in physical therapist practice: An umbrella and mapping review with meta-meta-analysis
Gamification for health and wellbeing: A systematic review of the literature
Staying physically active during the COVID-19 quarantine: Exploring the feasibility of live, online, group training sessions among older adults
Delivery of home-based exercise interventions in older adults facilitated by Amazon Alexa: A 12-week feasibility trial
Feasibility and acceptability of a remotely delivered, home-based, pragmatic resistance “exercise snacking” intervention in community-dwelling older adults: A pilot randomised controlled trial
Going digital –A commentary on the terminology used at the intersection of physical activity and digital health
Effectiveness of home-based rehabilitation using active video games on quality of life, cognitive and motor functions in people with Parkinson's disease: A systematic review
Effects on gait and balance of home-based active video game interventions in persons with multiple sclerosis: A systematic review
Home-based exergames for older adults balance and falls risk: A systematic review
Effect of eHealth-delivered exercise programmes on balance in people aged 65 years and over living in the community: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials
Effectiveness of home-based exercise delivered by digital health in older adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis
A systematic literature review and meta-analysis on digital health interventions for people living with dementia and mild cognitive impairment
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses: The PRISMA statement
PRISMA 2020 explanation and elaboration: Updated guidance and exemplars for reporting systematic reviews
The PRISMA 2020 statement: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Library Curtin University. Systematic reviews: Formulating the research question. Available at: https://libguides.library.curtin.edu.au/c.php?g=863554&p=6191899. [accessed 03.08.2022].
How to write a systematic review
Synchronous and asynchronous tele-exercise during the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic: Comparisons of implementation and training load in individuals with spinal cord injury
Recent directions in telemedicine: Review of trends in research and practice
Diabetes clinic at a distance: Telemedicine bridges the gap
The online inverted classroom model (oICM). A blueprint to adapt the inverted classroom to an online learning setting in medical and health education [Version 2]
Review of use of asynchronous technologies incorporated in mental health care
Is it really home-based? A commentary on the necessity for accurate definitions across exercise and physical activity programmes
Exergaming in youth: Effects on physical and cognitive health
Older adults’ physical activity and exergames: A systematic review
Effects of exergaming in people with dementia: Results of a systematic literature review
Witherspoon L. ACSM information on exergaming. Available at: http://healthysd.gov/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/exergaming.pdf. [accessed 29.05.2022].
The feasibility and efficacy of the home-based exercise programs in patients with cognitive impairment: A pilot study
Effects of online bodyweight high-intensity interval training intervention and health education on the mental health and cognition of sedentary young females
Remotely supervised exercise during the COVID-19 pandemic versus in-person-supervised exercise in achieving long-term adherence to a healthy lifestyle
A combination of physical activity and computerized brain training improves verbal memory and increases cerebral glucose metabolism in the elderly
Effects of an App-based physical exercise program on selected parameters of physical fitness of females in retirement: A randomized controlled trial
Effects of an information and communication technology-based fitness program on strength and balance in female home care service users
The effect of online low-intensity exercise training on fitness and cardiovascular parameters
Effects of remotely supervised physical activity on health profile in frail older adults: A randomized controlled trial protocol
Harnessing neuroplasticity to promote brain health in aging adults: Protocol for the MOVE-Cog intervention dtudy
Change in latent gray-matter structural integrity is associated with change in cardiovascular fitness in older adults who engage in at-home aerobic exercise
COVID-19 quarantine impact on wellbeing and cognitive functioning during a 10-week high-intensity functional training program in young university students
Personalized multicomponent exercise programs using smartphone technology among older people: Protocol for a randomized controlled trial
Effectiveness of an individually tailored home-based exercise programme for pre-frail older adults, driven by a tablet application and mobility monitoring: A pilot study
Adherence to and effectiveness of an individually tailored home-based exercise program for frail older adults, driven by mobility monitoring: Design of a prospective cohort study
A home-based exercise program driven by tablet application and mobility monitoring for frail older adults: Feasibility and practical implications
A randomized controlled trial into the cognitive effects of a computer-tailored physical activity intervention in older adults with chronic disease(s)
Randomized controlled trial of a web-based multi-modal therapy program for executive functioning in children and adolescents with unilateral cerebral palsy
Home-based exergaming on preschoolers' energy expenditure, cardiovascular fitness, body mass index and cognitive flexibility: A randomized controlled trial
Effect of Pokémon GO on the cognitive performance and emotional intelligence of primary school students
A pilot randomized controlled trial of exercise to improve cognitive performance in patients with stable glioma: A proof of concept
Feasibility of a home-based exercise intervention with remote guidance for patients with stable grade II and III gliomas: A pilot randomized controlled trial
Otago home-based strength and balance retraining improves executive functioning in older fallers: A randomized controlled trial
The Otago Exercise Program performed as group training versus home training in fall-prone older people: A randomized controlled trial
Effects of a home-based exercise program after supervised resistance training in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Physical exercise improves cognitive function in older adults with Stage 3–4 chronic kidney disease: A randomized controlled trial
Home-based exercise program for older adults with Motoric Cognitive Risk syndrome: Feasibility study
Gym-based exercise and home-based exercise with telephone support have similar outcomes when used as maintenance programs in adults with chronic health conditions: A randomised trial
Home-based, square-stepping exercise program among older adults with multiple sclerosis: Results of a feasibility randomized controlled study
The effects of virtual kayak paddling exercise on postural balance, muscle performance, and cognitive function in older adults with mild cognitive impairment: A randomized controlled trial
A multicomponent exercise intervention to improve physical functioning, cognition and psychosocial well-being in elderly nursing home residents: A study protocol of a randomized controlled trial in the PROCARE (prevention and occupational health in long-term care) project
Multicomponent exercise to improve motor functions, cognition and well-being for nursing home residents who are unable to walk–A randomized controlled trial
Feasibility and acceptability of an exergame intervention for schizophrenia
Exergame training-induced neuroplasticity and cognitive improvement in institutionalized older adults: A preliminary investigation
Efficacy of interactive video gaming in older adults with memory complaints: A cluster-randomized exercise intervention
Otago exercise programme for physical function and mental health among older adults with cognitive frailty during COVID-19: A randomised controlled trial
Virtual reality-based cognitive-motor training for middle-aged adults at high Alzheimer's disease risk: A randomized controlled trial
The impact of a home-based computerized cognitive training intervention on fall risk measure performance in community dwelling older adults, a pilot study
A videogame-based digital therapeutic to improve processing speed in people with multiple sclerosis: A feasibility study
A novel in-home digital treatment to improve processing speed in people with multiple sclerosis: A pilot study
Feasibility of a home-based speed of processing training program in middle-aged and older adults with HIV
Response heterogeneity to home-based restorative cognitive rehabilitation in multiple sclerosis: An exploratory study
A low-cost cognitive rehabilitation with a commercial video game improves sustained attention and executive functions in multiple sclerosis: A pilot study
Home-based (virtual) rehabilitation improves motor and cognitive function for stroke patients: A randomized controlled trial of the Elements (EDNA-22) system
A pilot study of an in-home multicomponent exergame training for older adults: Feasibility, usability and pre-post evaluation
The interactive Physical and Cognitive Exercise System (iPACES™): Effects of a 3-month in-home pilot clinical trial for mild cognitive impairment and caregivers
The Enhanced Interactive Physical and Cognitive Exercise System (iPACESTM v2.0): Pilot clinical trial of an in-home iPad-based neuro-exergame for mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
Pilot feasibility study of a home-based fall prevention exercise program (StandingTall) delivered through a tablet computer (iPad) in older people with dementia
A bespoke kinect stepping exergame for improving physical and cognitive function in older people: A pilot study
The use of home-based nonimmersive virtual reality to encourage physical and cognitive exercise in people with mild cognitive impairment: A feasibility study
Train at home, but not alone: A randomised controlled multicentre trial assessing the effects of live-streamed tele-exercise during COVID-19-related lockdowns
Effectiveness of Facebook remote live-streaming-guided exercise for improving the functional fitness of community-dwelling older adults
Personalized exercise programs based upon remote assessment of motor fitness: A pilot study among healthy people aged 65 years and older
Remote but together: Live-video group exercise via Zoom for heart failure patients has high adherence and satisfaction
Tablet-based strength-balance training to motivate and improve adherence to exercise in independently living older people: Part 2 of a phase II preclinical exploratory trial
Videoconference-based adapted physical exercise training is a good and safe option for seniors
Comparison of telecommunication, community, and home-based Tai Chi exercise programs on compliance and effectiveness in elders at risk for falls
Effects of a DVD-delivered exercise intervention on maintenance of physical activity in older adults
Non-inferiority of a home-based videoconference physical training program in comparison with the same program administered face-to-face in healthy older adults: The MOTION randomised controlled trial
Home-based physical activity program improves depression and anxiety in older adults
Economic evaluation of the e-Health StandingTall balance exercise programme for fall prevention in people aged 70 years and over
Effects of a home-based DVD-delivered physical activity program on self-esteem in older adults: Results from a randomized controlled trial
Online-delivered group and personal exercise programs to support low active older adults' mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic: Randomized controlled trial
Dance at home for people with Parkinson's during COVID-19 and beyond: Participation, perceptions, and prospects
Does a web-based exercise programming system improve home exercise adherence for people with musculoskeletal conditions? A randomized controlled trial
Impact of a novel home-based exercise intervention on health indicators in inactive premenopausal women: A 12-week randomised controlled trial
A randomized controlled trial of adherence to a 24-month home-based physical activity program and the health benefits for older adults at risk of Alzheimer's disease: The AIBL Active-Study
Feasibility, usability, and enjoyment of a home-based exercise program delivered via an exercise App for musculoskeletal health in community-dwelling older adults: Short-term prospective pilot study
Can the Otago falls prevention program be delivered by video? A feasibility study
Evaluation of a web-based intervention for multiple health behavior changes in patients with coronary heart disease in home-based rehabilitation: Pilot randomized controlled trial
Cost-effectiveness and cost-utility of a home-based exercise program in geriatric patients with cognitive impairment
Home-based balance training programme using Wii Fit with balance board for Parkinson's disease: A pilot study
Feasibility of an at-home, web-based, interactive exercise program for older adults
Telerehabilitation in multiple sclerosis: Results of a randomized feasibility and efficacy pilot study
Barriers and enablers for older adults participating in a home-based pragmatic exercise program delivered and monitored by Amazon Alexa: A qualitative study
Implementing an online virtual falls prevention intervention during a public health pandemic for older adults with mild cognitive impairment: A feasibility trial
Effects of a DVD-delivered exercise intervention on physical function in older adults
Effects of a DVD-delivered randomized controlled physical activity intervention on functional health in cancer survivors
Tablet-based strength-balance training to motivate and improve adherence to exercise in independently living older people: A phase II preclinical exploratory trial
Motivating and assisting physical exercise in independently living older adults: A pilot study
A novel Dance Dance Revolution (DDR) system for in-home training of stepping ability: Basic parameters of system use by older adults
An interactive home-based cognitive-motor step training program to reduce fall risk in older adults: Qualitative descriptive study of older adults' experiences and requirements
Exergames for unsupervised balance training at home: A pilot study in healthy older adults
Remote home-based exercise program to improve the mental state, balance, and physical function and prevent falls in adults aged 65 years and older during the COVID-19 pandemic in Seoul, Korea
Do people with intellectual disability use Nintendo Wii when placed in their home as part of a physiotherapy program? An observational study
Home-based exercise monitored with telehealth is feasible and acceptable compared to centre-based exercise in Parkinson's disease: A randomised pilot study
Home training with and without additional group training in physically frail old people living at home: Effect on health-related quality of life and ambulation
Novel smartphone game improves physical activity behavior in type 2 diabetes
Exergaming for physical activity in online physical education
Effect of a home-based exercise intervention of wearable technology and telephone coaching on walking performance in peripheral artery disease: The HONOR randomized clinical trial
Effects of an exergame software for older adults on fitness, activities of daily living performance, and quality of life
Remote home-based virtual training of functional living skills for adolescents and young adults with intellectual disability: Feasibility and preliminary results
The feasibility of group video conferencing for promotion of physical activity in adolescents with intellectual and developmental disabilities
Investigating the effects of an Otago-based program among individuals living with dementia
Feasibility of a home-based balance intervention in middle-aged women using Wii Fit Plus®
Effects of the augmented reality game Pokémon GO on fitness and fatness in secondary school students
Short-term efficacy of a computer-tailored physical activity intervention for prostate and colorectal cancer patients and survivors: A randomized controlled trial
Effectiveness of home-based telerehabilitation in mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease: A randomised controlled study
The SYNERGIC RCTs from Can Thumbs Up: Canadian experience in migrating lifestyle interventions to an @Home-based program to enhance cognition
The feasibility of a home-based, subject-controlled, interactive physical exercise program to promote cognitive health in older adults
Investigation of the effects of home-based exercise and cognitive training on cognitive and physical functions in cardiac patients: The COVEPICARDIO study protocol of a randomized clinical trial
COVEPIC (Cognitive and spOrt Virtual EPIC training) investigating the effects of home-based physical exercise and cognitive training on cognitive and physical functions in community-dwelling older adults: Study protocol of a randomized single-blinded clinical trial
Protocol for SYNchronising Exercises, Remedies in GaIt and Cognition at Home (SYNERGIC@Home): Feasibility of a home-based double-blind randomised controlled trial to improve gait and cognition in individuals at risk for dementia
Evaluating the effectiveness of a home-based exercise programme delivered through a tablet computer for preventing falls in older community-dwelling people over 2 years: Study protocol for the Standing Tall randomised controlled trial
ICT-based system to predict and prevent falls (iStoppFalls): Study protocol for an international multicenter randomized controlled trial
Effect of cognitive-only and cognitive-motor training on preventing falls in community-dwelling older people: Protocol for the smart ± step randomised controlled trial
Implementation of the StandingTall programme to prevent falls in older people: A process evaluation protocol
Design of the Park-in-Shape study: A phase II double blind randomized controlled trial evaluating the effects of exercise on motor and non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease
Mitii™ ABI: Study protocol of a randomised controlled trial of a web-based multi-modal training program for children and adolescents with an Acquired Brain Injury (ABI)
Move it to improve it (Mitii): Study protocol of a randomised controlled trial of a novel web-based multimodal training program for children and adolescents with cerebral palsy
Feasibility study design and methods for a home-based, square-stepping exercise program among older adults with multiple sclerosis: The SSE-MS project
Effects of remote feedback in home-based physical activity interventions for older adults: A systematic review
Virtual reality exercise as a coping strategy for health and wellness promotion in older adults during the COVID-19 pandemic
How to construct, conduct and analyze an exercise training study?
Functional and/or structural brain changes in response to resistance exercises and resistance training lead to cognitive improvements−A systematic review
Validation of a new tool for the assessment of study quality and reporting in exercise training studies: TESTEX
Identifying the “incredible”! Part 2: Spot the difference–A rigorous risk of bias assessment can alter the main findings of a systematic review
A novel cognitive-motor exercise program delivered via a tablet to improve mobility in older people with cognitive impairment–StandingTall Cognition and Mobility
E-health StandingTall balance exercise for fall prevention in older people: Results of a two year randomised controlled trial
Impact of activity tracker usage in combination with a physical activity intervention on physical and cognitive parameters in healthy adults aged 60+: A randomized controlled trial
Effects of two short-term aerobic exercises on cognitive function in healthy older sdults during COVID-19 vonfinement in Japan: A pilot randomized controlled trial
Feasibility and effectiveness of interactive stepping exercise on community-dwelling older adults: A pilot randomized controlled trial
Cognitive and psychosocial outcomes of self-guided executive function training and low-intensity aerobic exercise in healthy older adults
Effects of exergame-based dual-task rraining on executive function and dual-task performance in community-dwelling older people: A randomized-controlled trial
Acute effects of Square Stepping Exercise on cognitive and social functions in sedentary young adults: A home-based online trial
A cognitively enhanced online Tai Ji Quan training intervention for community-dwelling older adults with mild cognitive impairment: A feasibility trial
Effects of an in-home multicomponent exergame training on physical functions, cognition, and brain volume of older adults: A randomized controlled trial
ICT-based system to predict and prevent falls (iStoppFalls): Results from an international multicenter randomized controlled trial
The effect of sensor-based exercise at home on functional performance associated with fall risk in older people–A comparison of two exergame interventions
A randomized controlled pilot study of home-based step training in older people using videogame technology
Effects of a home-based step training programme on balance, stepping, cognition and functional performance in people with multiple sclerosis—A randomized controlled trial
Home-based step training using videogame technology in people with Parkinson's disease: A single-blinded randomised controlled trial
Home-based exercise program improves balance and fear of falling in community-dwelling older adults with mild Alzheimer's disease: A pilot study
Effects of home-based virtual reality telerehabilitation system in people with multiple sclerosis: A randomized controlled trial
Effectiveness of home-based and remotely supervised aerobic exercise in Parkinson's disease: A double-blind, randomised controlled trial
A remotely supervised home-based aerobic exercise programme is feasible for patients with Parkinson's disease: Results of a small randomised feasibility trial
Virtual reality exercise on a home-based phase III cardiac rehabilitation program, effect on executive function, quality of life and depression, anxiety and stress: A randomized controlled trial
Interactive cognitive-motor step training improves cognitive risk factors of falling in older adults–A randomized controlled trial
Effects of an innovative telerehabilitation intervention for people with Parkinson's disease on quality of life, motor, and non-motor abilities
Virtual reality for motor and cognitive rehabilitation from clinic to home: A pilot feasibility and efficacy study for persons with chronic stroke
Motion-based technology for people with dementia training at home: Three-phase pilot study assessing feasibility and efficacy
American College of Sports Medicine position stand. Quantity and quality of exercise for developing and maintaining cardiorespiratory, musculoskeletal, and neuromotor fitness in apparently healthy adults: Guidance for prescribing exercise
Effects of exergames and cognitive-motor dual-task training on cognitive, physical and dual-task functions in cognitively healthy older adults: An overview
The effect of active video games on cognitive functioning in clinical and non-clinical populations: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Still no evidence that exergames improve cognitive ability: A commentary on Stanmore et al. (2017)
Exercise interventions for cognitive function in adults older than 50: A systematic review with meta-analysis
Cognitive aging and the promise of physical activity
Effects of physical exercise combined with nutritional supplements on aging brain related structures and functions: A systematic review
Physical and cognitive activity and exercise for older adults: A review
Making the best out of IT: Design and development of exergames for older adults with mild neurocognitive disorder – A methodological paper
Thinking while moving or moving while thinking–concepts of motor-cognitive training for cognitive performance enhancement
Structural and functional brain changes related to different types of physical activity across the life span
Perspective of dose and response for individualized physical exercise and training prescription
Dose-response matters!–A perspective on the exercise prescription in exercise-cognition research
A discussion on different approaches for prescribing physical interventions–Four roads lead to Rome, but which one should we choose?
Mediators of physical activity on neurocognitive function: A review at multiple levels of analysis
Joggin' the Noggin: Towards a physiological understanding of exercise-induced cognitive benefits
Applications of functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) neuroimaging in exercise-cognition science: A systematic, methodology-focused review
Safety and effectiveness of long-term exercise interventions in older adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials
Theories to explain exercise motivation and physical inactivity: Ways of expanding our current theoretical perspective
Affective–Reflective Theory of physical inactivity and exercise
The exercise-affect-adherence pathway: An evolutionary perspective
Key factors associated with adherence to physical exercise in patients with chronic diseases and older adults: An umbrella review
Effectiveness of different modalities of remote online training in young healthy males
Why are patients not doing their prescribed home-based exercises? An updated review of the factors affecting adherence to prescribed home-based exercise in patients with chronic low back pain
Reporting accelerometer methods in physical activity intervention studies: A systematic review and recommendations for authors
Assessing physical activity through questionnaires–A consensus of best practices and future directions

Supplementary materials
Peer review under responsibility of Shanghai University of Sport.
Supplementary materials associated with this article can be found in the online version at doi:10.1016/j.jshs.2023.01.004.