Characterisation and evaluation of early mobilisation interventions after emergency laparotomy surgery: a scoping review
Summary
Emergency laparotomy is a high-risk surgery, and postoperative functional decline contributes to the 1-yr mortality of 25%. However, there is no established guidance around postoperative interventions to restore functional capacity, including early mobilisation. This scoping review synthesised current evidence on the definition of early mobilisation, delivery of interventions, barriers, and outcomes reported for postoperative mobilisation interventions.
The review followed a structured methodological framework and was registered with Open Science Framework. Studies were identified through MEDLINE, Embase, and CINAHL. Eligible studies described an early mobilisation protocol (in isolation or as a bundled intervention) after emergency laparotomy. Data were extracted and analysed descriptively.
Fourteen studies (2783 participants) were included, with all but one published since 2018. Mobilisation out of bed within 24 h of surgery was the most frequently used definition of early mobilisation. Adherence rates ranged from 31% to 96%. Interventions were heterogeneous, ranging from encouragement to achieve mobilisation targets through to comprehensive multidisciplinary programmes. Intervention groups tended to achieve earlier and greater mobilisation. Key modifiable barriers were pain, fatigue, and limited physiotherapy staffing. All studies reported physical performance outcomes; only one reported quality of life outcomes.
This scoping review found heterogeneity in the delivery, dose, timing, and adherence to mobility interventions. Barriers to mobilisation after emergency laparotomy mirror those described after elective surgery. We suggest alignment in reporting the impact of individual factors (such as frailty and socioeconomic context) and core outcomes (including patient-centred measures) to standardise early postoperative mobilisation interventions and allow for synthesis of the evidence base.
Scoping review protocol
Open Science Framework (https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/R63CP).
Around 28 000 people undergo emergency laparotomy or laparoscopy of the gastrointestinal tract annually in England and Wales. The National Emergency Laparotomy Audit (NELA) has improved perioperative care for this vulnerable patient group, who often have physiological derangement superimposed on baseline frailty. Nonetheless, 30-day mortality remains 8% and 1-yr mortality is 25%. Postoperative quality of life suffers because of deconditioning and functional decline, making interventions to mitigate these effects essential.
Postoperative immobility increases the risk of pulmonary complications, venous thromboembolism, and sarcopenia, particularly in older patients. Although evidence on early mobilisation after elective surgery is mixed, a recent large observational study demonstrated an association with reduced complications and shorter length of hospital stay. After emergency laparotomy, there are additional challenges in achieving early mobilisation, including physiological instability, lack of psychological preparation, and potential for greater surgical complexity. However, patients with neck of femur fractures face similar challenges. Studies suggest that in patients with neck of femur fractures, early mobilisation reduces mortality, and is now considered standard care.
Early mobilisation is widely regarded as a foundational pillar of enhanced recovery programmes (ERPs) and included in most protocols. ERPs are well established in elective abdominal surgery and guidelines now exist for ERPs after emergency laparotomy. A recent meta-analysis found a significant difference in time to first postoperative ambulation between ERP and non-ERP groups after emergency laparotomy, and reduced length of stay and complications. Whether this is the result of a mobilisation intervention or target per se, or a result of the beneficial effects of the whole ERP, is unclear. This study included six RCTs which specified early mobilisation, but no details were provided about the nature of the interventions and only three trials reported time to ambulation. A previous meta-analysis, incorporating six studies which all included early mobilisation in their protocol, also demonstrated reduced length of stay and postoperative complications in the ERP group. A position paper from the World Society for Emergency Surgery states that early mobilisation should be encouraged as soon as possible after emergency laparotomy but does not cite specific evidence, or give a definition, of early mobilisation.
A scoping review maps the literature on a topic, identifying key concepts, evidence sources, and research gaps, making it ideal for analysing the heterogeneous evidence in this under-researched area. The objectives of this scoping review are to characterise studies investigating early mobilisation after emergency laparotomy and evaluate how this should inform future research. Specifically, the review seeks to synthesise evidence on the definition of early mobilisation, delivery of interventions, barriers, and outcomes reported.

Methods
The review authors consisted of a multidisciplinary team of healthcare professionals (including anaesthetists, intensivists, and physiotherapists) involved in the care of emergency laparotomy patients, providing diverse perspectives that informed review protocol development and data analysis. A scoping review was chosen by the multidisciplinary team as the best methodology to provide a comprehensive and descriptive analysis of the literature pertaining to early mobilisation interventions after emergency laparotomy surgery. This review follows the recommended five stages for scoping reviews: (1) identify the research question, (2) search for relevant published studies, (3) screen for inclusion, (4) extraction of data, and (5) synthesis to collate, report, and interpret the results.
The review adheres to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR) checklist. The protocol was published prospectively on Open Science Framework.

Identification
The population/concept/context framework in conjunction with the Peer Review of Electronic Search Strategies Checklist was used to develop a search strategy, in partnership with an experienced clinical librarian. Given the novel nature of the research objectives, a piloting and iterative process was used to ensure all relevant studies were identified.
The MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CINAHL databases were searched, ending on 13 February 2025. Citation searching was undertaken, and grey literature was searched using the Google search engine, also ending on 13 February 2025. Search strategies are available in Supplementary material 1.

Eligibility
Studies were eligible if they enrolled adults, with more than 50% of participants undergoing a NELA-defined laparotomy (urgent open or laparoscopic general surgical procedures, excluding appendicectomy, trauma, and surgery to the gallbladder, oesophagus, or spleen). Where cohorts combined elective and emergency cases, subgroup analysis was required. Inclusion further required an explicit early mobilisation intervention or target, either alone or within an ERP, with comparators defined as an alternative mobilisation protocol or standard care. Studies were eligible if they reported adherence to mobility targets or protocols, or outcomes related to mobilisation status. No restrictions were applied regarding study design, language, or year of publication. Exclusion criteria comprised published conference proceedings, case series, or non-experimental designs.
Early mobilisation is a heterogeneously defined concept and therefore operational criteria were defined to determine whether a study met the inclusion criteria. Specifically, mobilisation had to be initiated within the first 72 h of surgery, should include an activity designed to promote patient movement, and should be aimed at enhancing recovery or improving functional outcome.

Screening
Rayyan software (Rayyan Systems Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA) was used for automatic duplicate recognition, with manual review, and blinded abstract screening by two reviewers (LM, TL), with a third (LH) resolving conflicts.

Data extraction and synthesis
A piloted data extraction form collected quantitative and qualitative information. Data extraction included patient characteristics, features of the intervention, feasibility of instituting the intervention, and barriers to implementation.Extraction was done by one reviewer (LM) with a proportion checked independently for consistency (TL). Data were summarised in narrative and tabular form, using structured frameworks where relevant. No risk of bias assessment was undertaken, as this is a scoping review.

Results

Articles
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow diagram.
Fig 1
Publications included in the scoping review of early mobilisation after emergency laparotomy. EGS, emergency general surgery; IPPV, invasive positive pressure ventilation. ASA PS; American Society of Anesthesiologists physical status; RCT, randomized control trial; ICU, Intensive Care Unit; Postop, postoperative; Preop, preoperative.
Table 1
Authors, year	Study design	Location	Number of patients	Mean age	Gender (% male)	ASA (% grade 1–2)	Cohort (% open surgery)	Exclusions	 	Jønsson and colleagues, 2023	Prospective cohort	Denmark, single tertiary centre	48	61	52%	73%	EGS (77%)	Low-risk procedures, e.g. appendicectomy, cholecystectomy. No surgical intervention	 	Jønsson and colleagues, 2018	Prospective cohort	Denmark, single tertiary centre	50	61	52%	66%	EGS (84%)	Low-risk procedures, e.g. appendicectomy, cholecystectomy	 	Boden and colleagues, 2022	Pilot RCT	Australia, single tertiary centre	49	67	53%	28%	EGS (100%)	Imminent death within 48 h, incision below umbilicus, immobile preop	 	Grass and colleagues, 2018	Retrospective cohort	Switzerland, single tertiary centre	1170	63	54%	75%	Colorectal (48%), 20% urgent	None	 	Khadaroo and colleagues, 2020	Prospective non-randomised before-and-after study	Canada, two tertiary centres	684	76	52%	Mean 2.7	EGS (70%)	Age <65 yr, trauma, palliative procedure, baseline functional dependency	 	McComb and colleagues, 2018	Before-and-after pilot sub-study	Canada, single tertiary centre	66	76	33%	Not recorded	EGS (79%)	Age <65yr, trauma, palliative procedure, baseline functional dependency	 	Pranavi and colleagues, 2022	RCT	India, single tertiary centre	120	46	87%	64%	Perforation peritonitis (100%)	ASA PS 4E, localised peritonitis, septic shock, polytrauma	 	Ceresoli and colleagues, 2023	Prospective cohort	Italy, multicentre, ‘high-volume hospitals’	589	72	47%	46%	EGS (75%)	Septic shock, surgery for complications of elective surgery, postop ICU >72 h	 	Aggarwal and colleagues, 2023	RCT	India, single tertiary centre	60	45	53%	73%	Obstruction (100%)	Bowel perforation, peri-op organ failure, IPPV >48 h	 	Shang and colleagues, 2018	Retrospective propensity score matching	China, multi-centre, tertiary hospitals	636	66	60%	69%	Colectomy for obstruction (40%)	Stoma, perforation, neoadjuvant treatment, ‘mental disease’	 	Roulin and colleagues, 2014	Prospective cohort	Switzerland, single tertiary centre	91	62	53%	46% urgent vs 81% elective	Colorectal resection (49%), 31% urgent	>Two nights ICU postop	 	Lohsiriwat, 2019	Prospective cohort	Thailand, single tertiary centre	60	63	62%	63%	Colorectal resection (100%)	Trauma, no resection	 	Saurabh and colleagues, 2020	RCT	India, single tertiary centre	70	44	70%	100%	Small bowel surgery (100%)	ASA PS >2, symptoms >5 days, severe sepsis, polytrauma, perforated duodenal ulcer	 	Mandal and colleagues, 2024	Prospective cohort	India, single tertiary centre	90	39	72%	10%	EGS (100%)	Septic shock, ASA PS >3, pregnancy, readmission or re-laparotomy
Out of 4047 records identified, 14 studies (2014–2024) remained after screening and selection (Fig. 1), with a total of 2783 participants from tertiary centres across advanced and emerging and developing countries (Table 1). There were four RCTs, eight prospective studies, and two retrospective studies. Two studies focused exclusively on older people; of these, one looked at a subgroup from a larger study.

Patient characteristics and eligibility criteria of the included studies
In eight studies, more than 50% of patients had no reported comorbidities or only mild systemic disease (Table 1). Notable exclusion criteria included baseline functional dependency (e.g. nursing home residents requiring assistance with three or more activities of daily living), preoperative septic shock, or more than 48 h of postoperative invasive ventilation. Seven articles looked at a heterogeneous cohort, whereas the other seven studied a specific population, for example colorectal surgery or small bowel obstruction. The percentage of patients undergoing open vs laparoscopic surgery ranged from 40% to 100% and, except for two studies, all included mostly patients having urgent surgery. Six studies included an assessment of baseline functional status, for example New Mobility Score, World Health Organization performance status, and the Clinical Frailty Scale. No studies considered socioeconomic background.

Definition of early mobilisation
The early mobilisation targets used in the included studies were highly heterogeneous in both timing and activity, and often also only minimally described. Four studies aimed to achieve mobilisation on the day of surgery, whereas nine studies targeted postoperative day (POD) 1 and one study initiated their reconditioning programme on POD2. Definitions of ‘early mobilisation’ varied widely, ranging from bed-based exercised for very frail patients through to structured walking programmes (e.g. walking more than 20 feet four times daily). Intermediate definitions included sitting on the edge of the bed, transferring to a chair, standing, and performing simple active movements. The most common minimum threshold was ‘getting out of bed’, reported in 10 studies. Across the literature, ‘early mobilisation’ therefore encompassed a spectrum of activities but was most typically defined as transfer from bed to chair within the first 24 h after surgery.

Interventions
Early mobilisation interventions and adherence using modified ‘Template for Intervention Description and Replication’ (TIDIeR) framework. EASE BE-FIT, elder-friendly approaches to the surgical environment—bedside reconditioning for functional improvements; ERAS, enhanced recovery after surgery; ERP, enhanced recovery program; MDT, multidisciplinary; OT, occupational therapy; Physio, physiotherapy; POD, postoperative day.
Table 2
Authors, year	What: materials/procedures	Who	When and how much including tailoring	How well: planned/actual	 	Jønsson and colleagues, 2023	Two distinct cohorts but followed same ERP, including early mobilisation	Physio, OTs, and nursing staff motivated and assisted patients. Daily physio visit including weekends, all seen by OT	10–30 min daily with individualised progression for the first 7 days. Aims: mobilisation within 24 h for at least 4 h, out of bed for at least 1 h on POD1, gradual increase in walking distance. Self-training advice once independent. In-bed exercises if unable to get out of bed	Documented by healthcare staff. 92% sitting up <24 h, 88% achieved 1 h out of bed POD1. >82% able to stand or walk ≥four times daily every day in the first week. Mean 5 h out of bed POD1	 	Jønsson and colleagues, 2018	Predefined mobilisation protocol including basic activities, e.g. getting in and out of bed, rising from a chair, standing, and walking		65% independently mobile by POD3, median >23 h per day lie or sit in the first week	 	Boden and colleagues, 2022	Information booklet plus face-to-face education	Daily physio visit	30 min total daily physical activity from POD1. Protocol of progressive rehab exercises and assisted ambulation, with deep breathing and coughing exercises	Protocol followed exactly in 35% of sessions. Over 5 days intervention group median 86 min physiotherapy vs 23 min in the standard group. Median time to assisted ambulation 26 h	 	Grass and colleagues, 2018	ERP	Nursing staff trained to supervise and promote mobilisation. Mobilisation assisted by physiotherapist if needed	Out of bed POD0, more than 6 h per day from POD1	Patient reported. Urgent group 31% >6 h out of bed POD1 (42% overall)	 	No detail described	 	Khadaroo and colleagues, 2020	McComb is a sub-study of Khadaroo. All received EASE interventions including the BE-FIT programme	Support from healthcare staff, could ask for help if needed	Exercises demonstrated to patient and first set supervised then instructed to perform exercises three times daily. Exercises tailored to preop frailty status with in-bed exercises for frailest	60% adherence to reconditioning programme, intervention group mean 29.1 h until out of bed vs 46.4 h in the standard group	 	McComb and colleagues, 2018	‘EASE’ elder-friendly practice including MDT care, ERAS principles, and BE-FIT reconditioning programme. Visual diagram of exercises provided and logbook to encourage compliance	83% of exercises completed, 55% completed logbook. Intervention group significantly greater improvement in number of sit-to-stands between POD2 and POD5	 	Pranavi and colleagues, 2022	ERP	Not described	Ambulation POD0, sit up for 2 h if epidural in situ (removed at 24 h) then walking	Ambulation at mean 2.4 days in the ERP group vs 6.0 days in the non-ERP group	 	No detail described	 	Ceresoli and colleagues, 2023	ERP	Not described	Early mobilisation (at least 4 h) starting from POD1	36% >4 h ‘mobilisation’ POD1, 69% on POD2	 	No detail described	 	Aggarwal and colleagues, 2023	ERP	Not described	Ambulation ‘encouraged from POD1’. Ambulation=able to walk more than 20 feet at least four times daily in the first 3 days	Ambulation at mean 1.9 days in the ERP group vs 2.9 days in the non-ERP group	 	No detail described	 	Shang and colleagues, 2018	ERP	Not described	Out-of-bed activity POD1 then gradual increase in mobilisation	96% out of bed POD1	 	No detail described	 	Roulin and colleagues, 2014	ERP	Not described	Out of bed more than 15 min POD0 then more than 6 h per day	Out of bed 15 min POD0 26% (vs 32% in the elective group), out of bed ≥6 h POD1 32% (vs 46% elective). Postop protocol adherence 49%	 	No detail described	 	Lohsiriwat, 2019	ERP	Trained nursing staff assisted ambulation and daily physio	Ambulation from POD1	85% ambulation POD1 without intra-abdominal infection, 35% with. Postop protocol adherence 78% vs 50%	 	No detail described	 	Saurabh and colleagues, 2020	ERP	Not described	Ambulation POD0, sit up for 2 h if epidural in situ (removed at 24 h) then walking	Ambulation at mean 1.6 days in the ERP group vs 2.6 days in the non-ERP group	 	No detail described	 	Mandal and colleagues, 2024	ERP	Not described	Ambulation within 24 h	Ambulation at mean 2.3 days in the ERP group vs 2.4 days in the non-ERP group (non-significant)	 	No detail described
Table 2 describes the mobilisation protocols of the included studies, structured according to a modification of the Template for Intervention Description and Replication (TIDIeR) framework. Three studies looked at mobilisation interventions in isolation, whereas the remainder studied a bundled intervention/ERP. In nine studies, the comparison arm was predefined as usual or standard care. Two observational studies used those who failed to meet an agreed mobilisation target as the comparator. One study compared urgent vs elective patients, one had no comparison arm but documented adherence to the protocol, and one compared the application of an ERP in those who had an intra-abdominal infection with those without infection.
Adherence to the study protocols or ability to meet the specified targets varied widely both in description and results. Only one study comments on adherence on the day of surgery, with 26% of urgent patients achieving 15 min out of bed. On POD1, the proportion of patients able to get out of bed for any amount of time was 88–96%. Adherence to targets for longer periods out of bed on POD1 was lower: 31–36% for >4 h out of bed. Boden and colleagues showed that 55% of patients were able to ambulate for >3 min on day 1.
Strict adherence to more complex programmes was often reported to be difficult to achieve. For example, only 35% of sessions adhered exactly to an intensive physical activity protocol, although the intervention group achieved significantly more physiotherapy time (86 vs 23 min over 5 days). Patient engagement, as opposed to achievement of targets, was rarely reported. One group showed 83% adherence to a self-directed programme of graded exercises, although only 55% completed the accompanying logbook.
Studies implementing ERPs observed earlier mobilisation in the ERP group, for example ambulation at 2.4 vs 6.0 days. In the studies applying multidisciplinary protocols to the care of older people, there was a consistent trend towards achieving earlier or greater mobilisation. For example, a significant reduction in mean time to mobilisation from 46 h to 29 h after surgery was demonstrated after introduction of the ‘EASE’ elder-friendly protocol, which included proactive rehabilitation activities.

Barriers and predictors for delay in early mobilisation
Barriers and predictors for delay in early mobilisation. ERP, enhanced recovery protocol. ICU, Intensive Care Unit
Table 3
Authors, year	Patient-related barrier	Staff-related barrier	System-related barrier	 	Jønsson and colleagues, 2023	Preoperative morbidity	Nil documented	Nil documented	 	Fatigue	 	Pain	 	Dizziness	 	Jønsson and colleagues, 2018	Fatigue (42–70%)	Nil documented	Monitoring and therapeutic equipment	 	Pain (13–20%)	ICU admission	 	Boden and colleagues, 2022	Fatigue (12%)	Nil documented	Lack of physio staff at weekends (27%)	 	Pain (5%)	 	Refusal (4%)	 	Grass and colleagues, 2018	Age >70 yr	Nil documented	Intra-operative fluid administration >2 L	 	Emergency surgery	Emergency surgery	 	Khadaroo and colleagues, 2020	Nil documented	Nil documented	Nil documented	 	McComb and colleagues, 2018	Pain	Nil documented	Nil documented	 	Belief in bed rest	 	Pranavi and colleagues, 2022	Epidural (reduced target)	Nil documented	Nil documented	 	Ceresoli and colleagues, 2023	Age >70 yr		Open surgeryFluid overload	 	Comorbidity	 	Surgical drain	 	Intra-abdominal sepsis	 	Aggarwal and colleagues, 2023	Nil documented	Nil documented	Nil documented	 	Shang and colleagues, 2018	Nil documented	Nil documented	Nil documented	 	Roulin and colleagues, 2014	Emergency surgery	Nil documented	Not possible to apply ERP on ICU	 	Lohsiriwat, 2019	Intra-abdominal infection	Time constraints	Limited resources out of hours	 	Complications	 	Saurabh and colleagues, 2020	Epidural (reduced target)	Nil documented	Nil documented	 	Mandal and colleagues, 2024	Nil documented	Nil documented	Nil documented
Table 3 categorises the barriers to early mobilisation identified in each study, and factors prognostic of delayed mobilisation. A barrier was defined as a factor that negatively affects the likelihood, timing, or frequency of mobilisation activities. Patient-related barriers, such as frailty or poor preoperative function, pain, and fatigue, were the most commonly cited barriers. One study also highlighted that some patients retained a belief that bed rest was beneficial.
Emergency surgery itself was associated with greater difficulty achieving early mobilisation. Of patients undergoing urgent surgery, only 32% achieved more than 6 h out of bed on POD1, whereas this was 46% for patients having elective surgery. Another study found that an emergency indication was an independent risk factor for delayed mobilisation (odds ratio [OR], 0.40, P=0.028). Urgent patients tended to be higher risk (54% vs 19% ASA physical classification status 3–4) and were more likely to have undergone an open procedure (82% vs 35%, P<0.001).
Lohsiriwat reported that 85% of those without intra-abdominal infection were able to ambulate on POD1, vs 35% of those with intra-abdominal infection. Patients located in critical care settings were also slower to mobilise, although mechanical ventilation was not an absolute barrier to mobilisation. Two studies specifically reduced the mobilisation goals for patients with ongoing epidural infusions.
Other barriers included ongoing requirement for monitoring or therapeutic equipement, and availability of physiotherapy staff, particularly at weekends. However, implementation of a largely self-directed reconditioning programme for older people showed improved physical performance despite significantly fewer physiotherapy or occupational therapy visits. Geriatrician or multidisciplinary team input was felt to be helpful, particularly for the frail patient cohort.

Outcomes measured
Study outcomes as per Taxonomy of Dodd. Taxonomy of Dodd: outcome classification with five core areas, used to annotate outcomes included in core outcomes sets within the Core Outcome Measures in Effectiveness Trials database. ERP, enhanced recovery protocol; LOS, length of stay; PPC, postoperative pulmonary complications.
Table 4
Authors, year	Mortality	Physiological/clinical	Life impact	Resource use	Adverse events	 	Jønsson and colleagues, 2023	Mortality	Physical activity	Pain, fatigue, health-related quality of life	Reoperation	PPC	 	Jønsson and colleagues, 2018	Mortality	Physical activity	Barriers to mobilisation	LOS, ICU admission	PPC	 	Boden and colleagues, 2022	Nil	Physical activity	Nil	ICU admission	Adverse events	 	Grass and colleagues, 2018	Nil	Physical activity	Nil	LOS, reoperation	Adverse events	 	Khadaroo and colleagues, 2020	Mortality	Physical activity	Alternative care	LOS, ICU admission	Adverse events	 	McComb and colleagues, 2018	Nil	Physical performance	Nil	LOS, number of physio visits	Adverse events	 	Pranavi and colleagues, 2022	Mortality	Functional recovery parameters	Nil	LOS, readmission	Adverse events	 	Ceresoli and colleagues, 2023	Mortality	Functional recovery parameters	Nil	LOS, readmission	Adverse events	 	Aggarwal and colleagues, 2023	Mortality	Functional recovery parameters	Nil	LOS, readmission	Adverse events	 	Shang and colleagues, 2018	Nil	Gastrointestinal recovery, time to postoperative chemotherapy	Nil	LOS	Adverse events	 	Roulin and colleagues, 2014	Nil	Adherence to ERP	Nil	LOS	Adverse events	 	Lohsiriwat, 2019	Mortality	Gastrointestinal recovery, adherence to ERP	Nil	LOS, readmission	Adverse events	 	Saurabh and colleagues, 2020	Mortality	Functional recovery parameters	Nil	LOS, readmission	Adverse events	 	Mandal and colleagues, 2024	Mortality	Functional recovery parameters	Nil	LOS, readmission	Adverse events
The Taxonomy of Dodd framework was used to categorise the outcomes, as recommended by the ‘Core Outcome Measures in Effectiveness Trials’ Initiative (Table 4). Six studies used at least one outcome from each domain. A measure of physical activity or functional performance was recorded in all studies. Life impact outcomes included pain, fatigue, and discharge to alternative care, but only one study investigated postoperative quality of life. The most used ‘resource use’ outcomes were length of stay, reoperation, readmission, and ICU admission.

Discussion
Suggestions for future research.
Fig 2
This review brings together the heterogeneous evidence around early mobilisation interventions after emergency laparotomy. The definition and implementation of early mobilisation varied widely across studies, with most targeting mobilisation out of bed by POD1. Although ERPs and multidisciplinary approaches generally improved mobilisation outcomes, strict adherence to complex interventions was often difficult, and patient-related factors such as frailty, pain, and emergency surgery were major barriers. Simple, self-directed protocols may offer the greatest chance of successful implementation given limited resource availability, with greater adherence if they can be individualised to the patient’s needs. Future research requires a structured approach to intervention and outcome description to facilitate systematic analysis (Fig. 2).

Definitions
No universal definition of early mobilisation after surgery exists and ERP guidelines simply state that mobilisation should occur ‘as early as possible’ after surgery. In the studies included within this review, there was marked variation in what was meant by mobilisation, but the most used protocol or target was transfer from bed to chair within 24 h of surgery. A high proportion of patients were able to get out of bed on the first postoperative day. For neck of femur fracture patients, a cohort with similarities to the emergency laparotomy cohort, guidelines recommend mobilisation (sitting or standing out of bed) with a physiotherapist on the day after surgery. Observational evidence suggests that in this patient group, early mobilisation vs late (2 days or more after surgery) leads to improved survival and recovery. The Perioperative Quality Improvement Study looks at patients undergoing major noncardiac surgery and defines early mobilisation as ‘mobilisation from bed to chair with assistance from a maximum of one person within 24 hours of surgery’. Early mobilisation is an independent predictor of postoperative length of stay in this elective cohort. Given that mobilisation from bed to chair within 24 h of surgery appears to be feasible after emergency laparotomy and given the evidence suggesting outcome benefits in other groups, this seems an appropriate definition of early mobilisation after emergency laparotomy.

Interventions
This review has highlighted a heterogeneous group of interventions, with none describing all the details required by the TIDIeR framework. Where detail was provided, the intervention typically involved 10–30 min of progressive activity. Longer periods of time out of bed for example 4–6 h, were often not achieved until beyond POD2. Higher levels of adherence were reported to simpler or shorter interventions, particularly in the initial days after surgery. Notably, self-directed rehabilitation (logbook in which patients tracked their own progress) led to successful protocol adherence and a positive patient experience, despite fewer visits from therapists. There is currently not enough evidence to determine whether greater adherence can compensate for the reduction in efficacy expected from a simpler intervention. Recent guidelines on early mobilisation in critical care emphasise step-wise progression, with ‘dose’ adjusted depending on baseline physical criteria.
Before elective surgery, patients often receive counselling about what to expect in the postoperative period and about the benefits of early mobilisation. The absence of this opportunity before emergency laparotomy may increase the importance of giving patients a feeling of agency for their own recovery. A review of co-designed rehabilitation interventions found that patient collaboration in the design process increases feelings of empowerment and allows tailoring of the intervention to patient needs.
Future research should focus on establishing the most effective and resource-efficient early mobilisation intervention. Establishing the required intensity and duration required could be studied using a SMART method (sequential, multiple assignment, randomised trial design). This trial design involves multiple randomisation points, depending on the patient’s response to treatment, and allows for an adaptive and personalised intervention. The detailed protocol provided by Boden and colleagues may provide a useful starting point for future intervention design.
It is also important to consider that intervention protocols require a more nuanced approach than a single rule such as ‘out of bed within 24 h’. This could work well in a homogeneous cohort of low-risk elective surgery patients but is likely to fail for many emergency patients, because of the spectrum of patient physiology, procedural factors, and system factors. Practical protocol adaptations—such as graded mobilisation goals (‘any movement counts’), explicit pre-mobilisation checklists, proactive orthostatic screening, device-handling bundles, and symptom-optimisation strategies—can broaden the pool of patients who mobilise safely. These modifications, alongside flexible staffing and equity-focused education, would allow emergency surgery pathways to retain the spirit of enhanced recovery while making mobilisation more achievable and inclusive.

Barriers
Barriers can be broadly classified into three themes: (1) patient related, for example illness severity; (2) staff related, for example workload or education; and (3) system related, for example lack of resources or guidelines. The studies within this review have highlighted barriers within each of these categories, with patient-related barriers such as pain and fatigue being particularly prominent. Multiple studies have also identified factors prognostic of delayed mobilisation, for example age or fluid status. Although not barriers in themselves, these are proxies for other clinical or functional barriers that may be overcome with targeted interventions.
Previous work looking at emergency abdominal surgery found fatigue to be the primary patient-perceived obstacle preventing early mobilisation. Postoperative fatigue may be partly driven by inflammatory stress. Evidence is emerging for strategies to mitigate the surgical stress response, for example, through minimally invasive surgery, neuraxial blockade, and perioperative glucocorticoids. A recent RCT showed promising results for less fatigue and earlier mobilisation after preoperative administration of high-dose dexamethasone. As fatigue is also a central component of reduced quality of life after emergency laparotomy, this is an important avenue of future research.
Relative to elective abdominal surgery, patients who have emergency surgery are more likely to be frail and comorbid, have a higher incidence of delirium, experience infection or complications (often requiring longer ICU stay with more invasive monitoring), and suffer worse pain (associated with higher incidence of orthostatic hypotension). This creates a much more challenging environment for the implementation of standardised early mobilisation protocols. The use of brief safety checklists to ensure physiological readiness can ensure that mobilisation can be undertaken safely.
Postoperative delirium is a potentially preventable barrier to safe and cooperative mobilisation. It commonly co-exists with factors that may delay mobilisation such as frailty, pain, and comorbidity. A bi-directional relationship exists between delirium and mobilisation: it both impedes mobilisation and may be reduced by early mobilisation. Therefore, protocols that integrate delirium prevention are synergistic with early mobilisation. Measuring delirium as a distinct barrier helps to clarify whether low mobilisation is a cause or a consequence.
It is also important to understand whether patient-related barriers exist as a result of patient inability or refusal to mobilise, or as a result of clinician withholding of mobilisation because of perceived or actual risks, for example haemodynamic instability or device burden. These are conceptually distinct concepts and have different remendability and equity implications. Patient refusal often reflects modifiable factors (poor analgesia, fear, lack of education, delirium), and thus, interventions (education, analgesia, reassurance) can change compliance rates. Clinician withholding may reflect correct safety practice but sometimes reflects over-caution, lack of confidence, or training gaps—these are addressed by protocols, training, and safety-monitoring strategies. Often, studies only record ‘did not mobilise’ without attributing reason, making it impossible to tell whether low mobilisation in a subgroup is a result of clinicians denying mobilisation (potential structural bias) vs true patient inability. To address this, future studies should capture granular reasons for mobilisation failure, emphasising patient voice, and use validated screening tools to increase objectivity around mobilisation withholding.
The studies in this review made few comments about staff- or system-related barriers, but lack of access to physiotherapy, particularly at weekends and in the evenings, was noted as a barrier in some studies. The Effectiveness of a National Quality Improvement Programme to Improve Survival After Emergency Abdominal Surgery (EPOCH) trial failed to show improved outcomes after a quality improvement programme for emergency laparotomy, which it attributed largely to lack of time and resources to implement the programme consistently. This is an inevitable problem in healthcare systems with limited resources. Self-directed exercises may provide one solution, and in combination with real-time feedback using wearable technology, this could allow patients to drive their own recovery. Evidence from elective surgery, where similar barriers to early mobilisation exist, suggests that the use of clinical-decision tools and a culture which prioritises physical activity may improve adherence.
Evidence is emerging about patient experience and quality of life after emergency laparotomy, with deterioration in mobility between pre- and postoperative likely to be a factor in the decline in quality of life. Currently, no qualitative studies looking specifically at early mobilisation interventions after emergency laparotomy exist. Future co-produced research should focus on the patient’s lived experience to elucidate the specific psychological barriers to mobilisation and to develop strategies for how these may be overcome.

Reported outcomes
The outcomes measured in the studies within this review covered all the domains of the Taxonomy of Dodd but each study used a different selection. This heterogeneity would be prohibitive to performing a meta-analysis of the data. The use of a core outcome set can help to address these issues. The PRACTICE: Development of a Core Outcome Set for Trials of Physical Rehabilitation in Critical Illness study used a Delphi consensus process to develop a core outcome set for rehabilitation after critical illness. The eight outcomes which reached consensus were physical function, activities of daily living, survival, health-related quality of life, exercise capacity, cognitive function, emotional and mental well-being, and frailty. Core outcome measurement sets for each of these were not defined. Applying this outcome set in a consistent manner to future trials of early mobilisation after emergency laparotomy could facilitate data synthesis. Use of patient-reported outcome measures, particularly relating to quality of life, was lacking in the studies within this review. Patient and public involvement in the planning of future research may help to address this.

Target population
The articles in this review included a varied cohort of patients, with some focusing on a much younger and less comorbid cohort than would be typical of patients undergoing emergency laparotomy for all causes. Sepsis or septic shock was commonly used exclusion criteria. With 20% of patients in the NELA cohort having sepsis at admission, this may make the outcomes of these studies less applicable to the wider emergency laparotomy cohort.
More than half of patients undergoing emergency laparotomy in the UK are older than 65 and 40% of these are classified as frail. These patients have a much greater mortality risk and longer length of stay and are more likely to require care-home accommodation after discharge. Mobilisation, and consequent reduction in sarcopenia, represents a modifiable aspect of the frailty syndrome and therefore additional rehabilitation efforts are likely to be particularly beneficial in this patient group. A study looking at emergency general surgery patients older than 65 found that those achieving early mobilisation had a 7-day shorter length of stay vs late mobilisers. Although there are likely to be many confounding factors affecting this result, this supports striving for early mobilisation in the older patient cohort. Evidence from elective surgery suggests that frail patients can achieve good adherence to enhanced recovery protocols, including early mobilisation, with improved outcomes including length of stay. The Centre for Perioperative Care guidelines for perioperative care of people living with frailty outline numerous strategies to minimise hospital-acquired deconditioning including early mobilisation. Future research needs to be pragmatic with broad inclusion criteria, such that the feasibility of early mobilisation in frail and unwell patients can be studied.
Socioeconomic deprivation is associated with higher mortality rates after emergency laparotomy but no studies in this review recorded socioeconomic status. Literature from other areas shows disparities in care delivery by race, language, and socioeconomic status. For example, hip fracture care shows lower guideline concordance for racial or ethnic minorities. Although emerging evidence suggests that ERPs can help to overcome barriers to equitable care, direct evidence linking socioeconomic status or ethnicity to mobilisation tolerance is scarce. This supports collecting sociodemographic data alongside mobilisation milestones in future studies. Equity analysis may also help to identify clinician withholding because of implicit bias or structural inequity, or patient refusal as a result of health literacy or cultural preferences.
Socioeconomic deprivation is also related to lower levels of baseline physical activity, which may predispose to slower postoperative recovery. Further research could therefore consider links between socioeconomic status and baseline physical activity and how this information can be used to optimise individual rehabilitation potential.

Limitations
We acknowledge several limitations. Firstly, although the primary aim of this review was to look at patients undergoing laparotomy, the decision was taken to follow the NELA definition of laparotomy, which includes emergency laparoscopy. Minimally invasive techniques are an important component of ERPs, but studies with a high proportion of patients having laparoscopic surgery may be more likely to show feasibility of early mobilisation. However, this reflects the reality of the emergency laparotomy patient cohort and should therefore mean the results are applicable to this group. Two studies also included only a minority of emergency patients. Secondly, this review looked at isolated mobilisation interventions, and bundled ERP or multidisciplinary interventions. Given the complex nature of postoperative rehabilitation, it was felt pragmatic to include both, but it is more difficult to elucidate the impact of the mobilisation intervention when other changes are applied simultaneously. Finally, no purely qualitative studies met the inclusion criteria, which limited discussion of the patient experience and psychological barriers to early mobilisation. This is further explored in studies such as that by Park and colleagues.

Conclusions and future research
Early mobilisation after surgery is recommended by enhanced recovery protocols to reduce functional decline, prevent complications, and minimise hospital length of stay. This scoping review of early mobilisation interventions after emergency laparotomy surgery has used structured frameworks to synthesise the existing evidence and identify knowledge gaps. Defining early mobilisation as being able to transfer from bed to chair within 24 h of surgery appears to be an achievable target and has been validated within other populations, for example patients with neck of femur fracture. Adherence may be optimised by using simple and self-directed interventions, which could help to overcome the frequently cited barrier of limited physiotherapy access. Other barriers, such as fatigue, delirium, and staff attitudes, should be addressed by further interventional and qualitative work.
Specific next steps may include piloting a personalised early mobility progression protocol, incorporating clearly defined mobility goals, simple tools to facilitate patient self-initiation, and structured processes to identify and mitigate both patient-related and systemic barriers. In parallel, the consistent application of a core outcome set that prioritises patient-centred outcomes, such as functional independence at discharge, and incorporates perspectives from key stakeholders—including patients, nursing staff, physiotherapists, and surgeons—would strengthen the uniformity and relevance of future research. Further work should also address health equity by examining socioeconomic factors and patient characteristics, including disparities in mobilisation rates and outcomes by socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and comorbidities. Cost-effectiveness analyses could determine whether resource-light mobilisation protocols deliver value for healthcare systems, for example through reductions in staff time, complications, or length of stay. Ultimately a multicentre randomised controlled trial of a pragmatic, progressive, and patient-centred intervention may help to provide the evidence that is needed to change and improve practice in this area.

Authors’ contributions
Conception and study design: all authors
Screening and data extraction: LM, TL
Interpretation of data: LM, TL, LH
Drafting of the manuscript: LM
Critical revisions of the manuscript: all authors
Approval of the final version of the manuscript: all authors
Accountable for all aspects of the work: all authors

Declaration of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

References
Quality of life after emergency laparotomy: a systematic review
Consequences of bed rest
Effects of early postoperative mobilization following gastrointestinal surgery: systematic review and meta-analysis
Association Between Mobilization and Composite Postoperative Complications Following Major Elective Surgery
Challenges in optimising recovery after emergency laparotomy
What factors affect early mobilisation following hip fracture surgery: a scoping review
Early mobilisation after hip fracture surgery is associated with improved patient outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis
A systematic review of the intervention components, adherence and outcomes of enhanced recovery programmes in older patients undergoing elective colorectal surgery
Consensus guidelines for perioperative care for emergency laparotomy Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS(®)) Society recommendations part 2—emergency laparotomy: intra- and postoperative care
Evaluating the impact of enhanced recovery after surgery protocols following emergency laparotomy – a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials
Meta-analysis of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) protocols in emergency abdominal surgery
Enhanced perioperative care in emergency general surgery: the WSES position paper
Updated methodological guidance for the conduct of scoping reviews
Undertaking a scoping review: a practical guide for nursing and midwifery students, clinicians, researchers, and academics
Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework
PRISMA Extension for Scoping Reviews (PRISMA-ScR): checklist and explanation
Recommendations for the extraction, analysis, and presentation of results in scoping reviews
PRESS peer review of electronic search strategies: 2015 guideline statement
Audit Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
Intensive physical therapy after emergency laparotomy: pilot phase of the Incidence of Complications following Emergency Abdominal surgery Get Exercising randomized controlled trial
Adapted ERAS pathway versus standard care in patients undergoing emergency surgery for perforation peritonitis-a randomized controlled trial
Modified Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) protocol versus non-ERAS protocol in patients undergoing emergency laparotomy for acute intestinal obstruction: a randomized controlled trial
Adapted ERAS pathway versus standard care in patients undergoing emergency small bowel surgery: a randomized controlled trial
Physical performance following acute high-risk abdominal surgery: a prospective cohort study
Early intensive mobilization after acute high-risk abdominal surgery: a nonrandomized prospective feasibility trial
Clinical effectiveness of the elder-friendly approaches to the surgical environment initiative in emergency general surgery
Development of a reconditioning program for elderly abdominal surgery patients: the Elder-friendly Approaches to the Surgical Environment-BEdside reconditioning for Functional ImprovemenTs (EASE-BE FIT) pilot study
Implementing enhanced perioperative care in emergency general surgery: a prospective multicenter observational study
Enhanced recovery pathway for urgent colectomy
Enhanced recovery after surgery for emergency colorectal surgery: Are there any differences between intra-abdominal infection and other indications?
Comparative study on the effectiveness of Enhanced Recovery After Surgery (ERAS) with standard care in patients undergoing emergency gastrointestinal surgery
Feasibility of early postoperative mobilisation after colorectal surgery: a retrospective cohort study
Modified enhanced recovery after surgery protocols are beneficial for postoperative recovery for patients undergoing emergency surgery for obstructive colorectal cancer: a propensity score matching analysis
Developing the TIDieR-Rehab checklist: a modified Delphi process to extend the Template for Intervention Description and Replication (TIDieR) for rehabilitation intervention reporting
A taxonomy has been developed for outcomes in medical research to help improve knowledge discovery
The 30-day survival and recovery after hip fracture by timing of mobilization and dementia: a UK database study
Delivery of drinking, eating and mobilising (DrEaMing) and its association with length of hospital stay after major noncardiac surgery: observational cohort study
Guideline on positioning and early mobilisation in the critically ill by an expert panel
Patient experiences of codesigned rehabilitation interventions in hospitals: a rapid review
Sequential, multiple assignment, randomized trial designs
Early mobilization in enhanced recovery after surgery pathways: current evidence and recent advancements
Patients' perceptions of barriers to enhanced recovery after emergency abdominal surgery
Preoperative high dose of dexamethasone in emergency laparotomy: randomized clinical trial
Characteristics of older patients undergoing surgery in the UK: SNAP-3, a snapshot observational study
Risk factors and incidence of postoperative delirium in elderly patients after elective and emergency surgery
Postoperative morbidity survey, mortality and length of stay following emergency laparotomy
Analgesia for emergency laparotomy: a systematic review
Prevalence and associated factors of postoperative orthostatic intolerance at University of Gondar Comprehensive Specialized Hospital, Northwest Ethiopia, 2022: cross sectional study
Effectiveness, safety, and barriers to early mobilization in the intensive care unit
Perceived barriers to early goal-directed mobility in the intensive care unit: results of a quality improvement evaluation
Effectiveness of a national quality improvement programme to improve survival after emergency abdominal surgery (EPOCH): a stepped-wedge cluster-randomised trial
Patient experiences of the emergency laparotomy pathway: a qualitative study
PRACTICE: development of a core outcome set for trials of physical rehabilitation in critical illness
Older patients undergoing emergency laparotomy: observations from the National Emergency Laparotomy Audit (NELA) years 1–4
Compliance to an enhanced recovery pathway among patients with a high frailty index after major gastrointestinal surgery results in improved 30-day outcomes
Socioeconomic deprivation and mortality after emergency laparotomy: an observational epidemiological study
Racial and ethnic disparities in providing guideline-concordant care after hip fracture surgery
Can ERAS help reduce health disparities and overcome barriers to equitable surgical care in marginalized communities?
The socioeconomic gradient in physical inactivity: evidence from one million adults in England
Is preoperative physical activity level of patients undergoing cancer surgery associated with postoperative outcomes? A systematic review and meta-analysis

Supplementary data
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjao.2025.100501.