Exploring Stakeholder Involvement in Intervention Implementation Studies: Systematic Evidence Synthesis With an Evidence Gap Map Approach
Stakeholder involvement (SI) is essential for effective and sustainable intervention implementation, yet practical guidance is lacking. This study mapped SI use in implementation science studies, identified gaps, and proposed a practical framework for improved SI planning. Using an evidence gap map approach, this study built on Mielke et al.’s (2022) methodology, which identified implementation studies from 2015–2020. The search was updated to include studies from 2021–2023 from PubMed, using the same search strategy and inclusion criteria. Data extraction followed the Guidance for Reporting on Involvement of Patients and the Public reporting checklist. From 10,184 studies, a random sample of 2,005 was screened, adding 162 implementation science studies to Mielke et al.’s 110, totaling 272 studies for SI analysis. SI was reported in 89% of studies, but often lacked depth and strategic planning. Stakeholders were mainly engaged during the preparatory phase. Most studies involved micro- and meso-level stakeholders, rarely including macro-level stakeholders. Few described stakeholder selection or preparation. SI was mostly consultative, via interviews, surveys, and focus groups, with limited active collaboration. SI processes and costs were rarely evaluated. Our findings underscore the need for structured, comprehensive SI planning and offer practical recommendations to strengthen SI efforts in implementation research.

Background
To address the challenges of translating research into real-world practice, implementation science relies on stakeholder involvement (SI). Stakeholder involvement can be defined as “an iterative process of actively soliciting the knowledge, experience, judgment and values of stakeholders selected to represent a broad range of direct interests in a particular issue, for the purposes of creating a shared understanding and making relevant, transparent and effective decisions” (, p. 5). Although the appropriateness of the term ‘stakeholder’ can be questioned, we used the definition “individuals, organizations or communities that have a direct interest in the process and outcomes of a project, research or policy endeavor” (, p. 5). Implementation Science takes a pragmatic approach to studying how best to overcome barriers to implementing interventions in practice. From analysing the context to explore and prepare for intervention development or adaptation, to implementation and evaluation of implementation and effectiveness outcomes, SI is a key implementation strategy integral to the process of change and essential to study the implementation process.
Stakeholder involvement has become a standard expectation in funding proposals due to its benefits across research stages and health contexts, from scaling-up mental health services to implementing prevention and control interventions during public health emergencies. It enhances the acceptability, feasibility, and relevance of research, supporting more sustainable, culturally relevant, and context-sensitive intervention implementation. Engaging (non-research) stakeholders ensures that research addresses unmet needs and insights often missed by researchers alone. Their input can enhance study design, improve recruitment and retention, tailor data collection tools, and clarify complex findings. They can help overcome logistical, cultural, and regulatory barriers, ensuring appropriate and effective implementation. Stakeholder involvement helps support clear communication and dissemination, increasing public understanding, awareness, and acceptance of findings, and it promotes accountability and transparency, fostering trust in research. Furthermore, SI fosters mutual learning and empowerment by expanding knowledge and skills for both researchers and participants.
Stakeholder involvement is not a binary concept: it ranges from “informing” to “co-creation”, with a continuum from limited power or decision making ability, up to an equal right and responsibility to impact the project for all participating organizations and/or individuals. “Informing” is the lowest level, where information only flows in one direction. Stakeholders have limited power and are only made aware of the project. “Consultation” seeks stakeholder input without making commitment that their voice will carry any weight. “Co-creation” involves active collaboration and shared power throughout the project lifecycle, where information sharing is bidirectional, including feedback on stakeholder contributions. The umbrella term “involvement” will be used here to cover these various levels.
Various organisations from different countries, including governments, non-profit and patient organisations, pharmaceutical industries and academia, have developed their own SI guidelines or theories, such as the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI) Engagement Rubric, the Patients Active in Research and Dialogues for an Improved Generation of Medicines (PARADIGM) patient engagement toolbox, the principles for community-based participatory research, the INVOLVE briefing notes, the ‘7Ps’ of stakeholders, and the ‘ladder of participation’, to name a few. Yet, the field is still missing an commonly accepted definition of SI so it remains an complex, unclear construct, leading to varied terms such as “patient and public involvement”, “community participation”, “participatory research”, “stakeholder engagement”, “co-creation”, “partnerships”, and “citizen science”. Moreover, while involving stakeholders has increasingly been emphasized, there is a lack of literature on how involvement costs and value are being calculated.
While these existing theories offer valuable guidance, they lack practical steps to plan and initiate SI. A structured and intentional approach to recruiting and involving stakeholders is essential. Starting with clearly defining the purpose of SI, encouraging reflection on its scope. Planned stakeholder identification and recruitment enables research teams to engage diverse stakeholders to shape feasible, context-specific solutions. Specifying the level of involvement and selecting appropriate methods (e.g., focus groups, individual feedback) ensures contributions are meaningful and that they match the input needs, stakeholder expertise and capacity for involvement. Finally, evaluating SI efforts allows for ongoing improvement, refining SI efforts to the dynamic real-world environments. We propose here an overview of the current state of knowledge regarding SI in implementation science and propose a practical guidance to streamline further SI efforts within the field.

Objective
The overall objective of this work was to quantify the volume of SI and critically review and map current SI characteristics in implementation science studies, identifying gaps and challenges. The review was guided by the following key research questions: What proportion of papers address stakeholder involvement? What are the critical gaps in reporting on the Guidance for Reporting on Involvement of Patients and the Public (GRIPP2) reporting checklist recommended SI concepts (theoretical foundations of SI, stakeholder-related information, methodologies, and evaluation of SI)? For further details on the research questions, see Suppl. Table 4.

Methods

Study Design
Since our aim was to identify gaps that need further exploration, without providing an overview of all existing SI evidence, we used an evidence gap map (EGM), i.e., a visual or descriptive summary that presents an overview of relevant evidence to quickly understand the scope of the available evidence on a given topic. Building on methodology, who created an EGM for methodological approaches to contextual analysis (110 articles included), we conducted a sub-analysis of her data focusing on SI and supplemented it with an updated search to include more recent literature (162 articles included).

Study Selection and Screening
The articles identified from study (search from 2015 to 2020) were used and, using the same search string, (Suppl. Table 1), were complemented by an updated search covering papers published in Pubmed between January 2021-2023. A random sample comprising 20% of the articles published in each year was selected using a random number generator. This selection was screened for intervention implementation science studies using the inclusion criteria from for consistency; all criteria needed to apply (Suppl. Table 1): (a) peer-reviewed articles or study protocols (b) intervention implementation studies (c) using experimental or quasi-experimental designs (d) testing intervention effectiveness (e) in routine practice, (f) including at least one of interventions, and (g) reporting on the implementation pathway evaluation with qualitative or quantitative information on the process or at least one implementation outcome per (Suppl. Table 2). Feasibility studies were included only if they assessed at least one additional implementation outcome. Studies had to be (h) written in English or German (i) with full texts available. For SI, we used the definition of, considering a broad range of stakeholders at the micro-, meso- and macro-level and a broad range of terms referring to the involvement of stakeholders (Suppl. Table 3). Studies were screened in two phases. In the first step, inclusion criteria from suppl. Table 1 were applied to identify intervention implementation science studies, based on review of titles and abstracts, and if relevant, full text. In step 2, the identified studies (n = 272) were further assessed regarding SI. Screening was independently done by the first (KA) and last author (SV) using the web-based tool “Rayyan”. After each step, screening of studies was unblinded and conflicts resolved.

Data Extraction to Explore Gaps in SI
Based on our research questions (Suppl. Table 4), a detailed data extraction table was drafted (this information can be obtained as an excel file from the authors). Data extraction was performed based on the GRIPP2 reporting checklist. It was developed to improve the quality, transparency, and consistency of reporting on patient and public involvement in research. Although GRIPP2 was designed for patient and public involvement, it provides a strong foundation for reporting on broader SI. Since the GRIPP2 checklist is designed for reporting on involvement in a paper, we used its aspects but grouped them under SI categories rather than paper sections. Furthermore, to enrich our data extraction, we have customized the GRIPP2 checklist, focusing on capturing more specific details on SI by introducing essential aspects within existing categories to gather broader information. Nineteen dimensions of SI were coded: Theoretical gaps reported in SI, frameworks, aims; stakeholders, employing the 7Ps framework to delineate stakeholders across 7 stakeholder groups and their identification, preparation what stakeholder had to do; the research phases in which stakeholders were involved, the varying levels of SI (IAP2 Public Participation Spectrum), the methods and compensation for involvement; the aim for evaluating SI, the outcomes and impacts of SI, the methods for evaluation, reported robustness of SI methods, evaluation of frameworks, and context and process factors influencing SI.

Data Analysis and Reporting
General study characteristics were analysed descriptively, calculating frequencies and percentages. For the SI data, we initially conducted a descriptive analysis calculating frequencies and percentages to provide a visual representation of the gaps in SI practices.

Results

Screening
The updated PubMed search returned 10,184 records. After selecting the random sample, screening and removing duplicates, 2005 records relevant to implementation science remained. Applying implementation science selection criteria, we added 162 implementation studies to the initial 110 intervention implementation studies previously identified by, totalling 272 papers for SI data extraction (Suppl. Figure 1).

General Characteristics
Most of the extracted articles were study protocols (n = 195, 72%), primarily focusing on community services (n = 99, 36%). Most articles were from North America (n = 108, 39.7%) and used experimental study designs (n = 239, 88%). Among studies with hybrid designs (n = 193, 71%), most were described as Hybrid Type II (n = 36; 19%). SI was identified in 241 (89%) of 272 studies. (Suppl. Table 5)

Overview of EGM in SI
EGM Overview Reporting Frequency of Various Dimensions of SI.
Note. SI = Stakeholder Involvement
Figure 1 presents an EGM showcasing the reporting frequency of 241 studies across various dimensions of SI, as assessed using the GRIPP2 reporting checklist. Gaps are evident in aspects such as “Evaluation of SI Approaches” (see also Suppl. Table 6).

Theoretical Underpinning for SI
Applied Theories or SI Approaches to Inform SI and Information on Stakeholders Involved in Intervention Implementation Studies (N = 241)
Identified theories or SI approaches (n = 22)	Reported by studies (n, %)	 	Reported underlying theoretical foundation or SI approaches:	27 (11%)a	 	Community involvement approaches	10 (4%)	 	Participatory research approaches	8 (3%)	 	Citizen engagement approaches	2 (1%)	 	Other theoretical foundation or methodological approach:	11 (5%)	 	 (Experience-based) Co-design 	2 (1%)	 	 Collaborative intervention planning framework 	2 (1%)	 	 Team science approach 	1 (0.4%)	 	 Action cycle 	1 (0.4%)	 	 Collaborative participation 	1 (0.4%)	 	 Darthmouth model for co-design and implementation 	1 (0.4%)	 	 Patient-centered outcomes research institute engagement rubric 	1 (0.4%)	 	 Co-creation approach: Cooperative planning 	1 (0.4%)	 	 Normalisation process theory 	1 (0.4%)	 	Not reported/unclear	214 (89%)
Stakeholder type	Reported by studies (n, %)	 	Reported on stakeholders involved:	237 (98%)b	 	Micro-level	 	 Target population	176 (73%)	 	 Family/caregivers	67 (28%)	 	Meso-level	 	 Healthcare stakeholders (provider/institution)	185 (77%)	 	 Public/community	73 (30%)	 	 Other researchers	36 (15%)	 	Macro-level	 	 Policy maker/(local) government or leadership	40 (17%)	 	 Payers/funders	12 (5%)	 	 Purchaser	1 (0.4%)	 	Other	51 (21%)	 	 Not reported/unclear	4 (2%)
Stakeholder selection	Reported by studies (n, %)	 	Reported on methods for selection:	110 (46%)c	 	 Purposive sampling	77 (32%)	 	 Convenience sampling	28 (12%)	 	 Random sampling	25 (10%)	 	 Snowball sampling	10 (4%)	 	Not reported/unclear	131 (54%)
Preparation for involvement	Reported by studies (n, %)	 	Reported on preparation:	7 (3%)d	 	 Provide project information to stakeholders 	3 (1%)	 	 Photovoice training for stakeholders 	2 (1%)	 	 Skills learning for stakeholders 	1 (0.4%)	 	 Developing cultural competence research team	1 (0.4%)	 	Not reported/unclear	234 (97%)
Notes.
aSeveral studies reported multiple theories, resulting in 22 theories identified in 27 studies.
bSeveral studies reported several stakeholders.
cSeveral studies reported several recruitment techniques.
dSeveral studies reported several forms of preparing stakeholders, 1 study reported stakeholder preparation but did not specify.
Most studies (n = 196, 81%) reported an aim for their SI upfront (Figure 1). Only 27 studies (11%) reported underlying theories for SI efforts (Table 1), like community involvement (4%) or participatory research approaches (3%), which conceptualize the principles of empowerment, collaboration, and shared knowledge, emphasizing the active participation of stakeholders. Eight studies (3%) reported a rationale for why involvement is important (theoretical gaps).

Identifying Stakeholders and Preparing for Involvement
Authors described involving diverse stakeholders, predominantly micro- (e.g., target population, family/caregivers) and meso-level stakeholders (e.g., clinicians, healthcare administrators, community, and researchers). Macro-level stakeholders (e.g., payers, policymakers) were less reported. Purposive sampling was the predominant method for identifying stakeholders (n = 77, 32%). Only seven studies (3%) addressed stakeholder preparation before involvement. Of these, three studies prepared stakeholders by providing information beforehand. Two studies prepared stakeholders for photovoice methods by familiarizing them with camera usage. One study provided skill-based training, such as public speaking. One study highlighted the research team’s preparation for involving Indigenous communities through cultural competence development (Table 1).

Methods for Conducting SI
Methods for Conducting and Evaluating SI in Intervention Implementation Studies (N = 241)
Research phase	Reported by studies (n, % of 241)	 	Reported on research phase:	217 (90%)a	 	 Preparatory phase	126 (52%)	 	 Baseline	47 (17%)	 	 During the intervention trial	120 (50%)	 	 After the intervention trial	110 (45%)	 	 Process evaluation	69 (29%)	 	 Dissemination of findings	34 (14%)	 	Not reported/unclear	24 (10%)
Level of involvement	Reported by studies (n, % of 241)	 	Reported on level:	238 (99%)b	 	 Consultation (asking for their views)	213 (88%)	 	 Collaboration/co-creation (working together throughout the research process)	103 (43%)	 	 Informing (outreach and education)	32 (13%)	 	 Stakeholder-led (research initiative and decision-making lies with stakeholders)	3 (1%)	 	Not reported/unclear	3 (1%)
Methods for SI	Reported by studies (n, % of 241)	 	Reported on methods:	238 (99%)c	 	 Interviews	158 (65%)	 	 Surveys	86 (36%)	 	 Focus groups	73 (30%)	 	 Meetings	36 (15%)	 	 Steering/working committee	25 (10%)	 	 Workshops/sessions	25 (10%)	 	 (Community) advisory board	23 (10%)	 	 Observations, notes/reports, logbooks	13 (5%)	 	 Dissemination methods (social media, press release, presentations)	8 (3%)	 	 Discussion groups	6 (3%)	 	 Photovoice	5 (2%)	 	 Jury panel	4 (2%)	 	 Other	22 (9%)	 	Not reported/unclear	3 (1%)
SI evaluation	Reported by studies (n, % of 241)	 	Reported on aim SI evaluation:	10 (4%)	 	 Formative assessment (to improve engagement processes)	1 (0.4%)	 	 Process assessment (to identify factors affecting the engagement process)	1 (0.4%)	 	 Summative assessment (to demonstrate the outcomes of the engagement process)	8 (3%)	 	Not reported/unclear	231 (96%)
Impact of SI	Reported by studies (n, % of 241)	 	Reported on SI impact:	154 (64%)d	 	 Impact on aspects of the research project	123 (51%)	 	 Impact on the stakeholders engaged	5 (2%)	 	 Impact on the research team	3 (1%)	 	 Wider impact	38 (16%)	 	 Economic impact (costs related to SI)	9 (4%)	 	Not reported/unclear	87 (36%)
Notes. SI = stakeholder involvement.
aSeveral studies reported involvement in multiple research phases.
bSeveral studies reported several levels of involvement.
cSeveral studies reported several kinds of methods.
dSeveral studies reported several impacts.
Table 2 illustrates varying levels of SI across different research phases. Most studies involved stakeholders during the preparatory (52%), intervention (50%) or after trial phase (45%). There was little SI reported at baseline (n = 47, 17%) and during dissemination (n = 34, 14%).
The majority of studies (n = 213, 88%) involved stakeholders through consultation and only three authors reported on stakeholder-led research. Tasks assigned to stakeholders were predominantly related to key informant data collection methods such as interviews (n = 158, 65%), focus groups (n = 73, 30%), and surveys (n = 86, 36%) to assess intervention experiences, barriers, facilitators, and implementation outcomes. Eleven percent (n = 27) of studies reported compensating their stakeholders for their input.

Methods for Evaluation of SI
Only ten studies (4%) reported evaluating SI, with few detailing their evaluation methods (Table 2). The main evaluation of SI reported related to its impact on the research project itself, such as its effect on intervention development or adaptation. The impact of SI on the stakeholders themselves was noted in five studies (2%) while three studies (1%) reported impact of SI on the research team. Broader impacts of SI were mentioned in 38 studies (16%). Economic impacts of SI were discussed in nine studies (4%), but only two studies described their evaluation methods. No study reflected on the theoretical underpinning or methods developed for conducting/evaluating SI. Two studies evaluated the external influence of (contextual, n = 1 and process, n = 1) factors on the conducted SI.

Discussion
Following the EGM methodology of, we sought to provide an overview to quickly understand the scope of the available evidence regarding SI in implementation studies. Across the 272 identified implementation science studies, 89% reported some form of SI, which was not surprising given the rising trend of SI in research. However, very few studies reported details regarding theoretical background, methodological aspects, and evaluation of SI, possibly due to a lack of skills and knowledge among scientists regarding SI, and the absence of SI principles in implementation theories.

Growing Field of Implementation Science
Compared to study, encompassing 110 implementation science studies over five years, our updated analysis added 162 studies within a two-year timeframe, a 147% increase in publication rate. This growth underscores the rapid global expansion of this field, and reflects advancements in research methodologies promoting real-world adoption of health innovations and ensuring their long-term sustainability.

SI in Implementation Science

Lack of Theory Application and SI Planning
While several theories and approaches for SI exist, only 11% of our included studies reported using a guiding theory for their SI efforts (Table 1). These theories broadly fell into three categories: (a) community-based approaches prioritizing partnerships with communities to address research questions, (b) participatory research approaches focusing on engaging stakeholders to drive social change, and (c) citizen involvement approaches that include the broader public in scientific research. A few lesser-known models were identified, such as the Darthmouth model for co-design and implementation and cooperative planning. Despite lacking comprehensive step-by-step guidance, they still provide a structure to help ensure that key elements of SI are considered.
Although 81% of studies outlined aims for SI, most focused narrowly on consulting stakeholders about implementation barriers and facilitators. Few studies articulated their specific goals for SI, or explained how stakeholder input would shape research decisions. For example, involved stakeholders to identify relevant determinants of physical activity, aiming to enhance intervention’s acceptability. Clearly defining the objective of SI is essential, as it helps shape the scope of SI efforts. However, involving stakeholders can present challenges, such as power imbalances, language barriers, differing beliefs, and limited time, that should be addressed upfront. Without thoughtful planning, SI effort risk resulting in misalignment in expectations, superficial involvement and ethical concerns about the transparency and value of stakeholder contributions.

Variability in Stakeholder Identification and Preparation
Our findings reveal a gap in reporting identification and selection of stakeholders. Some studies reported using techniques like convenience and purposive sampling, as described in the literature. However, the majority of studies did not specify how stakeholders were identified, nor the criteria used for their selection and recruitment. This lack of detail contrasts with recommendations, which emphasize identifying stakeholders based on their relevance, influence, and interest in the research to ensure diverse perspectives and expertise are represented. Effective recruitment of stakeholders should involve clear communication to show the mutual benefits of their involvement. This would help build trust, encourage involvement and sustain it over time.
In clinical research, stakeholders are typically patients and health care providers. However, implementation science requires involving a broader spectrum of stakeholders at the micro-, meso- and macro-level of the system. While we identified substantial involvement of micro- and meso-level stakeholders, macro-level stakeholders, such as payers and policymakers, were rarely mentioned, consistent with findings in implementation grants. These stakeholders should not be overlooked as they play a crucial role in shaping the implementation environment and translating research findings to policy and practice, thereby impacting sustainability.
Few studies explicitly addressed how stakeholders or research teams were prepared for involvement, suggesting that the importance of preparatory steps might be underrecognized and/or underreported in the literature. However, preparation is important for building and maintaining trust between stakeholders and researchers throughout the SI process. Only highlighted the importance of preparing research teams, specifically by developing cultural competence and building relationships with stakeholders to increase trust and mutual understanding. Both stakeholders and researchers can benefit from support and training: stakeholders need guidance on the research process, while researchers should receive training on SI. Programs, such as those organized by EUPATI ( https://eupati.eu/eupati-fundamentals/) for instance, provide education and resources to empower patients and stakeholders to be involved in medicines research and development.

Lack of SI within Implementation Phases
Reporting on SI varied across research stages, with the highest involvement seen during the preparatory phase. However, SI should ideally be integrated across all phases of implementation projects. In the preparatory phase, stakeholders can play a key role by helping identify and select relevant context factors for analysis, ensuring the work is grounded in practical needs and local insights. They can also contribute to developing or adapting interventions by interpreting findings, and support implementation by helping to select appropriate strategies. Involvement during evaluation phases is also important, as it helps extend outcomes and supports sustainable implementation. Limited reporting of SI in later stages may reflect a bias in literature, with studies focusing more on trial design and less on subsequent phases.
Interestingly, less than half of the studies reported active collaboration with stakeholders. While continuous collaboration or stakeholder-led research may not always be necessary or feasible, deeper and more frequent SI is preferred to fully benefit from stakeholder perspectives and enhance the research impact. Methods such as focus groups, interviews, surveys, are commonly used for SI, reflecting a reliance on traditional forms of consultation. However, these approaches often position stakeholders more as information sources, serving as research participants rather than active collaborators. The limited level of active involvement may stem from the substantial time, resources flexibility required, demanding substantial commitment from researchers.

Lack of SI Evaluation and Reporting
There is a notable lack of evaluation of SI, both within our EGM (4%) and in the broader literature. Despite progress in SI, the evaluation of SI lags behind. Without proper evaluation and reporting, it is challenging to determine whether SI is simply a box-ticking exercise or making a meaningful contributor to the project’s success, and how future SI efforts can be improved. The limited availability of conceptual frameworks and validated measurement tools is a key barrier. A few tools have been developed to support this process, such as the Public Involvement Impact Assessment Framework (PIIAF) and the Public and Patient Engagement Evaluation Tool (PPEET). Combining these tools with a mixed methods approach can offer a comprehensive understanding of the value of SI.
Terminology used in evaluating SI can be ambiguous, with terms like “impact” and “outcomes” often used interchangeably. Yet, they refer to different aspects of SI effectiveness. Outcomes are specific endpoints of a study resulting from SI efforts and were reported by 86% of our identified studies. Examples include identifying stakeholder needs, satisfaction levels, barriers and facilitators to implementation, and feedback on interventions or implementation strategies. However, many studies fail to report how these outcomes are used or what influence they have, with 63% of identified studies reporting the SI impact. Impact refers to the influence of SI. As noted by, SI can impact various areas: the research process (e.g., refining interventions based on end-user needs, improving implementation through tailored action plans, and disseminating research findings more broadly); stakeholders involved (e.g., personal reflection, knowledge and skill development; researcher teams (e.g., gaining insights into patient experiences); and wider society (e.g., community trust in research, widespread integration of interventions, awareness, and influencing policy changes.
We observed minimal consideration of how context or process factors influence (<1%). Context is the environment and conditions under which SI occurs (e.g., policy, funding). Process factors relate to how involvement is carried out including the level of involvement, timing and design. Neglecting these factors can limit the potential impact of SI. This again highlights the importance of an well-planned, strategic approach to SI.
Reporting of costs associated with SI was also typically missing, with only 4% reporting an economic outcome, and less than 1 % specifying methods for its evaluation. Economic evaluations of SI are generally lacking in the literature, despite potential impacts on project costs. This could stem from a lack of practices, for example compensating stakeholders for their time and expertise was reported in only 11% studies. Economic evaluations are also interesting for macro-level stakeholders such as funders and policymakers who need to assess cost against benefits.

Limitations
Despite our best efforts, we acknowledge several limitations to our work. First, our approach involved limited screening of the available literature, which could potentially result in missing important information from other studies. Additionally, we were limited by time and resources and therefore limited the scope to peer reviewed literature. Stakeholder involvement information was often scattered and poorly described, making it challenging to identify specific details. It is also possible that research projects involved stakeholders without reporting it, as this is not a standard reporting item for implementation studies. Moreover, most papers were protocol papers, which may only reflect aspirations and not actual practices. Further, our analysis does not clarify whether the absence of SI reporting in different research phases was due to the phases not being part of the study or simply SI being undocumented, preventing us from making this distinction. Due to restricted resources, we were unable to conduct any cross-gap analyses, however, this could be considered in future work. Finally, despite our thorough data extraction process, it remains subject to human judgment due to the current heterogeneity of the SI-terminology and definitions.

Recommendations
We recommend researchers to use SI resources that exist such as the GRIPP2 checklist and systematically reporting on key aspects and challenges linked to SI when publishing on implementation science projects. Systematically embedding SI requirements to implementation science research calls and funding schemes could further advance and normalize SI. Furthermore, there is a need to build an evidence base for evaluating SI, including defining appropriate outcomes and impacts, through systematic reviews on SI evaluation and mixed-methods studies on experiences and impacts.
Stakeholder Involvement Plan Encompassing Critical Aspects of SI
First steps at the beginning of an implementation science-SI project:	 	 ✓ Use a (reporting) theory/framework to ensure critical aspects are covered and reported: GRIPP2 checklist 	 	 ✓ Conceptualize SI according to EPIS-framework: exploration, preparation, implementation, sustainment (see below) 	 	 ✓ Use 7Ps framework: environmental scan to list all stakeholders and their interactions with the broader context or setting 	 	Implementation science phase A	Implementation science phase B	 	Exploration: plan involvement	Preparation: prepare SI With stakeholders	Implementation: conduct involvement	Sustainment: evaluate and reflect on involvement	 	 ✓ Define the purpose and desired outcomes by SI ✓ Stakeholder analysis: Map stakeholders, narrowing down the list to stakeholders important for each research phase (reasons/importance) ✓ Prepare the involvement plan○ Determine research activities○ Determine level of involvement for each research activity and each stakeholder (group): Informing (outreach and education), consulting, co-creation or stakeholder-led ○ Define expectations and responsibilities, type of work for stakeholders and specify SI methods and approaches to be applied ✓ Consider resources for SI (budget, time, personnel, training opportunities, contracts) 	✓ Recruit stakeholders and prepare for involvement (introduction session or materials, share and discuss the contract, provide training if needed, …) ✓ Establish communication channels and build trust by continuous communication and feedback	✓ Gather, analyze, and incorporate stakeholder input into the research as described in the involvement plan✓ Document and monitor SI efforts✓ Provide feedback to stakeholders on the impact of their input on the project 	✓ Evaluate SI efforts using validated tools or different mixed methods focusing on: ○ Impact on the research, on the stakeholders themselves and on the research team○ SI process (e.g., what worked well/challenging, areas for improvement, appropriateness methods)✓ Document and report on the SI process, outcomes, and impact ✓ Reflect and refine future involvement efforts if appropriate
Note. The table summarizes recommendations for planning and conducting SI in implementation science studies, providing researchers with a structured approach at each phase, drawing on established principles or tools. The table is designed as a practical reference for researchers, providing actions and resources that can be adapted to their context and needs. SI = stakeholder involvement.
Regarding conducting SI, researchers should prioritize integrating SI throughout the research process, and develop a comprehensive SI plan tailored to their research project, context, and resources. Drawing on previous literature and our EGM findings, we have developed recommendations to facilitate the planning of SI in implementation science studies (Table 3 and Suppl. Figure 2): we recommend engaging diverse stakeholders throughout the research project, using varied approaches such as workshops, advisory panels or committees, beyond focus groups or surveys. Researchers should evaluate SI by measuring the process and the impact using mixed methods and incorporate flexibility for continuous review and refinement.

Conclusion
Significant gaps exists in SI within intervention implementation science studies. Despite the increase in studies conducting SI, even in “engaged implementation research,” scientists typically lead projects, with stakeholders minimally and superficially involved, often turning the SI process into a box-ticking exercise. Few studies adhere to a structured framework for SI, resulting in further gaps, such as overlooking methods to identify and prepare stakeholders. Furthermore, researchers should strive to improve transparency and clarity in SI, providing detailed descriptions rather than scattering information throughout the text to enhance the accessibility and usability of SI methods and findings. Although summarizing all SI evidence is challenging due to its breadth and diversity, we offer recommendations to guide SI planning in implementation science studies.

Supplemental Material
Funding: The authors disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: KA reports the support of the Leerstoel Marc Boogaerts and the Michaël Van Waeyenberge Fund (King Baudouin Foundation Belgium) as part of the PhD. HS acknowledges the support of the UZ Leuven Klinische onderzoeks- en opleidingsraad (KOOR) of the University Hospitals of Leuven, Belgium.
The authors declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: KA reports a travel grant sponsored by Gilead not related to this work. HS reports having received personal fees from Incyte, Janssen, Novartis, Sanofi and from the Belgian Hematological Society (BHS), as well as research grants from Novartis and the BHS, all paid to her institution and not directly related to this work. She has also received non-financial support (travel grants) from Gilead, Pfizer, the EBMT (European Society for Blood and Marrow transplantation) and the CIBMTR (Center for International Bone Marrow Transplantation Research).
Supplemental Material: Supplemental material for this article is available online.

ORCID iDs
Juliane Mielke https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9771-2383
Annette Boaz https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0557-1294
Helene Schoemans https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7568-8239
Sabine Valenta https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5598-9579

References
Advancing a conceptual model of evidence-based practice implementation in public service sectors
Supporting the evaluation of public and patient engagement in health system organizations: Results from an implementation research study
Text messaging versus email messaging to support patients with major depressive disorder: Protocol for a randomized hybrid type II effectiveness-implementation trial
Intravenous versus oral iron for iron deficiency anaemia in pregnant Nigerian women (IVON): Study protocol for a randomised hybrid effectiveness-implementation trial
Cost and value of stakeholders participation: A systematic literature review
Development and evaluation of an HIV-testing intervention for primary care: Protocol for a mixed methods study
A ladder of citizen participation
Contextual influences on the impact of a peer worker-led self-stigma program for people with mental health issues: Protocol for an interventional implementation science study
Stakeholder engagement analysis—a bioethics dilemma in patient-targeted intervention: Patients with temporomandibular joint disorders
The MOHMQuit (Midwives and Obstetricians Helping Mothers to Quit Smoking) Trial: Protocol for a stepped-wedge implementation trial to improve best practice smoking cessation support in public antenatal care services
Health economic evaluation of a nurse-led care model from the nursing home perspective focusing on residents’ hospitalisations
Promises and pitfalls in implementation science from the perspective of US-based researchers: Learning from a pre-mortem
Collaborative research between clinicians and researchers: A multiple case study of implementation
How to engage stakeholders in research: Design principles to support improvement
Engaging patients to improve quality of care: A systematic review
Mapping the impact of patient and public involvement on health and social care research: A systematic review
Characterizing the use of research-community partnerships in studies of evidence-based interventions in children’s community services
An overview of research and evaluation designs for dissemination and implementation
Stakeholder analysis: A review
Mapping reviews, scoping reviews, and evidence and gap maps (EGMs): The same but different—the “Big Picture” review family
Cancer patients’ needs assessment in primary care: Study protocol for a cluster randomised controlled trial (cRCT), economic evaluation and normalisation process theory evaluation of the needs assessment tool cancer (CANAssess)
A systematic review of stakeholder engagement in comparative effectiveness and patient-centered outcomes research
Practical guidance for involving stakeholders in health research
A new taxonomy for stakeholder engagement in patient-centered outcomes research
Participatory action research
Impact of patient and public involvement on enrolment and retention in clinical trials: Systematic review and meta-analysis
Reflections on 10 years of effectiveness-implementation hybrid studies
The SMILe integrated care model in allogeneic SteM cell TransplantatIon faciLitated by eHealth: A protocol for a hybrid effectiveness-implementation randomised controlled trial
Stakeholder participation in comparative effectiveness research: Defining a framework for effective engagement
Patient engagement in research: A systematic review
Scale up of services for mental health in low-income and middle-income countries
Welcome to implementation science
Evaluating patient and stakeholder engagement in research: Moving from theory to practice
A continuity of care programme for women at risk of preterm birth in the UK: Process evaluation of a hybrid randomised controlled pilot trial
Community engagement for COVID-19 prevention and control: A rapid evidence synthesis
The science of stakeholder engagement in research: Classification, implementation, and evaluation
Frameworks for supporting patient and public involvement in research: Systematic review and co-design pilot
Knowledge translation of research findings
Examining the sustainability and effectiveness of co-created physical activity interventions in vocational education and training: A multimethod evaluation
Tokenism in patient engagement
Multifaceted antibiotic stewardship intervention using a participatory-action-research approach to improve antibiotic prescribing for urinary tract infections in frail elderly (ImpresU): Study protocol for a European qualitative study followed by a pragmatic cluster randomised controlled trial
Reducing depressive symptoms through behavioral activation in churches: A hybrid-2 randomized effectiveness-implementation design
Study protocol for a real-world evaluation of an integrated child and family health hub for migrant and refugee women
Recruiting, integrating, and sustaining stakeholder participation in environmental management: A case study from the great lakes areas of concern
Implementation mapping to plan for a hybrid trial testing the effectiveness and implementation of a behavioral intervention for HIV medication adherence and care retention
A review of literature about involving people affected by cancer in research, policy and planning and practice
Collaborative design of a health care experience survey for persons with disability
Review of community-based research: Assessing partnership approaches to improve public health
The effectiveness of a group-based computerized HIV/STI prevention intervention for black women who use drugs in the criminal justice system: Study protocol for E-WORTH (Empowering African-American Women on the Road to Health), a Hybrid Type 1 randomized controlled trial
Stakeholder impact on the implementation of integrated care: Opportunities to consider for patient-centered outcomes research
Juvenile justice-translational research on interventions for adolescents in the legal system (JJ-TRIALS): A cluster randomized trial targeting system-wide improvement in substance use services
Implementation strategy in collaboration with people with lived experience of mental illness to reduce stigma among primary care providers in Nepal (RESHAPE): Protocol for a type 3 hybrid implementation effectiveness cluster randomized controlled trial
The invested in diabetes study protocol: A cluster randomized pragmatic trial comparing standardized and patient-driven diabetes shared medical appointments
Improving cardiometabolic health through nudging dietary behaviours and physical activity in low SES adults: Design of the Supreme Nudge project
Embedding active pedagogies within pre-service teacher education: Implementation considerations and recommendations
An introduction to effectiveness-implementation hybrid designs
Facilitating stakeholder engagement in early stage translational research
An applied methodology for stakeholder identification in transdisciplinary research
Best practices to reduce COVID-19 in group homes for individuals with serious mental illness and intellectual and developmental disabilities: Protocol for a hybrid type 1 effectiveness-implementation cluster randomized trial
Meaningful and effective patient engagement: What matters most to stakeholders
A telehealth diabetes intervention for rural populations: Protocol for a randomized controlled trial
Sequential multiple assignment randomised trial of a brief contact intervention for suicide risk management among discharged psychiatric patients: An implementation study protocol
‘Stakeholder engagement’ needs A Rethink. Here’s what will replace it
Development of a model for shared care between general practice and mental healthcare: A protocol for a co-production study
Study protocol for a hospital-to-home transitional care intervention for older adults with multiple chronic conditions and depressive symptoms: A pragmatic effectiveness-implementation trial
Studying how patient engagement influences research: A mixed methods study
Reciprocal relationships and the importance of feedback in patient and public involvement: A mixed methods study
Conceptualizing stakeholder engagement in the context of sustainability and its assessment
Understanding the influence and impact of stakeholder engagement in patient-centered outcomes research: A qualitative study
Implementation of an evidence-based intervention to promote colorectal cancer screening in community organizations: A cluster randomized trial
Implementation of the community assets supporting Transitions (CAST) transitional care intervention for older adults with multimorbidity and depressive symptoms: A qualitative descriptive study
Study protocol: Evaluation of sheds for life (SFL): A community-based men’s health initiative designed ‘for shedders by shedders’ in Irish men’s sheds using a hybrid effectiveness-implementation design
Implementation of a co-designed physical activity program for older adults: Positive impact when delivered at scale
Where are the stakeholders in implementation science?
Methodological approaches to study context in intervention implementation studies: An evidence gap map
Ten recommendations for using implementation frameworks in research and practice
Systematic review of the Exploration, Preparation, Implementation, Sustainment (EPIS) framework
A protocol paper: Community engagement interventions for cardiovascular disease prevention in socially disadvantaged populations in the UK: An implementation research study
Opportunities for epidemiologists in implementation science: A primer
Implementation of eHealth technology in community health care: The complexity of stakeholder involvement
The role of culture in stakeholder engagement: Its implication for open innovation
Factors to consider during identification and invitation of individuals in a multi-stakeholder research partnership
Understanding implementation research collaborations from a co-creation lens: Recommendations for a path forward
Patient-reported outcome dashboards within the electronic health record to support shared decision-making: Protocol for Co-design and clinical evaluation with patients with advanced cancer and chronic kidney disease
The pharmacist discharge care (PHARM-DC) study: A multicenter RCT of pharmacist-directed transitional care to reduce post-hospitalization utilization
What public health challenges and unmet medical needs would benefit from interdisciplinary collaboration in the EU? A survey and multi-stakeholder debate
Towards an Implementation-STakeholder Engagement Model (I-STEM) for improving health and social care services
Methods to improve the selection and tailoring of implementation strategies
Frequency of reporting on patient and public involvement (PPI) in research studies published in a general medical journal: A descriptive study
Outcomes for implementation research: Conceptual distinctions, measurement challenges, and research agenda
Patient navigation and financial incentives to promote smoking cessation in an underserved primary care population: A randomized controlled trial protocol
Using participatory implementation science to advance health equity
Strengthening stakeholder-engaged research and research on stakeholder engagement
Azhe’é Bidziil (strong fathers): Study protocol for the pilot evaluation of an American Indian fatherhood program to improve the Health and Wellbeing of Diné (Navajo) fathers
The impact of language: Rethinking the term “stakeholder”
A typology of public engagement mechanisms
It takes an average of 17 Years for evidence to change practice-the burgeoning field of implementation science seeks to speed things up
Ask, do not tell: Consulting a patient advisory board to understand unmet needs of patients with GVHD in Europe
Evaluation of a civic engagement approach to catalyze built environment change and promote healthy eating and physical activity among rural residents: A cluster (community) randomized controlled trial
Protocol for the Yapatjarrathati project: A mixed-method implementation trial of a tiered assessment process for identifying fetal alcohol spectrum disorders in a remote Australian community
Researcher readiness for participating in community-engaged dissemination and implementation research: A conceptual framework of core competencies
The PCORI engagement rubric: Promising practices for partnering in research
Patient and service user engagement in research: A systematic review and synthesized framework
Stakeholder engagement in a hypertension and diabetes prevention research program: Description and lessons learned
Pragmatic trial of a multidisciplinary lung cancer care model in a community healthcare setting: Study design, implementation evaluation, and baseline clinical results
A study protocol of the adaptation and evaluation by means of a cluster-RCT of an integrated workplace health promotion program based on a European good practice
Designing a tool to support patient and public involvement in research projects: The Involvement Matrix
Exploring perceived barriers, drivers, impacts and the need for evaluation of public involvement in health and social care research: A modified Delphi study
‘Is it worth doing?’ Measuring the impact of patient and public involvement in research
GRIPP2 reporting checklists: Tools to improve reporting of patient and public involvement in research
Reviewing progress in public involvement in NIHR research: Developing and implementing a new vision for the future
Supporting goal-oriented primary health care for seniors with complex care needs using mobile technology: Evaluation and implementation of the health system performance research network, bridgepoint electronic patient reported outcome tool
Background and evaluation design of a community-based health-promoting school intervention: Fit Lifestyle at School and at Home (FLASH)
Participatory research methods – choice points in the research process
Alignment of stakeholder and scientist understandings and expectations in a participatory modeling project
Community and partner engagement in dissemination and implementation research at the National Institutes of Health: An analysis of recently funded studies and opportunities to advance the field
Community-based participatory research contributions to intervention research: The intersection of science and practice to improve health equity
Using community-based participatory research to address health disparities
Engaging patients to develop a customized digital health companion for periodontitis: Study protocol
Evaluation of an interactive web-based programme on relapse management for people with multiple sclerosis (POWER@MS2): Study protocol for a process evaluation accompanying a randomised controlled trial
Effective engagement requires trust and being trustworthy