Evaluation of common protein biomarkers involved in the pathogenesis of respiratory diseases with proteomic methods: A systematic review Evaluation of common protein biomarkers involved in the pathogenesis of respiratory diseases with proteomic methods: a systematic review
Abstract
Aim
Respiratory disease (RD) is one of the most common diseases characterized by lung dysfunction. Many diagnostic mechanisms have been used to identify the pathogenic agents of responsible for RD. Among these, proteomics emerges as a valuable diagnostic method for pinpointing the specific proteins involved in RD pathogenesis. Therefore, in this study, for the first time, we examined the protein markers involved in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), asthma, bronchiolitis obliterans (BO), and chemical warfare victims exposed to mustard gas, using the proteomics method as a systematic study.
Materials and Methods
A systematic search was performed up to September 2023 on several databases, including PubMed, Scopus, ISI Web of Science, and Cochrane. In total, selected 4246 articles were for evaluation according to the criteria. Finally, 119 studies were selected for this systematic review.
Results
A total of 13,806 proteins were identified, 6471 in COPD, 1603 in Asthma, 5638 in IPF, three in BO, and 91 in mustard gas exposed victims. Alterations in the expression of these proteins were observed in the respective diseases. After evaluation, the results showed that 31 proteins were found to be shared among all five diseases.
Conclusion
Although these 31 proteins regulate different factors and molecular pathways in all five diseases, they ultimately lead to the regulation of inflammatory pathways. In other words, the expression of some proteins in COPD and mustard‐exposed patients increases inflammatory reactions, while in IPF, they cause lung fibrosis. Asthma, causes allergic reactions due to T‐cell differentiation toward Th2.
Many diagnostic mechanisms have been used to identify the pathogenic agents of respiratory disease (RD). Proteomics is a diagnostic method to identify proteins involved in RD pathogenesis. In this study, for the first time, we examined the protein markers involved in the pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, asthma, bronchiolitis obliterans, and chemical warfare victims exposed to mustard gas, using the proteomics method as a systematic study.

Abbreviations
2DE
gel electrophoresis
AHSG
α2‐HS‐Glycoprotein
ALB
albumin
APO C3
apolipoproteinC3
APOA1
apolipoprotein A‐1
BALF
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
BCL‐2
B‐cell lymphoma 2
BO
bronchiolitis obliterans
COPD
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
CXCL
C‐X‐C motif chemokine ligand
ELISA
enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay
EMT
epithelial‐mesenchymal transition
ERK
extracellular signal‐regulated kinase
FTH1
heavy chain ferritin
GAPDH
glyceraldehyde 3‐phosphate dehydrogenase
GC
vitamin D binding protein
GSTP1
glutathione S‐transferase Pi 1
HSPB1
heat shock protein beta‐1
IGKC
immunoglobulin kappa constant
IL
interleukin
IPF
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
KRT9
keratin 9
KRT10
keratin 10
LC‐MS‐MS
liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry
LCN1
lipocalin1
LXA4
lipoxin A4
MALDI‐TOF
MALDI coupled to time‐of‐flight
MAPK
mitogen‐activated protein kinase
miR
microRNA
mTOR
mammalian target of rapamycin
OSMR
OSM receptor
Pb
peripheral blood
PI3K
phosphoinositide 3‐kinase
PLC
phospholipase C
PPAR‐γ
peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptor gamma
PSMA2
proteasome 20S subunit alpha 2
RBP4
retinol binding protein 4
RD
respiratory disease
S100A8
protein S100 A8
S100A9
protein S100 A9
Src
short for sarcoma
TF
tissue factor
TF
transferrin
TGF‐β
transforming growth factor beta
UBE2N
ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 N

INTRODUCTION
Respiratory disease (RD) is one of the leading causes of patient mortality worldwide. RD includes many diseases such as those resulting from exposure to mustard gas, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), Asthma, and many others. A wide range of clinical symptoms is observed in RD patients according to the type of disease and its pathogenesis. The pathogenesis of RD is not fully understood; however, several mechanisms and factors have been implicated in their development and progression. Inflammation, coagulation, and oxidative stress pathways are known to play important roles in the development and progression of RDs. Studies have shown that some of these pathways, including inflammatory pathways and oxidative stress, are involved in developing COPD and Asthma. Activation of the NF‐κB pathway in COPD has been shown to lead to inflammation. Furthermore, a decrease in the expression of superoxide dismutase (SOD) in COPD has been found to lead to an increase in oxidative stress.
Based on the evidence obtained, inflammation is the most important pathway in the pathogenesis of RD. Most cells in the respiratory pathway induce the production of cytokines. On the other hand, factors produced by respiratory cells lead to the production of inflammatory mediators that result in the chemotaxis of immune cells. Most oxidative stress pathways lead to inflammation. Despite disease progression, the occurrence of inflammation can also induce apoptosis.
Pulmonary disorders have also been shown in patients exposed to mustard gas and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) due to the activation of inflammatory pathways. So far, common factors and pathways involved in the pathogenesis of RD have not been identified. It has also been found that RD, including COPD, has not been correctly diagnosed in many cases. Spirometry testing is not practical for diagnosing and differentiating COPD from other RD. Including warfare victims exposed to mustard gas, some patients have inflammation in the airways, similar to Asthma in terms of clinical symptoms. Therefore, it is difficult to distinguish between them. Therefore, there is an urgent need for efficient diagnostic biomarkers to differentiate between these illnesses and common indicators.
Various methods have been used to identify markers, but it has been shown that proteomics can help locate involved features in RD pathogenesis; it is a high‐throughput method for biomarker panel discovery with high sensitivity and specificity. On the other hand, it has been shown that identifying proteins in tissues and cells in various diseases can be used as a diagnostic method. Proteomics is an approach which dramatically has been used in recent decades to detect proteins in many diseases. Also, new proteins identified by this method can be effective in early diagnosis, follow‐up, and patient management. Identifying common protein markers in RD can be a suitable solution for designing target therapy and preventive strategies for RD patients.
Furthermore, since inflammation is recognized as a primary pathogenesis pathway in RD, the identification of biomarkers associated with it can facilitate easier management of patients. On the other hand, the identification of factors associated with inflammatory pathways can be helpful in patient management.
No study has been performed to identify protein markers commonly involved in RD pathogenesis. Also, most studies have examined the protein markers involved in the pathogenesis of RD; the results of many of them are challenging.
Therefore, for the first time in this study, we examined the protein markers involved pathogenesis of COPD, IPF, Asthma, bronchiolitis obliterans (BO), and chemical warfare victims exposed to mustard gas using the proteomics method as a systematic study. Finding shared proteins among these respiratory disorders is the goal of this research, which will also help create common therapeutic approaches and a better understanding of disease mechanisms.

METHODS

Search strategy and literature
A systematic search was conducted up to September 2023, covering several databases, including PubMed, Scopus, ISI Web of Science, and Cochrane, from July to September 2023. Keywords used to search databases included the following: “COPD, Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, COAD, Chronic Obstructive Airway Disease, Chronic Airflow Obstruction, Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease, Obliterative bronchiolitis, Constrictive Bronchiolitis, Exudative Bronchiolitides, Proliferative Bronchiolitides, Mustard Gas, Mustard, Di‐2‐chloroethyl Sulfide, Sulfur Mustard, Yellow Cross Liquid, Yperite, Bis (beta‐chloroethyl) Sulfide, Mustard gas, Psoriazin, Mustard lung, Sulphur mustard, Asthma, IPF, Pulmonary Fibrosis, Fibrosing Alveolit, Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis, Fibrocystic Pulmonary Dysplasia, Usual Interstitial Pneumonia, Proteomic, proteome, proteomic profiling, proteomic fingerprinting, proteomic biomarkers.”
Search strategies were created using the words AND and OR. It did not restrict publication time, language, and type of study. It exported the results of searching all databases to Endnote X7 software (Thomson Reuters). Then, by reviewing the title and abstract extracted, relevant articles. Screening of related articles using the titles and abstracts was reviewed by two authors (B. Fatemeh Nobakht M. Gh and Hamid R. Rasouli) and discussed cases of discrepancy with the third author (Masoud Arabfard). Also, to further investigate, it manually reviewed the references of selected articles.
The criteria considered for article selection were based on PICO (population, intervention, comparator, outcome, and setting) and included the following: population—patients with RD, intervention—proteomics, comparator—healthy individuals, and setting—case‐control study.

Inclusion criteria
Criteria used to select articles included: case‐control studies performed on individuals over 18 years, the use of proteomics methods to examine markers, and access to supplementary files.

Exclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria for deleting unrelated articles included: review studies, clinical trials, case reports, use of animal models for analysis, in vitro studies, studies without a healthy control group, studies on children, and lack of access to supplementary files.

Data collection
After selecting articles based on cited criteria, extract the following information: authors' names, publication year, sample size, country, age, sex, type of sample, type of technique used, statistical analysis, number of Up/Downregulation proteins, model characteristics, and validation.

RESULTS
This study examined five diseases of COPD, Asthma, IPF, BO, and mustard gas‐exposed victims. In total, 4946 articles entered endnote X7 software. After deleting the duplicates and other articles, reviewed the full text of 148 articles based on the reasons mentioned in Figure 1. Finally, 119 studies were selected in this systematic review. Details and related findings of selected papers (age, sex, sample type, type of technique used, statistical analysis, number of increased or decreased proteins, model characteristics, validation test) are shown in supplementary files. It listed for COPD, IPF, Asthma, BO, and mustard gas‐exposed victims, respectively.
Prisma flow diagram.

Biological specimens
Using different samples in 119 selected studies. Accordingly, in COPD, the most commonly used selection was peripheral blood (PB); serum, plasma, or mononuclear cells were also isolated (25 of 56 studies). Also used were saliva samples in one study. In IPF, the most commonly used selection was Broncho‐alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) (12 out of 27). In Asthma, PB was the most commonly used sample (12 out of 27). In one study, the exosome was used; in another, one nasal brush was used as a sample. The most commonly used selection for mustard gas‐exposed victims was PB (5 out of 7). BALF was used in one study, and tissue as a biological sample in another. BALF was used in BO in two studies.

Technological platform used
Proteomics is a technique that evaluates the proteins in the samples; they can be cells, solutions, tissues, and many different biological samples. Proteomics includes other techniques depending on the sample type and the study's purpose. In the studies included in the systematic review, various methods have been used. In COPD and IPF, the most commonly used techniques were Two‐dimensional gel electrophoresis (2DE) and liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC‐MS‐MS). In Asthma, LC‐MS‐MS was used more than any other technique (13 out of 27). Matrix‐assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) coupled with time‐of‐flight (MALDI‐TOF) was more commonly used in BO (Supporting Information S1). In mustard gas‐exposed victims, four studies used 2DE, and 5 out of 7 studies used MALDI‐TOS‐MS/MS. Most studies used western blot and enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) techniques for validation (Supporting Information S1).

Proteomic biomarkers
After selecting the articles investigated, the expression changes of proteins were identified by proteomics and, in COPD, altered the expression of 6471 proteins. Asthma changed the face of 1603 proteins. Also, in IPF, 5638 proteins, and BO and mustard gas exposed victims, their 3 and 91 proteins expression were altered, respectively. Alteration of protein expression, or increase in their face in five diseases according to the control group, was considered.
After evaluating the results, 31 proteins were common between five diseases. These proteins included transferrin (TF), glutathione S‐transferase pi 1 (GSTP1), ubiquitin conjugating enzyme E2 N (UBE2N), haptoglobin (HP), eukaryotic initiation factor 5A (EIF5A), keratin 9 (KRT9), apolipoproteinA4 (APO A4), albumin (ALB), apolipoproteinC1 (APO C1), angiogenin (ANG), protein S100 A8 (S100A8), fibrinogen alpha chain (FGA), heat shock protein beta‐1 (HSPB1), complement component 3 (C3), lipocalin1 (LCN1), C‐reactive protein (CRP), ficolin 2 (FCN2), adiponectin, C1Q and collagen domain containing (ADIPOQ), immunoglobulin kappa constant (IGKC), myeloperoxidase (MPO), proteasome 20S subunit alpha 2 (PSMA2), actin beta (ACTB), protein S100 A9 (S100A9), vitamin D binding protein (GC), ferritin heavy chain 1 (FTH1), α2‐HS‐glycoprotein (AHSG), glyceraldehyde 3‐phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), apolipoproteinC3 (APO C3), peptidylprolyl isomerase A (PPIA), retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4), keratin 10 (KRT10) (Table 1).
Evaluation of biological characteristics of 31 proteins.
Symbol	Cellular component	Molecular function	Biological process	Reference	 	ACTB	MembraneExtracellular tissue and exosomeFilamentCytoplasm	Involved in cytoskeleton maintenanceATP bindingProtein kinase binding	Cell movementNeuron generation and elongationCytoskeleton organization		 	AHSG	Platelet granuleEndoplasmic reticulum lumenExtracellular region	Kinase inhibitor activityEndopeptidase inhibitor activity	Inflammation regulatoryInsulin regulatory signaling pathwayRegulation of bone mineralizationPinocytosisSkeletal system development		 	ALB	Cytoplasm	Plasma colloid osmotic pressureEndothelium regulator	TransporterBinding protein		 	Banding and transporter	 	APOA4	Extracellular regionHDL particlesPlasma membraneCytosolEndoplasmic reticulum lumen	Protein bindingCholesterol transferAmyloid beta bindingLipid binding	Cholesterol transportLipid metabolismProtein StabilizationRegulation of signaling pathway		 	APOC3	Extracellular regionEndosome	Lipase inhibitor activityProtein bindingEnzyme bindingCholesterol binding	Lipid metabolismLipid transporterRegulation of signaling pathway		 	C3	Extracellular regionPlasma membraneEndoplasmic reticulum lumenCell surfaceAzurophil granule lumen	Endopeptidase inhibitor activityProtein bindingAnaphylatoxin	Immune responseSignaling pathway regulationRegulation of phagocytosisFatty acid metabolism		 	FTH1	CytosolCytoplasmNucleusExtracellular region	Ferrous and ferric iron bindingProtein bindingFerroxidase activity	Cellular iron ion homeostasisImmune responseRegulation of proliferation		 	GAPDH	NucleusCytosolCytoplasmMicrotubule cytoskeletonPlasma membraneExtracellular region	Protein bindingNADP bindingNAD binding	Microtubule cytoskeleton organizationCytokine productionGlucose metabolic processImmune response		 	GC	Blood micro particleCytosolExtracellular regionLysosomal lumenCytoplasm	Actin bindingVitamin transmembrane transporter activityVitamin D binding	Vitamin transport		 	GSTP1	CytosolExtracellular regionNucleusCytoplasmPlasma membrane	Glutathione transferase activityProtein bindingNitric oxide binding	Response to reachCentral nervous system developmentImmune responseRegulation of cell signaling pathway		 	HSPB1	Extracellular regionNucleusCytoplasmCytosolPlasma membrane	RNA bindingProtein binding	Regulation of protein phosphorylationresponse to unfolded proteinInvolved in immune response		 	IGKC	Plasma membraneExtracellular regionBlood microparticle	Immunoglobulin receptor bindingAntigen binding	Immune responseB cell activationComplement activation, classical pathway		 	KRT10	NucleusCytosolCell surface	Protein bindingStructural constituent of skin epidermis	Peptide cross‐linkingKeratinocyte differentiation		 	KRT9	NucleusCytosolExtracellular region	Structural constituent of cytoskeleton	SpermatogenesisEpidermis developmentSkin development		 	LCN1	Extracellular region	Small molecules bindingProtein bindingSignaling receptor binding	Sensory perception of tasteProteolysisResponse to stimulus		 	PSMA2	NucleusCytosolExtracellular regionNucleoplasm	Protein binding	Proteasomal protein catabolic processResponse to infection		 	RBP4	Extracellular region	Protein bindingRetinol binding	Eye developmentGluconeogenesisOrgan and tissue development		 	S100A8	CytosolExtracellular regionNucleoplasm	Microtubule bindingCalcium bindingToll‐like receptor binding	AutophagyApoptotic processWound healingAstrocyte development		 	S100A9	Cell junctionExtracellular regionPlasma membraneNucleusCytoplasm	Calcium bindingProtein binding	AutophagyApoptotic processWound healingAstrocyte developmentInflammation response		 	TF	Clathrin‐coated endocytic vesicle membraneExtracellular regionVesicle	Protein bindingtransferrin receptor binding	Osteoclast differentiationRegulation of bone resorptionSignaling pathway regulation		 	UBE2N	Extracellular regionPlasma membraneNucleusCytoplasm	RNA bindingProtein bindingUbiquitin conjugating enzyme activity	Protein ubiquitinationPositive regulation of histone modificationImmune response regulationCell signaling pathway regulation		 	HP	Extracellular regionBlood micro particleHaptoglobin‐hemoglobin complex	Hemoglobin bindingProtein bindingAntioxidant activity	Defense responseAcute phase proteinPositive regulation of cell deathCellular oxidant detoxification		 	EIF5A	CytoplasmCytosolNucleusMembraneEndoplasmic reticulum	Protein bindingRNA bindingRibosome binding	regulation of apoptosis pathwayresponse to virus infectionregulation inflammation pathway		 	APOC1	Extracellular componentEndoplasmic reticulum	Fatty acid bindingProtein bindingPhospholipase inhibitor activity	Involved in lipid metabolism		 	ANG	NucleusExtracellular component	Protein bindingRNA bindingDNA bindingHeparin binding	AngiogenesisCell migrationCell communication		 	FGA	Extracellular componentPlasma membranePlatelet alpha granule	Protein bindingMetal ion binding	FibrinolysisPlatelet aggregation		 	CRP	Extracellular component	Choline bindingCalcium ion bindingProtein bindingProtein bindingComplement binding	Acute phase responseInflammatory responseInnate immune responseOpsonization		 	MPO	CytoplasmMembrane	Oxidoreductase	Inflammatory responseImmune response		 	FCN2	Extracellular componentCytoplasm	Complement activation	Inflammatory responseImmune response		 	ADIPOQ	Extracellular componentCellular surface	immunomodulation	Fatty acid metabolismInflammation response		 	PPIA	Extracellular componentCytoplasm	RNA bindingDNA binding	Positive regulationCell signaling pathway

DISCUSSION
This systematic review aimed to evaluate the studied protein markers using proteomics methods in patients with RD. Although systematic studies have been performed on the diagnostic and prognostic values of protein markers in RD, including COPD and Asthma, separately, no study has systematically evaluated common protein markers in RD. For the first time, this study assessed the protein markers identified by proteomics in COPD, Asthma, IPF, BO, and chemical warfare victims exposed to mustard gas in a systematic review.
Because identifying only two proteins in BO removed this disease from the results of the evaluation of common proteins between conditions. Therefore, in this section, the proteins of COPD, Asthma, IPF, and chemical warfare victims exposed to mustard gas are discussed. In this study, after removing duplications, identified 13,806 proteins in five diseases. After evaluation, 31 proteins were present in five conditions in the results section. After evaluating 31 proteins, we found that most are involved in the pathogenesis of inflammation and coagulation. Biological properties and their functions under normal conditions inside the cell are listed in Table 1.
Inflammation is one of the primary pathogens of RD; most of the 31 common proteins in cited diseases were involved in inflammatory reactions. C3 is one of the components of complement that plays a vital role in the immune system, especially innate immunity. Studies have shown that C3 expression increases in some diseases, especially COPD and chemical warfare victims exposed to mustard gas. C3 activates the NF‐κB pathway, which ultimately triggers the nucleotide‐binding oligomerization domain, leucine‐rich repeat, and pyrin domain containing (NLRP); it also induces inflammatory cytokines production, including IL‐1. It has also been shown that increased C3 expression in COPD leads to netosis.
Netosis is when neutrophils transfer their contents outward, creating a network that leads to the accumulation of immune cells and inflammation. Netosis increases TLR4 expression, which ultimately increases platelet activation. In addition, TLR4 activates NADPH Oxidase and increases ROS production by activating ERK. Increased ROS production causes neutrophil death and ketosis. Increased production of inflammatory cytokines can differentiate T helper2 (Th2) cells, which produce IL‐13 and IL‐5, leading to allergic reactions in patients, especially asthma patients.
On the other hand, C3 has been shown to inhibit the lipoxin A4 (LXA4) expression by activating the MAPK/ERK pathway. LXA4 has been shown to regulate pulmonary epithelial cells by regulating tight junctions and preventing inflammation. However, LXA4 reduces tissue factor (TF) expression by inhibiting the TNF‐α/PI3K/AKT pathway. TF is the starting factor in the coagulation cascade, the word of which can cause thrombosis. Increased C3 expression in IPF leads to activation of the TGF‐β/SMAD pathway, which ultimately causes lung fibrosis. Therefore, targeting C3 in mentioned diseases can prevent inflammation and disease progression.
Apolipoprotein A‐1 (ApoA1) is a component of HDL that is involved in cardiovascular disease prevention by regulating blood cholesterol levels. However, ApoA1 has also been shown to have an anti‐inflammatory role. It acts as a protective agent in preventing the progression of many diseases, including RD. In Asthma, APOA1 increases TGF‐β expression. Studies have shown that TGF‐β causes inflammation and airway obstruction by activating actin in epithelial cells. On the other hand, TGF‐β stimulates epithelial‐mesenchymal transition (EMT) to produce inflammatory mediators, including cytokines; they can affect pulmonary epithelial cells’ function.
However, ApoA1 in IPF has been shown to prevent inflammation by inhibiting TGF‐β expression. ApoA1 also inhibits inflammation and inflammatory cytokines production by inhibiting NF‐κB. In COPD, APOA1 expression has been shown to reduce the production of inflammatory cytokines, including IL‐1 and TNF‐α. Given that APOA1 suppresses NF‐κB can hypothesize that in COPD, APOA1 may reduce inflammatory cytokines production and inhibit inflammation by suppressing NF‐κB expression.
NF‐κB expression increases ferritin expression. Ferritin is one of the acute phase proteins that consists of two light and heavy chains. Asthma has been shown to reduce the expression of heavy‐chain ferritin (FTH1), which increases inflammation and oxidative stress. Therefore, it has been demonstrated that MAPK/ERK/c‐jun pathway increases FTH1 expression. However, this pathway is suppressed in Asthma. On the other hand, since TGF‐β expression has been shown to suppress the MAPK/ERK/c‐jun pathway, targeting TGF‐β in asthma patients can increase FTH1 expression and reduce inflammation and oxidative stress.
Studies have shown that increased ferritin expression in IPF, unlike Asthma, is associated with a poor prognosis leading to increased pulmonary fibrosis. It has also been shown that increased ferritin expression in COPD can be related to airway obstruction and disease progression (Figure 2).
Evaluation of pathways involved in lung dysfunction: C3 activates the NF‐κB pathway and also induces TGF‐β expression, which ultimately causes inflammation and pulmonary fibrosis. C3 also causes Netosis and TLR4 expression. In addition, it induces LXA4 expression through the MAPK/ERK pathway, which prevents inflammation. TF/CD71 acts as a double‐edged sword, causing inflammation on the one hand and preventing cell damage by expressing Nrf2 on the other. ALB, albumin; APOA1, Apo; Apo lipoprotein A1; EMT, epithelial mesenchymal transition; HSP, heat shock protein; LCN1, lipocalin 1; LXA4, lipoxin A4; NF‐κB, nuclear factor kappa B; NLRP, nucleotide‐binding oligomerization domain, leucine rich repeat and pyrin domain containing; Nrf2, NF‐E2–related factor 2; PPARγ, peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptor gamma; RBP4, retinol binding protein 4; ROS, reactive oxygen species; TF, tissue factor TGF‐β, tumor growth factor‐β; Th, T helper; TLR, toll like receptor.
Transferrin (TF) is another factor that plays a vital role in the pathogenesis of RD, the same as ferritin. Accordingly, it has been shown that in asthma and COPD, increased TF expression leads to TLR2 activation and, ultimately, inflammation. CD71 is known as the TF receptor. Heat shock protein (HSP) in COPD reduces inflammation by inhibiting the CD71/JNK/NF‐κB pathway. HSP also increases keratin expression and inflammation through the EGF/AKT pathway. In asthma, HSP causes inflammation by activating the ERK1/2/NF‐κB pathway. In IPF, after TF binding to CD71, the PI3K/AKT/mTOR/PTEN pathway is activated, which increases TGF‐β expression and causes pulmonary fibrosis. While shown in the mustard gas‐exposed patient, TF has a protective role.
TF reduces ROS production and inflammation. Therefore, can hypothesize that TF may prevent cell damage in patients by expressing Nrf2, which has an antioxidant role. On the other hand, HSP has been shown to cause pulmonary fibrosis by activating the TGF‐β/SMAD pathway. HSP acts as a double‐edged sword and plays an influential role in the occurrence and inhibition of inflammation; it is possible to control the progression of inflammation and improve patient survival by identifying its upstream and downstream pathways (Figure 2).
Lipocalin1 (LCN1) is another molecule like TF; it has a protective role. In COPD, LCN1 expression increased, associated with inflammation and oxidative stress prevention. LCN1 has been shown to increase the expression of Nrf2 and HO‐1 by activating the MAPK/ERK pathway. These two factors are antioxidants and prevent cell damage. LCN1, like COPD, plays a protective role in the mustard gas‐exposed patient and protects cells against ROS. In contrast, increased LCN1 expression in asthma has been shown to activate the NF‐κB pathway and causes inflammation. In IPF, increased LCN1 expression activates the NF‐κB pathway through MMP‐9. However, LCN1 expression in IPF is reduced by Peroxisome proliferator‐activated receptor gamma (PPAR‐γ) (Figure 2).
Retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4) is one of the genes involved in the pathogenesis of RD and regulates TGF‐β. In COPD, decreased RBP4 expression is associated with increased disease progression. Albumin (ALB) stabilizes by binding to RBP4. ALB/RBP4 then reduces inflammation by inhibiting NF‐κB. In addition, it blocks the TGF‐β/SMAD signaling pathway. In asthma, decreased RBP4 expression is associated with increased inflammation. In IPF, TGF‐β increases the expression of proteasome 20S subunit alpha 2 (PSMA2), leading to inflammation and pulmonary fibrosis. In asthma, PSMA2 expression causes inflammation by activating the NF‐κB and producing inflammatory cytokines. In COPD, PSMA2 activates NF‐κB and caspase3, causing lung cell apoptosis and worsening patients' clinical course. Thus, targeting RBP4 prevents inflammation and reduces apoptosis (Figure 2).
In general, in RDs, increased expression of inflammatory genes causes exacerbation of disease. Activation of NF‐κB lead to the production of cytokine by immune cell and induce activation of inflammation signaling pathway. The previous studies showed that activation of NF‐κB leads to increased serum level markers, including CRP, MPO, ANG, FGA, and FCN2.
The strengths of this study are as follows: This study focuses on the proteomic analysis of five diseases, namely COPD, IPF, asthma, chemical warfare victims exposed to mustard gas, and BO. It adopts a systematic review approach, which is the first of its kind. Furthermore, common proteins among the investigated diseases have been identified, which can be potentially utilized in the future for designing appropriate therapeutic strategies.
The limitation of the study are as follows: The methods used in the reviewed articles mostly consist of high dropout. Also, the study did not include an experimental validation of the identified proteins, which would provide more evidence for their potential role in disease pathogenesis.

CONCLUSION
Considering that 31 proteins (TF, GSTP1, UBE2N, HP, EIF5A, KRT9, APO A4, ALB, APO C1, ANG, S100A8, FGA, HSPB1, C3, LCN1, CRP, FCN2, ADIPOQ, IGKC, MPO, PSMA2, ACTB, S100A9, GC, FTH1, AHSG, GAPDH, APO C3, PPIA, RBP4, and KRT10) are common in five diseases, identifying their upstream and downstream pathways can be essential in designing treatment strategies and managing patients.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVE
It would be better to conduct experimental studies on human samples to confirm the results of this study. Additionally, examining differential proteins in each of the diseases and conducting additional studies on other OMICs, including transcriptome and metabolome, and integrating their data with proteome, can provide a better understanding of the conditions.

AUTHORS CONTRIBUTIONS
B. Fatemeh Nobakht M. Gh has conceived the manuscript and revised it. Hadi Rezaeeyan, B. Fatemeh Nobakht M. Gh, and Masoud Arabfard extraction data and analysis. Hamid R. Rasouli and Alireza Shahriary design strategy search. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

ETHICS STATEMENT
This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors.

Supporting information

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets used analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.

REFERENCES
Personalized medicine in respiratory disease: role of proteomics
Prevalence and factors for anxiety during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID‐19) epidemic among the teachers in China
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura following ChAdOx1 nCov‐19 vaccination: a case report
Evaluation of specificity and sensitivity of gastric aspirate shake test to predict surfactant deficiency in Iranian premature infants
Acute effects of air pollution on pulmonary function, airway inflammation, and oxidative stress in asthmatic children
Oxidative stress and redox regulation of lung inflammation in COPD
Cytokine storm in COVID‐19 and the treatment simulacrum
Therapeutic aptamer targeting sclerostin loop3 for promoting bone formation without increasing cardiovascular risk in osteogenesis imperfecta mice
Virulence and adhesion of the treponema pallidum nichols strain simultaneously decrease in a continuous‐infection New Zealand white rabbit model
A computational approach for the identification of key genes and biological pathways of chronic lung diseases: a systems biology approach
Emergency treatment and photoacoustic assessment of spinal cord injury using reversible dual‐signal transform‐based selenium antioxidant
A tunable fluorescent probe for superoxide anion detection during inflammation caused by Treponema pallidum
Levels of cytokine in bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid in patients with pulmonary fibrosis due to sulfur mustard gas inhalation
Overdiagnosis of COPD in hospitalized patients
New insights into natural products that target the gut microbiota: effects on the prevention and treatment of colorectal cancer
Transcriptome analysis using next‐generation sequencing
Proteomics: clinical and research applications in respiratory diseases
Surface‐engineered Prussian blue nanozymes as artificial receptors for universal pattern recognition of metal ions and proteins
Analysis of chronic lung transplant rejection by MALDI‐TOF profiles of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid
Proteomic identification of human neutrophil alpha‐defensins in chronic lung allograft rejection
Plasma proteomic profile of sulfur mustard exposed lung diseases patients using 2‐dimensional gel electrophoresis
Comparative proteomic study reveals the molecular aspects of delayed ocular symptoms induced by sulfur mustard
Two dimensional proteomic analysis of serum shows immunological proteins exclusively expressed in sulfur mustard exposed patients with long term pulmonary complications
Changes in protein profile of erythrocyte membrane in bronchial asthma
iTRAQ‐based proteomic analysis reveals potential serum biomarkers of allergic and nonallergic asthma
Plasma apolipoprotein H levels are different between aspirin induced respiratory diseases and aspirin tolerant asthma
Increased serum VDBP as a risk predictor for steroid resistance in asthma patients
Proteomic analysis of peripheral T‐lymphocytes in patients with asthma
Proteomic profiling reveals autoimmune targets in sarcoidosis
Towards a functional proteomics approach to the comprehension of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoidosis, systemic sclerosis and pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis
Analysis of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
S100A9 in BALF is a candidate biomarker of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Multiplex protein profiling of bronchoalveolar lavage in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Human bronchoalveolar lavage fluid protein two‐dimensional database: study of interstitial lung diseases
Carbonylated proteins in bronchoalveolar lavage of patients with sarcoidosis, pulmonary fibrosis associated with systemic sclerosis and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Bronchoalveolar lavage proteomic analysis in pulmonary fibrosis associated with systemic sclerosis: S100A6 and 14‐3‐3ε as potential biomarkers
A system biology study of BALF from patients affected by idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and healthy controls
Comparative proteome analysis of lung tissue from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), non‐specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) and organ donors
Quantitative proteomics of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Hemoglobin α and β are ubiquitous in the human lung, decline in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis but not in COPD
SELDI‐TOF‐MS in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Fetuin‐B (FETUB): a plasma biomarker candidate related to the severity of lung function in COPD
High‐resolution mass spectrometry proteomics for the identification of candidate plasma protein biomarkers for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Proteomic studies on receptor for advanced glycation end product variants in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Lung tissue proteomics identifies elevated transglutaminase 2 levels in stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Analysis of the plasma proteome in COPD: novel low abundance proteins reflect the severity of lung remodeling
A unique protein profile of peripheral neutrophils from COPD patients does not reflect cytokine‐induced protein profiles of neutrophils in vitro
SELDI‐TOF biomarker signatures for cystic fibrosis, asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Identification of novel diagnostic biomarkers for asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
A comparative protein analysis of lung cancer, along with three controls using a multidimensional proteomic approach
Sputum vitamin D binding protein (VDBP) GC1S/1S genotype predicts airway obstruction: a prospective study in smokers with COPD
Improved image analysis workflow for 2‐D gels enables large‐scale 2‐D gel‐based proteomics studies—COPD biomarker discovery study
Alterations of plasma inflammatory biomarkers in the healthy and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients with or without acute exacerbation
Selection of disease‐specific biomarkers by integrating inflammatory mediators with clinical informatics in AECOPD patients: a preliminary study
Comparative proteomics analysis of patients with quick development and slow development chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Protein network analysis identifies changes in the level of proteins involved in platelet degranulation, proteolysis and cholesterol metabolism pathways in AECOPD patients
Comparative proteome analysis of peripheral neutrophils from sulfur mustard‐exposed and COPD patients
Profiling the erythrocyte membrane proteome isolated from patients diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Distribution and levels of alpha‐1‐antitrypsin in the lung and plasma in smokers and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Plasma proteomic signatures in early chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Proteomic profiling of peripheral blood neutrophils identifies two inflammatory phenotypes in stable COPD patients
Pilot‐Scale study of human plasma proteomics identifies ApoE and IL33 as markers in atopic asthma
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid proteomic patterns of sulfur mustard‐exposed patients
Proteomic features of delayed ocular symptoms caused by exposure to sulfur mustard: as studied by protein profiling of corneal epithelium
Sputum proteomic signature of gastro‐oesophageal reflux in patients with severe asthma
Sputum proteomics and airway cell transcripts of current and ex‐smokers with severe asthma in U‐BIOPRED: an exploratory analysis
Differential proteomic analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in asthmatics following segmental antigen challenge
Nasal protein profiles in work‐related asthma caused by different exposures
Level of fatty acid binding protein 5 (FABP5) is increased in sputum of allergic asthmatics and links to airway remodeling and inflammation
Network analysis of quantitative proteomics on asthmatic bronchi: effects of inhaled glucocorticoid treatment
Exosomes in the nose induce immune cell trafficking and harbour an altered protein cargo in chronic airway inflammation
Specific haptoglobin expression in bronchoalveolar lavage during differentiation of circulating fibroblast progenitor cells in mild asthma
Intrapulmonary airway smooth muscle is hyperreactive with a distinct proteome in asthma
Induced sputum proteome in healthy subjects and asthmatic patients
Glycoproteomic identification of galectin‐3 and ‐8 ligands in bronchoalveolar lavage of mild asthmatics and healthy subjects
Application of isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) coupled with two‐dimensional liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry in quantitative proteomic analysis for discovery of serum biomarkers for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Peripheral blood proteomic profiling of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis biomarkers in the multicentre IPF‐PRO registry
Quantitative proteomic characterization of lung tissue in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Deep proteome profiling reveals common prevalence of MZB1‐positive plasma B cells in human lung and skin fibrosis
Label‐free plasma proteomics identifies haptoglobin‐related protein as candidate marker of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and dysregulation of complement and oxidative pathways
The peripheral blood proteome signature of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is distinct from normal and is associated with novel immunological processes
iTRAQ‐based proteomics reveals novel biomarkers for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Analysis by proteomics reveals unique circulatory proteins in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Comparative proteomic analysis of lung tissue from patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) and lung transplant donor lungs
Proteome profiling of lung tissues in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): platelet and macrophage dysfunction contribute to the pathogenesis of COPD
Sputum proteomics identifies elevated PIGR levels in smokers and mild‐to‐moderate COPD
Proteomics of human lung tissue identifies surfactant protein A as a marker of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Heat shock protein 27 and cyclophilin A associate with the pathogenesis of COPD
Peptidome profiling of induced sputum by mesoporous silica beads and MALDI‐TOF MS for non‐invasive biomarker discovery of chronic inflammatory lung diseases
Sputum proteomics in inflammatory and suppurative respiratory diseases
Identification of proteomic signatures associated with COPD frequent exacerbators
Long‐term smoking alters abundance of over half of the proteome in bronchoalveolar lavage cell in smokers with normal spirometry, with effects on molecular pathways associated with COPD
Gender differences in the bronchoalveolar lavage cell proteome of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Profiling the proteome of exhaled breath condensate in healthy smokers and COPD patients by LC‐MS/MS
Identification of proteomic signatures associated with lung cancer and COPD
Proteomic analysis of human epithelial lining fluid by microfluidics‐based nanoLC‐MS/MS: a feasibility study
Susceptibility to COPD: differential proteomic profiling after acute smoking
Exhaled breath condensate biomarkers for the early diagnosis of lung cancer using proteomics
Elevated sputum BPIFB1 levels in smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a longitudinal study
Protein networks in induced sputum from smokers and COPD patients
Proteomic analysis in lung tissue of smokers and COPD patients
Quantitative proteomic characterization of the lung extracellular matrix in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Proteomic study of human bronchoalveolar lavage fluids from smokers with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease by combining surface‐enhanced laser desorption/ionization‐mass spectrometry profiling with mass spectrometric protein identification
Integrated proteogenomic approach identifying a protein signature of COPD and a new splice variant of SORBS1
Large‐scale, ion‐current‐based proteomics investigation of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients
Proteomics of exhaled breath condensate in stable COPD and non‐COPD controls using tandem mass tags (TMTs) quantitative mass spectrometry: a pilot study
Alterations in the sputum proteome and transcriptome in smokers and early‐stage COPD subjects
Identification of lipocalin and apolipoprotein A1 as biomarkers of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Protein expression in sputum of smokers and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease patients: a pilot study by CapLC‐ESI‐Q‐TOF
Proteomic analysis of exhaled breath condensate for diagnosis of pathologies of the respiratory system
Sputum cytokine profiling in COPD: comparison between stable disease and exacerbation
Sputum protein biomarkers in airway diseases: a pilot study
Differential expression study of lysine crotonylation and proteome for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease combined with type II respiratory failure
Distinct plasma biomarkers confirm the diagnosis of mastocytosis and identify increased risk of anaphylaxis
Multiomics links global surfactant dysregulation with airflow obstruction and emphysema in COPD
Activation of the complement and coagulation systems in the small airways in asthma
Molecular signatures of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Differential expression of serum proteins in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease assessed using label‐free proteomics and bioinformatics analyses
Proteomic network analysis of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in ex‐smokers to discover implicated protein targets and novel drug treatments for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Comparative proteomic analysis of mustard lung as a complicated disease using systems biology approach
Integrated plasma proteomics and lung transcriptomics reveal novel biomarkers in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Proteomics and metabolomics profiling reveal panels of circulating diagnostic biomarkers and molecular subtypes in stable COPD
iTRAQ‐based proteomic analysis reveals potential serum biomarkers of allergic and nonallergic asthma
Proteomics technologies and challenges
Actin structure and function
A novel function of N‐linked glycoproteins, alpha‐2‐HS‐glycoprotein and hemopexin: implications for small molecule compound‐mediated neuroprotection
Impaired albumin function: a novel potential indicator for liver function damage?
Function and distribution of apolipoprotein A1 in the artery wall are markedly distinct from those in plasma
Apolipoprotein A‐I: a molecule of diverse function
Apolipoprotein C‐III: from pathophysiology to pharmacology
Promoter for the human ferritin heavy chain‐encoding gene (FERH): structural and functional characterization
Basic biology of GAPDH
The multifunctional properties and characteristics of vitamin D‐binding protein
New perspectives on the vitamin D binding protein
Glutathione‐S‐transferase family of enzymes
Regulatory functions of glutathione S‐transferase P1‐1 unrelated to detoxification
Heat shock proteins
Immunoglobulin isotypes: structure, function, and genetics
Structure, function, and dynamics of keratin intermediate filaments
Extrusion of feather keratin
The lipocalin protein family: structure and function
Tear lipocalin: structure and function
The proteasome
Relation between retinol, retinol‐binding protein 4, transthyretin and carotid intima media thickness
An update of the S100 nomenclature
S100 proteins: structure, functions and pathology
Transferrin: structure, function and potential therapeutic actions
Ubiquitin in motion: structural studies of the ubiquitin‐conjugating enzyme∼ubiquitin conjugate
SUMO modification of the ubiquitin‐conjugating enzyme E2‐25K
Haptoglobin phenotypes in health and disorders
Structure‐function analysis of the antioxidant properties of haptoglobin
Hypusine: its post‐translational formation in eukaryotic initiation factor 5A and its potential role in cellular regulation
Inhibition of HIV‐1 replication in lymphocytes by mutants of the Rev cofactor eIF‐5A
Apolipoprotein C1 (APOC1) as a novel diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for gastric cancer
RNA biology of angiogenin: current state and perspectives
Novel prognostic biomarkers of gastric cancer based on gene expression microarray: COL12A1, GSTA3, FGA and FGG
C‐reactive protein in rheumatology: biology and genetics
Myeloperoxidase
FCN2 inhibits epithelial–mesenchymal transition‐induced metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma via TGF‐β/Smad signaling
Identification and genetic effect of a variable duplication in the promoter region of the cattle ADIPOQ gene
Consensus reference gene (s) for gene expression studies in human cancers: end of the tunnel visible?
Three‐dimensional modeling of heart soft tissue motion
The role of complement activation in COPD exacerbation recovery
Usefulness of enzyme‐free and enzyme‐resistant detection of complement component 5 to evaluate acute myocardial infarction
Interleukin‐1β mediates arterial thrombus formation via NET‐associated tissue factor
Gut microbiome dysbiosis contributes to abdominal aortic aneurysm by promoting neutrophil extracellular trap formation
Endoscope image mosaic based on pyramid ORB
Lipoxin A4 restores oxidative stress‐induced vascular endothelial cell injury and thrombosis‐related factor expression by its receptor‐mediated activation of Nrf2‐HO‐1 axis
The interplay between noncoding RNAs and p21 signaling in gastrointestinal cancer: from tumorigenesis to metastasis
Iterative reconstruction of low‐dose CT based on differential sparse
Molecular study of the proliferation process of beta cells derived from pluripotent stem cells
Valerian (Valeriana officinalis) extract inhibits TNF‐α and iNOS gene expression in mouse LPS‐activated microglial cells
IL‐17A deficiency mitigates bleomycin‐induced complement activation during lung fibrosis
Soft tissue feature tracking based on deep matching network
ATP‐binding cassette transporter 1 attenuates ovalbumin‐induced neutrophilic airway inflammation
Apolipoprotein A1 inhibits TGF‐β1‐induced epithelial‐to‐mesenchymal transition of alveolar epithelial cells
Prevalence of addiction in Iranian myocardial infarction patients: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
The interplay between non‐coding RNAs and Wnt/ß‐catenin signaling pathway in urinary tract cancers: from tumorigenesis to metastasis
Is health contagious?—based on empirical evidence from China family panel studies' data
Toluene diisocyanate (TDI) regulates haem oxygenase‐1/ferritin expression: implications for toluene diisocyanate‐induced asthma
Esomeprazole attenuates inflammatory and fibrotic response in lung cells through the MAPK/Nrf2/HO1 pathway
Prosthetic vascular graft infection: a systematic review and meta‐analysis on diagnostic accuracy of 18FDG PET/CT
The effect of quercetin on induction of apoptosis and cell proliferation in experimental rat colon carcinoma
Prognostic evaluation of serum ferritin in acute exacerbation of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Increased airway iron parameters and risk for exacerbation in COPD: an analysis from SPIROMICS
In vivo function of airway epithelial TLR2 in host defense against bacterial infection
CD71+VISTA+ erythroid cells promote the development and function of regulatory T cells through TGF‐β
Ironing out the roles of macrophages in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
The role of leukemia inhibitory factor in pathogenesis of pre‐eclampsia: molecular and cell signaling approach
A concise review of common plant‐derived compounds as a potential therapy for Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease: insight into structure‐activity‐relationship
Long non coding RNAs reveal important pathways in childhood asthma: a future perspective
A review on proteomics analysis to reveal biological pathways and predictive proteins in sulfur mustard exposed patients: roles of inflammation and oxidative stress
Amplified canonical transforming growth factor‐β signalling via heat shock protein 90 in pulmonary fibrosis
Long noncoding RNA p21 enhances autophagy to alleviate endothelial progenitor cells damage and promote endothelial repair in hypertension through SESN2/AMPK/TSC2 pathway
Increased serum levels of lipocalin‐1 and ‐2 in patients with stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Discrepancy between mRNA and protein expression of neutrophil gelatinase‐associated lipocalin in bronchial epithelium induced by sulfur mustard
Calcium homeostasis in parkinson's disease: from pathology to treatment
Serum neutrophil gelatinase‐associated lipocalin (NGAL) is elevated in patients with asthma and airway obstruction
Neutrophil gelatinase‐associated lipocalin in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Albumin inhibits the nuclear translocation of Smad3 via interleukin‐1beta signaling in hepatic stellate cells
Clinical implications of serum retinol‐binding protein 4 in asthmatic children
Evaluation of proteasomal gene polymorphisms in Lithuanian patients with asthma
Activation of the ubiquitin‐proteasome pathway in the diaphragm in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
A comparative study of two angiogenic factors
Clinical value of angiogenin in predicting the prognosis of patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Systemic inflammation and COPD
Sputum myeloperoxidase in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease