Unlocking the potential of in silico approach in designing antibodies against SARS-CoV-2
Antibodies are naturally produced safeguarding proteins that the immune system generates to fight against invasive invaders. For centuries, they have been produced artificially and utilized to eradicate various infectious diseases. Given the ongoing threat posed by COVID-19 pandemics worldwide, antibodies have become one of the most promising treatments to prevent infection and save millions of lives. Currently, in silico techniques provide an innovative approach for developing antibodies, which significantly impacts the formulation of antibodies. These techniques develop antibodies with great specificity and potency against diseases such as SARS-CoV-2 by using computational tools and algorithms. Conventional methods for designing and developing antibodies are frequently costly and time-consuming. However, in silico approach offers a contemporary, effective, and economical paradigm for creating next-generation antibodies, especially in accordance with recent developments in bioinformatics. By utilizing multiple antibody databases and high-throughput approaches, a unique antibody construct can be designed in silico, facilitating accurate, reliable, and secure antibody development for human use. Compared to their traditionally developed equivalents, a large number of in silico-designed antibodies have advanced swiftly to clinical trials and became accessible sooner. This article helps researchers develop SARS-CoV-2 antibodies more quickly and affordably by giving them access to current information on computational approaches for antibody creation.

1 Introduction
The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, which is caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2), has already claimed the lives of approximately 6.8 million people so far and as of right now, there is no effective therapy for COVID-19 as the virus is emerging. To control the disease progression, various types of antiviral drugs and antibodies were prescribed to COVID-19 patients. Although antibodies offer protection with higher specificity against SARS-CoV-2 than drugs but their limitations point out the challenges in developing sustainable antibodies in the phase of rapid viral evolution.
COVID-19 therapeutic antibodies developed to target the key components of SARS-CoV-2, Spike (S) protein, which interacts with ACE2 receptor protein on the cells in the respiratory tract during viral invasion. However, continuous structural changes of S protein of SARS-CoV-2 caused by rapid mutations render the effectiveness of the therapeutic antibodies. The antibodies which have been approved by EUA to be prescribed for COVID-19 patients, lost the approval as the mAb is no longer effective against currently emerging SARS-CoV-2.
In this case, in silico technology paves promising approaches to design antibodies with our desired formats and customize the residues that favor higher binding affinity and good developability in a shorter time frame. According to Moore, the phrase “in silico” refers to computer-assisted experimental procedures used in modern research. The integration of in silico technology into pharmaceutical research, notably in antibody designing, offers a sustainable approach and complementary avenue to traditional experimental methods that facilitates efficient antibody discovery for SARS-CoV-2 while conserving time and resources.

2 Antibody discovery using in silico technology
Existing therapeutic antibodies for SARS-CoV-2 were discovered in laboratory through various approaches that involves in vitro technology. Hybridoma technology and phage display are employed to produce antibodies for SARS-CoV-2 with a wide range of application. Despite having many benefits to producing mAbs, in vitro technology poses limitations in terms of expenses as the methods mentioned above require sophisticated and resource-intensive high-throughput screening and characterization processes, which also consume adequate time. In this case, in silico technology complements in vitro technology and can overtake several stages of conventional antibody discovery methods.
In silico antibody discovery comprises a multi-staged computational approach that accelerates the precision of antibody development. The process begins with the analysis of antibody sequences extracted from databases such as Protein Data Bank (PDB), UniProt and other specified databases listed in Table 2. Modeling of 3D antibody structure is performed using predictive computational tools after sequence analysis to generate structural models with detailed spatial analysis. The next stage involves the evaluation of antibody interaction with targeted antigens through molecular docking. In this stage, high-affinity antibody candidates can be identified by predicting their interaction profiles. Finally, the developability of the antibodies will be evaluated via molecular dynamic simulation since the simulation refines the antibody-antigen complexes by examining their manufacturability. In recent times, in silico approach has been used widely in producing potential therapeutic options for COVID-19 through computational tools as presented in Table 1. In silico technology has been applied into SARS-CoV-2 antibody discovery in various stages of the process. Computational tools that can be used in different stages of SARS-CoV-2 antibody discovery are listed in Table 2.
Overview of in silico technology application in producing potential therapeutic options for COVID-19.
Article	Findings through in silico approach	Stages of antibody discovery using in silico approach	 	Antibody sequence database and structural database	Analysis of antibody sequences	Modeling of 3D antibody	Visualization of 3D antibody	Evaluation of 3D antibody	Evaluation of antibody interaction	Molecular dynamic simulation	 		To investigate the relationship between point mutation in the upstream region of the HR2 Motif of S protein and the binding capacity of mAb-39			✓		✓	✓	✓	 		To predict potential immunogenicity risk by accessing potential T-cell epitopes		✓						 		To predict solvent-exposed, potential N-glycosylation site in the Framework 1 region of Ab 22-D9 (N20) and one in the Framework 3 region of Ab 21-F2 (N92)			✓		✓			 		To analyse the binding mechanisms and impact of Omicron mutations on different classes of antibodies targeting the SARS-CoV-2 RBD.	✓	✓		✓		✓		 		To investigate the binding stability of RBD variants targeting a number of convalescent antibodies	✓					✓	✓	 		To produce structure guided design of fully de novo high affinity antibodies against specific epitopes of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein	✓	✓	✓		✓	✓		 		To study the interference of 6D3 with SARS-CoV-2 viral entry by competing with the host cell proteases	✓		✓		✓	✓		 		To provide a proof-of-concept study for the computational design of high-affinity antibodies that bind to multiple variants of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein	✓	✓		✓	✓			 		To investigate the interaction of 19n01 with RBD in the Omicron BA.2, BA.3, and BA.4/5 subvariants			✓			✓	✓	 		To redesign and renew the efficacy of COV2-2130 against Omicron BA.1 and BA.1.1 strains while maintaining efficacy against the dominant Delta variant	✓	✓	✓			✓	✓	 		To enhance the affinity of broadly neutralizing VHH that can combat COVID-19 in vivo		✓	✓			✓	✓	 		To enhance the binding affinity of the antibody	✓					✓	✓
This table summarizes research articles that incorporated in silico technology in various stages of SARS-CoV-2 antibody discovery process. Each reference listed under articles are individual research on in antibody discovery, followed by the finding of the research using in silico approach that highlights the key outcomes in the respective studies. Specific stages of antibody discovery where the computational approaches were used also identified in this table. For stages with in silico approach incorporation, a checkmark (✓) is used to indicate its inclusion. This table provide a comprehensive view of the diverse roles that in silico methods can play in antibody discovery and their adoption in different stages of the process.
Computational tools used in different stages of antibody discovery in silico.
Application in silico technology	Tools	Usage	References	 	Databases	UniProt	Provides well-annotated protein sequences		 	Protein Data Bank (PDB)	A repository for biological macromolecular crystal structures		 	SwissProt database	Provides non-redundant protein sequences		 	PROSITE	A protein data repository		 	Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP) database	Provide the most recent version of PDB of a protein		 	Structural Antibody Database (SAbDab)	Provides antibody structural data		 	Therapeutic Structural Antibody Database (Thera-SAbDab)	Antibody sequence repository, after numbered and aligned all therapeutic variable domain sequences to the sequences of known structures in SAbDab		 	Antibody Sequence Analysis	Antibody region-specific alignment (AbRSA)	Determines CDR through numbering the sequence		 	ANARCI	Annotates antibody and antigen receptor variable domain amino acid sequences from various species with different numbering schemes		 	3D Modeling of Antibody	SWISS-MODEL	Offers an automated modeling tool that is simple to use and incorporates expert knowledge, where the approach is characterized as rigid fragment assembly		 	MODELLER	Offers modeling of comparative protein structures		 	AlphaFold2	Offers an extensive deep-learning framework for protein structure prediction	, and 	 	RoseTTAFold	Model protein-protein complexes using only sequence information		 	ABodyBuilder	Model antibody only		 	Visualize 3D Antibody Model	PyMOL	Visualise protein molecules in various representations		 	Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD)	To view wider-ranging molecules including protein		 	Evaluation of 3D Antibody Interaction	ClusPro	Permits the direct docking of two interacting proteins		 	High Ambiguity Driven Docking Approach (HADDOCK)	Docking tool that harness biochemical and biophysical interaction data		 		RosettaDock	Offers multi-scale docking approach that combines a high-resolution, all-atom refinement stage that optimizes both rigid-body orientations and side-chain conformation with a low-resolution, centroid-mode, and coarse-grain stage		 	ZDOCK	A docking tool that uses Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to optimize electrostatics, desolvation, and GSC score that defines the total number of grid points in this layer that overlap any grid points belonging to ligand atoms to yield less a clash penalty		 	HawkDock	A docking tool is developed by the HawkDock server with the integration of the ATTRACT docking algorithm and the MM/GBSA free energy		 	Molecular Simulation of Antibody-antigen Complex	GROMACS (Groningen Machine for Chemical Simulations)	An open-source software package designed for molecular dynamics simulations of biochemical molecules including proteins	 and
This table outlines the key stages involves in in silico antibody discovery for SARS-CoV-2, along with the computational tools used at each stage, as described in the following sections of the review. The databases to acquire antibody and antigen sequences are also included in this table.

2.1 Analysis of antibody sequences
Sequences of antibody discovered as therapeutic option for COVID-19 are required to be analyzed before subjecting the sequence for further analysis. Since all variable domains fold into a series of beta strands joined by loops in a very similar 3D shape, the complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) are six of these loops at the top, where these regions develop loops that extend from the surface of the antibody, will result in direct contact with the antigen. Numbering each residue according to a conventional approach is very helpful for sequence comparisons and engineering due to the continuity of the antibody structural similarity. Precise identification and characterization of these antibody regions are crucial in development and modification of antibodies. These annotated CDRs establish a significant degree of variation in antibody structure. Hence, it is critical for recognizing CDR to ensure its binding to a specific antigenic molecule before posing modifications to the antibody.
Numbering schemes with different approaches and set of applications have been developed to standardize the annotation of CDRs. An early yet widespread approach for annotating CDRs is the Kabat numbering scheme, which detects hypervariable regions and relies on the antibody sequences alignment. The 3D structure of the antibodies is the foundation of Chothia numbering scheme which emphasizes the structural locations of CDRs and the protected framework areas that sustain them. An enhanced version of the original Chothia scheme, the Martin scheme, introduces more structural insights and improves the numbering to cover a greater number of spots, however, it has not been widely utilized. The well-established and comprehensive IMGT numbering scheme, annotates immunoglobulin and T cell receptors. It offers a standardized framework for comparing different species by ensuring consistency across species and antibody types by defining CDRs using both sequence and structural data.
Immunogenicity of the antibody sequences is also predicted to assess the immunogenic response of the therapeutic antibody which ensures safety and effectiveness. Immunogenicity prediction analysis helps in determining whether the antibody sequences exhibit low immunogenicity by identifying significant epitopes and ensuring that they fall below thresholds associated with strong immune activation. These antibodies can enhance their feasibility and reduce detrimental immune responses in various patient populations.
ANARCI, an online tool that offers to annotate variable domains of antibodies from various species, enabling precise identification of CDRs and their alignment for immunogenicity analysis, is widely used in several SARS-CoV-2 studies. Antibody region-specific alignment (AbRSA), is also a platform to perform sequence analysis by delimiting the CDRs and antibody numbering for numerous antibodies targeting viral particles.

2.2 Modeling of 3D antibody
The successive unfolding process of protein folding transforms the protein sequences of the SARS-CoV-2 binding antibodies, which are mostly composed of a linear sequence of amino acids, into a functional three-dimensional antibody structure. The arrangement of the amino acids determines its basic structure. From this linear arrangement, localized folding results in the formation of secondary structures including alpha helices and beta sheets, which are fuelled by hydrogen bonds between adjacent amino acids. The intricate three-dimensional tertiary structure is its repercussions of the continuous folding of the secondary structure together with the inclusion of loops and turns of the antibody.
Protein folding analysis provides many useful insights about the interaction of the antibody especially through identifying the structure of CDR loop formations, but this multifaceted process requires expensive and specialized equipment, making it a challenging task before computational tools are being employed. But as time passes, using in silico technology, where protein modeling has allowed for generally reliable predictions to be made. The goal of protein modeling is to make use of a range of computer methods to analyze amino acid sequences to predict the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the antibody sequences. Protein modeling provides distinctive approaches for predicting protein structures through a variety of tools that has been included on Table 2, which uses the protein sequences as an input.
AlphaFold2 produces remarkably accurate 3D structure predictions using a neural network architecture that has been trained on a large database of structural and protein sequence data. This tool is utilized in various SARS-CoV-2-related studies that explore the binding behavior of its structural proteins. There are also several studies on the structural analysis of antibodies that prove the modeling capability of AlphaFold2 for antibody sequences. SWISS-MODEL utilizes a homology-modeling approach that is performed iteratively until a satisfactory model structure is obtained. 3D structures of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies were successfully determined through this tool. MODELLER is a 3D modeling standalone tool, used to predict the 3D structure of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies and restore missing residues in its structure. RoseTTAFold is one of the modeling tools that uses neural network-based techniques, incorporating connection between sequences, atomic coordinates, residue-residue orientations, and distances. This tool has been used in several studies on SARS-CoV-2 antibody discovery. ABodyBuilder is an antibody modeling software that incorporates multiple tools, including ABangle and FREAD. Since this tool is specialized for antibody modeling, numerous studies employed ABodyBuilder to model the variable region of antibodies which also includes bispecific antibody.

2.3 Evaluation of antibody interaction
The specificity of a novel or pre-existing antibody of SARS-CoV-2 can be accessed through validation in silico using computational tools. The binding properties of an antibody are primarily determined by the sequence and structure of CDRs through molecular docking. Molecular docking is performed using the analyzed and modeled 3D antibody structures to study the interaction by predicting the preferred orientation, affinity, and interaction of an antibody-antigen complex by analyzing intermolecular interactions.
Molecular docking is a process that anticipates atomic-level molecular interactions. Molecular docking can be performed with various types of biological molecules which include small molecules such as drugs, metabolites, ligands, inhibitors, ions, and complex molecules that comprise DNA, RNA, proteins, peptides, carbohydrates, nucleosides. According to research by, molecular docking has proven its capability of being a pioneering analysis to validate biological model interaction by providing binding site information. In the process of validation of antibody binding, molecular docking helps in predicting the preferred orientation of an antibody to the targeted antigen when these molecules are bound to each other to form a stable complex.
Binding of an antibody exhibits both rigid and flexible properties which is essential for efficient antigen recognition and immune response. Electrostatic interactions and complementary structures lead to a relatively rigid and specific binding between the paratope and epitope where the rigidity ensures high-affinity binding and specificity. On the other hand, the antibody also exhibits flexibility that facilitates conformational changes in the antigen and antibody. Flexibility allows the antibody to bind to a wide range of epitopes and identify antigens with various conformations by allowing it to accommodate variations in the antigen structure. An induced-fit mechanism takes place in binding conditions, where the conformational changes between the antigen and antibody are made upon binding to enhance their interactions. The flexibility of an antibody allows it to adapt to the structural alterations in the antigen and improves binding affinity. In general, an antibody requires dynamic equilibrium between rigid and flexible phases upon its binding to the antigen.
RosettaDock is a docking approach that optimizes both rigid-body orientations and side-chain conformation. RosettaDock is used to perform docking of nanobodies against SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding domain (RBD), monoclonal antibodies against rare antigenic site of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and a specific antibody against SARS-CoV-2 spike protein to improvise the binding affinity. ZDOCK uses Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to yield less clash penalty in docking. Several studies employed ZDOCK to study the SARS-CoV-2 antibody-antigen interaction. HawkDock is an unique docking tool with integration of the ATTRACT docking algorithm and the MM/GBSA free energy that allows determination of antibody-antigen binding precisely. Docking is performed through this tool with nanobodies and therapeutic antibodies for interaction analysis. ClusPro is a widely used docking tool that has benchmarked against alternative docking tools in Critical Assessment of Predicted Interactions (CAPRI) studies. This tool employed to study the binding properties of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein RBD with nanobodies and SARS-CoV-2 spike protein with monoclonal antibodies. High Ambiguity Driven Docking Approach (HADDOCK) harnesses biochemical and biophysical interaction data, including mutagenesis or chemical shift perturbation data from NMR titration experiments to obtain near-native results. Binding prediction of the antibodies discovered with the targeted site on SARS-CoV-2 is performed in several studies using this tool.

2.4 Developability evaluation of antibody
The developability of antibody models discovered using in silico approach for COVID-19 will be studied and validated as they can aligned with the real-time experimentally produced therapeutic antibodies. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations offer a dynamic and comprehensive understanding of biomolecular behavior at the atomic level, and have developed to be an essential tool in the study of computational biophysics. In the field of antibody design, MD simulations have shown to be very helpful as a reliable means of testing in silico designs, bridging the gap between computational predictions and experimental findings by providing insights into the structures.
MD simulations operate based on the basic principles of classical mechanics, which make use of Newton’s equations of motion to predict the motions of individual atoms in a molecular system. MD simulations accurately depict the interactions between atoms, including the flexibility of bonds, angle bending, and non-bonded interactions such as van der Waals forces and electrostatics, by applying a force field, a mathematical model that defines the potential energy of the system. The force field selection is essential to the precision and dependability of MD simulations since it significantly impacts the simulation outcomes. Numerous force fields with unique strengths and applications have been developed over time. CHARMM force field is one of the most common and extensible force fields in computational chemistry which operates exceptionally well to simulate lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids. AMBER force field is particularly utilized for proteins and nucleic acids. The goal of AMBER is to supply precise parameter sets for biomolecular systems. The temporary conformational state of antibody binding is not always visible in static crystal structures but only can be revealed by MD simulations. Accurate parameterization of these forcefields in MD simulation play pivotal roles in comprehending the principles underlying antibody binding and refining antibody architectures to enhance their affinity and specificity for target antigens.
GROMACS, an open-source software package designed for molecular dynamics simulations of biochemical molecules including proteins, acts as an in silico to study the behavior of antibody and antibody-antigen complexes at the atomic level. The stability of various SARS-CoV-2 antibody-antigen complexes, including complexes involving the SARS-CoV-2 S protein and bispecific antibodies, as well as the SARS-CoV-2 S protein trimer with monoclonal antibodies, was assessed by measuring the root-mean-square fluctuation (RMSF) of the complexes to quantify dynamic stability.

3 Discussion
The global response to the SARS-CoV-2 outbreak has emphasized the critical necessity of quick therapeutic progress. Handling SARS-CoV-2 live virus necessitates adherence to Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3) laboratory standards as SARS-CoV-2 can be transmitted by air that can lead to respiratory transmission. Compliance with the biosafety regulations of BSL-3 adds to the time and cost of research as it requires a list of facilities and personal protective equipment. In this case, in silico approach have grown to be valuable in antibody discovery of SARS-CoV-2.
The usage of computational tools complements various parts of the experimental approach of antibody discovery for SARS-CoV-2. The process of discovering new antibodies necessitates creating antibody libraries consisting of a pool of antibodies featuring various binding sites and screening them to select the antibody candidates with the best binding affinities. Thus, the usage of molecular docking streamlines the process by cutting down the necessity to use experimental approach, which includes handling SARS-CoV-2 antigen or virus for repeated screening.
Molecular dynamic simulation bridges the gap between the in silico-developed antibodies and experimentally produced antibodies by mimicking the near-native condition of the antibody. Researchers can minimize the repeated usage of live SARS-CoV-2 virus and other experimental assays as these simulations reduce the dependence on experimental assessments while retaining a high level of accuracy. Determination of antibody 3D structure is also one of the most essential contributions of in silico approach in antibody discovery. 3D modelling is a useful complement to approaches such as cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) and X-ray crystallography for predicting the three-dimensional structure of antibodies. Computational modeling of 3D structure of the antibodies offers a cost-effective alternative, as the equipment required for the conventional approach is expensive to acquire and maintain.
Although implementation of in silico approach in SARS-CoV-2 antibody discovery significantly reduce the time and resource investments, transitioning from in silico predictions to experimentally validated antibodies present a few limitations. Biological systems are inherently complex, and in silico models often oversimplify these intricacies. Although in silico approaches can predict the near-native structure and conditions of antibodies, it unable to capture the complexity of the biological system such as glycosylation. Hence, developing integrated workflows that combine in silico predictions with experimental validation can optimise the transition between these stages.
Moreover, the effectiveness of in silico tools heavily depends on the availability of high-quality training data. Rapid evolution of SARS-CoV-2 has resulted in limited repositories of updated experimentally validated sequences and structural data in public databases. Limited availability of the information may hinder the accuracy of the computational tools and the accuracy of the computational predicts is compromised by this shortage of data. Expansion of these databases and providing quality training datasets for computational tools are critical steps that enhance the performance of in silico tools.

4 Conclusion
Antibody development is anticipated to accelerate at the greatest pace in upcoming years in life sciences, particularly in the fight against infectious diseases such as SARS-CoV-2. Researchers will be able to construct antibodies precisely but effortlessly due to the developments in bioinformatics and computer modeling. The in silico approach simplifies the process of antibody structure prediction and interaction analysis by providing a molecular dynamic simulation approach for validation. This method greatly improves the speed, economic performance, as well as effectiveness of the process of developing novel therapeutic antibodies. Although precision of computational assessments is reliant upon existing data and models, in silico technologies offer a quick and efficient means of prevention and treatment, that significantly reduce the worldwide burden of this infectious disease. The approaches are also having potential to resurface our knowledge of the immune system and antigen-antibody interaction advances. Overall, the idea of creating antibodies through in silico design has huge implications for the future prevention and management of SARS-CoV-2 and other infectious diseases.

Author contributions
TS: Conceptualization, Writing–original draft, Writing–review and editing. SM: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing–review and editing. WC: Supervision, Writing–review and editing. KA: Supervision, Validation, Writing–review and editing.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Generative AI statement
The author(s) declare that no Generative AI was used in the creation of this manuscript.

Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

References
Chapter 11 - protein structure prediction
Molecular docking as a tool for the discovery of molecular targets of nutraceuticals in diseases management
AlphaFold2 reveals structural patterns of seasonal haplotype diversification in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein variants
Remdesivir as a possible therapeutic option for the COVID-19
Establishment of murine hybridoma cells producing antibodies against spike protein of SARS-CoV-2
Nirmatrelvir use and severe covid-19 outcomes during the omicron surge
Identifying non-nucleoside inhibitors of RNA-dependent RNA-polymerase of SARS-CoV-2 through per-residue energy decomposition-based pharmacophore modeling, molecular docking, and molecular dynamics simulation
The SWISS-PROT protein sequence database and its supplement TrEMBL in 2000
Remdesivir for the treatment of covid-19 - final report
Mutual population-shift driven antibody-peptide binding elucidated by molecular dynamics simulations
Developments, applications, and prospects of cryo-electron microscopy
GROMACS: a message-passing parallel molecular dynamics implementation
The Protein Data Bank: a computer-based archival file for macromolecular structures
Computational approach for binding prediction of SARS-CoV-2 with neutralizing antibodies
De novo design and Rosetta-based assessment of high-affinity antibody variable regions (Fv) against the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor binding domain (RBD)
Chapter 10 - structural biology techniques: X-ray crystallography, cryo-electron microscopy, and small-angle X-ray scattering
CHARMM: the biomolecular simulation program
ZDOCK: an initial‐stage protein‐docking algorithm
Global landscape of SARS-CoV-2 genomic surveillance and data sharing
Crystal structure of a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) scFv domain rearrangement forming a VL-VL dimer
FREAD revisited: accurate loop structure prediction using a database search algorithm
Canonical structures for the hypervariable regions of immunoglobulins
In silico analyses on the comparative potential of therapeutic human monoclonal antibodies against newly emerged SARS-CoV-2 variants bearing mutant spike protein
Comparative binding ability of human monoclonal antibodies against Omicron variants of SARS-CoV-2: an in silico investigation
Antibody structure
Prediction of HIV sensitivity to monoclonal antibodies using aminoacid sequences and deep learning
Computationally restoring the potency of a clinical antibody against SARS-CoV-2 Omicron subvariants
Pymol: An open-source molecular graphics tool. CCP4 Newsl
HADDOCK: a protein-protein docking approach based on biochemical or biophysical information
Development of anti-PD-L1 antibody based on structure prediction of AlphaFold2
ANARCI: antigen receptor numbering and receptor classification
ABangle: characterising the VH-VL orientation in antibodies
Structural insights into the broad protection against H1 influenza viruses by a computationally optimized hemagglutinin vaccine
Local and global rigidification upon antibody affinity maturation
Predictions of the SARS-CoV-2 omicron variant (B. 1.1. 529) spike protein receptor-binding domain structure and neutralizing antibody interactions
Predicting changes in neutralizing antibody activity for SARS-CoV-2 XBB. 1.5 using in silico protein modeling
Antigen-antibody complex-guided exploration of the hotspots conferring the immune-escaping ability of the SARS-CoV-2 RBD
19n01, a broadly neutralizing antibody against omicron BA.1, BA.2, BA.4/5, and other SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern
Enhanced antibody-antigen structure prediction from molecular docking using AlphaFold2
On the interactions of the receptor-binding domain of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins with monoclonal antibodies and the receptor ACE2
Molnupiravir promotes SARS-CoV-2 mutagenesis via the RNA template
A human antibody of potent efficacy against SARS-CoV-2 in rhesus macaques showed strong blocking activity to B.1.351
Reducing immunogenicity by design: approaches to minimize immunogenicity of monoclonal antibodies
Computational design of nanomolar-binding antibodies specific to multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants by engineering a specificity switch of antibody 80R using RosettaAntibodyDesign (RAbD) results in potential generalizable therapeutic antibodies for novel SARS-CoV-2 virus
VMD: visual molecular dynamics
The PROSITE database
COVID-19 Variant Update
Recent advances in computational drug discovery for therapy against coronavirus SARS-CoV-2
In silico approach in drug design and drug discovery: an update
Identification of natural compounds as potent inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 main protease using combined docking and molecular dynamics simulations
Native or non-native protein–protein docking models? Molecular dynamics to the rescue
Synthesis, spectral studies, DFT, biological evaluation, molecular docking and dyeing performance of 1-(4-((2-amino-5-methoxy)diazenyl)phenyl) ethanone complexes with some metallic ions
Impact of E484Q and L452R mutations on structure and binding behavior of SARS-CoV-2 B. 1.617. 1 using deep learning AlphaFold2, molecular docking and dynamics simulation
Accurate prediction of antibody function and structure using bio-inspired antibody language model
Sequences of proteins of immunological interest
Nexus between in silico and in vivo models to enhance clinical translation of nanomedicine
Laboratory biosafety measures involving SARS-CoV-2 and the classification as a Risk Group 3 biological agent
Tixagevimab + cilgavimab: first approval
Developing therapeutic monoclonal antibodies at pandemic pace
Structural perspective on molecular interaction of IgG and IgA with spike and envelope proteins of SARS-CoV-2 and its implications to non-specific immunity
Applications of machine learning in antibody discovery, process development, manufacturing and formulation: current trends, challenges, and opportunities
Structure-based cross-docking analysis of antibody-antigen interactions
Development and characterization of phage-display-derived novel human monoclonal antibodies against the receptor binding domain of SARS-CoV-2
In silico analysis of the different variable domain oriented single-chain variable fragment antibody-antigen complexes
Continuous cultures of fused cells secreting antibody of predefined specificity
The ClusPro web server for protein–protein docking
ABodyBuilder: automated antibody structure prediction with data-driven accuracy estimation
IMGT®, the international ImMunoGeneTics information system® 25 years on
Machine learning based energy-free structure predictions of molecules, transition states, and solids
AbRSA: a robust tool for antibody numbering
Differential performance of RoseTTAFold in antibody modeling
SCOP: a structural classification of proteins database
Biosafety requirements for autopsies of patients with COVID-19: example of a BSL-3 autopsy facility designed for highly pathogenic agents
The RosettaDock server for local protein–protein docking
DNA binding studies of antifungal drug posaconazole using spectroscopic and molecular docking methods
Unravelling the molecular interactions between the SARS-CoV-2 RBD spike protein and various specific monoclonal antibodies
Structural families in loops of homologous proteins: automatic classification, modelling and application to antibodies
Protein structure analysis of the interactions between SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and the human ACE2 receptor: from conformational changes to novel neutralizing antibodies
What is in silico?
Hybridoma technology: is it still useful?
Computational modelling supports that dengue virus envelope antibodies can bind to SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding sites: is pre-exposure to dengue virus protective against COVID-19 severity?
Towards an optimal monoclonal antibody with higher binding affinity to the receptor-binding domain of SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins from different variants
Synthesis, characterization, molecular docking and network pharmacology of bioactive metallic sulfonamide-isatin ligands against promising drug targets
Computational approaches to therapeutic antibody design: established methods and emerging trends
Designing of a bispecific antibody against SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein targeting human entry receptors DPP4 and ACE2
An EUA for bebtelovimab for treatment of COVID-19
Significance of antibody numbering systems in the development of antibody engineering
SARS-CoV-2 and the host cell: a tale of interactions
Structural and functional properties of proteins
Exploring conformational landscapes and binding mechanisms of convergent evolution for the SARS-CoV-2 spike Omicron variant complexes with the ACE2 receptor using AlphaFold2-based structural ensembles and molecular dynamics simulations
Thera-SAbDab: the therapeutic structural antibody database
Broad epitope coverage of therapeutic multi-antibody combinations targeting SARS-CoV-2 boosts in vivo protection and neutralization potency to corner an immune-evading virus
Broadly neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 antibodies through epitope-based selection from convalescent patients
AlphaFold and implications for intrinsically disordered proteins
Bebtelovimab: the FDA-approved monoclonal antibody for treating patients with mild-to-moderate COVID-19
Comparative protein modelling by satisfaction of spatial restraints
An affinity-enhanced, broadly neutralizing heavy chain–only antibody protects against SARS-CoV-2 infection in animal models
SWISS-MODEL: an automated protein homology-modeling server
Omicron: a heavily mutated SARS-CoV-2 variant exhibits stronger binding to ACE2 and potently escapes approved COVID-19 therapeutic antibodies
Generation and molecular docking analysis of specific single-chain variable fragments selected by phage display against the recombinant nucleocapsid protein of fig mosaic virus
In silico methods and tools for drug discovery
Iterative in silico screening for optimizing stable conformation of anti-SARS-CoV-2 nanobodies
Atomic-level characterization of the structural dynamics of proteins
Molecular dynamics simulation of protein and protein–ligand complexes
AlphaFold 2: why it works and its implications for understanding the relationships of protein sequence, structure, and function
Multifaceted mutational immunotherapeutic approach to design therapeutic mAbs to combat monkeypox disease via integrated screening algorithms and antibody engineering
Phage display
An approach towards development of monoclonal IgY antibodies against SARS CoV-2 spike protein (S) using phage display method: a review
Role of computational methods in going beyond X-ray crystallography to explore protein structure and dynamics
A human monoclonal antibody neutralizes SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variants by targeting the upstream region of spike protein HR2 motif
Structural characterization of human monoclonal antibodies targeting uncommon antigenic sites on spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV
UniProt: a hub for protein information
GROMACS: fast, flexible, and free
Specificity, polyspecificity, and heterospecificity of antibody-antigen recognition
Development and testing of a general amber force field
Hybridoma-derived neutralizing monoclonal antibodies against Beta and Delta variants of SARS-CoV-2 in vivo
A large-scale systematic survey reveals recurring molecular features of public antibody responses to SARS-CoV-2
Comprehensive evaluation of fourteen docking programs on protein-peptide complexes
HawkDock: a web server to predict and analyze the protein–protein complex based on computational docking and MM/GBSA
Assessment of therapeutic antibody developability by combinations of in vitro and in silico methods
Comparative analysis of the CDR loops of antigen receptors
Nanobodies from camelid mice and llamas neutralize SARS-CoV-2 variants
Screening and affinity optimization of single domain antibody targeting the SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein
Benchmarking AlphaFold for protein complex modeling reveals accuracy determinants
Structure based affinity maturation and characterizing of SARS-CoV antibody CR3022 against SARS-CoV-2 by computational and experimental approaches
Recent progress in antibody epitope prediction
Broadly neutralizing anti-S2 antibodies protect against all three human betacoronaviruses that cause deadly disease