Pollination ecology in the tropical Andes: moving towards a cross‐scale approach
ABSTRACT
Plant–pollinator interactions structure ecological communities and represent a key component of ecosystem functioning. Pollination networks are expected to be more diverse and specialised in the tropics, but pollination ecology in these regions has been understudied in comparison to other areas. We reviewed research on pollination in the tropical Andes, one of the major biodiversity hotspots on Earth, where the uplift of mountains and past climate have resulted in spatiotemporally distinct species interactions. We found 1010 scientific articles on pollination in the Andes, of which 473 included or were carried out in tropical regions. The number of publications on pollination ecology in the tropical Andes has increased exponentially, with Colombia having the most articles, followed by Ecuador and Peru, and with Bolivia and Venezuela having notably fewer studies. More research has been carried out in humid montane forests and agricultural landscapes, and it has predominantly focused on describing diversity of species and interactions while neglecting analyses on the resilience and adaptability of pollinating systems, even though the Andean region is particularly susceptible to the effects of climate change and continues to undergo land conversion and degradation. Remarkably few studies have incorporated local knowledge, thus ignoring connections to human livelihoods and communities. A phytocentric perspective has been predominant, with fewer studies focusing directly on pollinators and a notable lack of articles with a holistic approach to the study of pollination across taxonomic groups at the community or ecosystem level. We propose that future research adopts a cross‐scale approach that considers the complexity of the ecological contexts in which plant–pollinator interactions occur, and incorporates long‐term monitoring with broader multilayer networks and molecular tools, experiments focused on ecophysiology and behaviour, animal telemetry, process‐modelling approaches and participatory science. A stronger field driven by interdisciplinary collaborations will contribute to knowledge about pollination at a global scale, as well as increase our understanding of the diversity and resilience of pollination interactions in this region, thus improving our capacity to predict and avoid ecosystem collapses.

INTRODUCTION
Pollinators shape the reproduction, gene flow and population dynamics of plants, while plants provide food resources that are vital for the survival, abundance and diversity of pollinators. Although plants can also reproduce without the aid of pollinators (i.e. through abiotic means or self‐pollination), most angiosperms depend on animals for pollen transfer and increased fecundity (Ollerton, Winfree & Tarrant,; Rodger et al., ; Stephens et al., ). The interactions between pollinators and pollinated plants form networks that are key for ecosystem functioning (Schleuning, Fründ & García, ) and, through evolutionary time, have been a major contributor to patterns of terrestrial biodiversity (Grimaldi, ; van der Niet & Johnson, ). The interdependence of species in plant–pollinator interactions is shaped by ecological and evolutionary contexts, with complex patterns of coevolutionary mosaics (Thompson,) and variation in their robustness and resilience to change (Kaiser‐Bunbury et al., ). With ongoing global changes, the importance of animal pollination as an underlying ecosystem service for food production, ecosystem restoration, and human welfare has been recognised as a high priority (Potts et al., ). Plant–pollinator interactions have therefore been the object of extensive study, with efforts made to increase our understanding of the drivers and consequences of such interactions, and aims ranging from advancing conceptual developments to addressing more applied goals such as sustainable agriculture (Mayer et al., ; Knight et al., ; Tong, Wu & Huang, ).
Still, pollination interactions in tropical regions remain largely understudied (Vizentin‐Bugoni et al., ), even though they exhibit remarkable variation and distinctiveness, have high species diversity and endemism, and are particularly vulnerable to ongoing anthropogenic changes. Within the tropics, the Andes Mountains stand out as one of the world's biodiversity hotspots (Myers et al., ). It is estimated that floral richness in the Andes exceeds 28,000 known species (Pérez‐Escobar et al., ), with many more yet to be described (Ondo et al., ). Similarly, several animal lineages in this region, including potential pollinating species, also reach record levels of diversity (Raven et al., ). Plants and animals in the Andes are also highly endemic, with many species having small ranges and occupying narrow niches (Lamoreux et al., ; Sandel et al., ), which makes them especially vulnerable to anthropogenic pressures because local extirpations may rapidly escalate to species extinctions when species ranges are small (Chichorro, Juslén & Cardoso, ; Staude, Navarro & Pereira, ; Manes et al., ; Trew & Mclean, ). Furthermore, endemic and threatened species in this region are insufficiently protected (Bax & Francesconi, ).
There is thus an urgent need for further investigation into plant–pollinator dynamics in tropical Andean ecosystems. Additional research on pollination ecology in this region will enhance management and restoration strategies, deepen our understanding of local Andean landscape complexities and contribute to the knowledge of pollination ecology globally. In this review, we initially describe the region, its major ongoing and future threats, and its uniqueness in terms of pollination systems (Section I). We then review current knowledge gaps about pollination ecology in the tropical Andes (Section II), propose future avenues that are critical for advancing research and informing conservation efforts (Section III), and outline major conclusions (Section IV).

Description of the tropical Andes
The tropical Andes Mountains occur broadly between 10° N and 23.4394° S (Tropic of Capricorn) on the western part of the South American continent. The region defined as the tropical Andes in our study includes the mountainous formations of Andean origin in Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia (Fig. 1). The Andes Mountain Range is also divided geologically into North, Central and South regions according to the position of the underlying tectonic plates, but we refer herein to the tropical and subtropical ecosystems north of the tropic of Capricorn as the ‘tropical Andes’ for simplicity and due to its ecological significance (Luteyn & Churchill, ).
Current and future land cover projections for the tropical Andes region. For this literature review, the tropical Andes region was defined as occurring north of the Tropic of Capricorn (23.4394° S), excluding areas in Chile and Argentina. (A) Current land cover for the region in 2020 at 1 km spatial resolution from the HILDA+ version 2b data set (Winkler et al., ). (B) Future land cover projections for 2100 under SSP5‐RCP8.5 (socioeconomic scenario of growth fuelled by fossil fuel consumption). (C) Projected areas of six land use and land cover classes from 2020 to 2100 under five socioeconomic scenarios (SSP1‐RCP2.6, sustainable development; SSP2‐RCP4.5, business as usual, SSP3‐RCP7.0, regional competition; SSP4‐RCP6.0, increased inequality, and SSP5‐RCP8.5, fossil fuels). Note that ‘Unmanaged grass/shrubs’ is equivalent to ‘Unmanaged grass/shrublands’ in the HILDA+ data set. The map for A and B was extracted from the GMBA Mountain Inventory (Snethlage et al., ) and we added a 50 km buffer to include lowland areas that are still under Andean influence (e.g. inter‐Andean valleys and foothills). See Fig. S1 for projections by country.
The ecosystems of the tropical Andes differ from those of the temperate Andes in that temperatures in tropical regions do not have marked seasonal fluctuations and growing seasons can span the entire year, although rainfall is highly variable (Young et al., ). Ranging from around 500 m above sea level (a.s.l.) up to summits over 6000 m a.s.l. (Josse et al.,), the tropical Andes hosts a variety of ecosystems including humid and dry forests, shrublands, and open grasslands that change drastically in abiotic and biotic conditions along elevation gradients (Cuatrecasas, ; van der Hammen,; Graham, ; Cleef, ). In fact, voyages throughout the Andes and observations of vegetation zonation along the slopes of Mt. Chimborazo in Ecuador inspired Alexander von Humboldt to conceptualise habitat stratification and turnover in elevation gradients as a foundational concept in biogeography and a major driver of biodiversity (Rahbek et al., ). Diversification across this region has been repeatedly linked to the uplift of the Andes mountains (Hughes & Eastwood, ; Antonelli et al., ; Chaves, Weir & Smith, ; Pérez‐Escobar et al., ) and is further influenced by the complexity of climatic history, environmental change and biotic interactions (Luebert & Weigend, ; Cadena, Pedraza & Brumfield, ; Lagomarsino et al.,; Flantua et al., ; Coelho et al., ).
Regardless of the ecological and evolutionary mechanisms driving species richness (Graham et al., ), it is undeniable that the tropical Andes is one of the most diverse regions on the planet (Myers et al., ). Different life forms are distributed from lowland habitats in inter‐Andean valleys and foothills to ecosystems of paramo or puna that are just below the rocky or snow‐covered mountain tops. Andean cloud forests at mid elevations (~1000–2000 m a.s.l.) are exceptionally diverse across taxonomic groups (Kessler et al., ; Kattan et al., ; Hutter, Lambert & Weins, ), but even elevations over 3000 and 4000 m a.s.l., exhibit adaptive radiations in some plant taxa [e.g. Lupinus (Hughes & Eastwood,); multiple clades in the paramo (Madriñán, Cortés & Richardson, ); Espeletia (Pouchon et al., )] and these ecosystems have a higher species richness than other tropical alpine regions, such as those in East Africa and New Guinea (Sklenář, Hedberg & Cleef, ).

Threats to tropical Andean ecosystems
The tropical Andes face the same major challenges that threaten ecosystems at a global scale, but this region is especially vulnerable to climate change and has been subject to intense landscape degradation and fragmentation (Young, Young & Josse, ; Armenteras et al., ). With increasing temperatures and changing precipitation regimes, the ranges of montane plants and animals are predicted to shift upwards in elevation (Larsen et al.,; Buytaert, Cuesta‐Camacho & Tobón, ; Bender et al., ; Tovar et al., ). Expected shifts in patterns also include increased tree cover in areas that are currently open ecosystems above the treeline (Morueta‐Holme et al., ; Arzac et al., ), contraction in species' ranges (Báez et al., ), and local extinctions on mountain summits (Forero‐Medina, Joppa & Pimm, ; Freeman et al., ). Although rainfall may increase in some areas, such as in forests located on the Pacific slopes in Ecuador and Colombia, the hydrological integrity of Andean ecosystems is threatened by reduced water supply from glaciers (Bradley et al., ), and changes in moisture transport from the Amazon basin (Arias et al., ) leading to longer dry seasons that might compromise biological stability and the overall health of ecosystems (Cresso et al., ). Temperature has increased and is predicted to produce warmer conditions, particularly at higher elevations, meaning that alpine ecosystems such as paramo and puna may be at higher risk (Vuille et al., ). In these vulnerable ecosystems, research has demonstrated that a shortage of water and increased temperatures cause physiological stress for plants, even though some species may be more tolerant than others (Ayarza‐Páez, Garzón‐López & Lasso,), making whole‐ecosystem responses difficult to determine. Similarly, different thermal tolerances have been found for bumblebees and stingless bees across elevation gradients, but species are thermally adapted to local climates and might be affected by changes in humidity with increased warming (González et al., ). As in other regions, plant–pollinator interactions are directly affected by climate change through possible changes in pollinator behaviour, plant or pollinator physiology, morphology or abundance, and spatiotemporal mismatches (Aguirre et al., ; Settele, Bishop & Potts,; Adedoja, Kehinde & Samways, ; Sonne, Maruyama & Martín González, ), impacting not only natural ecosystems but also related services to humans. For example, climate projections predict substantial reductions in species distributions of stingless bees used in meliponiculture in Colombia, threatening agricultural production and human livelihoods (González et al., ).
In addition, the Andes mountains have been historically transformed by human presence for thousands of years, long before the colonial period (Baied & Wheeler, ; Goldberg, Mychajliw & Hadly, ). Through time, wild landscapes have been impacted by agriculture, urban settlement, grazing, and mining (Etter, McAlpine & Possingham,; Armenteras et al., ; Rolando et al., ). Major cities and towns have expanded the human footprint in the region (Correa Ayram et al., ), and the influx and movement of human communities have brought about the introduction of exotic species, profoundly altering natural ecosystems (González et al., ). Today, the Andes are still under pressure from growing human populations and intensified production systems that cause land degradation and fragmentation, with several Andean ecosystems, including both humid and dry forests, already having lost more than 50% of their extent since preindustrial times (Comer et al., ).
To assess how the loss of natural ecosystems is expected to continue in the tropical Andes under different scenarios of socioeconomic development, we mapped current and future land cover projections for the region (Fig. 1) using the map for the Andes Mountains extracted from the GMBA Mountain Inventory (Snethlage et al., ). We used 1 km spatial resolution from the HILDA+ version 2b data set (Winkler et al., ) and downscaled future land use and land cover change projections from LandSyMM (Rabin et al., ) using the LandScaleR downscaling algorithm (Woodman et al., ; T. L. Woodman, B. Arendarczyk, K. Winkler, R. C. Henry, F. Eigenbrod, D. F. R. P. Burslem, P. Alexander & J. M. J. Travis, in preparation; see online Supporting Information, Appendix S1 for methods). We found that the expansion of cropland and managed forest cover in the tropical Andean region, for example, is projected to drive the loss of an additional 15 Mha of unmanaged forest and 4 Mha of unmanaged grass/shrubland areas between 2020 and 2100 under scenario SSP5‐RCP8.5, where future economic growth is sustained by fossil fuel consumption. Natural unmanaged forest areas are predicted to decrease by 2 Mha even under the scenario of sustainable development (SSP1‐RCP2.6; Fig. 1C). This pattern suggests that forests will be threatened by future land cover change if no mitigating actions are taken across the region. Substantial losses of unmanaged forests are expected to occur particularly in Colombia, where 7.67 Mha of unmanaged forest are projected to be lost by 2100 with business as usual (SSP2‐RCP4.5) in our defined Andean region (Fig. S1). Under the same scenario, the areas of unmanaged forest that will be lost by 2100 in the region for each country are: 2.38 MHa in Ecuador, 2.27 MHa in Peru, 0.16 MHa in Bolivia, and 0.11 MHa in Venezuela (Fig. S1). Habitat degradation and loss cause local extinctions that cascade through pollination networks, directly and indirectly affecting plants and pollinators and altering ecosystem stability as well as pollination services to crops (Pires et al., ; Bascompte & Scheffer, ). In short, due to their outstanding biodiversity and current and future threats, the tropical Andean mountains remain a global conservation priority, and the threats to these ecosystems constitute a threat to the communities of plants and pollinators within them (e.g. Martins et al., ).

Unique plant–pollinator interactions
The rugged topography, together with the dynamic geological and climatic history of the Andes, results in a highly heterogeneous landscape that shelters high endemism and diversity (Llambí & Rada, ), and thus the potential for unique plant–pollinator interactions with a striking richness of adaptations and interactions (Fig. 2), with new descriptions of species and pollination systems, even in recent years (e.g. Kawakita et al., ; Martel, Francke & Ayasse,). Fluctuations in past climate have repeatedly shifted vegetation bands along elevational gradients of mountain slopes, a phenomenon coined ‘flickering connectivity’ (Flantua et al., ) that results in iterative periods of isolation, differentiation and speciation (Hughes & Eastwood,; Rahbek et al., ). Importantly, pollination interactions themselves play a central role in driving diversification. Several mechanisms that contribute to diversification related to plant–pollinator interactions have been described using examples from the Andean region, including floral adaptation to pollinators (Muchhala & Potts, ; Smith, Ané & Baum, ), changes in plant reproductive strategies (Lagomarsino et al., ), and coevolutionary dynamics between interacting partners or guilds (Abrahamczyk, Souto‐Vilarós & Renner, ; Abrahamczyk, Poretschkin & Renner, ; Ibañez et al., ). The wealth of functional variation in tropical Andean plant clades in particular has stimulated research about transitions in adaptation to pollinators through the study of pollination syndromes (e.g. Lagomarsino et al., ; Smith & Kriebel, ). Pollination syndromes are suites of floral traits related to attracting certain functional groups of pollinators (sensu Fenster et al., ). Shifts in pollination syndromes through evolutionary time can be detected by mapping floral traits on phylogenetic trees, and these shifts can be driven by selection to reduce the extent of interspecific competition among plants (Muchhala, Johnsen & Smith, ; Cuartas‐Hernández et al., ) or expand the breadth of potential pollinators and increase pollination efficiency (Dellinger et al., ).
Photographs showcasing examples of plant–pollinator interactions in the tropical Andes. (A) Bombus rubicundus, a pollinator that is an important hub of interactions both within and between modules in plant–pollinator networks at high elevations, visiting rosetted plants (Espeletia grandiflora) endemic to paramos. (B) Two flies (left, Hirtodrosophila sp. and right, Zygothrica antedispar) attracted to the mushroom‐smelling orchid Dracula laffleurii. (C) Diurnal hawkmoth visiting flowers of Stachytarpheta cf. cayennensis, an exotic verbena flower popular in ornamental gardens. (D) Orchid bees of the genus Euglossa visiting flowers of Anthurium antioquiense, a plant endemic to the Central Cordillera of Colombia. (E) Solitary male bees of the genus Caenohalictus visiting a flower of the cactus Cumulopuntia sphaerica in mountainous desert shrubland, where these bees are frequent pollinators of cacti but have been largely understudied. (F) Stingless bee Melipona sp. in a sanctuary dedicated to meliponiculture, visiting a native aster, Cosmos sp., that is commonly used to attract insect pollinators to gardens and crops. (G) A male fly of Eudejeania sp. pseudocopulating with a flower of the sexually deceptive orchid Telipogon salinasiae. (H) Anoura fistulata, the nectar bat with the longest tongue relative to its body recorded for any mammal, drinking from the flowers of bromeliad Werauhia gladioliflora. (I) Phaethornis guy, a hermit hummingbird with a long, curved bill visiting Heliconia sp. by hovering. (J) Oxypogon guerinii, a hummingbird with a short, straight bill visiting Espeletia grandiflora by clinging to the flowers. (K) Nectar‐robbing by Diglossa cyanea through holes it pierces in the base of the corolla of an exotic Kniphofia sp. (L) Nectar‐robbing by Aglaiocercus kingii from Fuchsia sp., using holes previously made by flowerpiercers. Photographs by Laura Milena Manrique‐Garzón (A), Lorena Endara (B), Diego Emerson Torres (C), Daniel Salazar Rios (D), Yeison Calizaya Melo (E), José Isidro Vargas (F), Carlos Martel (G), Nathan Muchhala (H), and Pedro A. Camargo‐Martínez (I–L).
Examples of extreme morphological and ecological specialisation also exist, despite the risks of relying on just a single or a few interaction partners. Such is the case for two plants from different families (Centropogon nigricans, Campanulaceae and Marcgravia williamsii, Marcgraviaceae) in the Ecuadorian cloud forests that have a single recorded floral visitor: Anoura fistulata, the tube‐lipped nectar bat (Muchhala et al., ). This bat's tongue is so long that it is the only one capable of reaching the nectar deep within the flowers of these plants. Measuring 150% of the bat's body length, the tongue retracts into a glossal tube in the bat's thoracic cavity (Muchhala,). The risk inherent in increased specialisation is relying on a single or reduced set of interaction partners, which can lead to coevolutionary escalation (Thompson, ) and an increased vulnerability to disturbance (Bascompte & Scheffer,). Interestingly, in harsh habitats with lower pollinator richness and abundance, differences in mating systems arise, with potentially lower levels of outcrossing due to the predominance of generalised pollination (Cristóbal‐Pérez et al., ; Manrique‐Garzón et al., ), abiotic reproductive strategies (e.g. wind pollination in high‐elevation Espeletia; Berry & Calvo, ), and selfing for reproductive assurance (e.g. Melastomataceae; Manrique Valderrama et al., ). Furthermore, as bee species richness peaks at mid elevations in cloud forests (González & Engel, ), at higher elevations bumblebees and other insect pollinators such as dipterans and moths may become more predominant (Abrahamovich & Díaz, ; Wang et al., ; but the latter only has one data set from the Andean region) and vertebrate pollination is favoured (Dellinger et al., ).
In addition, the tropical Andes also stands out for having a group of vertebrate pollinators that have notably radiated in this region: the hummingbirds (40% of all described species occur in the Andes; McGuire et al., ). Although hummingbirds occur from Alaska and Canada to Patagonia, clades unique to the region such as Coquettes and Brilliants diversified with the uplift of the Andes, while others such as Mangoes, Emeralds, Hermits and Bee hummingbirds colonised different areas or originated after Andean orogeny (McGuire et al., ). Such taxonomic richness is also expressed as a remarkable functional diversity, where key differences in morphology and behaviour have resulted in the exploitation of a broader spectrum of niches in comparison with other regions where hummingbirds are extant (Sonne et al., ). For instance, the hummingbird species with the largest and the smallest bills can be found coexisting in the same assemblage in the Colombian Andes (Rico‐Guevara, ). Additionally, tropical Andean hummingbirds have smaller ranges and higher levels of endemism (Sonne et al., ), and have even colonised ecosystems at high elevations (Stiles, ) with adaptations to harsh mountain conditions. One example of such adaptations is adjusted haemoglobin concentrations in response to decreased oxygen availability (Williamson et al., ). Throughout the complex evolutionary history of hummingbirds as pollinators (Barreto et al., ), variation in key traits such as bill shape and size, body mass, and even feet for clinging while drinking nectar (Colwell et al., ), has fostered trait‐matching and concomitant size and shape variation with floral morphology (Rico‐Guevara et al., ). This is classically explained with the example of the long bill of the sword‐billed hummingbird (Ensifera ensifera) matching the long corolla tubes of the flowers it pollinates (including species in the genera Passiflora, Brugmansia, and Aetanthus), but bill length varies throughout this hummingbird's range according to the richness of visited plant species. In these geographic mosaics of local adaptation the quality and probability of interactions are driven by the presence or absence of different species in plant–pollinator communities, creating specialised interactions that can also be evolutionarily labile (Abrahamczyk et al., ; Soteras et al., ).
In general, the high spatial variation in community composition and environmental contexts has led to differences in the likelihood, type, and effectiveness of plant–pollinator interactions, even at very small spatial scales (Vélez‐Mora, Trigueros‐Alatorre & Quintana‐Ascencio, ). For example, populations of evening primrose plants (Oenothera epilobiifolia) in the Venezuelan Andes exhibit lower nectar quality at a higher (4450 m a.s.l.) than lower elevation (3600 m a.s.l.) site and had no recorded visits from pollinators even though pollinators were present and visited other plants. Given that the total energy offered by these flowers was similar between these sites due to floral aggregation at the high‐elevation site, the lack of pollinator visits to O. epilobiifolia at higher elevation may be due to the low reward per flower visit not offsetting the cost of foraging. Additionally, although plants exhibited similar capacities for self‐compatibility at both elevations, pollinator visitation at lower elevations resulted in increased seed production (Rodríguez‐Sánchez et al., ).
Furthermore, since the probability, quantity and quality of interactions also depend on the temporal match between plant and pollinator, interaction networks are influenced by plant phenology and the movement of pollinators within or across habitat patches (Olesen et al., ; Guzmán, Chamberlain & Elle, ). In the tropical Andes, rainfall, rather than seasonal temperature changes, largely determines flowering pulses (e.g. Franco‐Saldarriaga & Bonilla‐Gómez, ). Consequently, the timing of flowering follows complex patterns that are variable across dry or wet years, which are determined by global and regional climatic variability (Poveda et al., ; Arias et al., ). In addition, flowering within and between species is not always synchronous, allowing plant communities at the same site to sustain assemblages of pollinators throughout the year (Pelayo et al., ) or pollinators to move between sites to exploit differences in plant phenology, for example across elevations (Gutiérrez, Rojas‐Nossa & Stiles, ).
The emerging picture is that plant–pollinator networks in tropical Andean mountains are highly variable at fine spatiotemporal scales, as a response to species turnover and patterns of endemism and diversity, differences in environmental variables across sites, and changing climatic conditions within and across years (Cuartas‐Hernández & Medel, ; Restrepo Correa et al., ; Rodríguez‐Sánchez et al.,). A better understanding of this complexity is necessary to understand the diversity, evolution, and vulnerability of plant and pollinator communities (Burkle & Alarcón, ) as well as their use in local human activities and value to people.

KNOWLEDGE GAPS
To assess the current knowledge gaps about pollination ecology in the tropical mountain ecosystems of the Andes, we conducted a systematic literature search with a standardised protocol and set of key words (Pullin & Stewart, ; Page et al., ; see Appendix S2 and Fig. S2). We searched for published research articles that contained in the title, abstract, or key words, the words ‘pollen’ or ‘pollin*’ and ‘Andes’, ‘Andean’, ‘South Americ*’ or any Andean country as an indication of location (see Appendix S2 for search string). Given that Spanish is the main language of the Andean region and it is used for scientific publications on this region, we designed a bilingual search (Amano et al., ; Zenni et al., ) that (i) employed search terms both in English and Spanish (see Appendix S2) and (ii) used two databases: Web of Science as the global database of indexed research, and Scielo, which contains collections of local biodiversity and ecology journals in Latin America. We conducted this search on 28 December 2023.
We automatically excluded Web of Science categories related to analyses of fossil pollen (and unrelated topics, see Appendix S2) and removed duplicates. This resulted in 3109 publications, and we added 55 relevant articles that were not located by the automated search (Pullin & Stewart, ; Table S1). We checked all publications by reading titles and abstracts. During this stage, we further excluded studies that were conducted outside the Andean region, not original research (e.g. reviews), unrelated to pollination ecology or not directly about the plant–pollinator interaction (e.g. descriptions of pollen grain structures, phylogenetic reconstructions that did not consider interactions, and distribution models or descriptions of single species). For the remaining 1010 publications that were included in downstream analyses, we recorded country (or countries), elevation(s), ecosystem(s) type where the study was performed, year of publication, journal, language, taxonomic scope, and if the study included applied research (e.g. honey production or agriculture) (Table S1). We used country information to define if studies were carried out in the tropical or temperate Andes, both, or at a continental scale. Although Chile and Argentina have territories north of the Tropic of Capricorn, we defined any study in these countries as ‘temperate Andes’ for ease of classification of studies by country rather than searching for coordinates. Of the 1010 studies identified by our search procedure, we excluded 537 studies from for the temperate Andes from further analyses, giving a final total of 473 studies included in our review. Finally, we identified the major themes that each publication addressed and the main methods used (Table S1, Appendix S2), allowing each study to have several themes and methods when they were covered. Common research themes were: (i) functional, genetic and species diversity; (ii) phenology; (iii) species interactions; and (iv) resilience and adaptability to change (Appendix S1).
Of the 1010 articles identified by our search, 414 (41%) were studies conducted in tropical regions (defined as in Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru or Bolivia), 537 (53%) in temperate regions (defined as in Chile or Argentina), 9 (0.9%) encompassed both regions, and 50 (5%) were carried out at continental scales. Within the tropics, 18% of studies that reported elevation were located at low (below 1000 m a.s.l.), 11% at mid (1000–2000 m a.s.l.), 24% at higher mid (2000–3000 m a.s.l.), 11% at high (3000–4000 m a.s.l.), and 2% at very high (over 4000 m a.s.l.) elevations, whereas the remaining 35% covered elevational gradients encompassing more than one of these categories (Figs 3A and S3). The fact that a large proportion of studies have been carried out at higher elevations may reflect an Andean history of large human settlements in these areas, with three capital cities being located over 2500 m a.s.l. (Bogotá, Quito and La Paz). Most publications about pollination ecology in the region have focused on humid montane forests (37% of articles that described their study‐site ecosystems), with research in dry or alpine ecosystems increasing more recently (Figs 4 and S4). For anthropogenic habitats, most research has been done in croplands and pastures (23%) compared to urban (4%) and forestry areas (3%, Fig. 4). The number of studies has increased exponentially, notably in Colombia (a total of 174 published studies), followed by Ecuador (107) and Peru (83). There were fewer studies in Bolivia (40) and Venezuela (33) (Fig. 3B). Almost one quarter of published articles (22%) were written in Spanish, highlighting the importance of including local languages to gain a more complete picture of relevant scientific output.
Geographic, temporal, thematic, and taxonomic distribution of research on pollination ecology in the tropical Andes. (A) Density of articles about pollination in the tropical Andes according to study site elevation in metres above sea level (m a.s.l.), with the green curve showing lower bounds and the blue curve showing the upper bounds of study locations. When studies were carried out at a single elevation, the lower and upper bounds are the same. Dashed lines indicate elevations of capital cities in tropical Andean countries, with the addition of Cusco, which was the capital of the Inka empire. Note that Caracas and Lima are not located in the Andes. The same plot by country is available in Fig. S3. (B) Accumulated total publications through time for each tropical Andean country. Studies with a continental approach (i.e. encompassing several countries and aiming for broad spatial coverage) are classified as ‘continental’. (C) Number of publications according to major research themes (top panel) and taxonomic groups (bottom panel). ‘Diversity’ refers to functional, genetic and species diversity. Studies that were not focused on a single group but rather studied pollination as a whole are classified as ‘General’.
Natural and anthropogenic ecosystem types where research on pollination ecology has been conducted in the tropical Andes. Ecosystem types were extracted from publications that described the ecosystem where they were carried out (359 publications) and are classified as shown in the legend, based on the map of South America ecosystems provided by The Nature Conservancy (see Table S2) and adding three anthropogenic categories: agriculture (croplands and pastures), forestry and urban areas. We removed one very early study (1950, in agricultural ecosystem type in Peru) to ease visualisation. See Fig. S4 for plots by country.
Greater emphasis has been given to describing functional, genetic and species diversity, together with species interactions, whereas a focus on phenology or on the resilience and adaptation of pollination to change was less common (Fig. 3C). Of the published work we assessed, 5% focused on honey production and 23% on agriculture. Only 16 (3%) articles used local knowledge as part of their research. Most published work investigated pollination by using plants as the focal taxonomic group (62%; Fig. 3C), with plant chemical ecology (volatiles, 5% of total studies on plants), genomics (4%), species distribution models (SDMs, 2%) and network analyses (1%) receiving less attention within plant research in this field. There were fewer studies on the pollinators themselves (36% in total, with hymenopterans and birds being the most studied groups, with 82 and 61 articles, respectively; Fig. 3C). Particularly few studies have investigated methods of animal movement (3% of studies on animals), or used behavioural experiments (5%), genomics (2%), population genetics (0.5%), and SDMs (5%). It may be the case that our search terms, which focused solely on pollination, excluded publications on pollinating animals that did not explicitly consider their interaction with plant reproduction or make a direct link to pollination biology and ecology. However, we note that this is symptomatic of research ignoring the consequences of animal dispersal, seasonality, behaviour, and evolution on their role as pollinators, as well as the influences of plants on these animals. This represents a significant gap in animal research for the tropical Andes, and more attention must be given to studying plant–pollinator interactions from the pollinator's perspective. There is also a lack of publications that are not focused on taxonomic groups but take a holistic approach to characterising pollination at the community or ecosystem level (only 8 articles, 1% of total).
In the following subsections we present an overview of the scientific literature on pollination ecology in the tropical Andes, identifying knowledge gaps and summarising results from the perspective of the four major themes: functional, genetic and species diversity; phenology; species interactions; and resilience and adaptability to change.

Functional, genetic and species diversity
Due to the high species richness of the tropical Andes, it is unsurprising that research on pollination in this region has mainly focused on describing diversity (289 studies, 61%). By comparison, studies on pollination ecology in Chilean mediterranean ecosystems of the temperate Andes are available for less than 8% of plant species (Medel, González‐Browne & Fontúrbel, ), a number that could potentially be even lower for the tropical Andes, since this region is highly biodiverse. Baseline information on pollination in the tropical Andes is still lacking even for economically important crops such as cacao and avocado (Dymond et al., ; Vansynghel et al., ). Continued efforts revealing the variation in forms and function of pollination in this region will undoubtedly enrich our understanding about the nature of interactions between plants and their pollinators, as well as reveal patterns in their diversity.
The most common method used to assess functional diversity has been through measuring morphological traits (266 studies, 56%), mostly for plants but also for pollinators (Figs 5 and S5). Key traits that influence pollination have been compared within clades and across groups of pollinators to study adaptation to certain interaction partners (Filipowicz & Renner, ; Muchhala & Thomson, ) and environmental contexts (Cuartas‐Hernández et al.,; Rodríguez‐Sánchez et al., ), including interspecific competition (Muchhala & Potts, ). Morphological traits that are key for pollination are also subject to selection (Lagomarsino et al., ), and variation in key traits can result in reduced niche overlap, thus explaining the occurrence of closely related sympatric species with differing reproductive strategies (Moreno‐Betancur & Cuartas‐Hernández, ) or highly specialised feeding habits (Mauck & Burns, ). The reconstruction of ancestral states of traits has been frequently used to explain shifts in plant pollination syndromes and infer visiting pollinators (Weigend & Gottschling, ; Lagomarsino et al., ), and this has stimulated research in taxonomy and systematics (52 studies, 11%). Less attention has been given to uncovering the basis of phenotypic variation or quantifying gene flow and population structure (15 and 29 studies, 3 and 6%, respectively). Plants have been the main focus of genetic analyses (87 studies, 18% of total), with arthropods (13, 3%) and birds (4, 1%) included in genetic studies much less frequently and mammals not at all (0 studies).
Relationships among major research themes, taxonomic groups and main methods used in the scientific literature on pollination ecology in the tropical Andes. Thickness of lines is proportional to the number of studies, with a line being drawn each time a major theme (left) or method (right) is included in a study, so several lines can be drawn if a study has more than one theme or method. Colours indicate taxonomic groups: plants (green), arthropods (lilac), birds (pink), mammals (yellow), and a general (black) approach to pollination (i.e. not focused on taxonomic groups). ‘Diversity’ refers to functional, genetic and species diversity; SDM = species distribution model; ‘Morphometrics’ and ‘Phenology’ include plant and pollinator morphometrics and phenology, respectively; ‘Other’ includes several other methods (Table S1). A histogram of studies by method is available in Fig. S5.
The special focus on plants, followed by hymenopterans and birds as pollinators (Fig. 3C), has led to a taxonomic bias that excludes some pollination systems altogether or underestimates the number of possible pollinators. Such bias neglects less‐conspicuous taxonomic groups, traditionally dismissed as unrelated to pollination, or third‐party species that may influence pollination interactions. Nocturnal pollination, for example, is typically understudied due to the increased difficulty of fieldwork at night, although some nocturnal pollinators such as bats (23 studies, 5%) and moths (2 studies, 0.4%) are known to be very important in this region, as well as globally (Muchhala & Potts, ; Buxton et al., ; González‐Gutiérrez et al., ). Moreover, studies that challenge previous research biases on pollinators may reveal groups of pollinators that were previously thought to not have such a role, such as fireflies visiting flowers of endemic paramo plants (Ladino Peñuela, Botero & Lima da Silveira,). In other parts of the world, surprising pollinators have also been described, such as snails in India being important pollinators of morning glories (Volvulopsis nummularium) during rainy days when bees are not active (Sarma et al., ). By contrast, occasional pollinators may have limited influence on plant reproduction, but recognising their role in pollen transfer can broaden our knowledge about pollination strategies and network complexity (Ollerton, ; Requier et al., ). This is the case for rodent pollination, for which we only found three studies from Ecuador (Cárdenas et al., ; Dellinger et al., ; Nivelo‐Villavicencio, Timbe & Astudillo, ) and one in Colombia (Matallana‐Puerto & Cardoso, ). Lastly, species with an essential but indirect relation to pollination interactions have also been ignored. For example, we found no studies relating microbes in plants or soil to pollination, despite the growing evidence supporting their influence on plant–pollinator interactions in other parts of the world (Barber & Soper Gorden, ; Russell & Ashman, ).

Species interactions
Plant–pollinator interactions in the tropical Andes have been studied mostly through observational research, with floral visitation detected visually by humans or cameras (197 studies, 42%) or inferred by collecting pollen grains from the bodies of captured animals (part of pollen analysis methods; 139 studies, 29%, Figs 5 and S5). By recording the occurrence and frequency of interactions, these methods have revealed key properties of community structure, environmental variation and unexpected species associations. Network analyses (27 studies, 6%) have been useful to detect key species roles, describe community structure (e.g. Ramírez‐Burbano et al., , Manrique‐Garzón et al., ), and relate spatiotemporal change in structural properties to the stability of pollination communities (Tinoco et al., ; Sonne et al., ). Nevertheless, there is evidence that pollination networks are highly variable even at very fine spatial scales (Pelayo et al., ), so compiling more networks with standardised protocols across the region will be useful to understand broader patterns and underlying mechanisms of network structure, providing insight to questions related to the diversity and evolution of pollination interactions at a macroecological scale (as has been done for hummingbird–plant interactions, see e.g. Maruyama et al., ; Dalsgaard et al., ).
However, a bipartite model of pollination as a mutualism omits other interactions that also influence the plant–pollinator interaction. Although understudied, there is evidence of competition modifying resource selection (Weinstein & Graham, ) and herbivory affecting pollinator visitation through damage to floral morphology and reward (Chautá et al., ) and emission of volatile compounds (Kessler, Halitschke & Poveda,). A notable case of direct and indirect competition influencing pollinator visitation to flowers is nectar robbing (Hazlehurst & Karubian, ). Nectar robbers shape the structure of plant–pollinator networks and can reduce plant fitness as they pierce holes that change behaviours of legitimate pollinators (Kjonaas & Rengifo, ; González & Loiselle,). Although nectar‐robbing is common in other regions, the tropical Andes has a high diversity of specialised flowerpiercers (Rojas‐Nossa, Sánchez & Navarro, ). Flowerpiercers are birds in the tanager family (Thraupidae) that have hooked bills (Mauck & Burns, ), which they use to hold the flower's corolla, pierce it with the mandible, and drink nectar without coming into contact with the flower's reproductive structures. A few studies have shown that some flowerpiercers can also be legitimate pollinators, lending insight into how the mutualism–antagonism spectrum can vary with behaviour and morphology and highlighting the importance of considering their role in pollination networks (Pelayo, Rengifo & Soriano, ; Cuta‐Pineda, Arias‐Sosa & Pelayo, ).
By contrast, we found no studies in the tropical Andes on how predation affects pollinators' behaviour (Gavini, Quintero & Tadey, ), or how mutualistic–antagonistic interactions with fungi and microbes influence key pollination traits (Russell & Ashman, ; Wang & Tang, ; O'Neill, Brody & Ricketts, ). A closer look at these smaller life forms will certainly improve our understanding of how tertiary partners influence pollination interactions, such as phoretic mites hitching rides on hummingbirds to visit flowers possibly competing with their animal hosts for floral nectar (López‐Orozco & Cañón‐Franco, ). Additionally, there is a research gap on the role played by exotic species of plants, pollinators and tertiary partners, with a few examples showing how invasive plants are already integrated into pollination networks (Mackin et al., ; Quijano‐Abril et al., ) and the predominance of honeybees (Apis mellifera) over native bees in degraded landscapes (Cely‐Santos & Philpott, ). Invasive species strongly influence communities of pollinators and plants, and this has been extensively studied in the temperate Andes (e.g. Aizen, Morales & Morales, ; Sanguinetti & Singer, ; Chalcoff et al., ), which serves as a catalyst for prioritising similar studies in the tropical Andes too.

Phenology
The complexity of phenological patterns of both plants and pollinators in the tropical Andes warrants more research. We found 104 (22%) studies related to this topic, but much more evidence is required to describe broad spatiotemporal patterns because phenology is expected to be species and context specific. Marked changes in flowering are probably driven by precipitation seasonality, but this is poorly documented (Aguirre et al., ). Moreover, there is evidence of high variation in pollination network structure even at very small spatial scales (Cuartas‐Hernández & Medel, ). Asynchronicity in flowering is possibly driven by the benefit of sustaining pollinator assemblages throughout the year (Pelayo et al., ) and reducing competition between closely related plant species (Moreno‐Betancur & Cuartas‐Hernández, ). Tropical plants exhibit great variability in phenological rhythms (Sakai, ), and there is a large knowledge gap regarding the genetic basis underlying this diversity and their plasticity in response to changing climatic conditions (Satake, Nagahama & Sasaki, ). Most efforts to describe phenology have concerned plant flowering (Fig. 5), with almost no information on the seasonal movements of pollinators. Overall, researchers should aim to replicate their studies across sites and temporal windows to describe general patterns, as has been suggested previously for other complex mountainous regions (Medel et al., ).

Resilience and adaptability to change
Publications related to resilience and the capacity for adaptation of pollination in the tropical Andes are the least frequent (69 studies, 15%; Fig. 3C), despite the urgent need of data for management and conservation initiatives. There are more publications in this theme that incorporate local knowledge in their research (3% of total publications versus 15% of those focused on resilience and adaptability to change), and a greater use of methods classified as ‘other’ that are useful in describing responses to disturbance (e.g. land cover analyses represent 20% of publications in this theme versus 3% of total publications). However, some methods that could provide relevant insights into how pollination interactions are affected by change in this region are underrepresented in the literature, for example pollinator movement (1% of publications within this theme), phylogenetic analyses (1%), genomics (1%), animal experiments (3%), and species distribution models (4%, Fig. 5).
As research on resilience and adaptability to change accumulates for the tropical Andes, evidence has shown that plants and pollinators are affected by land conversion, fragmentation and pesticide use (Gutiérrez‐Chacón et al., ; Tinoco, Santillán & Graham, ; Struelens, Mina & Dangles, ; Obregón et al., ), invasive species have become integrated into interaction networks (Mackin et al., ), key roles of endangered species are lost as they disappear from unprotected habitats (Ramírez‐Burbano et al., ), and that habitat fragmentation causes pollen limitation, genetic bottlenecks and altered population dynamics (López‐A., Bock & Bedoya, ; López et al.,). Additionally, some studies have demonstrated that predicted changes in future climate may lead to reduced available niches (e.g. González et al., ) and associated co‐extinction of interaction partners in plant–pollinator networks (Matallana‐Puerto et al., ; Sonne et al., ). The variety of threats and their implications for pollination will be increasingly overwhelming as evidence accumulates, and yet research has failed to predict change and generate direct recommendations. The few exceptions have shown that improved predictions should assess spatial and temporal heterogeneity of interactions, since the rate of coextinctions is variable across ecological communities (Sonne et al., ) and assessments of resilience are conditioned by the complexity that we recognise within interactions (Montesinos‐Navarro et al., ).
There have been only a few studies that have tested management strategies and identified tangible means for recovering plant–pollinator interactions in the tropical Andes. A study in western Colombia found that active restoration was more effective than natural regeneration in augmenting pollinator visitation and fruit production in an aroid plant (García‐Robledo, ). In the southern Andes of Ecuador, network metrics of plant–hummingbird interactions were used to select plant species that are key for restoration (Crespo et al., ). In rural settings in Colombia a study showed that artificial feeders for hummingbirds have the potential to increase connectivity between habitat patches (Ramírez‐Burbano et al., ), although the generalised use of feeders remains hotly debated and more conclusive evidence is needed (Echeverry‐Galvis et al., ). More research in anthropogenic landscapes could give insights into how pollination interactions have responded to change, but comparatively few studies are from urban areas or managed forests (4% and 3%, respectively, of the 359 articles that described studied ecosystem types). Overall, knowledge gaps remain substantial, and the urgent need for data to inform conservation and management actions demands more applied research and greater involvement of local communities.

FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
The scale of organisation of the key players and processes involved in pollination ranges from genes and molecules to organs, organisms, populations, communities, ecosystems, landscapes and biogeographic regions. In this sense, research that embraces complexity and avoids excluding key abiotic or biotic factors will contribute most strongly to the field (Levine & Hart, ). A cross‐scale approach places pairwise interactions into a wider ecological and evolutionary context with population or community‐level studies (Fig. 6), improving predictions of change. Research on pollination ecology at a global scale has increasingly adopted a network‐based view (Knight et al., ) and plant–pollinator conservation has been encouraged to adopt a systems approach (Borchardt et al., ), providing the basis to recognise pollination as a vital process that underlies ecosystem structure and has deep implications for human livelihoods and wellbeing (Potts et al., ).
A cross‐scale approach to the study of pollination ecology. Pollination includes key players that range from the level of molecules, genes and microorganisms (A) to the web of interactions of communities (B) and landscapes across elevation gradients and geographic regions (C). (A) Circles highlight microscopic factors that can influence pollination, including volatile molecules that attract pollinators to flowers, microorganisms resident in the soil or plant organs, and the genes of both plant and pollinator partners. (B) Web of interactions at the community level, with orange lines showing floral visitors as potential pollinators, and white lines showing fruit development and seed dispersal. Dashed lines indicate additional biotic interactions within (blue) and between (yellow) species, such as direct competition (hummingbirds in territorial dispute), and indirect competition (fly and bee feeding on nectar, shrubs competing for light under the canopy), predation (owl hunting hummingbird), and interaction antagonism (phoretic mite on hummingbird competing for flower nectar). The honeybee is in a pink circle to depict invasive species. (C) Landscape configurations of habitats within and across elevational bands, which can also be approached at large continental scales. Colours indicate different habitat types, black dashed lines show movement within or between habitat patches and white dashed lines indicate movement across elevations. Note that illustrations are not to scale, and they represent functional groups rather than species. Figure created in BioRender (https://BioRender.com/o34w763).
Single research projects typically cannot convey complexity across all scales, but broadening awareness of the field's status and needs will enable research questions to be more impactful and interconnected. International and interdisciplinary research networks have the potential to (i) integrate relevant methodologies and standardised protocols for data collection, through shared knowledge and training, (ii) secure resources to support the longer‐term continuation of projects that have already started to flourish across the tropical Andes, and (iii) expand research to additional sites and subregions, especially those that have been underexplored.
In this section, we outline future research avenues that should be prioritised to advance the field of pollination ecology in the tropical Andes. We highlight the need to monitor spatiotemporal variation, conduct experiments focused on behaviour and ecophysiology, track movement of pollen and pollinators, model complex processes and stimulate participatory research that engages local human communities.

Monitoring spatiotemporal variation
Monitoring schemes collect data continuously, providing essential background data for longer term studies that can identify trends across time. Monitoring data collected in relation to pollination ecology may include, but are not limited to, occurrence and abundance of species and interactions, pollinator behaviour and movement, plant growth and physiology, abiotic conditions, etc. Monitoring is fundamental to capture the dynamic nature of pollination interactions (CaraDonna et al., ), since snapshots are insufficient to encompass the variability of the interaction and its ecosystemic role. Data collected by monitoring also serve as a baseline to assess change and suggest management goals. Spatial variation may be captured by forming collaboration networks that include various study sites, with standardised protocols to make comparisons possible. It is challenging to identify the most urgent monitoring needs, and monitoring programmes require investment of both funds and human resources. However, the cost of monitoring is likely to be much lower than the economic value of pollination services (Breeze et al., ). Ideally, monitoring protocols should be general enough that numerous research questions can use the collected data. A good strategy is to monitor several taxonomic groups rather than only a few, providing a community‐level approach that reveals aspects of system structure and stability. Additionally, monitoring tertiary partners outside the pollinating relationship will allow the study of multilayer networks with more than one interaction type (Dáttilo et al., ; Luna & Dáttilo, ), variation across time and space (Pilosof et al., ), and the influence of abiotic properties. Monitoring protocols can range from traditional surveys (O'Connor et al., ) to continuous detection of floral visitors using camera traps (van der Niet et al., ) or triggering systems (Rico‐Guevara & Mickley, ), schemes where citizen scientists help collect data (Birkin & Goulson, ), or more sophisticated techniques such as computer vision and artificial intelligence to identify interactions and describe behaviour (Ratnayake et al., ). The use of genetic tools may be particularly useful, with DNA barcoding and environmental DNA (eDNA) sampling and metabarcoding uncovering hidden diversity and interactions (Carrasco‐Puga et al., ; Marconi et al.,; Johnson et al., ) such as for microbiomes of plants and pollinators (Luna et al., ). With the possibility of constructing large data sets that should be maintained and curated through time, it is important to reflect not only on how data will be collected, but also consolidated, curated, stored and shared (following FAIR principles, see Wilkinson et al., ). Monitoring schemes may be inserted into national strategies (e.g. for Colombia, see Nates‐Parra, ) to ensure continuity, relevance and scope.

Case study: collaborative network to monitor pollination in the high Andes of Venezuela
The Global Observation Research Initiative in Alpine Environments (GLORIA) is a long‐term project that aims to assess the effects of global warming on montane ecosystems at a continental scale through standardised protocols that survey plant communities (Steinbauer et al., ). The creation of GLORIA‐Andes in South America was a key step to connect to this global initiative and generate monitoring data in a region where it is lacking (Inouye, ; Tovar et al., ). Venezuela has been part of the GLORIA‐Andes network since 2012, and has established seven vegetation monitoring summits located between 4200 and 4600 m a.s.l. Starting in 2018, a baseline for the annual phenological flowering pattern of summit plants and plant–pollinator networks was also established in the Piedras Blancas study area to provide mechanistic indicators to investigate how interactions that shape plant reproduction are responding to climate change (Fig. 7). Results thus far indicate that these high tropical alpine plant communities and their plant–pollinator networks could be particularly vulnerable to the loss of species in climate change scenarios, given their low species richness and functional redundancy, coupled with a high degree of specialisation and endemism (Pelayo et al., ). In accordance with the GLORIA protocol of repeating monitoring every 5 years, the Venezuelan sites were again surveyed for plant phenology and pollination interaction networks between 2023 and 2024, generating data that are currently under analysis. Continuation of long‐term monitoring schemes will enable robust assessments of community responses to climate change, but participation of other high tropical mountain locations within GLORIA is yet to take place. Joining such continent‐wide initiatives provides the potential for exchange of information such as new methods and local training.
Variation of monitored interaction networks across elevations. Monitoring is part of the GLORIA‐Andes project in Piedras Blancas, Parque Nacional La Culata, Venezuela at 4200, 4400 and 4600 m above sea level (a.s.l.). All networks are highly specialised and have marked seasonal fluctuations, but the two lowest summits have similar species richness and structural indices compared to the highest site. Across sites, probabilities of interactions are linked to plant species occurrence, plant phenology and sampling effort. Nodes on the left side of networks indicate visited plants and nodes on right show pollinators, with colours indicating different taxonomic groups as shown in the legend. Thickness of connecting lines show frequency of visits and size of nodes represent degree centrality. Figure adapted from Pelayo et al..

Experiments focused on ecophysiology and behaviour
Experimental approaches can enable research to establish causal relationships that are relevant for pollination, with the potential for revealing complex direct and indirect effects of a variety of abiotic and biotic factors on behaviour, morphology and physiology, and, ultimately, the mechanisms that drive and sustain pollination, such as network stability and species fitness (e.g. Fründ et al., ; Biella et al.,). Experiments have primarily been carried out on plant reproduction (115 studies, 24%), focusing on the study of pollen limitation by assessing seed and fruit set. However, more detailed studies on physiology and behaviour that incorporate animals in experimental setups (only 14 studies, 3%) can also unveil morphological adaptations that influence pollinator attraction as well as pollen transfer, efficiency, and receptivity (Rengifo, Cornejo & Akirov, ; Muchhala & Potts, ; Muchhala & Thomson, ; Muchhala et al., ; Policha et al., ; Costa et al., ). Experimental research in the temperate Andes, for example, has described visual and olfactory cues that are key for pollinator attraction, vary geographically and have driven floral diversification (Schlumpberger & Raguso, ; Schlumpberger et al., ; Moré, Cocucci & Raguso,; Moré et al., ).
In addition, we highlight that manipulating abiotic conditions to simulate future scenarios is important to anticipate responses and inform management strategies. For example, Guevara et al. controlled resource availability to test the effects of land use change on competition between hummingbirds. They found that forest conversion affects selection of the best artificial feeders in the presence of competitors, but that this trend changed across elevations and species assemblages. Similarly, González et al. (2022) increased temperatures in controlled conditions to study thermal thresholds that affect bumblebee physiology at different elevations. Their results showed that high mountain bumblebees could survive similar maximum temperatures as lower elevation bumblebees, suggesting that other drivers related to climate change, such as drought or competition, may be more important for future persistence. The use of elevational gradients as natural laboratories is a way to compare predicted responses in different environments [e.g. Tito, Vasconcelos & Feeley, ; Olsen et al. in Norway].

Case study: using OTC‐based research to evaluate pollination in a warmer world
The IPPEX network (International network of paramo and puna experimental warming sites) has pioneered a series of in situ warming experiments using open‐top chambers (OTCs) to simulate future warmer climates for high‐Andean mountain ecosystems. OTCs have polycarbonate walls hinged together into a hexagonal shape with an open top, warming the air inside the chamber through delayed escape of infrared radiation while also allowing airflow, rainfall, and movement of animals such as pollinators (Fig. 8). This experimental approach can be used to predict future climate change impacts on mountain biodiversity and ecosystem services, and to assess the ecological consequences of warming. The IPPEX network's collaborative, multi‐site strategy across the Andes also allows investigation of the spatial variability of responses of paramo and puna ecosystems to climate change.
Experimental approach to simulate climate change with open‐top chambers (OTCs). OTCs set up in the Paramo Sumapaz in Colombia at 3500 m above sea level (a.s.l.) (A) and in the Paramo in the Antisana Volcano in Ecuador at 4580 m a.s.l. (B). Photographs by Eloisa Lasso.
A critical future focus for the IPPEX network through OTC‐based research is exploring how warming influences plant reproductive processes, including phenology, pollination, and fertility. Experiments conducted in Ecuador and Colombia using OTCs have consistently demonstrated gradual shifts in vegetation dynamics in response to warming (Duchicela et al., ; Lasso et al., ; Solarte et al.,). Preliminary findings from Ecuador indicate alterations in floral investment without corresponding phenological changes, while observations from Colombia suggest that warming may advance or delay flowering times, depending on the species, potentially disrupting the spatial and temporal patterns of pollinator interactions. OTC experiments can also explore how warming affects floral traits and displays, which in turn influence pollinator behaviour and ultimately impact reproductive success. Variations in precipitation, seasonality, elevation, vegetation, and land‐use history of the sites in the network are crucial for understanding broader patterns and pinpointing the conditions under which warming will exert the most significant impacts. The effects of warming on the phenology and reproduction of these unique ecosystems remain poorly understood, highlighting a significant knowledge gap that OTC‐based research in the tropical Andes is exceptionally positioned to fill.

Tracking movement of pollen and pollinators
Pollinator movement is informative of their foraging behaviour, seasonality, dispersal, and range shifts, and therefore is relevant for plant reproduction and population dynamics through patterns in floral visitation, pollen transfer and deposition, and ultimately gene flow. Methods to collect data on pollen movement include using fluorescent powder (Valdivia & González‐Gómez, ) and labelling pollen grains with quantum dots (Minnaar & Anderson, ), as well as inferring pollen flow from the analysis of plant genetic differentiation (Dellinger et al., ; Gamba & Muchhala,). Pollinator movement can be detected and described from direct observations (Smith et al., ), mark–recapture (García‐Robledo et al., ), estimating seasonal species distributions with citizen science data (Rueda‐Uribe et al., ), analysing stable isotopes (Paxton et al., ), and animal tracking with telemetry (Hazlehurst & Karubian, ).
Animal telemetry is the method that directly measures an individual's trajectory, providing detail on pollinator movement. It can be applied over larger spatial and temporal scales compared to direct observation by humans or use of cameras, since transmitters are attached to animals and may communicate location data remotely. We found only one study related to pollination ecology that tracked animal movement with telemetry in the tropical Andes (Hazlehurst & Karubian, ), possibly because it is still difficult and expensive to track small species despite the relatively recent technological advances (Wilmers et al., ). A variety of technologies are available, with the choice depending on the research questions, available budget, and study species. The size of the study species is important because transmitters need to be as light as possible to avoid adverse effects on the animal's health or behaviour (Geen, Robinson & Baillie, ). Very light transmitters have been developed for deployment on small animals to generate near‐continuous tracking data. The largest tags incorporate Global Positioning System (GPS) transmitters to obtain information on an animal's coordinates. Lighter alternatives include geolocators, passive integrated transponders (PIT) and radio transmitters, but differences in their spatial and temporal resolution, storage capacity, detection distance, battery life and tag weight should all be carefully considered (Bridge et al., ). Outside the tropical Andes, research tracking pollinators has generally been focused on bees and bumblebees and has been used to determine space use and feeding preferences, particularly in croplands (e.g. Hagen, Wikelski & Kissling, ; Cavigliasso et al., ). More recently, telemetry studies in other regions have provided exciting new data that describe foraging activity and routes of pollinating bats (Goldshtein et al., ; Rivera‐Villanueva et al., ). Across taxonomic groups, tracking technologies are an essential toolbox that can enable the discovery of unknown movement patterns across different landscapes, improving inferences on the effects of climate and land use change, as well as enhancing related management strategies.

Case study: fine‐scale and near‐continuous tracking of wild pollinators with radio telemetry
Automated radio telemetry systems (ARTS) currently provide the lightest tags for estimating continuous trajectories of animals. Tag weight starts at 0.06 g, allowing deployment on animals with a body mass over 1.2 g (maximum 5% of body mass). ARTS consist of arrays of receivers that store information about radio signal strength emitted by tags, which can be calibrated to estimate the distance of a tag to each receiver by timestamps. By overlapping data from three nodes or more, x and y coordinates of animal trajectories may be calculated. An ARTS grid to track pollinating hummingbirds and flowerpiercers has been set up in the Eastern Cordillera of Colombia in Chingaza National Natural Park, over 3150 m a.s.l. and covering elfin forest and paramo vegetation (Rueda‐Uribe et al., ). It consists of 46 receiving nodes, which cover an area of approximately 0.7 km2 (Fig. 9). It has produced novel bird movement data at a fine spatiotemporal scale and may be used to investigate pollinator seasonality, home ranges, and association with vegetation types. In the future, other pollinators that may be tracked with this technology include bats, rodents, insects such as bumblebees, moths and butterflies.
Automated radio telemetry system to track movement of pollinators in high‐Andean ecosystems. (A) Map of grid set up in the Valle de los Frailejones in Chingaza National Park, Colombia, with 46 receiving nodes (white points) and main antenna (pink flag). (B) Set‐up of the main antenna 10 m above the ground. Data are received from nodes in the valley by receiving yagi antennas (i) and downloaded using the Cellular Tracking Technologies (CTT) SensorStation (ii). Power is supplied to the system from a marine deep cycle battery (iii) that has additional charge from a solar panel (iv). (C–E) Birds with attached CTT LifeTags radio transmitters: (C) great sapphirewing (Pterophanes cyanopterus) with a hummingbird harness; (D) masked flowerpiercer (Diglossa cyanea) with a leg loop harness; and (E) sparkling violetear (Colibri coruscans) with glue‐on tag. Map made using Google Earth and photographs by Cristina Rueda‐Uribe (B, E), Manuela Lozano (C), and Pedro A. Camargo‐Martínez (D).

Modelling complex processes
Conceptual and quantitative models help understand how multiple drivers are interconnected in determining the responses of complex systems and enable predictions of plant–pollinator communities under different scenarios. Pollination studies in the tropical Andes have used models to untangle driving factors of species radiations (Lagomarsino et al., ), identify the major variables that define species ranges (Matallana‐Puerto et al., ) and predict coextinction cascades (Sonne et al., ). Models can be tailored to the questions of interest. For example, Moré et al. used species distribution modelling to understand the environmental factors that influenced floral scent variation. Even though models may be restricted by temporal and spatial resolution, computing power, and the choice of scale, they have the capacity to test processes at different levels. For example, a spatially explicit individual‐based model to study the pollination ecology of the palm Oenocarpus bataua in northwestern Ecuador found that high co‐flowering density reduced pollen dispersal distance at a local scale, but the reverse pattern was true across the landscape (Díaz‐Martín et al., ). Despite such studies, key topics have not been investigated in the tropical Andes through modelling but have been addressed elsewhere. Examples include the effect of mating systems on genetic diversity (Marchelli, Smouse & Gallo, ), abundance of pollinators and pollination services across landscapes (Lonsdorf et al., ; Polce et al., ), and integration of possible effects of policy and market economies (Kremen et al., ). The development and application of models should aim to integrate major stakeholders, particularly if the goal is to anticipate losses of biodiversity or find management solutions, but such models have scarcely been used to predict change in the tropical Andes (with some exceptions, see e.g. Matallana‐Puerto et al., ; Sonne et al., ) and there is an urgent need to formulate new models with nuanced context‐dependent drivers.

Engagement with local knowledge through participatory research
Participatory research engages local knowledge from the early stages of projects to ensure a more accurate assessment of needs, motivations and management opportunities. A real exchange between different types of knowledge (Groffman et al., ) can result in projects that are successful and sustainable in time. Participatory research can provide greater knowledge about the natural systems that are studied, and human presence and intervention in the landscape is also key to understanding current patterns of diversity. Unfortunately, we found that very few studies (16, 3%) used local knowledge in their research on pollination ecology in the tropical Andes, despite evidence of how the participation of local communities can help to identify pollinators (Beltrán‐Tolosa et al., ), recognise motivations to protect pollinators (Kolze et al., ), define the most viable management solutions (Bravo‐Monroy, Tzanopoulos & Potts, ; Struelens et al., ), and describe cultural processes that affect gene flow, diversity and evolution of staple crops (Parra‐Rondinel et al., ). People may be engaged in research projects on pollination through a variety of mechanisms, ranging from passive to active involvement. These include but are not limited to surveys, workshops, focus groups, citizen science and BioBlitzes, encounters between art and science, and science‐policy meetings. Much greater effort needs to be made by researchers to incorporate these methods into projects as a fundamental component rather than a secondary feature, using established frameworks that link ecological research with other disciplines such as social sciences and art (Adams et al., ). It is urgent for research on pollination ecology in the tropical Andes to integrate local communities because pollination is intrinsically linked to human systems through its influence on livelihoods and the economic value of pollination services (Olschewski et al., ; Ollerton, ), even in urban contexts (Silva et al., ).

Case study: integrating specialised and local knowledge to restore pollination
Nature reserves have the potential to engage human communities to restore pollination services through the integration of specialised and local knowledge. One example is the private reserve El Zoque, located in the Eastern Cordillera of Colombia at 3000 m a.s.l. in a rural area not far from the capital Bogotá. It is dedicated to conserving remaining high‐Andean forest and paramo, using a strategy that involves local people in nature tourism, sustainable production and conservation (Fig. 10). Through nature tourism, the reserve generates funds and employment opportunities from the protection of natural ecosystems, provides a service of entertainment and connection to nature, and benefits from the knowledge of local guides about the landscape and its history. The reserve has also supported a shift from cow to goat dairy production to reduce localised impacts on plants and soils, and has a plant nursery for active restoration in adjacent areas that is managed by local young people and has the goal of increasing ecological connectivity for pollinators. By using observation data on plant–pollinator interactions, the reserve's nursery has selected keystone species to prioritise and establish in degraded areas to increase pollinator abundance. In addition, they have involved the local community in monitoring pollinators and educational activities related to pollination ecology, including the painting of a mural to depict pollinators and visited flowers. In this way, El Zoque has created opportunities for restoring and preserving fundamental ecological processes, renewed young peoples' interest in nature, and integrated specialised and local knowledge in management.
Examples of nature‐based solutions and research involving local communities. Activities carried out in El Zoque Nature Reserve in the Eastern Cordillera of Colombia include (A) a plant nursery with slow‐growing Puya sp. bromeliads of the paramo, experimenting with different growing techniques and employing local people; (B) active restoration efforts with community training; (C) farmers and nature guides sharing produce from goat milk as a productive alternative to dairy cows; and (D) an artistic mural made by young community leaders of a charismatic plant–pollinator interaction of the region (flowers of stem rosette Espeletia grandiflora and green‐bearded helmetcrest, Oxypogon guerinii). Photographs by Mauricio Restrepo (A, B) and Cristina Rueda‐Uribe (C, D).

CONCLUSIONS
Research on pollination ecology in the tropical Andes has increased exponentially, but there are thematic, taxonomic, methodological, geographic, and ecosystem‐level biases that lead to significant knowledge gaps. Publications on pollination ecology in this region have primarily described diversity and pairwise species interactions through methods of morphometrics and pollinator visitation, mostly focusing on plants and overlooking some groups of important pollinators as well as biotic and abiotic factors that influence pollination indirectly.
It is concerning that local knowledge has been largely ignored in pollination research within the region, as engaging key stakeholders is essential for achieving meaningful impacts on policy and society.
Moving beyond descriptive studies to understand the wider context of pollination and how natural communities can respond to change will enhance our ability to manage and protect pollination interactions amid ongoing environmental challenges.
We propose a cross‐scale approach to capture the complexity of pollination, emphasising the importance of international and interdisciplinary research networks to drive progress of this field in the region. Collaborative networks can be particularly useful in integrating standardised data‐collection methods, supporting the continuation of existing projects, and expanding research to understudied locations.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
C. R.‐U.: Conceptualisation, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualisation, Project Administration, Writing – original draft; A. C.: Conceptualisation, Data curation, Investigation, Methodology, Writing – review and editing; T. L. W: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Visualisation, Writing – review and editing; E. L.: Supervision, Conceptualisation, Visualisation, Writing – original draft; R. C. P.: Supervision, Conceptualisation, Writing – original draft; L. M. M.‐G.: Visualisation, Writing – review and editing; M. C. M: Writing – review and editing; R. A.: Writing – review and editing; T.‐L. A.: Writing – review and editing; G. B.: Project Administration, Writing – review and editing; D. F. R. P. B: Writing – review and editing; P. A. C.‐M.: Writing – review and editing; M. A. E.‐G.: Supervision, Writing – review and editing; C. G.‐A.: Writing – review and editing; C. G.‐R: Writing – review and editing; L. T. L: Supervision, Writing – review and editing; K. K. S. L.: Supervision, Writing – review and editing; F. M.: Writing – review and editing; C. M.: Writing – review and editing; L. M.: Writing – review and editing; A. S. T. P.: Writing – review and editing; R. A. R: Supervision, Visualisation, Writing – review and editing; J. R.: Writing – review and editing; A. R.‐G.: Writing – review and editing; C. R.: Writing – review and editing; J. M. J. T: Project administration, Supervision, Writing – review and editing.

Supporting information

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
Data are available as online Supporting Information.

REFERENCES
References identified with an asterisk (*) are cited only within the online Supporting Information.
Evolutionary flexibility in five hummingbird/plant mutualistic systems: testing temporal and geographic matching
Escape from extreme specialization: passionflowers, bats and the sword‐billed hummingbird
Influence of plant reproductive systems on the evolution of hummingbird pollination
Bumble bees of the neotropical region (Hymenoptera: Apidae)
Are deception‐pollinated species more variable than those offering a reward?
Phenological growth stages of tree tomato (Solanum betaceum cav.), an emerging fruit crop, according to the basic and extended bbch scales
Toward increased engagement between academic and indigenous community partners in ecological research
Asynchrony among insect pollinator groups and flowering plants with elevation
Functional structure and patterns of specialization in plant‐pollinator relationships of an agroecosystem in Valle del Cauca, Colombia
Floral and reproductive biology of Matisia cordata (fam: Malvaceae)
Abejas visitantes de Aspilia tenella (Kunth) s. f. Blake (Asteraceae): comportamiento de forrajeo y cargas polínicas
Bees visiting Mimosa pigra l. (Mimosaceae): foraging behavior and pollen loads
Invasive mutualists erode native pollination webs
Effect of Bombus atratus (Hymenoptera: Apidae) on tomato production (Lycopersicon esculentum mill.) in greenhouse in Bogotá plateau, Colombia
Are orchid bees useful indicators of the impacts of human disturbance?
The effect of photoperiod on flowering and tps production in the warm tropics
Trophic composition of the insect community in two livestock production agroecosystems with Leucaena leucocephala (lam.) de wit and Panicum maximum jacq
Tapping into non‐English‐language science for the conservation of global biodiversity
Columnea corralesii, a new species of Gesneriaceae from Colombia
Phylogenetic relationships and ecological speciation in the mistletoe Tristerix (Loranthaceae): the influence of pollinators, dispersers, and hosts
Solanum perlongistylum and S. catilliflorum, new endemic Peruvian species of Solanum, section basarthrum, are close relatives of the domesticated pepino, S. muricatum
Tracing the impact of the Andean uplift on Neotropical plant evolution
Genetic insights into the historical distribution of Polylepis pauta (Rosaceae) in the northeastern cordillera oriental of Ecuador
Stigmatic receptivity and hybridization in cowpea beans (Vigna unguiculata l. (Walp.))
Species of Syrphidae (Insecta: Diptera) of the UCLA University Park, Lara state, Venezuela
Diet of nectarivorous bats from the national park Cerros de Amotape, Tumbes
Diet and trophic structure in an assemblage of bats in montane forest of Pampa Hermosa National Sanctuary, Junín, Peru
Hydroclimate of the Andes part II: Hydroclimate variability and sub‐continental patterns
Changes in atmospheric moisture transport over tropical South America: an analysis under a climate change scenario
Pollination systems in sweet granadilla (Passiflora ligularis juss.) as a basis for genetic and conservation studies
Floral reorientation: the restoration of pollination accuracy after accidents
Divergent pollination systems in sympatric species of Southamerican Dalechampia (Euphorbiaceae)
Deforestation dynamics and drivers in different forest types in Latin America: three decades of studies (1980–2010)
Pollination system of two endemic Bolivian cacti: Harrisia tetracantha and Neoraimondia herzogiana
Modelling the effect of temperature changes on plant life‐form distribution across a treeline ecotone in the tropical Andes
Morphometric variation in the Alonsoa‐Meridionalis complex (Scrophulariaceae)
Fine‐scale temporal dynamics of flower visitors sheds light on insect‐assemblage overlap between sexes in a dioecious Ecuadorian palm
Reproductive growth of Passiflora cincinnata mast
Habitat preference and vulnerability to drought of three Hypericum species of the páramo
Interspecific reproductive barriers between sympatric populations of wild tomato species (Solanum section lycopersicon)
Effects of climate change on Andean biodiversity: a synthesis of studies published until 2015
Evolution of high Andean puna ecosystems: environment, climate, and culture change over the last 12,000 years in the Central Andes
The predictive value of nectar chemistry to the recognition of pollinator types
How do belowground organisms influence plant–pollinator interactions?
Palynological analysis at family level of corbicular pollen and hairy surface of Melipona eburnea and Melipona illota (Apidae: Meliponini)
Macroevolution of the plant–hummingbird pollination system
Outbreeding depression and reproductive biology of Nymphaea ampla (salisb.) dc. (Nymphaeaceae)
Palynological evaluation of bee pollen load batches from the Venezuelan Andes of Misinta
The resilience of plant–pollinator networks
Conservation gaps and priorities in the tropical Andes biodiversity hotspot: implications for the expansion of protected areas
Estudios de biología floral, reproductiva y visitantes florales en el Loche de Lambayeque (Cucurbita moschata duchesne)
Flower abundance and defendability at two mass‐blooming understory plants structure nectar‐feeding bird guilds in garua forest of western Ecuador
Unraveling plant‐pollinator interactions from a south‐west Andean forest in Colombia
Genetic variability of parentals and inter and interspecific f1 populations of Physalis peruviana l. and P. floridana rydb
Mestizo farmers' knowledge of Entomofauna is reflected in their management practices: A case study in the Andean‐Amazon foothills of Peru
Projected impacts of climate change on functional diversity of frugivorous birds along a tropical elevational gradient
Floral biology and pollination of the dioecious palm Phytelephas seemannii in Colombia: an adaptation to staphylinid beetles
Floral nectar chemical‐composition of some species from Reserva Rio Guajalito, Ecuador
Wind pollination, self‐incompatibility, and altitudinal shifts in pollination systems in the high Andean genus Espeletia (Asteraceae)
Pollinator limitation and position dependent fruit‐set in the high Andean orchid Myrosmodes cochleare (Orchidaceae)
Long‐and short‐billed hummingbirds as pollinators of Palicourea demissa, a distylous treelet of neotropical cloud forests
Experimental loss of generalist plants reveals alterations in plant‐pollinator interactions and a constrained flexibility of foraging
Flower production, male‐sterility and berry setting in Andigena potato
Using citizen science to monitor pollination services
Parrots as key multilinkers in ecosystem structure and functioning
Origin of hummingbird faunas
Bird visitation to a high Andean Anthurium (Araceae) in eastern Ecuador
Biting the hand that feeds you: wedge‐billed hummingbird is a nectar robber of a sicklebill‐adapted Andean bellflower
Floral phenology of an Andean bellflower and pollination by buff‐tailed sicklebill hummingbird
The Manu gradient as a study system for bird pollination
Morphological and anatomical characterization of yellow diploid potato flower for effective breeding program
Plant–pollinator conservation from the perspective of systems‐ecology
Flowering biology of Geonoma irena and G. cuneata var. sodiroi (Arecaceae)
Staggered flowering in four sympatric varieties of Geonoma cuneata (Palmae)
Caveats to quantifying ecosystem services: fruit abortion blurs benefits from crop pollination
Oxaea austera gerstaecker in Bolivia, with a new host record (Hymenoptera‐Apoidea)
Inferring trends in pollinator distributions across the Neotropics from publicly available data remains challenging despite mobilization efforts
Threats to water supplies in the tropical Andes
Ecological and social drivers of coffee pollination in Santander, Colombia
Pollinator monitoring more than pays for itself
Technology on the move: recent and forthcoming innovations for tracking migratory birds
Do nectar feeders in Andean nature reserves affect flower visitation by hummingbirds?
Outcrossing rate in cultivated autotetraploid potato
Habitat loss and fragmentation reduce effective gene flow by disrupting seed dispersal in a neotropical palm
Short‐term genetic consequences of habitat loss and fragmentation for the neotropical palm Oenocarpus bataua
Spread of self‐compatibility constrained by an intrapopulation crossing barrier
The future of plant‐pollinator diversity: understanding interaction networks across time, space, and global change
A global review demonstrating the importance of nocturnal pollinators for crop plants
Potential impacts of climate change on the environmental services of humid tropical alpine regions
Studies on the pollination biology of the tropical forage legume shrub Cratylia argentea
Pollination in the rainforest: scarce visitors and low effective pollinators limit the fruiting success of tropical orchids
Climate, habitat associations and the potential distributions of Neotropical birds: implications for diversification across the Andes
Citogenética de especies de Vasconcellea (Caricaceae)
Notes on floral visitors in Seemannia sylvatica (Kunth) Hanstein (Gesneriaceae)
Pollination in the desert: adaptation to bees and birds in Salvia rhombifolia
Measurement of stomata and pollen as an indirect indicator of polyploidy in the genus Polylepis (Rosaceae) in Ecuador
Time‐activity budgets and behaviour of the Amazilia hummingbird, Amazilia amazilia (Apodiformes: Trochilidae) in an urban environment
Cytological mechanisms of 2n pollen formation in the wild potato Solanum okadae and pollen‐pistil relations with the cultivated potato, Solanum tuberosum
Agronomic characterization of the ‘trompito inta’ Persian walnut cultivar
Dipterans associated to the flowering of the avocado Persea americana mill cv. hass in Cauca, Colombia
Effect of the exclusion of the floral visiting insects in the fruit set of Persea americana cv. hass (Lauraceae)
Native bees as putative pollinators of the avocado Persea americana mill. cv. hass in Colombia
Interaction rewiring and the rapid turnover of plant–pollinator networks
First record of flower visitation by a rodent in Neotropical Proteaceae, Oreocallis grandiflora
First record of Platyscapa quadraticeps (hymenoptera: Chalcidoidea: Agaoninae) in Colombia: a warning sign?
Non‐pollinating fig wasps associated with Ficus andicola (Moraceae) in the central Andes of Colombia
Non‐pollinating fig wasps decrease pollinator and seed production in Ficus andicola (Moraceae)
Revealing hidden plant diversity in arid environments
Ancognatha vulgaris (Melolonthidae, Cyclocephalini): a specialized pollen‐feeding scarab associated with wax palms (Ceroxylon spp., Arecaceae) in Andean cloud forests of Colombia
Orchestrated flowering and interspecific facilitation: key factors in the maintenance of the main pollinator of coexisting threatened species of Andean wax palms (Ceroxylon spp.)
Interacciones murciélago‐flor en el bosque seco tropical del Valle del Cauca, Colombia
Markers for the spatial and temporal differentiation of bee pollen harvested by Apis mellifera l. in the Eastern Andes of Colombia
Effect of cross‐pollination in ‘criolla’ olives: a typical cultivar of Peru
Spatio‐temporal dynamics of landscape use by the bumblebee Bombus pauloensis (Hymenoptera: Apidae) and its relationship with pollen provisioning
Intersections between rural livelihood security and animal pollination in Anolaima, Colombia
Local and landscape habitat influences on bee diversity in agricultural landscapes in Anolaima, Colombia
Sporadic pollen consumption among tropical ants
The structure matters: bees visitors of coffee flowers and agroecological main structure (mas)
Invasive bumble bee disrupts a pollination mutualism over space and time
Botanical origin and geographic differentiation of bee‐pollen produced in high mountains from the Colombian Eastern Andes
El Polen apícola como producto forestal no maderable en la Cordillera Oriental de Colombia
Floral and reproductive biology of Vaccinium meridionale (Ericaceae) in the eastern Andes of Colombia
Honeydew of Stigmacoccus asper (Hemiptera: Stigmacoccidae): a bee‐honey resource in oak forests of Colombia
Evidence of gene flow between transgenic and non‐transgenic maize in Colombia
Matucana rebutiiflora, a new cactus species from Ancash, Peru
Defensive functions and potential ecological conflicts of floral stickiness
Leaf herbivory imposes fitness costs mediated by hummingbird and insect pollinators
Effects of natural and artificial pollination on fruit and offspring quality
Diversification in Adelomyia hummingbirds follows Andean uplift
Gene transfer of earliness and cold tolerance to hybrid mayze population in the highland Andes of southern Peru
A review of the relation between species traits and extinction risk
Gene flow and genetic diversity in cultivated and wild cacao (Theobroma cacao) in Bolivia
Convergence of anti‐bee pollination mechanisms in the neotropical plant genus Drymonia (Gesneriaceae)
The geography of climate and the global patterns of species diversity
Caracterización funcional de plantas y su utilidad en la selección de especies para la restauración ecológica de ecosistemas altoandinos
Repeated evolution of unorthodox feeding styles drives a negative correlation between foot size and bill length in hummingbirds
Conserving ecosystem diversity in the Tropical Andes
Spatiotemporal evaluation of the human footprint in Colombia: four decades of anthropic impact in highly biodiverse ecosystems
New insights into the phylogenetic relationships, character evolution, and phytogeographic patterns of Calceolaria (Calceolariaceae)
Floral colour variation of Nicotiana glauca in native and non‐native ranges: testing the role of pollinators' perception and abiotic factors
Key plant species to restore plant‐hummingbird pollinator communities in the southern Andes of Ecuador
Future climate change renders unsuitable conditions for paramo ecosystems in Colombia
Elevational and seasonal patterns of plant pollinator networks in two highland tropical ecosystems in Costa Rica
A new species of Anthurium sect. cardiolonchium (Araceae) from the Cordillera Oriental (Napo province), Ecuador
Genetic improvement and mating system of the Camu camu shrub in the Peruvian amazon
Topology of plant‐flower‐visitor networks in a tropical mountain forest: insights on the role of altitudinal and temporal variation
Contrasting population genetic structure of two sympatric species of Anthurium (Araceae) along elevation in an Andean mountain forest
Contrasting patterns of floral size variation in two sympatric species of Anthurium along an elevation gradient in a tropical mountain forest
Aspectos de la vegetación natural de Colombia
Morphology and morphometry of two banderitas species (Orchidaceae: Masdevallia) in Colombia
The flowerpiercers interactions with a community of high Andean plants
The influence of biogeographical and evolutionary histories on morphological trait‐matching and resource specialization in mutualistic hummingbird–plant networks
A new Oliveriana (Orchidaceae: Oncidiinae) from Ecuador
Comparative rates of recruitment to pollen sources by Africanized and European honey bees (Apis mellifera L)
Unravelling Darwin's entangled bank: architecture and robustness of mutualistic networks with multiple interaction types
Stamen dimorphism in bird‐pollinated flowers: investigating alternative hypotheses on the evolution of heteranthery
Opposing patterns of altitude‐driven pollinator turnover in the tropical and temperate Americas
Population structure in Neotropical plants: integrating pollination biology, topography and climatic niches
A specialized bird pollination system with a bellows mechanism for pollen transfer and staminal food body rewards
Low bee visitation rates explain pollinator shifts to vertebrates in tropical mountains
Bimodal pollination systems in Andean Melastomataceae involving birds, bats, and rodents
Determinación por morfometría geométrica de Varroa sp. (Acari: Varroidae) ectoparásito de Apis mellifera L., costa norte del Perú, 2018
Impacts of flowering density on pollen dispersal and gametic diversity are scale dependent
Forest cover at landscape scales increases male and female gametic diversity of palm seedlings
Pollination ecology of Justicia rusbyi (Acanthaceae), a common understory plant in a tropical mountain forest in eastern Bolivia
Pollination ecology of Polylepis tomentella (Rosaceae), an Andean anemophilous tree presenting a potential floral fungal infection
Floral development, stigma receptivity and pollen viability in eight Nolana (Solanaceae) species
Sexual compatibility between eight Nolana L.f. (Solanaceae) species from Peru and Chile
The evolution of Cayaponia (Cucurbitaceae): repeated shifts from bat to bee pollination and long‐distance dispersal to Africa 2–5 million years ago
Microclimatic warming leads to a decrease in species and growth form diversity: insights from a tropical alpine grassland
The role of insect pollinators in avocado production: A global review
The hummingbird plant community of a tropical montane rain forest in southern Ecuador
Potential effects of artificial feeders on hummingbirds‐plant interactions: are generalizations yet possible?
A new species of Liparis (Orchidaceae, Epidendroideae, Malaxidinae) from the Bosque de Protección Alto Mayo, San Martin, Peru
The pollination ecology of Phemeranthus punae (Montiaceae) in southern Bolivia
Lord of the flies: pollination of Dracula orchids
Floral scent chemistry and pollination ecology in phytelephantoid palms (Arecaceae)
Identification of functional groups of insects associated with family agricultural production systems in the province of Sumapaz, Colombia
Limited seed dispersal shapes fine‐scale spatial genetic structure in a neotropical dioecious large‐seeded palm
Inbreeding depression and heterosis for yield and its components in pumpkin Cucurbita moschata duch. ex‐poir
Historical patterns and drivers of landscape change in Colombia since 1500: a regionalized spatial approach
Growth rates, reproductive phenology, and pollination ecology of Espeletia grandiflora (Asteraceae), a giant Andean caulescent rosette
Taxonomic revision and molecular phylogeny of the fig wasp genus Anidarnes Boucek, 1993 (Hymenoptera: Sycophaginae)
Reproductive ecology of dioecious Siparuna (Monimiaceae) in Ecuador ‐ a case of gall midge pollination
Pollination biology and seed production of dioecious Caryodendron orinocense (Euphorbiaceae) in a plantation in coastal Ecuador
Pollination syndromes and floral specialization
Mating patterns of a subdivided population of the Andean oak (Quercus humboldtii Bonpl., Fagaceae)
Studies in Labiatae ‐ vi. Hybridization in the genus Salvia in Colombia and the horticultural relevance
Population genetic diversity and structure of Pilosocereus tillianus (Cactaceae, Cereeae), a columnar cactus endemic to the Venezuelan Andes
Interpopulation reproductive synchrony of Agave cocui (Agavaceae) in Venezuela
Brunfelsia (Solanaceae): A genus evenly divided between South America and radiations on Cuba and other Antillean islands
The flickering connectivity system of the north Andean páramos
Constraints to species' elevational range shifts as climate changes
Phylogeny of the neotropical sages (Salvia subg. calosphace; Lamiaceae) and insights into pollinator and area shifts
Sexual reproductive strategies of Puya nitida (Bromeliaceae) in a Colombian paramo, a tropical high‐elevation ecosystem
Biogeography and ecological drivers of evolution in the Andes: resolving the phylogenetic backbone for Calceolaria (Calceolariaceae)
Climate change causes upslope shifts and mountaintop extirpations in a tropical bird community
Bee diversity effects on pollination depend on functional complementarity and niche shifts
Evaluation of the physicochemical and functional properties of Colombian bee pollen
Some aspects of the natural history of nectar‐feeding bat Anoura peruana (Chiroptera, Phyllostomidae) in the valley of la Paz
Pollinator type strongly impacts gene flow within and among plant populations for six Neotropical species
Pollen resources used by two species of stingless bees (Meliponini) in a tropical dry forest of southern Ecuador
Is variation in flower shape and length among native and non‐native populations of Nicotiana glauca product of pollinator‐mediated selection?
Restoration of plant–pollinator interactions: pollination neighborhood and asymmetric pollen flow between restored habitats in a beetle‐pollinated aroid
Beetle pollination and fruit predation of Xanthosoma daguense (Araceae) in an Andean cloud forest in Colombia
Morphology, viability, and longevity of pollen of national type and trinitarian (ccn‐51) clones of cocoa (Theobroma cacao L.) on the coast of Ecuador
Pollinator response to within‐patch spatial context determines reproductive output of a giant rosette plant
Equal and opposite effects of floral offer and spatial distribution on fruit production and predispersal seed predation in Xanthosoma daguense (Araceae)
Predator and floral traits change pollinator behaviour, with consequences for plant fitness
Effects of tracking devices on individual birds–a review of the evidence
Interactions at large spatial scale: the case of Centris bees and floral oil producing plants in South America
Ecological niche modeling and geographical distribution of pollinator and plants: a case study of Peponapis fervens (Smith, 1879) (Eucerini: Apidae) and Cucurbita species (Cucurbitaceae)
Novedades taxonómicas y corológicas en Echeandia (Asparagaceae)
Post‐invasion demography of prehistoric humans in South America
Reinforcement learning enables resource partitioning in foraging bats
Inbreeding and true seed in tetrasomic potato. I. Selfing and open pollination in Andean landraces (Solanum tuberosum Gp. Andigena)
Patterns of diversity of flower‐visitor assemblages to the understory Araceae in a tropical mountain forest in Colombia
Reproductive biology and cytogenetics of Distichia muscoides (Juncaceae)
Pilostyles boyacensis, a new species of Apodanthaceae (Cucurbitales) from Colombia
Inflorescence and floral traits of the Colombian species of Tristerix (Loranthaceae) related to hummingbird pollination
Flower development of Tristerix confirms irregular calyx formation and obhaplostemony as plesiomorphies in new world Loranthaceae (Santalales)
Linking migration flows with the prevalence of exotic plant species in the Andes
Assemblage of nectarivorous birds and their floral resources in an elfin forest of the central Andes of Peru
Species interactions in an Andean bird–flowering plant network: phenology is more important than abundance or morphology
Nesting biology of a new high Andean bee, Anthophora walteri González (Hymenoptera:Apidae:Anthophorini)
Climate change will reduce the potential distribution ranges of Colombia's most valuable pollinators
The tropical Andean bee fauna (Insecta: Hymenoptera: Apoidea), with examples from Colombia
New Andean bee species of Chilicola spinola (Hymenoptera: Colletidae, Xeromelissinae) with notes on their biology
Foraging activity of the solitary Andean bee, Anthophora walteri (Hymenoptera: Apidae, Anthophorini)
High thermal tolerance in high‐elevation species and laboratory‐reared colonies of tropical bumble bees
Neotropical stingless bees display a strong response in cold tolerance with changes in elevation
Structure and roles in pollination networks between phyllostomid bats and flowers: a systematic review for the Americas
Gametophytic self‐incompatibility in Andean capuli (Prunus serotina subsp. capuli): allelic diversity at the s‐rnase locus influences normal pollen‐tube formation during fertilization
Genetic diversity of potatoes for local use in Venezuelan Andean communities, through morphological, molecular and pollen characterization
The Andes: a geological overview from a biological perspective
The origin and maintenance of montane diversity: integrating evolutionary and ecological processes
Pollination of a Tristerix mistletoe (Loranthaceae) by Diglossa (Aves, Thraupidae)
The co‐radiations of pollinating insects and angiosperms in the Cretaceous
Two new neotropical genera of Drosophilidae (Diptera) visiting palm flowers
Restarting the conversation: challenges at the interface between ecology and society
Hummingbird community structure and nectar resources modulate the response of interspecific competition to forest conversion
Plant and habitat use by black‐breasted pufflegs (Eriocnemis nigrivestis), a critically endangered hummingbird
Dinámica anual de la interaccion colibri‐flor en ecosistemas altoandinos
Pollination of granadilla (Passiflora ligularis) benefits from large wild insects
Biological corridors as important habitat structures for maintaining bees in a tropical fragmented landscape
Network robustness and structure depend on the phenological characteristics of plants and pollinators
A flower in paradise: citizen science helps to discover Thismia paradisiaca (Thismiaceae), a new species from the Chocó biogeographic region in Colombia
Genome diversity of tuber‐bearing Solanum uncovers complex evolutionary history and targets of domestication in the cultivated potato
Space use of bumblebees (Bombus spp.) revealed by radio‐tracking
Nectar robbing impacts pollinator behavior but not plant reproduction
Impacts of nectar robbing on the foraging ecology of a territorial hummingbird
Pollen carriers of Cocos nucifera L (Palmae) in Costa Rica and Ecuador (neotropical region)
Historic and recent fragmentation coupled with altitude affect the genetic population structure of one of the world's highest tropical tree line species
In vitro anther culture of rocoto (Capsicum pubescens Ruiz & pPav.)
Reproductive and recruitment traits as indicators of the invasive potential of Kalanchoe daigremontiana (Crassulaceae) and Stapelia gigantea (Apocynaceae) in a neotropical arid zone
Evolution and diversity of floral scent chemistry in the euglossine bee‐pollinated orchid genus Gongora
Biología reproductiva y asignación de biomasa floral en Solanum gardneri Sendth. (Solanaceae): una especie andromonoica
Report of Astaena pygidialis Kirsch (Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae), the main chafer beetle causing damage to avocado fruit and young leaves in Antioquia department, Colombia
Morphological variation in Puya (Bromeliaceae): an allometric study
Xylose in the nectar of Puya raimondii (Bromeliaceae), the queen of the puna
Morphology, nectar characteristics and avian pollinators in five Andean Puya species (Bromeliaceae)
Assessment of the genetic diversity and population structure of the Peruvian Andean legume, Tarwi (Lupinus mutabilis), with high quality SNPs
Island radiation on a continental scale: exceptional rates of plant diversification after uplift of the Andes
Rapid diversification and time explain amphibian richness at different scales in the Tropical Andes, Earth's most biodiverse hotspot
Crescendo, diminuendo and subito of the trumpets: winds of change in the concerted evolution between flowers and pollinators in Salpichroa (Solanaceae)
Taxonomy and biology of Andean Velloziaceae: Vellozia andina sp nov and notes on Barbaceniopsis (including Barbaceniopsis castillonii comb. nov.)
Nectar robbing in the trainbearers (Lesbia, Trochilidae)
Effects of climate change on alpine plants and their pollinators
Identification of flora and nutritional analysis of honey bees for beekeeping
Reproductive ecology of the bird‐pollinated Nicotiana glauca across native and introduced ranges with contrasting pollination environments
A new species of high mountain Andean fig wasp (hymenoptera: Agaonidae) with a detailed description of its life cycle
Benefits for multiple ecosystem services in Peruvian coffee agroforestry systems without reducing yield
Ongoing evolution of the potato on the Altiplano of Western Bolivia
Environmental DNA metabarcoding from flowers reveals arthropod pollinators, plant pests, parasites, and potential predator–prey interactions while revealing more arthropod diversity than camera traps
Passiflora unipetala, a new bat‐pollinated species of Passiflora supersect. Tacsonia (Passifloraceae)
Genetic diversity and population structure in diploid potatoes of Solanum tuberosum group phureja
The robustness of pollination networks to the loss of species and interactions: a quantitative approach incorporating pollinator behaviour
Biological diversification in a complex region: a spatial analysis of faunistic diversity and biogeography of the Andes of Colombia
Leafflower–leafflower moth mutualism in the Neotropics: successful transoceanic dispersal from the Old World to the New World by actively‐pollinating leafflower moths
Rapid speciation and the evolution of hummingbird pollination in neotropical Costus subgenus costus (Costaceae): evidence from mDNA its and ETS sequences
Pollinator assemblages and visitation rates for 11 species of neotropical Costus (Costaceae)
Herbivory‐mediated pollinator limitation: negative impacts of induced volatiles on plant–pollinator interactions
Patterns and ecological correlates of pollination modes among bromeliad communities of Andean forests in Bolivia
Species richness and endemism of plant and bird communities along two gradients of elevation, humidity and land use in the Bolivian Andes
Differential effects of avian nectar‐robbing on fruit set of two Venezuelan Andean cloud forest plants 1
Four new species of the oxypodine genus Polylobus Solier (Coleoptera, Staphylinidae, Aleocharinae) collected on the flower heads of some high Andean giant rosette plants (Espeletiinae, Asteraceae)
Pollen morphology and functional dioecy in Solanum (Solanaceae)
Reflections on, and visions for, the changing field of pollination ecology
High foraging fidelity and plant‐pollinator network dominance of non‐native honeybees (Apis mellifera) in the Ecuadorian Andes
Floral scent and pollination in Browneopsis disepala (Leguminosae: Caesalpinioideae) in Western Ecuador
Floral scents and pollination in neotropical Lecythidaceae
Flower scent and pollination in selected neotropical palms
Flowering in six clones of the Andean root crop arracacha (Arracacia xanthorrhiza Bancroft)
Campesino and indigenous women conserve floral species richness for pollinators for aesthetic reasons
On the pollination of Bejaria resinosa Mutis ex Linne f. (Ericaceae), an ornithophilous Andean paramo shrub
Possible pollination by hummingbirds in Anthurium sanguineum Engl. (Araceae)
Pollination and other ecosystem services produced by mobile organisms: a conceptual framework for the effects of land‐use change
First phylogeny of Pseudolychnuris reveals its Polyphyly and a staggering case of convergence at the Andean Paramos (Lampyridae: Lampyrini)
The abiotic and biotic drivers of rapid diversification in Andean bellflowers (Campanulaceae)
Repeated evolution of vertebrate pollination syndromes in a recently diverged Andean plant clade
A gradient of pollination specialization in three species of Bolivian Centropogon
Two new species of Siphocampylus (Campanulaceae, Lobelioideae) from the central Andes
Biología reproductiva y polinización artificial del tomate de árbol (Cyphomandra betacea (cav.) Sendt)
Physalis peruviana L. and Physalis philadelphica Lam. Palynological characterization and pollen viability
Biología reproductiva de la uchuva
Global tests of biodiversity concordance and the importance of endemism
Migration through a major Andean ecogeographic disruption as a driver of genetic and phenotypic diversity in a wild tomato species
Flowering phenology and flower visitors of the macana palm Wettinia kalbreyeri (Arecaceae) in an Andean montane forest
Pollination biology of Oreocereus celsianus (Cactaceae), a columnar cactus inhabiting the high subtropical Andes
Reproductive biology of Oreocereus fossulatus (Cactaceae), a long‐lived columnar cactus endemic to the tropical Andes
Hummingbird‐plant interactions in three plant communities of the southeastern part of Parque Nacional natural Chiribiquete, Colombia
Homeostatic response to three years of experimental warming suggests high intrinsic natural resistance in the páramos to warming in the short term
Hummingbird‐flower interaction in three remnants of tropical dry forest (TDF) in the municipality of Chimichagua (Cesar, Colombia)
The floral scent of Cyathostegia mathewsii (Leguminosae, Papilionoideae) and preliminary observations on reproductive biology
The fragility of extreme specialization: Passiflora mixta and its pollinating hummingbird Ensifera ensifera
Reciprocal interactions between a facilitator, natives, and exotics in tropical alpine plant communities
Ecological research in the tropical alpine ecosystems of the Venezuelan páramo: past, present and future
Modelling pollination services across agricultural landscapes
Pollen limitation and reproductive incompatibility system in a critically endangered tree, Polylepis incarum (bitter) M. Kessler & Schmidt‐Leb (Rosaceae)
Genetic structure in remnant populations of an endangered Andean Magnolia
Rubus glaucus Benth.: morphology and floral biology aimed at plant breeding processes
Phoretic mites identified on Andean hummingbirds (Trochilidae) of Caldas, Colombia
Leucospis leucotelus (Hymenoptera: Leucospidae) as a parasitoid of the large carpenter bee Xylocopa lateralis (Hymenoptera: Apidae, Xylocopinae) in Colombia
Phylogenetic insights into Andean plant diversification
Geography shapes the microbial community in Heliconius butterflies
Murri (Antioquia department, Colombia): hotspot for neotropical blueberries (Ericaceae: Vaccinieae)
Cytogenetic evaluation of chili (Capsicum spp., Solanaceae) genotypes cultivated in Valle del Cauca, Colombia
Rapid evolution of a floral trait following acquisition of novel pollinators
Páramo is the world's fastest evolving and coolest biodiversity hotspot
Diet and pollinator role of the long‐snouted bat Platalina genovensium in Lomas ecosystem of Peru
Diet of phyllostomid bats of Kosnipata valley, San Pedro, Cusco ‐ Peru
Do artificial nectar feeders affect bat‐plant interactions in an Ecuadorian cloud forest?
An elevational gradient in floral traits and pollinator assemblages in the neotropical species Costus guanaiensis var. tarmicus in Peru
Secretory tissues of the flower of Sanango racemosum (Gesneriaceae). I. Light microscopy
Anther culture in Physalis peruviana L. microspore stages, sterilization methods and culture media
The ecology and social behavior of the neotropical butterfly Heliconius xanthocles Bates in Colombia
Endemism increases species' climate change risk in areas of global biodiversity importance
Yacon (Smallanthus sonchifolius (Poepp. & Endl.)) seed production through controlled pollination techniques
A study of paramo plant‐pollinator interactions on the sky islands of Colombia: specialization, modularity and species roles
First report on generalized pollination systems in Melastomataceae for the Andean páramos
Geographic and ecological amplitude in the nectarivorous bat Anoura fistulata (Pyhllostomidae: Glossophaginae)
Short‐distance pollen dispersal for an outcrossed, wind‐pollinated southern beech (Nothofagus nervosa (Phil.) Dim. et Mil.)
DNA barcoding of stingless bees (Hymenoptera: Meliponini) in northern Peruvian forests: A plea for integrative taxonomy
Mutations in two pollen self‐incompatibility factors in geographically marginal populations of Solanum habrochaites impact mating system transitions and reproductive isolation
Spiders associated with the flowering of Drimys granadensis (Winteraceae)
Floral phenology and flower visitors in Drimys granadensis l.f. (Winteraceae)
Anatomy and development of stamens and carpels of Drimys granadensis (Winteraceae)
The chemical and visual bases of the pollination of the Neotropical sexually deceptive orchid Telipogon peruvianus
Pollination ecology of the neotropical gesneriad Gloxinia perennis: chemical composition and temporal fluctuation of floral perfume
The uncinate viscidium and floral setae, an evolutionary innovation and exaptation to increase pollination success in the Telipogon alliance (Orchidaceae: Oncidiinae)
Genetic diversity in natural populations of the endangered neotropical orchid Telipogon peruvianus
Pollen collected by Nannotrigona mellaria (Apidae: Meliponini) in two urban environments (Valle Del Cauca ‐ Colombia)
Polinización efectiva de flores ornitófilas en un bosque de niebla de Colombia
Species conservation under future climate change: the case of Bombus bellicosus, a potentially threatened south American bumblebee species
Functional diversity mediates macroecological variation in plant–hummingbird interaction networks
The integration of alien plants in mutualistic plant‐hummingbird networks across the Americas: the importance of species traits and insularity
Honeybees are far too insufficient to supply optimum pollination services in agricultural systems worldwide
Ratatouille of flowers! Rats as potential pollinators of a petal‐rewarding plant in the urban area
Rarity up in the mountain: ecological niche modeling, phenology, and reproductive biology of the most commercialized Masdevallia species
Phylogeny, biogeography, and recurrent evolution of divergent bill types in the nectar‐stealing flowerpiercers (Thraupini: Diglossa and Diglossopis)
Pollination ecology in the 21st century: key questions for future research
Phylogeny, diversity, and distribution in Exostema (Rubiaceae): implications of morphological and molecular analyses
Molecular phylogenetics and the diversification of hummingbirds
Pollination in the Chilean Mediterranean‐type ecosystem: a review of current advances and pending tasks
Effects of altitudinal variation on pollination in purple passion fruit crops (Passiflora edulis f. edulis)
Floral development and compatibility studies of Carica species
Oil palm pollinator dynamics and their behavior on flowers of different oil palm species Elaeis guineensis, Elaeis oleifera and the oleifera x guineensis hybrid in Ecuador
Pollen flow of Theobroma cacao and its relationship with climatic factors in the central zone of the Ecuadorian littoral
Recursos florales usados por dos especies de Bombus en un fragmento de bosque subandino (Pamplonita‐Colombia)
Evaluation of growth and the floral morphology and the fruit of chilacuan (Vasconcellea cundinamarcensis b.)
Using quantum dots as pollen labels to track the fates of individual pollen grains
Red nectar presentation and characterization of the breeding system of an Andean nightshade
Breeding system features and a novel method for locating floral nectar secretion in a south American nightshade (Jaltomata quipuscoae)
Network structure embracing mutualism–antagonism continuums increases community robustness
Revision of ring‐gentians (Symbolanthus, Gentianaceae) from Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru, with a first assessment of conservation status
Flowering and fructification phenology in Macadamia integrifolia
The honey plants and its resources offer in five paths of the municipality of Piendamo, Cauca
Effects of landscape structure and climate seasonality on pollen intake by honeybees in neotropical highland agroecosystems
Interactions between bats and floral resources in a premontane forest, Valle del Cauca, Colombia
The importance of oligosulfides in the attraction of fly pollinators to the brood‐site deceptive species Jaborosa rotacea (Solanaceae)
Phylogeny and floral trait evolution in Jaborosa (Solanaceae)
Flower diversification across ‘pollinator climates’: sensory aspects of corolla color evolution in the florally diverse south American genus Jaborosa (Solanaceae)
Floral scent evolution in the genus Jaborosa (Solanaceae): influence of ecological and environmental factors
Divergence on the reproductive strategy of two sympatric species of Anthurium (Araceae) in a tropical Andean forest
Differential tolerance to increasing heterospecific pollen deposition in two sympatric species of Burmeistera (Campanulaceae: Lobelioideae)
Biogeography, phylogenetic relationships and morphological analyses of the south American genus Mutisia l.f. (Asteraceae) shows early connections of two disjunct biodiversity hotspots
Morphological characterization of the American oil palm collection Elaeis oleifera (Kunth) cortes
Grias purpuripetala (Lecythidaceae), a new purple‐flowered species from southern Colombia
Strong upslope shifts in Chimborazo's vegetation over two centuries since Humboldt
Nectar bat stows huge tongue in its rib cage
The pollination biology of Burmeistera (Campanulaceae): specialization and syndromes
Adaptive trade‐off in floral morphology mediates specialization for flowers pollinated by bats and hummingbirds
Functional significance of interspecific variation in Burmeistera flower morphology: evidence from nectar bat captures in Ecuador
Flower visitation by bats in cloud forests of western Ecuador
Competition for hummingbird pollination shapes flower color variation in Andean Solanaceae
Bat–flower trait matching: extreme phenotypic specialization affects diet preferences but not diet breadth
Character displacement among bat‐pollinated flowers of the genus Burmeistera: analysis of mechanism, process and pattern
Going to great lengths: selection for long corolla tubes in an extremely specialized bat‐flower mutualism
Fur versus feathers: pollen delivery by bats and hummingbirds and consequences for pollen production
Interspecific competition in pollination systems: costs to male fitness via pollen misplacement
Biodiversity hotspots for conservation priorities
Population genetic structure of Venezuelan chiropterophilous columnar cacti (Cactaceae)
Reproductive biology and mating system estimates of two Andean melocacti, Melocactus schatzlii and M. andinus (Cactaceae)
Stingless bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini) in oriental mountains cementeries [cemeteries] from Colombia
Geographical and botanical origin of Apis mellifera (Apidae) honey in four Colombian departments
Effect of landscape change on the structure of the stingless bee community (Hymenoptera: Apidae) in Meta, Colombia
Foraging of Melipona eburnea (hymenoptera: Apidae) colonies in the foothills of the western plains (Meta, Colombia)
Patterns of contemporary phenotypic selection and flower integration in the hummingbird‐pollinated Nicotiana glauca between populations with different flower‐pollinator combinations
Pollination ecology and effect of nectar removal in Macleania bullata (Ericaceae)
Reproductive biology and effect of nectar robbing on fruit production in Macleania bullata (Ericaceae)
Adaptation of floral traits and mating system to pollinator unpredictability: the case of Disterigma stereophyllum (Ericaceae) in southwestern Colombia
Pollination ecology of Disterigma stereophyllum (Ericaceae) in south‐western Colombia
Ecuadendron (Fabaceae: Caesalpinioideae: Detarieae): a new arborescent genus from western Ecuador
The hymenopterans associated with an agroforestry plot of Borojoa patinoi, Cedrela odorata, Apeiba aspera and Inga spectabilis at the farm of the University of Chocó, municipality of Lloró, Chocó
Analysis of genetic diversity of teak (Tectona grandis l. f.) germplasm in Ecuador
Observaciones de forrajeo en recursos florales por Phyllotis haggardi (Rodentia: Cricetidae) en un ecosistema de páramo al sur del Ecuador
Reproductive biology and pollination ecology of the milpesos palm Oenocarpus bataua in the Colombian Andes
Monitoring insect pollinators and flower visitation: the effectiveness and feasibility of different survey methods
Inoculum source dependent effects of ericoid, mycorrhizal fungi on flowering and reproductive success in highbush blueberry (Vaccinium corymbosum)
Natural habitat partially mitigates negative pesticide effects on tropical pollinator communities
Floral preference of Melipona eburnea friese (hymenoptera: Apidae) in a Colombian Andean region
Missing and forbidden links in mutualistic networks
What are the phylogenetic limits to pollinator diversity?
How many flowering plants are pollinated by animals?
Economic evaluation of pollination services comparing coffee landscapes in Ecuador and Indonesia
Climate influence on plant–pollinator interactions in the keystone species Vaccinium myrtillus
Plant diversity darkspots for global collection priorities
Unilateral incompatibility in capsicum (solanaceae): occurrence and taxonomic distribution
Biología floral de accesiones de Arracacia xanthorrhiza Bancr. del banco de germoplasma de Colombia
Effect of inbreeding on the quality traits of squash fruit
Genetic correlations and path analysis in butternut squash Cucurbita moschata Duch
Pollination ecology of Rodriguezia granadensis (Orchidaceae)
Interaction networks and the use of floral resources by male orchid bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Euglossini) in a primary rain forests of the Chocó region (Colombia)
Capture rates of male euglossine bees across a human intervention gradient, Chocó region, Colombia
The effects of pesticides on morphology, viability, and germination of blackberry (Rubus glaucus Benth.) and tree tomato (Solanum betaceum cav.) pollen grains
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Entomofauna associated with the cultivation of granadilla de quijos Passiflora popenovii (Passifloraceae)
Aspects of floral biology in papaya (Carica papaya L.) cv. Cartagena roja in Lara state, Venezuela
Natural and cultural processes influencing gene flow among wild (atoq papa), weedy (araq papa and k'ipa papa), and crop potatoes in the Andean region of southern Peru
Dynamics of nectar resources of hummingbird‐visited plants in a montane forest of southern Ecuador
Stable isotope analysis of multiple tissues from Hawaiian honeycreepers indicates elevational movement
Plant phenology dynamics and pollination networks in summits of the high tropical Andes: A baseline for monitoring climate change impacts
Avian nectar robbers of Passiflora mixta (Passifloraceae): do they have a positive effect on the plant?
Phenological patterns and pollination network structure in a Venezuelan páramo: a community‐scale perspective on plant‐animal interactions
Exotic cultivated plants in the diet of the nectar‐feeding bat Glossophaga soricina (Phyllostomidae: Glossophaginae) in the city of Lima, Peru
Effect of honey bee (Apis mellifera L.) density on pollination and fruit set of avocado (Persea americana Mill.) cv. hass
Clonal diversity and fine‐scale genetic structure in a high Andean treeline population
Recent origin and rapid speciation of Neotropical orchids in the world's richest plant biodiversity hotspot
The Andes through time: evolution and distribution of Andean floras
Differential nectar foraging by Africanized and European honeybees in the Neotropics
Fenología y brotación vegetativa de una nueva especie de Vriesea (Bromeliaceae) de Colombia en condiciones ex situ
The multilayer nature of ecological networks
Diversity of visitors and approach to the use of trap nest for Xylocopa (Hymenoptera: Apidae) in a passion fruit production area in Colombia
Floral visitors and pollinators in wild population of Andean blueberry (Vaccinium meridionale) in Colombian Andean forest
Pollen resource and seasonal cycle of Thygater aethiops (Hymenoptera: Apidae) in an urban environment (Bogotá‐Colombia)
The indirect paths to cascading effects of extinctions in mutualistic networks
Parasites and pathogens associated with native bumble bees (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Bombus spp.) from highlands in Bolivia and Peru
Species distribution models for crop pollination: a modelling framework applied to Great Britain
Disentangling visual and olfactory signals in mushroom‐mimicking Dracula orchids using realistic three‐dimensional printed flowers
Dracula orchids exploit guilds of fungus visiting flies: new perspectives on a mushroom mimic
Arthropods associated with a Bombus pauloensis (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Bombini) nest in the Sabana of Bogotá (Colombia)
Safeguarding pollinators and their values to human well‐being
The assessment report on pollinators, pollination and food production: summary for policymakers. Secretariat of the Intergovernmental Science‐Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
Phylogenomic analysis of the explosive adaptive radiation of the Espeletia complex (Asteraceae) in the tropical Andes
High impact weather events in the Andes
Efficiency of pollination by orphan colonies of Bombus atratus (Hymenoptera: Apidae) in strawberry (fragaria x ananassa) in greenhouse
Effect of climate seasonality and vegetation cover on floral resource selection by two stingless bee species
Botanical origin of the honey of Apis mellifera L. produced Guaremal reservoir basin, state Yaracuy, Venezuela
Guidelines for systematic review in conservation and environmental management
Forest fragmentation and edge effects on the genetic structure of Clusia sphaerocarpa and C. lechleri (Clusiaceae) in tropical montane forests
Functional traits of invasive species Thunbergia alata (Acanthaceae) and its importance in the adaptation to Andean forests
Low genetic diversity and fragmentation effects in a wind‐pollinated tree, Polylepis multijuga plige (Rosaceae) in the high Andes
Pollination systems of five species of orchids growing under greenhouse conditions
Impacts of future agricultural change on ecosystem service indicators
High‐levels of interspecific hybridization between Solanum sparsipilum and Solanum stenotomum in experimental plots in the Andes
Study of gene flow from GM cotton (Gossypium hirsutum) varieties in El Espinal (Tolima, Colombia)
Humboldt's enigma: what causes global patterns of mountain biodiversity?
Phenological growth stages of feijoa [Acca sellowiana (O. Berg) Burret] according to the BBCH scale under tropical Andean conditions
Nectar provision attracts hummingbirds and connects interaction networks across habitats
The role of the endemic and critically endangered colorful Puffleg Eriocnemis mirabilis in plant‐hummingbird networks of the Colombian Andes
Spatial monitoring and insect behavioural analysis using computer vision for precision pollination
The distribution of biodiversity richness in the tropics
Floral biology of quinua (Chenopodium quinoa)
First report of nectar robbing by sword‐billed hummingbirds Ensifera ensifera
Estudio sobre polinización y biología floral en Passiflora edulis f. edulis Sims, como base para el premejoramiento genético
One size fits all: corolla compression in Aphelandra runcinata (Acanthaceae), an adaptation to short‐billed hummingbirds
Neglecting non‐bee pollinators may lead to substantial underestimation of competition risk among pollinators
Dynamics of the phenology and floral visitors of two terrestrial bromeliads from a Colombian paramo
Exploring palm–insect interactions across geographical and environmental gradients
Pollination behavior and efficiency of Bombus atratus franklin in sweet peppers (Capsicum annum L.) grown in a greenhouse
Effects of climate variability on queen production and pollen preferences of neotropical bumblebee Bombus atratus in a high Andean suburban condition
Pollination relations of Lycopersicon esculentum in native and foreign regions
Morfología y forrajeo para buscar artrópodos por colibríes altoandinos
Bene ‘fit’ assessment in pollination coevolution: mechanistic perspectives on hummingbird bill–flower matching
Bring your own camera to the trap: An inexpensive, versatile, and portable triggering system tested on wild hummingbirds
Micromorphology and ultrastructure of anthers and pollen grains in ten elite genotypes of Theobroma cacao (Malvaceae)
Study of the reproductive characteristics of carnation hybrids (Dianthus caryophyllus)
Fire regimes and pollinator behaviour explain the genetic structure of Puya hamata (Bromeliaceae) rosette plants
Activity patterns of the nectar‐feeding bat Leptonycteris yerbabuenae on the Baja California peninsula, Mexico
Morphological constraints and nectar robbing in three Andean bumble bee species (hymenoptera, Apidae, Bombini)
Pseudohypocera kerteszi (Enderlein) (Diptera, Phoridae), a pest of the honey bee
Desarrollo reproductivo de Krapfia weberbaueri (Ranunculaceae) en condiciones controladas de luz y temperatura
Widespread vulnerability of flowering plant seed production to pollinator declines
Bees as providers of cultural ecosystem services: case of the Bogotá botanical garden, Colombia
Intraspecific variation in pollination ecology due to altitudinal environmental heterogeneity
Black potatoes, colored potatoes and no names in the Andes of Merida genetic recognition
Better common than rare? Effects of low reproductive success, scarce pollinator visits and interspecific gene flow in threatened and common species of Tibouchina (Melastomataceae)
Nectar robbing: a common phenomenon mainly determined by accessibility constraints, nectar volume and density of energy rewards
Key ecosystem services and ecological intensification of agriculture in the tropical high‐Andean Puna as affected by land‐use and climate changes
High temperature tolerance in a novel, high‐quality Phaseolus vulgaris breeding line is due to maintenance of pollen viability and successful germination on the stigma
Notes on the seasonality, geographic distribution, and floral preferences of the bee Alocandrena porteri (hymenoptera: Andrenidae)
Citizen science data reveal altitudinal movement and seasonal ecosystem use by hummingbirds in the Andes Mountains
Tracking small animals in complex landscapes: a comparison of localisation workflows for automated radio telemetry systems
Mutualistic relations between the bat Glossophaga longirostris and the columnar cacti in the arid region of La Tatacoa, Colombia
Associative learning of flowers by generalist bumble bees can be mediated by microbes on the petals
Características polínicas y composición química del Polen apícola colectado en Cayaltí (Lambayeque ‐ Perú)
Bat and hummingbird pollination of an autotetraploid columnar cactus, Weberbauerocereus weberbaueri (Cactaceae)
Phenological diversity in tropical forests
Corbicular bee pollen collected by Apis mellifera L. (Hymenoptera: Apidae), botanical origin and chromatic dominance in four biogeographical zones in Colombia
Traceable system in the process of extraction and corbicula pollen collected by Apis mellifera L. (Hymenoptera: Apidae) in the high Andean zone of Boyacá, Colombia
Nectar of Puya species like resource for high Andean hummingbirds of Ancash, Peru
Diversity of terrestrial fauna of Arthropoda at Jaboque wetland, Bogotá Colombia
Current climate, isolation and history drive global patterns of tree phylogenetic endemism
Are there any agricultural effects on the capture rates of male euglossine bees (Apidae: Euglossini)?
Invasive bees promote high reproductive success in Andean orchids
Pollination systems and nectar rewards in four Andean species of Salvia (Lamiaceae)
Pollen types used by the native stingless bee, Tetragonisca angustula (Latreille), in an Amazon‐Chiquitano transitional forest of Bolivia
Snail‐pollination in Volvulopsis nummularium
A cross‐scale approach to unravel the molecular basis of plant phenology in temperate and tropical climates
Preliminary observations on the flower visitors of Nasa colanii (Loasaceae), a poorly known species endemic to northern Peru
Dioecy in south American Deprea (Solanaceae)
Predicting ecosystem functions from biodiversity and mutualistic networks: an extension of trait‐based concepts to plant–animal interactions
Geographic variation in floral scent of Echinopsis ancistrophora (Cactaceae); evidence for constraints on hawkmoth attraction
Extreme variation in floral characters and its consequences for pollinator attraction among populations of an Andean cactus
Climate change impacts on pollination
Evolution of Suessenguthia (Acanthaceae) inferred from morphology, AFLP data, and its rDNA sequences
Pollen analogues are transported across greater distances in bee‐pollinated than in hummingbird‐pollinated species of Justicia (Acanthaceae)
Consequences of the pollination system on genetic structure and patterns of species distribution in the Andean genus Polylepis (Rosaceae): a comparative study
Flowering and flower visitors in Carludovica palmata (Cyclanthaceae) ‐ an ecological paradoxon
Effect of the spatial arrangement of agroecosystem on bee (Hymenoptera: Apoidea) diversity in potato (Solanum tuberosum) crops of Antioquia, Colombia
Flowering, floral visitors and climatic drivers of reproductive phenology of two endangered magnolias from neotropical Andean forests
Seeking the flowers for the bees: integrating biotic interactions into niche models to assess the distribution of the exotic bee species Lithurgus huberi in south America
Diverse urban pollinators and where to find them
An ultrasound‐absorbing inflorescence zone enhances echo‐acoustic contrast of bat‐pollinated cactus flowers
Island biogeography of tropical alpine floras
The role of pollinator shifts in the floral diversification of Iochroma (Solanaceae)
Phylogenetics of the florally diverse Andean clade Iochrominae (Solanaceae)
Systematics of Iochrominae (Solanaceae): patterns in floral diversity and interspecific crossability
Comparative pollination biology of sympatric and allopatric Andean Iochroma (Solanaceae) 1
Convergent evolution of floral shape tied to pollinator shifts in Iochrominae (Solanaceae)
A hierarchical inventory of the world's mountains for global comparative mountain science
GMBA Mountain Inventory v2. GMBA‐EarthEnv
Effects of distance between pollen donor and pollen recipient on fitness components in Espeletia schultzii
Breeding systems in a montane tropical cloud forest in Venezuela
Photosynthetic traits of páramo plants subjected to short‐term warming in OTC chambers
Biodiversity cradles and museums segregating within hotspots of endemism
High proportion of smaller ranged hummingbird species coincides with ecological specialization across the Americas
Extinction, coextinction and colonization dynamics in plant–hummingbird networks under climate change
The distributions of morphologically specialized hummingbirds coincide with floral trait matching across an Andean elevational gradient
Resource availability, diet and reproduction in Glossophaga longirostris (Mammalia: Chiroptera) in an arid zone of the Venezuelan Andes
Range overlap between the sword‐billed hummingbird and its guild of long‐flowered species: An approach to the study of a coevolutionary mosaic
Range size predicts the risk of local extinction from habitat loss
Accelerated increase in plant species richness on mountain summits is linked to warming
Passerine pollination of Erythrina megistophylla Diels (Fabaceae)
Habitat and population structure of rare and endemic Andean Espeletia pycnophylla subsp. llanganatensis (Asteraceae) in an Ecuadorian biodiversity hotspot
Insect pollination for most of angiosperm evolutionary history
Ecomorphology and phylogeny of hummingbirds: divergence and convergence in adaptations to high elevations
Exploring the ontogenetic scaling hypothesis during the diversification of pollination syndromes in Caiophora (Loasaceae, subfam. Loasoideae)
The evolution of floral ontogenetic allometry in the Andean genus Caiophora (Loasaceae, subfam. Loasoideae)
Combined effects of landscape composition and pesticide use on herbivore and pollinator functions in smallholder farms
Development and morphology of flowers in Loranthaceae
Breeding system evolution in Tarasa (Malvaceae) and selection for reduced pollen grain size in the polyploid species
Effects of hummingbird morphology on specialization in pollination networks vary with resource availability
Land use change has stronger effects on functional diversity than taxonomic diversity in tropical Andean hummingbirds
Mountain ecosystems as natural laboratories for climate change experiments
Reproductive strategies of animal‐pollinated plants on high mountains: A review of studies from the ‘third pole’
Understanding climate change impacts on biome and plant distributions in the Andes: challenges and opportunities
Plant dispersal strategies of high tropical alpine communities across the Andes
Vulnerability of global biodiversity hotspots to climate change
Expression of stylar incompatibility in the Andean clonal tuber crop oca (Oxalis tuberosa Mol., Oxalidaceae)
Germplasm conservation of oca (Oxalis tuberosa Mol) through botanical seed: seed formation under a system of polymorphic incompatibility
First records of Callaspidia defonscolombei dahlbom, 1842 (Hymenoptera, Cynipioidea, Figitidae) in an urban environment in Colombia
Pollen preference patterns by Tetragonisca angustula (Apidae: Meliponini) in a Boliviano‐Tucumano forest
Plant richness and blooming cover affect abundance of flower visitors and network structure in Colombian orchards
First report on generalized pollination systems in Melastomataceae for the Andean paramos
Fruit and seeds variability in butternut squash Cucurbita moschata Duch. and Cucurbita argyrosperma subsp. sororia L. H. Bailey Merrick & D.M. Bates
A trade‐off between the amount and distance of pollen dispersal triggered by the mixed foraging behaviour of Sephanoides sephaniodes (Trochilidae) on Lapageria rosea (Philesiaceae)
Pollination of the cycad Zamia incognita a. Lindstr. & Idarraga by Pharaxonotha beetles in the Magdalena Medio Valley, Colombia: a mutualism dependent on a specific pollinator and its significance for conservation
Asymmetrical legitimate pollination in distylous Palicourea demissa (Rubiaceae): the role of nectar production and pollinator visitation
Dimorphisms and self‐incompatibility in the distylous species Palicourea demissa (Rubiaceae): possible implications for its reproductive output
Temperaturas de suelo en el transecto Buritaca‐La Cumbre
Long‐term camera trapping needed to identify sunbird species that pollinate the endangered south African orchid Satyrium rhodanthum
Phylogenetic evidence for pollinator‐driven diversification of angiosperms
First report of phoresy by silken fungus beetles on Bombus funebris (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Bombini) in the southern Andes of Ecuador
Cacao flower visitation: low pollen deposition, low fruit set and dominance of herbivores
Cross‐pollination with native genotypes improves fruit set and yield quality of Peruvian cacao
Magnolia vargasiana (Magnoliaceae), a new Andean species and a key to Ecuadorian species of subsection talauma, with notes on its pollination biology
Contrasting responses of bee communities to coffee flowering at different spatial scales
The contribution of non‐managed social bees to coffee production: new economic insights based on farm‐scale yield data
Natural enemy diversity reduces temporal variability in wasp but not bee parasitism
Floral ecology of Puya ctenorhyncha (Bromeliaceae) an endemic plant of Bolivia
Floral ecology and floral visitors of Puya atra (Bromeliaceae), a Bolivian endemic plant
Evidence of morphological divergence and reproductive isolation in a narrow elevation gradient
Evaluation of three methods of artificial pollination in clones of cocoa (Theobroma cacao L.) ccn‐51
Extrafloral nectar feeding by Strymon jacqueline Nicolay & Robbins, 2005 (Lepidoptera: Lycaenidae: Eumaeini)
Simple sequence repeat markers reveal genetic diversity and population structure of Bolivian wild and cultivated tomatoes (Solanum lycopersicum L.)
Flavonoids in Meliponinae honeys from Venezuela related to their botanical, geographical and entomological origin to assess their putative anticataract activity
Impact of the global warming hiatus on Andean temperature
How do arbuscular mycorrhizas affect reproductive functional fitness of host plants?
The effect of elevation, latitude, and plant richness on robustness of pollination networks at a global scale
The influence of floral traits on specialization and modularity of plant‐pollinator networks in a biodiversity hotspot in the Peruvian Andes
Pollinator effectiveness of native and non‐native flower visitors to an apparently generalist Andean shrub, Duranta mandonii (Verbenaceae)
Reloading the revolver ‐ male fitness as a simple explanation for complex reward partitioning in Nasa macrothyrsa (Loasaceae, Cornales)
Evolution of funnel‐revolver flowers and ornithophily in Nasa (Loasaceae)
A preliminary phylogeny of Loasaceae subfam.: Loasoideae (Angiospermae: Cornales) based on TRNL(UAA) sequence data, with consequences for systematics and historical biogeography
Evaluating broad scale patterns among related species using resource experiments in tropical hummingbirds
Hummingbird pollination in Salvia haenkei (Lamiaceae) lacking the typical lever mechanism
Floral diversity and pollen transfer mechanisms in bird‐pollinated Salvia species
Pollination syndromes of New World Salvia species with special reference to bird pollination
The FAIR guiding principles for scientific data management and stewardship
Hummingbird blood traits track oxygen availability across space and time
The golden age of bio‐logging: how animal‐borne sensors are advancing the frontiers of ecology
Three new species of Pleurothallis (Orchidaceae: Pleurothallidinae) in subsection Macrophyllae‐Fasciculatae from northern South America
Hidden in plain sight: a new species of Pleurothallis (Orchidaceae: Pleurothallidinae) from Colombia previously misidentified as Pleurothallis luctuosa
HILDA+ version 2.0: global land use change between 1960 and 2020 [dataset]
Strong genetic differentiation among populations of Fosterella rusbyi (Bromeliaceae) in Bolivia
Nocturnal versus diurnal pollination success in Isertia laevis (Rubiaceae): a sphingophilous plant visited by hummingbirds
Evolution of flower morphology, pollen dimorphism, and nectar composition in Arcytophyllum, a distylous genus of Rubiaceae
Pollination ecology of Ecuadorian Asclepiadoideae (Apocynaceae): how generalized are morphologically specialized flowers?
Introducing LandScaleR: A novel method for spatial downscaling of land use projections
A note on some insects associated with cocoa in Ecuador
Uso de la app iNaturalist como una herramienta eficaz para identificar los potenciales polinizadores en Lupinus mutabilis
Tropical and subtropical landscapes of the Andes
Intraannual variation in the pollen spectrum of honey production in Huaran (Cusco, Peru)
Pollen spectrum of honey from Cuyo Grande, Cusco, Peru
Low‐temperature effect on selective fertilization by pollen mixtures of wild and cultivated tomato species
Interaction of flowers flies (Diptera: Syrphidae) and Salvia bogotensis (Lamiaceae) in the botanical garden of Bogotá (Colombia)
Global patterns of interaction specialization in bird–flower networks
Variación en la composición de visitantes florales de cacao (Theobroma cacao) entre cinco sistemas de producción en Sara Ana, Alto Beni, Bolivia
Multi‐lingual literature searches are needed to unveil global knowledge