In Vivo Evaluation of Hemiarthroplasty Bearing Materials Using Animal Models: A Scoping Review (Part II)
ABSTRACT
Hemiarthroplasty is commonly used to treat damage localized to one side of a synovial joint, maximally preserving the patient's opposing healthy bone and cartilage; however, challenges remain due to accelerated wear of the cartilage articulating with the implant surface. This scoping review summarized investigations of hemiarthroplasty bearing materials (HBMs) utilizing animal models. The review focused on HBMs tested, animal models used, duration of animal survival, and outcome assessments (e.g., gait analysis, image analysis, histological staining, and cartilage scoring). The initial search was designed to broadly capture all studies evaluating HBMs articulating against articular cartilage. A total of 1798 studies were identified, which after screening yielded 72 that met the inclusion criteria. Of these, 24 were classified as in vivo and were included in this review. The HBMs evaluated included metals (63%), hard and soft polymers (33%), ceramics (17%), and synthetic carbons (17%). HBMs were predominantly studied in canines (46%), rabbits (25%), and sheep (21%), with survival durations from 2 to 104 weeks. Outcome assessment of cartilage wear varied across studies and histological staining was performed in all studies with the most common stains being Safranin‐O (58%) and Hematoxylin and Eosin (54%). Commonly used cartilage scoring systems were Mankin and Modified Mankin (38%); however, among all studies, scales and sub‐categories for scoring criteria varied drastically. While similarities were identified with respect to HBMs, animal models, and some outcome measures, the diversity of testing methodologies and lack of comparative evaluations limited the ability to identify the best practice for evaluating HBM performance.

Introduction
Hemiarthroplasty is the partial replacement of a synovial joint, typically performed to treat damage localized to one side of the joint. This procedure replaces only one surface of the joint with a synthetic bearing material, benefiting patients who have localized cartilage damage by maximally preserving healthy bone and cartilage. Hemiarthroplasty has shown promise in treating acetabulofemoral and glenohumeral joint diseases, including avascular necrosis, and it is also a common treatment for femoral neck and proximal humeral fractures. Beyond these more common indications for hemiarthroplasty, recent applications have included the treatment of fractures and osteoarthritis (OA) in small joints.
The outcome of hemiarthroplasty is largely determined by the wear of the healthy opposing cartilage surface, with accelerated wear being the most common mode of failure. A key challenge in improving outcomes is identifying novel hemiarthroplasty bearing materials (HBMs) that minimize cartilage damage. Despite the clinical use of various materials, including cobalt–chromium (CoCr) alloys, stainless steel (SS), titanium (Ti) alloys, zirconia (ZrO2), and pyrolytic carbon (PyC), there is no consensus on the optimal HBM for preserving cartilage integrity and improving long‐term outcomes. Furthermore, the absence of standardized preclinical evaluation methods for HBMs hinders comparisons across studies, limiting progress in this area.
Preclinical testing in animal models is deemed a critical pathway for HBM evaluation and regulatory clearance. The implantation of HBMs in live animals provides valuable insights for biomaterial development and translating treatments to clinical practice. However, different animal models present unique advantages and limitations. For example, while canines, like humans, lack the intrinsic ability to heal cartilage, their cartilage is relatively thin compared to humans. Rabbit models, on the other hand, can be more cost‐effective and have reasonable joint size; however, their cartilage is also relatively thin, and they exhibit a larger variation in joint loading conditions when compared to humans. The selection of an appropriate animal model also depends on various other factors, including the specific goal of the study, timeline, handling and housing capabilities, anatomical similarity, and the outcomes being assessed. Given the cross‐species differences and numerous animal‐dependent factors, selecting an optimal animal model for preclinical in vivo HBM studies can be a complex decision and lead to inconsistent use throughout the research community.
The refinement and selection of optimal HBMs through laboratory and animal testing is essential for maximizing cartilage preservation and improving the long‐term success of hemiarthroplasty. However, to date, the current state‐of‐the‐art has yet to be established. To that end, this review aims to summarize current preclinical testing methodologies and cartilage wear assessment for HBM evaluation and identify knowledge gaps to improve the translatability of HBM research to clinical practice. The findings are presented in two parts: (I) in vitro evaluation of HBMs against an articular cartilage counter‐surface and (II) in vivo evaluation of HBMs in animal models.
As Part II of the scoping review, this paper focuses on preclinical in vivo studies in which an HBM was surgically implanted into a live animal. This scoping review sought to synthesize and summarize the literature on animal models that have been employed in HBM testing, addressing the following key questions: (a) What HBMs have been tested in live animals? (b) What animal species and joints were used for evaluation? (c) What were the animals' ages, and what was their survival duration? And (d) How was cartilage health and damage assessed?

Methods

Literature Search
Using Covidence, a scoping review was performed following the Arksey and O'Malley methodological framework. The search strategy was developed in collaboration with librarians from Rush University and the University of Illinois Chicago. A single search was performed for Parts I and II of this review utilizing the same Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) and keywords (Appendix: Search Strings). Search results from PubMed, Scopus, Google Scholar, and the Cochrane Library (December 2024) were compiled into Covidence, where an independent review process was conducted using defined inclusion/exclusion criteria (Table 1). Disagreements were resolved via majority consensus among authors.
Inclusion and Exclusion criteria for the literature search.
Inclusion criteria	 	Research conducted in vitro or in vivoEvaluations of articular cartilage articulated against HBMs, including benchtop mechanical testingPreclinical and clinical reports assessing cartilage wear from articulation with HBMs, including X‐ray imaging (joint space narrowing or bony erosion)	 	Exclusion criteria	 	Solely modeling or FEA analysesClinical assessments using only PROMs (e.g., KOOS, WOMAC, SF‐12)Non‐English languagesReview ArticlesTextbook Chapters
Abbreviations: FEA, finite element analysis; KOOS, knee injury and osteoarthritis outcome score; PROMs, patient‐reported outcome measures; SF‐12, 12‐Item Short Form Health Survey; WOMAC, Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Arthritis Index.

Data Extraction
All included studies were independently reviewed and separated by type of HBM evaluation, in vitro and in vivo, and data was extracted from the in vivo analysis papers by two authors (L.B., V.M.) (Table 2). Disagreements regarding data extraction were settled via consultation with a third author.
Data extracted from each in vivo animal study.
Category	Data extracted	 	Hemiarthroplasty Bearing Material (HBM)	HBM type (e.g., metal, hard and soft polymer, ceramic, synthetic carbon) and subtype (e.g., CoCr and SS)	 	Animal model characteristics	Species, joint, age, length of study	 	Outcome metrics	Gait analysis, imaging analysis (in vivo and post‐mortem), histological assessment (histology and scoring system)

Data Analysis
Data were summarized descriptively, without statistical analysis. Categorical data were presented as percentages. All data organization was performed in Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Corporation), with visualization, including timelines and web charts developed in Microsoft Word (Microsoft Corporation) and RStudio (Posit PBS).

Results

Literature Review
The primary literature search returned 3509 titles, including both preclinical (in vivo and in vitro) and human clinical studies. The initial screening process removed 1711 duplicates, yielding 1798 titles that were screened, along with their abstracts, using the inclusion/exclusion criteria. After screening, 164 studies underwent full‐text reviews, which resulted in the exclusion of 73 additional articles for reasons including: review articles (20), no cartilage was tested (21), textbook chapters (6), clinical studies using only PROMs (5), and in languages other than English (6). More in‐depth review of the 91 remaining studies led to the exclusion of an additional 19, including 11 that did not test against a cartilage counter surface, 1 that was focused on tissue engineering, 1 that lacked data on cartilage testing, and 2 cadaveric and 4 clinical studies that did not report cartilage wear assessments. Ultimately, 72 studies were segregated by type of testing: Part I: in vitro (48 studies) and Part II: in vivo (24 studies), the latter being the focus of this review (Figure 1).
PRISMA flow diagram for literature search and study inclusion/exclusion.

Study Rationales
There were three main motivations for the 24 studies that evaluated HBMs in vivo: assess the effects of HBMs on articular cartilage (hemiarthroplasty and focal defects), develop an articular cartilage replacement for the purpose of HA, and assess the performance of a novel patient‐specific implant. The purpose of 20 studies (83%) was to assess the effects of HBMs on articular cartilage. Within this cohort, 10 studies evaluated the effects of HBMs on articular cartilage following partial joint replacement, 6 evaluated the implantation of HBMs as a treatment for focal cartilage defects, 2 evaluated the effects of HBMs on articular cartilage with respect to the surgical approach/technique, 1 assessed cartilage damage following HBM implantation caused by subchondral bone changes (subchondral plate thickness, porosity and architecture of trabecular bone), and 1 evaluated cartilage damage following HBM implantation of a polymeric artificial meniscus. Two studies were performed to develop articular cartilage replacements. Both evaluated artificial cartilage implants as alternatives to traditional hemiarthroplasty implants; 1 study focused on preservation of subchondral bone, and the other on mosaicplasty. The purpose of the 2 remaining studies was to assess novel patient‐specific implants with geometries that matched the native bone they were replacing (Appendix: Study Overview Table 1).

Hemiarthroplasty Bearing Material (HBM)
The HBMs evaluated in all 24 studies were categorized into 4 groups: metals, hard and soft polymers, ceramics, and synthetic carbon materials (Figure 2). Three different metals were tested in 15 (63%) of the studies: Cobalt Chromium alloys (10 studies), Titanium alloys (3 studies), and Stainless Steel (2 studies). Hard and soft polymers were tested in 8 studies (33%); 7 evaluated Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA) hydrogels, and 1 evaluated Polyetheretherketone (PEEK). In 3 of the PVA studies titanium mesh was used to provide mechanical support for the hydrogel articulating surface, while another 2 used nano‐hydroxyapatite and polyamide 66 (PA66) composites for support. Ceramics were used in 4 studies (17%), including Partially Stabilized Zirconia ceramic (PSZ), Alumina Ceramic (AC), Zirconia (ZrO2), and 1 case where the ceramic composition was not specified. Synthetic carbon HBMs were used in 4 studies, all of which used Pyrolytic Carbon (PyC).
Breakdown of materials evaluated, with the number of studies evaluated for each (#) and the associated animal models used. (Note: 6 of the 24 studies were comparative studies that evaluated two or more HBMs). Titanium (Ti), Cobalt Chromium (CoCr), Stainless Steel (SS), Alumina Ceramic (AC), Pyrolytic Carbon (PyC), Partially Stabilized Zirconia (PSZ), Zirconia Dioxide (ZrO2), Polyetheretherketone (PEEK), Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA).
Eighteen studies examined a single HBM against cartilage, and six studies performed comparative testing that evaluated the cartilage wear of two or more HBMs (Table 3 and Appendix: Study Overview Table 1). Of the 6 studies that evaluated 2 or more HBMs, all included non‐metals as a test material, with either CoCr or Ti alloys as a comparator. Ceramics and synthetic carbon categories, including AC and PyC were evaluated in 5 out of the 6 comparative studies, and polymers, including PEEK and PVA were evaluated in 2 out of the 6 comparative studies (Table 3).
Study, hemiarthroplasty bearing materials (HBMs) tested, and the animal models used in each of the 6 comparative studies reviewed.
Study	HBM	Animal model	 	Chang 1997 	PVA, AC, Ti	Canine (knee)	 	Cook 1984 	Ti, PyC	Canine (hip)	 	Maistrelli 1991 	CoCr, Ceramic	Canine (hip)	 	Salkeld 2016 	CoCr, PyC	Canine (knee)	 	Jung 2008 	CoCr, PyC, ZrO2	Rabbit (hand, interphalangeal)	 	Meng 2021 	CoCr, PEEK	Goat (hip)

Animal Species, Joint Type, Length of Study, Maturity, and Time Points
Eleven of the 24 in vivo animal studies were performed using canines, 6 used rabbits, 5 used sheep, 1 used rats, and 1 used goats (Figure 2). Of the studies using canines, 5 replaced the proximal femoral heads, 4 replaced one or both femoral condyles, 1 replaced the trochlear groove, and 1 replaced the acetabular shelf. The rabbit studies included 1 femoral head replacement, 1 medial femoral condyle implant, 1 humeral head replacement, 1 proximal interphalangeal head replacement, 1 femoral trochlear groove implant, and 1 meniscus replacement. Three of the studies using sheep investigated femoral head replacement, while 2 studied a medial femoral condyle replacement. The study using rats replaced the proximal humeral head. The study using goats evaluated femoral head replacement.
Animal survival after HBM implantation varied widely, though the duration of most studies was less than 52 weeks. For canine studies, survival ranged from 2 to 78 weeks with “adult” or “skeletally mature” animals. For sheep studies, 12 to 52 weeks with animals aged 18 to 60 months or stated “skeletally mature” without providing an age. Rabbit studies had survival durations of 4 to 104 weeks, with a minimum age of 5 months or “adult”/“mature.” The single rat study used 3‐month‐old animals with a survival duration of 26 weeks, and the goat study was performed using skeletally mature animals followed for 12 weeks. Twenty studies (83%) included serial data collection to monitor the progression of degenerative changes; 10 canine, 4 rabbit, 5 sheep, and 1 rat (Figure 3, Appendix Study Overview Table 1).
Study timelines of the 24 studies reviewed with data collection (dots) and animal sacrifice time points (tick marks), as well as the materials assessed in each study. Cobalt Chromium (CoCr), Polyetheretherketone (PEEK), Stainless Steel (SS), Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVA), Pyrolytic Carbon (PyC), Zirconia Dioxide (ZrO2), Partially Stabilized Zirconia (PSZ), Alumina Ceramic (AC), Titanium (Ti).

Outcome Measures

Gait Analysis
Gait analysis was performed in 13 studies (54%). In 10 studies, animals were visually monitored after surgery, and lameness was recorded qualitatively. The remaining 3 studies used force plates to evaluate vertical ground reaction forces, providing quantitative data on loading differences, between the contralateral and treated limbs.

Imaging Modalities
Among the 24 studies reviewed, only 3 directly assessed cartilage damage using imaging techniques. Two studies (8%) employed scanning electron microscopy to evaluate articular cartilage degeneration and the surface characteristics of HBMs, while 1 study (4%) utilized microcomputed tomography (CT) to assess cartilage damage and bone wear. Although 15 studies (63%) discussed joint spacing, none provided details regarding quantitative assessments of cartilage degeneration. The remaining studies used imaging primarily to evaluate implant positioning and bony ingrowth.

Histological Assessment
All 24 studies conducted histological assessments on full thickness articular cartilage samples. With respect to the histological preparation of tissue, 12 studies embedded their specimens in paraffin, 2 studies in LX‐112, 2 studies in Poly‐methyl‐methacrylate (PMMA), and 1 study in polyester resin. Histological staining primarily included Safranin‐O (14 studies, 58%) and Hematoxylin and Eosin (13 studies, 54%). Toluidine blue was used in 7 studies (29%), Giemsa in 3 studies (13%), Masson's Trichrome in 2 studies (8%) and several others stains in individual studies, including Propidium Iodide, Alcian Green, Goldner's Trichrome, Thionin, and Von Kossa (Appendix Study Overview Table 2).
Fifteen of the 24 in vivo studies reported cartilage damage using semi‐quantitative scoring systems. Nine studies of the 15 (60%) used Mankin or Modified Mankin scoring systems. Within those studies, 1 study did not report a scale for their scoring, while the others reported various scoring ranges from 0 to 9, 0 to 30, 0 to 12, 0 to 27, and 0 to 32. Several studies reported their own scoring systems and scales, including “wear grades” (1 to 5), “gross appearance” (0 to 10), and “modified International Cartilage Repair Society (ICRS) ‐ histological visual scale” (0 to 24). Only 1 study reported using the OARSI (Osteoarthritis Research Society International) grading system to quantify signs of cartilage degeneration (Appendix: Study Overview Table 3). Nine studies (38%) did not report the scoring system used for analysis.

Discussion
The aim of this scoping review was to summarize preclinical in vivo methodologies that evaluated cartilage damage in animal models directly associated with wear against hemiarthroplasty bearing materials (HBMs). To achieve this objective, a scoping review was performed that yielded 24 studies involving the surgical implantation of HBMs. Trends were identified in HBM selection, animal models, and outcome measures. Metals were the most tested HBMs (15 studies), with canines (10 studies) and rabbits (6 studies) as the primary animal models. Most studies implanted HBMs in the proximal (11 studies) and distal femur (9 studies). Only 3 studies incorporated quantitative gait or cartilage wear imaging assessments. Cartilage health was primarily evaluated using histological staining (24 studies) and scored using the Mankin system (9 studies).
The animal models in this review demonstrate an apparent shift in species selection over time. Of the 11 studies that used canines, 8 (73%) were conducted 20–41 years ago, while 11 of the 12 studies using rabbits, sheep, and goats (92%) were conducted in the past 20 years. Historically, canines were favored for orthopedic studies due to their joint anatomy and biomechanics being closely compared to humans. Although canine cartilage is thinner (0.95–1.3 mm) than human cartilage (~2.35 mm), it is 2 to 3 times thicker than rabbit cartilage (0.36–0.52 mm), making canines suitable for studying focal cartilage defects.
Other species, including rats, sheep, and goats, are also commonly used. Rats are a cost‐effective model for initial testing, but their small joint size and thin cartilage (0.1 mm) limit their applicability for studying degenerative cartilage changes. In contrast, sheep and goats provide advantages in terms of large joint size, similar anatomical structures to humans, and cartilage thickness comparable to canines (1.1 mm), but are associated with higher costs and the need for more expansive housing. The choice of animal model is influenced by factors such as anatomical similarity, cartilage characteristics, and practical considerations related to cost and housing requirements.
In addition to the species, the age of the animal can play a crucial role in addressing the research question. A recurring trend within this review was the use of “skeletally mature” or “adult” animals, although specific ages were often not reported. The age at which animals are skeletally mature can vary across and within species, and the term “adult” can be misleading, as it may refer to either skeletal or sexual maturity. Moreover, different joints may become skeletally mature at different times in the same animal. Clarifying the specific age at which the animal's joint under study is considered skeletally mature would provide greater consistency and precision in preclinical studies.
Given the benefit of maximally preserving cartilage and bone stock, especially in younger patients, it is surprising that relatively few research studies have focused on hemiarthroplasty bearing materials in animal models. Only 24 studies were identified that performed hemiarthroplasty on load‐bearing, single‐articulation joints in quadrupeds (hip, knee, shoulder, and metacarpal). However, there is also a need to further explore and develop an understanding of potential treatments for small, multi‐articular joints (e.g., wrist and ankle). While there is added complexity to studying and improving HBM applications in multi‐articular joints, cartilage injuries are apparent in 17% to 32% of wrists after trauma. For cartilage injury after trauma to the wrist, treatments include partial and total wrist fusion (arthrodesis), proximal row carpectomy, or total wrist replacement (arthroplasty). However, each has significant limitations, such as reduced upper extremity function (fusion) and component loosening and failure (arthroplasty). Hemiarthroplasty, which in this case is simply the replacement of individual bones, as a treatment option earlier in the progression of degenerative changes might be a better, more conservative approach.
Gait analysis was performed in over half of the studies reviewed (13 studies); however, in 10 studies the authors relied solely on visual monitoring to assess postoperation lameness. Visual gait analysis, while of some value, introduces subjectivity and is prone to observer bias, as it relies on the researcher's interpretation of lameness and movement patterns. This can lead to inconsistent assessments, particularly in animals who deliberately conceal pain and discomfort as prey avoidance maneuvers. Clinically, the limitations of qualitative gait assessments have been addressed with the implementation of a quantitative approach, such as using force plates or motion capture systems, which provide objective and reliable data on parameters including stride length, stride velocity, and joint angles. Quantitative gait assessment has been deemed a reliable and objective method for evaluating patients with osteoarthritis, both pre‐ and post‐arthroplasty. Implementing quantitative gait analysis could enhance the objectivity of outcomes, providing a more reliable assessment of functional mobility and joint performance in animal models.
Overall, there was a lack of clinically translatable imaging analysis directly associated with gross cartilage wear related to HBM performance evaluation. This highlights a key limitation in current imaging practices for HBM evaluation, where more targeted methods are needed to directly assess cartilage in vivo. While 15 studies (63%) examined joint spacing, none were rigorous, as they lacked preoperative imaging and quantitative assessment of joint spacing. Clinically, radiography remains the primary tool for assessing joint space narrowing as an indicator for cartilage loss, though its reliability is often compromised by variability in imaging techniques and study designs. Additionally, radiography primarily provides insight into late‐stage cartilage degeneration, limiting its ability to detect early changes. However, advancements in imaging technologies, such as ultrasound, CT, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), have enhanced OA research, complementing traditional radiography. Advanced compositional MRI techniques, in particular, are capable of detecting early biochemical changes in cartilage, offering a promising method for evaluating cartilage damage. Refining and utilizing these advanced imaging practices for preclinical animal studies may help improve comparability and enhance the translational relevance of cartilage damage assessments.
All of the studies included in this review conducted histological assessments on articular cartilage. Safranin‐O and Hematoxylin and Eosin were the most commonly used stains across studies, targeting proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans, cell nuclei, and cartilage matrix, respectively. Toluidine blue was the third most common stain (7 studies), which also targets proteoglycans and glycosaminoglycans. However, it has been reported that Toluidine blue results in more intense staining, when compared to Safranin‐O, and Safranin‐O may not accurately indicate the proteoglycan content in tissue depleted of glycosaminoglycans. That being said, both Safranin‐O and Toluidine blue are identified as the primary cationic stains by the OARSI cartilage histopathology guidelines.
This review did find that scoring systems were commonly used to quantify HBM‐associated cartilage damage. However, there was significant variability in the sub‐categories and scales of the histological scoring systems, as well as inconsistencies in reporting histological findings. While 38% of the studies used the Mankin or Modified Mankin scoring system, the sub‐categories and scales varied considerably. For example, Minihane et al. used a modified Mankin scoring system and reported a scale of 0 to 30 with sub‐categories of articular surface integrity, proteoglycan staining, chondrocyte clustering, cellularity, osteophytes, and other disorders. In contrast, Van Der Muelen et al. also used the Modified Mankin system, but with a scale of 0 to 9, where 0 represented healthy normal cartilage and sub‐categories of articular surface structure, cellular organization, clone formation, and tidemark integrity. These inconsistencies in sub‐categories and scales within the Modified Mankin system precluded direct comparisons of histological outcomes across studies. In addition to the Modified Mankin scoring system, several other scoring methods were employed, including “wear grades 1 to 5”, “gross appearance” 0 to 10, “modified ICRS – histological visual scale” 0 to 24, and OARSI. The OARSI scoring system in particular has been viewed as the modern, up‐to‐date system, allowing for detailed assessment of OA progression, however it was first introduced in 2006 and over 40% of the studies in this review pre‐date its conception. Thus, while histological analysis remains an important method for assessing cartilage wear and degradation, the subjective nature and inconsistent use of scoring systems pose challenges in comparing outcomes across studies.
In studies that compared multiple HBMs, 5 out of 6 studies reported that metals were the least favorable HBM when compared to ceramics, synthetic carbon, and hard and soft polymers. The inferiority of metals was based upon several metrics, including cartilage loss (quantified via macroscopic evaluation), quality of articular cartilage (quantified via macroscopic evaluation and histology), time at which onset of cartilage degeneration began (quantified via macroscopic evaluation at serial sacrifice timepoints), and cellular changes (quantified via histological evaluation). Concerns regarding the cytotoxicity and tissue response to metal ions highlight the need for further investigation into alternative materials that may offer improved biocompatibility and wear performance in hemiarthroplasty applications. The identification of metals as the least favorable HBMs was based on varying outcome measures limiting a rigorous conclusion of material superiority, emphasizing a need for future studies of consistent comparative evaluations. The difficulty in cross‐comparisons of HBM performance can be overcome by considering a consistent approach for quantitatively assessing outcomes and standardizing a consistent cartilage scoring system within the HBM research community.
The limitations of this scoping review stem from the literature search and data extraction. The literature search was limited to four databases (PubMed, Scopus, Google Scholar, Cochrane Library). Within these databases the MeSH and keywords used may have limited the scope of studies identified. The data extraction was performed individually by two authors, potentially leading to oversight of testing methodologies and outcome assessment details. Conflicts regarding the inclusion or exclusion of articles were resolved by a third author. Additionally, the exclusion of non‐English studies may have led to the omission of relevant articles.

Conclusion
This review highlights the methodologies and outcome assessments used in the testing of HBMs in animal models. Common to more than half of the papers was the use of gait analysis to evaluate functional performance, and histology and cartilage scoring systems to evaluate cartilage damage. However, variability was evident in how the gait analysis and cartilage scoring systems were implemented. There was also a great deal of variability in the testing methodologies used, as different materials were tested in different animal species, different joints, and varying lengths of time. The overall lack of standardization and the limited number of studies makes it difficult to draw definitive conclusions on best practices for HBM evaluation. This summary of the testing methodologies and outcome assessments suggests that a standardized approach—or standardized approaches—might be needed to systematically advance HBMs for use in large versus small and weightbearing versus non‐weightbearing joints, with thoughtful consideration of animal species, joint replaced, and duration of implantation before analysis. Currently, quantitative gait analysis and histological evaluation of cartilage damage are commonly used to assess performance, but they have not been proven to predict long‐term outcomes in human clinical applications.

Author Contributions
Landon M. Begin, Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi, Douglas C. Moore, Markus A. Wimmer, and Joseph J. Crisco: conceptualization. Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi, Douglas C. Moore, Markus A. Wimmer, and Joseph J. Crisco: search strategy, methodology. Landon M. Begin, Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi, Douglas C. Moore, Markus A. Wimmer, and Joseph J. Crisco: manuscript screening – title and abstract. Landon M. Begin and Victoria P. Marino: manuscript screening – full text review. Landon M. Begin and Victoria P. Marino: data extraction. Landon M. Begin: data analysis. Landon M. Begin, Douglas C. Moore, Markus A. Wimmer, and Joseph J. Crisco: data interpretation. Landon M. Begin: writing – original draft preparation. Landon M. Begin, Victoria P. Marino, Francesca De Vecchi, Douglas C. Moore, Markus A. Wimmer, and Joseph J. Crisco: writing – review and editing. Landon M. Begin: figure preparation. Landon M. Begin: table preparation. Joseph J. Crisco: supervision. Joseph J. Crisco and Markus A. Wimmer: project administration. Joseph J. Crisco and Markus A. Wimmer: funding acquisition.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

Supporting information

References
Preclinical Evaluation of a Novel Implant for Treatment of a Full‐Thickness Distal Femoral Focal Cartilage Defect
Shoulder Hemiarthroplasty: Outcomes and Long‐Term Survival Analysis According to Etiology
The Effect of Osteoarthritis on Functional Outcome Following Hemiarthroplasty for Femoral Neck Fracture: A Prospective Observational Study
Bilateral Posterior Fracture‐Dislocation of the Shoulder After Electrical Shock Treated With Bilateral Hemiarthroplasty: A Case Report
Arthroplasties for Hip Fracture in Adults
Total Hip Arthroplasty or Hemiarthroplasty for Hip Fracture
The Porcine Accessory Carpal Bone as a Model for Biologic Joint Replacement for Trapeziometacarpal Osteoarthritis
Carpal Bone Replacement Using Personalized 3D Printed Tantalum Prosthesis
Metallic Hemiarthroplasty or Arthrodesis of the First Metatarsophalangeal Joint as Treatment for Hallux Rigidus: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Factors Associated With Reoperation After Pyrocarbon Proximal Interphalangeal Joint Arthroplasty for the Arthritic Joint: A Retrospective Cohort Study
Current Concepts in Distal Humeral Hemiarthroplasty
A Larger Sized Cup Accelerates Cartilage Erosion of Acetabulum After Bipolar Hemiarthroplasty in Elderly With Femur Neck Fracture
Factors Influencing Changes in Articular Cartilage Following Hemiarthroplasty in Sheep
Effect of Hip Hemiarthroplasty on Articular Cartilage and Bone in a Canine Model
Development of a New Model of Humeral Hemiarthroplasty in Rats
Patient‐Specific 3D‐printed Shelf Implant for the Treatment of Hip Dysplasia Tested in an Experimental Animal Pilot in Canines
Comparison of Cobalt Chromium, Ceramic and Pyrocarbon Hemiprostheses in a Rabbit Model: Ceramic Leads to More Cartilage Damage Than Cobalt Chromium
In Vivo Study of Carbon Artificial Femoral Head
Biological and Functional Evaluation of a Novel Pyrolytic Carbon Implant for the Treatment of Focal Osteochondral Defects in the Medial Femoral Condyle: Assessment in a Canine Model
Animal Models in Biological and Biomedical Research ‐ Experimental and Ethical Concerns
Animal Models for Cartilage Regeneration and Repair
Animal Models of Osteoarthritis: Classification, Update, and Measurement of Outcomes
In Vitro Evaluation of Hemiarthroplasty Bearing Materials: A Scoping Review (Part I)
Covidence Systematic Review Software, Published online 2024, www.covidence.org.
Scoping Studies: Towards a Methodological Framework
Early Acetabular Cartilage Wear Following Hemiarthroplasty: An Ovine Model
Comparison of the Bony Ingrowth Into an Osteochondral Defect and an Artificial Osteochondral Composite Device in Load‐Bearing Joints
Hemiarthroplasty of the Shoulder Joint Using a Custom‐Designed High‐Density Nano‐Hydroxyapatite/Polyamide Prosthesis With a Polyvinyl Alcohol Hydrogel Humeral Head Surface in Rabbits
Evaluation of Metallic Personalized Hemiarthroplasty: A Canine Patellofemoral Model
An Evaluation of Prosthetic Femoral Head Impact on Acetabular Articular Cartilage in a Hemiarthroplasty Model
Biomechanics and Repair of Articular Cartilge
Focal Knee Resurfacing and Effects of Surgical Precision on Opposing Cartilage. A Pilot Study on 12 Sheep
Treatment of Full Thickness Focal Cartilage Lesions With a Metallic Resurfacing Implant in a Sheep Animal Model, 1 Year Evaluation
The Response of Articular Cartilage to Weight‐Bearing Against Metal. A Study of Hemiarthroplasty of the Hip in the Dog
Response of the Articular Cartilage to Weight‐Bearing: Comparison of Hemiarthroplasty With Ceramic and Cobalt‐Chromium Head in Dogs
A Partial Hemi‐Resurfacing Preliminary Study of a Novel Magnetic Resonance Imaging Compatible Polyetheretherketone Mini‐Prosthesis for Focal Osteochondral Defects
Histologic Comparison of Tibial Articular Surfaces Against Rigid Materials and Artificial Articular Cartilage
Repair of Articular Cartilage and Subchondral Defects in Rabbit Knee Joints With a Polyvinyl Alcohol/Nano‐Hydroxyapatite/Polyamide 66 Biological Composite Material
A Two Year In Vivo Study of Polyvinyl Alcohol‐Hydrogel (PVA‐H) Artificial Meniscus
Autologous Chondrocyte Implantation in a Canine Model: Change in Composition of Reparative Tissue With Time
Cancellous Bone Grafting of Large Osteochondral Defects: An Experimental Study in Dogs
Sheep as a Model for Evaluating Mesenchymal Stem/Stromal Cell (MSC)‐Based Chondral Defect Repair
Knee Osteoarthritis: A Review of Animal Models and Intervention of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Time Course of Epiphyseal Growth Plate Fusion in Rat Tibiae
The Effect of Skeletal Maturity on Functional Healing of the Anterior Cruciate Ligament
Structural Differences Between Immature and Mature Articular Cartilage of Rabbits by Microscopic MRI and Polarized Light Microscopy
Review of Growth Plate Closure Compared With Age at Sexual Maturity and Lifespan in Laboratory Animals
Therapeutic Interventions for Osteoarthritis of the Wrist: A Systematic Review and Meta‐Analysis
Ankle Osteoarthritis: Toward New Understanding and Opportunities for Prevention and Intervention
Cartilage Injuries and Posttraumatic Osteoarthritis in the Wrist: A Review
Outcomes of Revision Total Wrist Arthroplasty
Proximal Row Carpectomy Versus 4‐Corner Fusion: Incidence, Conversion to Fusion, and Cost
Results of 189 Wrist Replacements. A Report From the Norwegian Arthroplasty Register
Do ʻPrey Speciesʼ Hide Their Pain? Implications for Ethical Care and Use of Laboratory Animals
Factors Influencing the Clinical Adoption of Quantitative Gait Analysis Technology With a Focus on Clinical Efficacy and Clinician Perspectives: A Scoping Review
Present and Future of Gait Assessment in Clinical Practice: Towards the Application of Novel Trends and Technologies
Gait Analysis before and After Unilateral Total Knee Arthroplasty. Study Using a Linear Regression Model of Normal Controls—Women Without Arthropathy
Current Applications of Gait Analysis After Total Knee Arthroplasty: A Scoping Review
Comparison of Joint Space Width Determinations in Grade I and II Knee Osteoarthritis Patients Using Manual and Automatic Measurements
Location Specific Radiographic Joint Space Width for Osteoarthritis Progression
A Measurement Method of Knee Joint Space Width by Ultrasound: A Large Multicenter Study
Joint Space Narrowing and Kellgren–Lawrence Progression in Knee Osteoarthritis: An Analytic Literature Synthesis
Imaging of Osteoarthritis—Recent Research Developments and Future Perspective
Imaging in Osteoarthritis
Limitations of Safranin ʻOʼ Staining in Proteoglycan‐Depleted Cartilage Demonstrated With Monoclonal Antibodies
Osteoarthritis Cartilage Histopathology: Grading and Staging
Oarsi Osteoarthritis Cartilage Histopathology Assessment System: A Biomechanical Evaluation in the Human Knee
Histological Analysis of Cartilage Defects Repaired With an Autologous Human Stem Cell Construct 48 Weeks Postimplantation Reveals Structural Details Not Detected by T2‐Mapping MRI
Evaluation of Histological Scoring Systems for Tissue‐Engineered, Repaired and Osteoarthritic Cartilage
Molecular and Immune Toxicity of CoCr Nanoparticles in Mom Hip Arthroplasty
Toxicity Assessment and Health Hazard Classification of Stainless Steels
Reduced Toxicity and Superior Cellular Response of Preosteoblasts to Ti‐6Al‐7Nb Alloy and Comparison With Ti‐6Al‐4V