Network psychometrics and the network approach to posttraumatic stress disorder: A conceptual and methodological overview
Abstract
The network approach to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has rapidly developed in recent years, driven by a growing number of empirical studies employing psychometric network analyses to investigate the structure of associations among PTSD symptoms. In this paper, we provide an overview of network psychometrics and consider the role of these analyses within the network approach to PTSD. Adopting a recently proposed workflow for conducting network psychometric analyses, we identify and address issues that researchers using network psychometrics to study PTSD are likely to confront. We conclude with a consideration of work beyond network psychometrics that will be critical in translating the growing body of empirical network studies into meaningful advances in the field's understanding of the causal systems underlying PTSD.
In recent years, a growing number of studies have used network psychometrics to investigate the structure of associations among symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). In the first such study, published in 2015, researchers investigated the associations among PTSD symptoms in survivors of an earthquake (McNally et al.,). Numerous studies quickly followed (e.g., Armour, Fried, & Olff,; de Schryver et al.,), extending this work with larger samples (e.g., Bryant et al.,), more rigorous methods (e.g., robustness analyses; Fried et al.,), and the use of time‐series data (e.g., Greene et al.,). Within a few short years, systematic (Birkeland et al.,) and meta‐analytic (Isvoranu et al.,) reviews of the PTSD network literature were published, summarizing network studies with dozens of samples and a total of nearly 30,000 participants. In the years since, the PTSD network literature has only continued to grow.
The rapid increase in PTSD network studies speaks to the appeal of this analytic approach and the conceptual framework that motivates it (Borsboom,; Borsboom & Cramer,). As the field approaches a decade of research on PTSD employing network psychometric tools, this paper aims to take stock of this evolving analytic approach and consider how to most effectively use network psychometrics to advance the field's understanding of PTSD. We begin by introducing the network approach to PTSD. We then provide an overview of network psychometrics within the context of PTSD research. Finally, we broaden our perspective and consider next steps for the network approach to PTSD.

THE NETWORK APPROACH TO PTSD
The network approach to psychopathology emerged from efforts to understand the nature of mental disorders, especially the association between symptom and disorder. Although traditionally conceptualized as a reflective relationship in which symptoms arise from and reflect the presence of an underlying disease entity, researchers working in the philosophy of psychiatry (Kendler et al.,) and psychometrics (Borsboom,) independently developed the idea that, for many mental disorders, the relationship may instead be mereological: part to whole. Symptoms, these researchers posited, are not passive indicators of an underlying disease but rather active components of a causal system (see Figure 1).
Essentialist and network models of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Note: Panel A depicts an “essentialist” model of PTSD in which symptoms arise from and serve to indicate the presence of a common underlying cause. Panel B depicts a “network” (or “causal system”) model of PTSD in which symptoms cohere as a syndrome, at least in part, because of causal associations among the symptoms themselves.
The appeal of this conceptual framework for PTSD is immediately apparent. On one hand, decades of research have failed to identify any one factor that could plausibly qualify as the sole common underlying cause of the PTSD syndrome. On the other hand, even a cursory review of PTSD diagnostic criteria suggests numerous plausible causal relationships among PTSD symptoms. Intrusive and distressing memories almost certainly play a causal role in the avoidance of such memories, nightmares almost certainly causally contribute to sleep disturbance, and negative beliefs about oneself (e.g., “I am bad”) almost certainly contribute to a negative emotional state (e.g., enduring feelings of shame). PTSD theorists have gone further, positing causal associations that may be less readily apparent. For example, in their cognitive model of PTSD, Ehlers and Clark posit that not only do distressing memories cause avoidance but that avoidance, in turn, plays a causal role in maintaining frequent and intrusive distressing memories.
Given these plausible causal relationships, PTSD researchers were primed to embrace a conceptual framework that features a central role for intersymptom causal relationships. However, the intuitive appeal of this framework alone does not provide a satisfying account of the rapid growth of the network approach to PTSD. As the example of the cognitive model of PTSD makes clear, the notion that there are causal relationships among symptoms of PTSD is not new. Why, then, did the network approach to PTSD—which takes the presence of such relationships as a central theoretical position—stimulate such a rapidly growing body of research? We suggest that the answer is two‐fold.
First, the network approach not only posits that causal relationships among symptoms exist but also confronts the implications of these causal relationships for how mental disorders are conceptualized, studied, and treated. To take a “network approach” is to adopt a “systems thinking” lens, giving consideration to how the components of a syndrome may interact, regulate, or reinforce one another and ultimately lead to the maintenance of distressing and impairing symptoms (Borsboom, Cramer, et al.,). This lens brings with it a host of concepts and insights developed within the transdisciplinary field of systems science that further inform understanding of how PTSD may operate as a complex system (McNally,; Cramer et al.,; Scheffer et al.,). Thus, although the plausibility of the causal relationships among PTSD symptoms may have encouraged researchers to try on this systems thinking lens, we suspect that it is the insight this lens provides that has helped sustain the growth of the network approach to PTSD.
Second, the network approach not only provided a new conceptual framework but also provided new tools for research. Once one begins to explore any phenomenon through a systems lens, two important questions immediately arise: what are the components of the system, and how are the components of the system related? For PTSD, there is a clear, if preliminary, answer to the first question: The PTSD symptoms enumerated in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th ed.; DSM‐5; American Psychiatric Association,) are highly plausible candidate components of the system (Borsboom,). Although there are good reasons to question whether DSM‐5 symptoms are the only, or even the most important, components of this system (Jones et al.,; Rosencrans et al.,), the inclusion of these symptoms in the DSM nonetheless represents an expert consensus that these symptoms frequently cohere as a syndrome and, thus, may plausibly be bound together by a web of causal interactions. The latter question concerning how these symptoms are related to one another, however, is less straightforward. In many areas of network science, the associations among components of a network are readily observable (e.g., tracks that connect two train stations). For psychopathology, however, associations among symptoms cannot be directly observed. As researchers began to work from within the network approach to understand the structure of psychological networks, it became clear that there was a need for an exploratory method that could estimate the structure of these relationships from empirical data (Marsman & Rhemtulla,). Network psychometrics were developed to meet this need, bringing together estimation methods from multivariate statistics and the descriptive tools of network science to provide a procedure for estimating, describing, and visualizing the structure of statistical relationships among a set of components (Epskamp, Maris, et al.,; Isvoranu et al.,). The impact of these methods on the network approach to PTSD has been substantial. Although the implications of the network approach for PTSD were explored as far back as 2012 (McNally,), it was not until several years later, after the development of freely accessible network psychometric tools (Epskamp et al.,) and the publication of the first empirical network studies (de Schryver et al.,; McNally et al.,), that the network approach began to take hold in the PTSD literature. In other words, it was not just the proposal of a novel conceptual framework but also the provision of new methodological tools to work from within that framework that created the fertile ground from which the network approach to PTSD was able to grow.

NETWORK PSYCHOMETRICS
In the years since the earliest network psychometric tools were developed, the pace of innovation in these methods has been considerable. For PTSD researchers, this rapidly developing set of methodological tools has afforded the opportunity to gain new insight into PTSD. However, it has also brought a unique set of challenges that accompany efforts to work within a new, sometimes controversial, and quickly evolving methodological landscape (Epskamp,; for a summary of methodological critiques of network analysis and a reply to those critiques, see Neal et al.,, and Borsboom, Deserno, et al.,, respectively). To support researchers in navigating this landscape, there has been a concerted effort to provide a stable set of guidelines for how best to conduct (e.g., Borsboom et al.,; Epskamp, Borsboom, & Fried,; Huth et al.,; Isvoranu et al.,), visualize (Jones et al.,), and report (Burger et al.,) these analyses. In this section, we draw on and supplement these guidelines to provide an overview of this methodological approach for PTSD researchers, focusing especially on the data that are put into these analyses and the inferences that are taken from them (see Figure 2).
Network psychometrics workflow.
Note: The workflow for network psychometrics depicted here was adapted from a recent primer on this analytic approach (Borsboom et al.,).

Research question
As with any empirical study, it is important to first ensure that the chosen analytic approach is well‐suited to answer—or help move toward answers to—one's research questions. At this stage, network psychometrics are primarily a set of exploratory methods for investigating patterns of pairwise conditional dependencies in multivariate data. Given this focus, in the domain of PTSD research, network psychometrics are likely to be most appropriate when researchers are interested in understanding pairwise associations involving one or more PTSD symptoms that cannot be readily accounted for by shared associations with other PTSD symptoms. There are at least three common types of such questions for which network psychometrics has been fruitfully employed in the PTSD literature.
The first type is rooted in the question that most directly motivated the network approach to PTSD: What is the structure of pairwise associations among PTSD symptoms? It was this question that was posed in the first empirical network study of PTSD (McNally et al.,) and, in the nearly 10 years that have followed, numerous researchers have used network psychometrics to investigate this question (Birkeland et al.,). Accordingly, for researchers interested in this research question, there is a wealth of information already in the published literature upon which they can draw.
The second set of questions concerns how external factors relate to PTSD. From the perspective of network theory, one means by which risk factors or treatments may affect PTSD is by affecting one or more specific symptoms of the syndrome. Similarly, the impact of PTSD on other psychosocial factors (e.g., suicidal thinking) may be driven by some symptoms more than others. Incorporating such external factors in one's analysis can provide insight into how those factors relate to the broader PTSD syndrome. For example, Armour, Fried, Deserno, et al. found that self‐destructive or reckless behavior was the PTSD symptom with which suicidal thinking was the most conditionally dependent.
The third set of research questions concerns how PTSD is related to other conditions commonly comorbid with PTSD. From a network perspective, elevated comorbidity is an expected consequence of (a) overlap in the symptoms that constitute the syndromes (e.g., irritability is a symptom of not only PTSD but also generalized anxiety disorder [GAD]) and (b) causal relationships between distinct symptoms of these syndromes (e.g., between the intrusive thoughts of the PTSD syndrome and the difficulty concentrating symptom of depression; Cramer et al.,). Network psychometrics can, therefore, help identify how syndromes may relate to one another. For example, Price and colleagues found that the restricted ability to experience positive affect may be an important link between PTSD and a broad community of experiences comprising symptoms of both GAD and depression.

Data collection
If network analysis is deemed an appropriate tool for one's research questions, those research questions can also help guide decisions about the data needed for one's analysis. Researchers will be faced with at least three broad decisions: what to assess, who to include, and how often to administer assessments.

What to assess?
For network analyses, the focus of assessment is on the components of the posited network. In the PTSD network literature, most studies assess the PTSD symptoms identified in the DSM, typically using a self‐report measure or clinician‐administered assessment (for comparisons of these methods when assessing the PTSD network, see Moshier et al.,, and Rosencrans et al.,). There are significant advantages to using these DSM‐focused assessments, including the widespread availability of data collected with these assessments and the consistency it affords in comparing results across studies. However, there are also disadvantages. For example, DSM‐focused measures were not designed to provide a rigorous assessment of each individual PTSD symptom. As a result, PTSD symptoms are typically assessed with a single item, leaving them vulnerable to measurement error (de Ron et al.,). Where possible, researchers should consider incorporating multiple items for each assessed symptom to more rigorously assess each component of the network, and, as we discuss further in the final section of this paper, there may be advantages to developing measures that look beyond only those symptoms identified in the DSM.

Who to assess?
For PTSD researchers, the question of whom to include in one's study often begins with whether to use a clinical sample (e.g., individuals with PTSD) or a community sample (e.g., a broader sample that includes individuals with and without PTSD). Although it may seem preferable to focus one's analyses on individuals with PTSD, restricting the sample in this way can introduce selection bias in which the findings from the selected subpopulation (e.g., participants who exceed the PTSD Checklist for DSM‐5 cutoff score) differ from the broader population of interest (e.g., all participants who have experienced a traumatic event; de Ron et al.,). This bias can produce attenuated or even reversed associations among symptoms relative to what is observed in the full population (for an illustration, see the Supplementary Materials). Importantly, this does not mean that the findings from clinical samples are inaccurate (Haslbeck, Ryan, & Dablander,); network analyses will still capture the associations among symptoms that are present in those groups. However, researchers should consider the effects of restricting their sample when determining whom to include in their study.
Researchers must also determine how many participants to include in their study. Sample size is a key factor in determining whether one's study is well‐positioned to detect the associations of interest and whether the study findings are likely to replicate in future research. All things being equal, larger samples tend to provide better estimates and more robust findings (Christensen et al.,; Isvoranu & Epskamp,; Williams et al.,). However, the precise number of participants needed will depend on the study aims, the nature of the data, the characteristics of the network to be assessed, and other features of the study. Methodologists have recently developed tools that allow researchers to obtain estimates of the sample size needed given the specific features of one's study, including an R package (R Core Team,) for performing power analysis for Gaussian graphical models (GGMs; Constantin et al.,) and a tutorial for setting up one's own network power analysis (Hoekstra et al.,). We would encourage researchers to utilize these tools to ensure they have a sample size that is sufficient to make network analysis a suitable tool for addressing their research aims.

How often to administer assessments?
In the network psychometric literature, most studies use data from a single assessment point, typically by analyzing data from a large sample of individuals who have completed a retrospective assessment of PTSD symptoms (Birkeland et al.,). With these cross‐sectional data, researchers can estimate networks in which the associations between variables are driven by differences between individuals (e.g., whether individuals who report strong negative beliefs about themselves are more likely to report strong negative emotions than those without such beliefs). However, it is important to be mindful that the associations among variables observed in cross‐sectional analyses cannot be assumed to be equivalent to the associations that would be observed among variables within an individual over time (e.g., whether a given individual tends to be above their own mean level of negative emotion when they are also above their own mean level of negative beliefs; Hamaker,; for further discussion, see the Supplementary Materials). To be clear, the fact that findings from cross‐sectional and within‐person analyses may not align does not mean that cross‐sectional analyses are uninformative, or even necessarily less informative, than within‐person analyses. It means only that one cannot assume the equivalence of between‐person and within‐person analyses, and one's conclusions should be constrained accordingly.
With intensive longitudinal data, researchers can gain two valuable pieces of information distinct from that gained in cross‐sectional analyses. First, researchers will be able to assess the within‐person (or intraindividual) association between variables. Second, researchers will be able to assess the temporal relationship between variables (e.g., whether negative beliefs at a given assessment point tend to predict negative beliefs or negative emotions at the next assessment point). For PTSD researchers, this additional information may be highly valuable for one's research questions. For example, differences in symptom associations across individuals could potentially inform understanding of why some individuals experience persistent PTSD symptoms whereas others do not. However, there are barriers to the feasibility of assessing idiographic networks, especially in the number of assessment points needed for these analyses when working with the number of variables typically present in mental health syndromes, such as PTSD (Mansueto et al.,). Accordingly, when one's focus is on intraindividual associations, it may be necessary to balance the desire to assess the full symptom network with the need for a feasible number of assessment points.

Network analysis
Network psychometric analyses are commonly conducted using packages in the statistical computing software environment R (R Core Team,; for a list of helpful packages, see the Supplementary Materials). More recently, many psychometric network tools have also been implemented in the freely available statistical analysis software JASP (JASP Team,). Whether in R or JASP, network analysis consists of three broad steps: (a) estimating the parameters of the statistical network model, (b) visualizing and describing the network, and (c) assessing the stability of (or uncertainty around) the network findings.

Network estimation
The first step in network analysis is to estimate the network structure: that is, to estimate the (conditional) associations among the proposed network's components. Once the network structure has been estimated, the components of the proposed network are commonly referred to as nodes, and the statistical associations among them are commonly referred to as edges. For helpful tutorials regarding network estimation, see Epskamp, Borsboom, and Fried and Huth et al..

Cross‐sectional analyses
For cross‐sectional data, the most common approach is to estimate a pairwise Markov random field (PMRF), a graphical model representing pairwise, undirected, weighted, and conditional dependence associations among a set of variables (Epskamp et al.,). The type of PMRF used depends on the type of data. If the data are binary, the Ising model can be used, where the edges represent log‐linear relationships (Van Borkulo et al.,). If the data are continuous, a GGM can be used, where the edges represent partial correlations (Epskamp, Maris, et al.,; Williams et al.,). If the data contain a mix of continuous, categorical, and/or binary variables, a mixed graphical model (MGM) can be used, where the edges represent the regression coefficients from generalized linear regression models (Haslbeck & Waldorp,). Recently, Bayesian methods for estimating a PMRF have also become available (e.g., Huth et al.,; Williams,), including methods designed specifically for use with ordinal data (Marsman & Haslbeck,). In each of these cases, the PMRF represents the structure and strength of conditional associations among the variables of interest.
After the initial estimation, even variables that are, in fact, conditionally independent may have nonzero associations due to estimation error and sampling variation. Edge selection methods aim to remove these spurious associations from the network. One common approach to edge selection entails using regularized estimation procedures, such as the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO; Epskamp & Fried,). In this approach, network estimation and edge selection are combined in a single step. Another approach to edge selection entails using null hypothesis testing procedures, with the inclusion or exclusion of each edge based on its statistical significance (Williams & Rast,) or via the Bayes factor (Marsman & Haslbeck,). Here, network estimation and edge selection are separated into two steps: the saturated statistical network model is estimated, and then edges are removed based on a chosen criterion (e.g., a nonsignificant p value).
To help determine the most appropriate estimation method for one's cross‐sectional data, we would encourage PTSD researchers to review the simulation study by Isvoranu and Epskamp, which examined the performance of a wide range of estimation methods under conditions likely to be observed in PTSD research (e.g., moderate sample sizes and positively skewed ordinal symptom‐level data). Their analysis makes clear that there is no one method that consistently outperforms all others, and, thus, the choice of estimation procedure should be guided by one's research questions and the characteristics of one's data (see also, Williams et al.,).

Time‐series analyses
For time‐series data, estimation of the network structure is often performed using graphical vector autoregressive (GVAR) models (Bringmann et al.,). GVAR models explain each variable at time point t as a linear combination of all variables (including itself) at the previous time point t‐1. In the network psychometric literature, a GVAR model of one person (i.e., an “idiographic” model) is typically used to generate two types of networks: the temporal network and the contemporaneous network. In the temporal network, the edges are directed and represent how much the current state of a variable depends on the prior state of the same variable (autoregression) or another variable in the network (cross‐regression). In the contemporaneous network, the edges are undirected and represent the associations that remain after controlling for the temporal effects.
Multilevel approaches to network estimation that incorporate information across individuals, such as multilevel vector autoregressive (VAR) models (Epskamp, Waldorp, et al.,), may help mitigate the challenges of purely idiographic network research (Mansueto et al.,). Relatedly, group iterative multiple model estimation (GIMME) provides a tool for estimating person‐specific networks while distinguishing between associations common across all participants and those specific to each individual (Beltz & Gates,). Given the potential practical challenges of idiographic work and the information these analyses provide across participants, multilevel analyses constitute an effective approach for PTSD researchers interested in investigating within‐person associations.

Network visualization and description
The output of network estimation is a set of nodes (representing one's variables of interest) and edges (representing the estimated statistical associations among those variables). These nodes and edges are, in turn, the input for network visualization and description. Network visualization provides researchers with an accessible way of grappling with a complex pattern of conditional dependence associations. The most common approach to visualizing networks within the network approach to psychopathology has been to use the default methods embedded in the R package qgraph (Epskamp,), though there are alternative options that may lend themselves to even clearer interpretation (Jones et al.,).
Network visualization should be accompanied by a quantitative description of the network. Network descriptions broadly fall into two domains: those focused on the overall network (i.e., “global” features) and those that focus on specific components of the network (i.e., “local” features). Among the more commonly examined global characteristics are network density (or “connectivity”), which is typically assessed as the sum of all network edges or as the proportion of possible edges that are present, and community structure, where communities are groups of nodes that are more strongly related to one another than they are to the rest of the network. Among local features, nodes can be described in terms of their centrality, a collection of indices that describe a node's relation to the rest of the network. The most common centrality indices are node strength (i.e., the sum of the absolute edge weights connected to the node of interest), closeness (i.e., the inverse of the distance between a given node and the remaining nodes in the network; see Opsahl et al.,, for further detail), and betweenness (i.e., how often the node of interest lies on the shortest path between any two other nodes). Additional node‐specific metrics include expected influence (i.e., the sum of edge weights, retaining the sign of that edge) and node predictability (i.e., how well a node can be predicted by other nodes in the network; Haslbeck & Waldorp,).

Stability analysis
The final step of network analysis entails examining the stability of one's findings. Because networks are estimated, they are subject to estimation error and sampling variation. In other words, there is uncertainty in the estimated parameters of the network and the findings will likely differ, at least somewhat, from one sample to the next. Given this, it is critical to evaluate the stability of the estimated network. Most commonly, stability is assessed using resampling techniques, such as bootstrapping and permutation tests. Resampling entails repeatedly estimating the parameter of interest (e.g., edge weights) on a new dataset sampled from the original dataset with replacement (Epskamp, Borsboom, et al.,). These bootstrapped parameter estimates are then used to generate a bootstrap confidence interval (CI) around the original parameter estimate (for helpful guidance regarding the interpretation of these intervals, see Burger et al.,; Epskamp, Borsboom, et al.,; Williams,). If the interval is large, it indicates that there is considerable uncertainty in the estimated parameter—the parameter is prone to sampling variation and, therefore, should be interpreted with significant caution, if at all. When comparing components of the networks (e.g., edge weights or node centralities), the bootstrapped values can be used to evaluate if two edge weights or node centralities significantly differ from one another (Epskamp, Borsboom, et al.,). If centrality indices are being used to examine local features of the network, case‐dropping stability analysis can be used to evaluate the stability of these indices (see Epskamp, Borsboom, et al.,, for further details).
Bayesian estimation methods provide an alternative approach to investigating the uncertainty around estimated network parameters. These methods allow researchers to model uncertainty in the estimated network and quantify the strength of evidence in favor of specific features of the network, including individual pairwise associations, specific configurations of pairwise associations (e.g., a particular pattern of associations among a small number of nodes), and the overall network structure. Moreover, Bayesian estimation methods allow one to consider the evidence not only for conditional dependence relationships but also for conditional independence relationships. That is, they equip researchers to evaluate whether the absence of an edge between two nodes indicates that they are genuinely conditionally independent or if there is simply insufficient evidence for conditional dependence. For example, in their initial analysis of the PTSD symptom network, McNally et al. reported that there was no evidence for a conditional dependence relationship between internal avoidance and anger nor was there evidence for such a relationship between internal avoidance and loss of interest. In a Bayesian reanalysis of these data, Marsman and Haslbeck found strong evidence that avoidance and anger were conditionally independent but that for internal avoidance and loss of interest, there was an absence of evidence for either dependence or independence. Given this additional insight, it will be valuable to bring Bayesian estimation methods further into the PTSD network literature (for an accessible introduction to Bayesian networks, see Huth et al.,).

Inference and interpretation
The interpretation of one's network is a crucial step in the network analysis workflow and arguably the step at which experts in PTSD have the most critical role to play. When interpreting the findings from network analysis, it is important to avoid common inferential pitfalls (for further discussion, see the Supplementary Materials) and to be guided by both methodological and substantive considerations.

Methodological considerations
Perhaps the most important—and most debated—methodological consideration for the interpretation of psychometric networks concerns their replicability. A detailed summary of the discussion on replicability in the network literature is beyond the scope of this paper. For interested readers, Christensen and colleagues provide a concise overview, and critics of network analysis have organized and annotated a bibliography of many of the relevant papers (Neal et al.,). Although sometimes contentious, this ongoing discussion has spotlighted the importance of replicability, helped prompt the development of new methods for evaluating the robustness of network findings, and recently motivated simulation studies that further contribute to the field's understanding of these methods (Christensen et al.,; Isvoranu & Epskamp,; Williams,). In our view, three key messages have emerged from this ongoing discussion.
First, it is critical to use stability analyses to constrain one's inferences. Researchers should avoid relying solely on point estimates (e.g. edge weights, centrality values) when making inferences, as these estimates by themselves do not account for sampling variability (Fried et al.,). Stability analyses provide valuable context for these estimates and position the researcher to focus their interpretation only on those findings likely to replicate in future research. Alongside the stability analyses described in the previous section, there are also tools that equip researchers to directly evaluate the expected replicability of their network, including the “replicationSimulator” function implemented in the R package bootnet (Fried et al.,), and the expected network replicability tool implemented in the R package GGMNonreg (Williams,).
Second, sample size is a key factor affecting replicability. Accordingly, it is important to consider sample size not only when determining whether network analysis is an appropriate analytic tool for addressing one's research questions but also when considering the implications and potential generalizability of one's findings. When working with small or moderate sample sizes, caution is warranted, and it will be especially important to constrain one's analysis on the basis of stability findings.
Finally, we would encourage researchers to interpret phenomena with caution until those phenomena are observed across multiple studies. Given this, it is critical to place one's findings in the context of prior work. To assist in this effort, Table 1 lists five contributions to the PTSD network literature that will be valuable for researchers to consider when interpreting their findings. In each, researchers used large samples, aggregated findings across multiple studies, and/or rigorously evaluated the stability of their findings. If meta‐analytic studies or comparable studies with larger samples have consistently observed a finding that the researcher also sees in their own analysis, then they will be in a stronger position from which to make inferences about that finding.
Selected posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) network studies.
Article	Description	 	Birkeland et al. 	A systematic review of 20 cross‐sectional psychometric network studies of PTSD symptoms.	 	Isvoranu et al. 	A meta‐analysis of cross‐sectional psychometric network studies of PTSD with data from 52 samples and nearly 30,000 total participants.	 	Fried et al. 	Cross‐sectional analyses of four trauma patient samples, with an emphasis on replicability and generalizability of findings across samples.	 	Duek et al. 	A cross‐sectional network study of PTSD symptom network in a sample of more than 158,000 veterans with PTSD.	 	Crowe et al. 	A PTSD symptom network assessed using panel data collected at four time points over 5 years in a sample of more than 1,000 U.S. veterans
Note: Included in this table is a selection of studies that provide a valuable place for researchers to begin when placing their findings in the context of prior research on the PTSD symptom network.

Substantive considerations
It is important to remember that there is no one “true” psychometric network of PTSD. Psychometric networks represent statistical associations, and these associations will be affected by many factors, including study design and sample characteristics. The findings from time‐series data should not be expected to precisely align with those from cross‐sectional data (Hamaker,) nor should the findings from clinical samples be expected to align precisely with those from community samples (de Ron et al.,). It is, thus, helpful to remember that any one analysis only provides the view of intersymptom associations afforded by the specific context of that study.
We would also encourage restraint when interpreting centrality indices. Although centrality indices can provide concise descriptive information about a node's position within a network, there are limits to the estimation (Hallquist et al.,) and interpretation (Bringmann et al.,) of centrality indices in psychometric networks, and these indices should not be interpreted as having identified symptoms that are causally important within the network (Dablander & Hinne,; Henry et al.,). Moreover, in the context of the PTSD network literature, there has been relatively little evidence that any one symptom is consistently more central to the PTSD network than any other symptom (Crowe et al.,; Isvoranu et al.,); this is a reminder that, for many complex systems, there is no one component that is uniquely important in determining system behavior. Accordingly, we would encourage researchers to resist the urge to reduce the emergence or resolution of PTSD to a small set of driving factors, whether latent factors or highly central symptoms.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, researchers should refrain from causal conclusions (for an extended discussion, see Huang et al.,) or even the more general conclusion that the pattern of statistical associations represented in one's network identifies the undirected structure of the causal system that produced those statistical associations (Ryan et al.,). This is true not only for network analyses performed with cross‐sectional data but also for analyses that utilize time‐series data.
The importance of not drawing causal conclusions from correlational analyses has led some to suggest that network psychometrics has little to offer researchers whose questions concern potential causal relationships among symptoms (Neal et al.,). Although we agree with these researchers’ insistence on not drawing causal conclusions from exploratory network analyses, this does not mean that these findings cannot support the generation of hypotheses about potential causal relationships. When interpreting network findings, we would encourage researchers to use abductive inference (inference to the best explanation; Haig,). That is, when the researcher has observed a robust network finding, we would encourage them to ask: What is the best explanation for this finding? In many cases, we suspect causal relationships will be among the plausible candidate explanations.
To illustrate, consider three of the most robust conditional pairwise associations observed across studies in the PTSD literature: the associations between hypervigilance and startle response; internal and external avoidance; and flashbacks and intrusive memories (Isvoranu et al.,). A researcher may reasonably infer that a causal relationship is the best available explanation for the robust association between hypervigilance and startle response. That is, being chronically vigilant for signs of danger may cause one to be easily startled (Cornwell et al.,), thereby producing a robust conditional dependence relationship. Similarly, a causal relationship may be the best available explanation for the association between internal and external avoidance such that one avoids external reminders because this individual is making efforts to avoid trauma‐related thoughts, memories, and emotions. In contrast, a researcher may conclude that a causal relationship is not the most plausible explanation for the observed association between flashbacks and involuntary recollections of the trauma memory, instead positing that a flashback is, in fact, a specific type of involuntary recollection and that the observed association is due to an unmeasured latent cause: a highly accessible autobiographical memory of the traumatic event (Rubin et al.,). As these examples illustrate, network analyses can support inference about the best explanation for observed findings, including (though certainly not limited to) the generation of hypotheses about plausible causal relationships. For an extended discussion of possible causal and noncausal explanations for conditional dependence relationships, see Borsboom.
Notably, the system that underlies PTSD is likely to feature many elements (e.g., nonlinear effects, feedback loops, components operating at distinct time scales) that will muddy efforts to draw clear abductive inferences from observed statistical associations (Haslbeck, Ryan, Robinaugh, et al.,). To guide one's consideration of the best explanation of one's findings, it will be helpful to look beyond the network psychometric literature. For at least some intersymptom associations, there has already been considerable effort devoted to directly evaluating causal hypotheses. For example, another of the most robust conditional dependence relationships observed across PTSD network studies is the association between social detachment and emotional numbness (Isvoranu et al.,). Social psychologists have devoted considerable effort to investigating a posited causal effect of social exclusion on emotional numbness (DeWall et al.,; but see Schaafsma et al.,) as well as an effect of positive emotional experiences in promoting perceived social connection (Kok et al.,). This research provides considerable guidance for researchers aiming to determine the best explanation for the association between social detachment and emotional numbness and provides support for the hypothesis that mutually reinforcing causal associations among symptoms may give rise to this conditional dependence association.

Reporting
In many cases, after a network has been estimated, described, and interpreted, the researcher will want to share their findings. To facilitate communication around these analyses, we encourage readers to consult Burger et al.’s recently proposed reporting guidelines. These guidelines encourage transparent and detailed reporting of decisions made at each stage of the workflow adopted here, providing the reader with the context needed to appropriately interpret the analytic findings.

THE FUTURE OF THE NETWORK APPROACH TO PTSD
The network psychometric tools reviewed here have played a crucial role in the network approach to PTSD, and we encourage researchers to make use of these tools, adopt a systems thinking lens, and explore the structure of associations among PTSD symptoms. However, to build on this work, it will be necessary to look beyond network analyses of existing symptom data alone. We see three interrelated areas of importance in advancing the network approach to PTSD.
First, there is a need for more empirical research that adopts a systems thinking lens but utilizes methods other than psychometric network analyses. Perhaps most saliently, there is a need for more experimental studies that evaluate hypotheses regarding intersymptom causal relationships. Just as importantly, there is a need for rich descriptive research on the dynamics and correlates of PTSD symptoms as they unfold over time within individuals. The identification of robust, well‐described phenomena related to these dynamics of PTSD will play a critical role in informing and constraining ideas about how the system underlying PTSD behaves and, in turn, how that system may be structured (Eronen & Bringmann,). In general, the network approach to PTSD will be strengthened if researchers are able to identify phenomena regarding the associations among symptoms and the behavior of the PTSD syndrome that are robust across a range of methods (Hammerton & Munafò,).
Second, efforts to describe the system that gives rise to PTSD will be strengthened by innovation in the measurement of this system. As noted, most network studies have focused on assessing symptoms enumerated in the DSM. Although a suitable starting place, the DSM diagnostic criteria were not created with the intent of identifying individual components of a causal system. Consider DSM‐5 PTSD Criterion D2: “persistent and exaggerated negative beliefs or expectations about oneself, others, or the world.” This item abstracts over very distinct beliefs that may have substantially different causal associations with other PTSD symptoms. The belief that “I am bad” almost certainly elicits different emotions and behaviors (e.g., shame and social detachment) than does the belief that “the world is completely dangerous” (e.g., fear, hypervigilance, or avoidance). Including these distinct beliefs in a single item likely attenuates the associations observed between beliefs and other symptoms within the PTSD network and precludes any insight into how distinct beliefs may differentially contribute to the maintenance of PTSD. Accordingly, there would be considerable value in the development of an assessment that aims to rigorously assess a set of conceptually precise components posited to play a key role in the system that produces PTSD (Bringmann et al.,).
Finally, it will be critical to develop a network theory of PTSD. The broad network theory of mental disorders (Borsboom,; Borsboom & Cramer,) provides a conceptual framework for thinking about PTSD, but it does not posit precisely how PTSD symptoms interact to produce and maintain this syndrome. To our knowledge, no such theory yet exists. The development of a network theory of PTSD would guide and strengthen empirical research on the system underlying PTSD, clarifying the components of the system under investigation and the phenomena that researchers should expect to observe in empirical research. It will be especially valuable to develop a formal network theory of PTSD—a theory that expresses the posited associations among PTSD in some formal language, such as a mathematical or computational model. Such models equip researchers to better deduce what their theory predicts, and this support is extremely valuable when working with complex systems, as the behavior of such systems is notoriously difficult to predict using mental reasoning alone (Haslbeck, Ryan, Robinaugh, et al.,).
A network theory of PTSD would also serve to summarize what has been learned about the associations among PTSD symptoms. As noted, network psychometrics are a valuable tool for stimulating ideas about how symptoms may be related. However, if these exploratory insights are not translated into a well‐developed theory about the system of causal mechanisms underlying PTSD, these insights are unlikely to translate to practical impact in the real world. In contrast, if the field can move toward a more iterative exchange between empirical research and theory development in which theories both inform empirical research and summarize what is learned from that research, then a network theory of PTSD will become an increasingly faithful representation of the causal system underlying PTSD and, thereby, can begin to inform how to better predict, prevent, and treat PTSD.

Conclusion
Network psychometrics are a tool for exploring pairwise associations in multivariate data. This tool can provide insight into the complex patterns of statistical associations involving PTSD symptoms and can stimulate hypotheses about the most likely explanation for those associations. However, network psychometrics are not a panacea. We encourage researchers who adopt a network approach to PTSD to use network psychometrics as one means of investigating the system that produces PTSD and to supplement these analyses with a wide range of other methodological approaches, especially those that allow for the careful description of PTSD symptom dynamics and directly test hypotheses about causal relationships among symptoms. We also urge researchers to generate and develop network theories of PTSD that both summarize what is known about the causal system underlying PTSD and inform ongoing research to further improve understanding of this system.

AUTHOR NOTE
Supplementary materials for this manuscript are available at https://osf.io/qxzs5/

REFERENCES
A network analysis of DSM‐5 posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms and correlates in U.S. military veterans
PTSD symptomics: Network analyses in the field of psychotraumatology
Network mapping with gimme
The network approach to posttraumatic stress disorder: A systematic review
Psychometric perspectives on diagnostic systems
A network theory of mental disorders
Network analysis: An integrative approach to the structure of psychopathology
Network analysis of multivariate data in psychological science
Reply to ‘Critiques of network analysis of multivariate data in psychological science.’
What do centrality measures measure in psychological networks?
Back to basics: The importance of conceptual clarification in psychological science
A network approach to psychopathology: New insights into clinical longitudinal data
Acute and chronic posttraumatic stress symptoms in the emergence of posttraumatic stress disorder: A network analysis
Reporting standards for psychological network analyses in cross‐sectional data
A general Monte Carlo method for sample size analysis in the context of network models
The unpredictive brain under threat: A neurocomputational account of anxious hypervigilance
Major depression as a complex dynamic system
Comorbidity: A network perspective
Longitudinal PTSD network structure: Measuring PTSD symptom networks over 5 years
Node centrality measures are a poor substitute for causal inference
Unpacking constructs: A network approach for studying war exposure, daily stressors and post‐traumatic stress disorder
Psychological networks in clinical populations: Investigating the consequences of Berkson's bias
Quantifying and addressing the impact of measurement error in network models
Network analysis of PTSD and depressive symptoms in 158,139 treatment‐seeking veterans with PTSD
A cognitive model of posttraumatic stress disorder
Reproducibility and replicability in a fast‐paced methodological world
Package qraph (Version 1.9.8)
Estimating psychological networks and their accuracy: A tutorial paper
Q‐graph: Network visualizations of relationships in psychometric data
A tutorial on regularized partial correlation networks
The Gaussian graphical model in cross‐sectional and time‐series data
The theory crisis in psychology: How to move forward
Replicability and generalizability of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) networks: A cross‐cultural multisite study of PTSD symptoms in four trauma patient samples
On the importance of estimating parameter uncertainty in network psychometrics: A response to Forbes et al. (2019)
Dynamic networks of PTSD symptoms during conflict
Problems with centrality measures in psychopathology symptom networks: Why network psychometrics cannot escape psychometric theory
Causal inference with observational data: The need for triangulation of evidence
The sum of all fears: Comparing networks based on symptom sum‐scores
Modeling psychopathology: From data models to formal theories
How well do network models predict observations? on the importance of predictability in network models
mgm: Estimating time‐varying mixed graphical models in high‐dimensional data
On the control of psychological networks
Unlocking the potential of simulation studies in network psychometrics: A tutorial
Depression networks: A systematic review of the network paradigm causal assumptions
Bayesian analysis of cross‐sectional networks: A tutorial in R and JASP
Which estimation method to choose in network psychometrics? Deriving guidelines for applied researchers
Network models of posttraumatic stress disorder: A meta‐analysis
JASP (Version 0.18.3)[Computer software]
Commentary: A network theory of mental disorders
Visualizing psychological networks: A tutorial in R
What kinds of things are psychiatric disorders?
How positive emotions build physical health: Perceived positive social connections account for the upward spiral between positive emotions and vagal tone
Investigating the feasibility of idiographic network models
Guest editors' introduction to the special issue “network psychometrics in action”: Methodological innovations inspired by empirical problems
The ontology of posttraumatic stress disorder: Natural kind, social construction, or causal system?
Mental disorders as causal systems: A network approach to posttraumatic stress disorder
Examination of posttraumatic stress disorder symptom networks using clinician‐rated and patient‐rated data
Critiques of network analysis of multivariate data in psychological science
Node centrality in weighted networks: Generalizing degree and shortest paths
The symptoms at the center: Examining the comorbidity of posttraumatic stress disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, and depression with network analysis
R: A language and environment for statistical computing [Computer software]
A network approach to posttraumatic stress disorder: Comparing interview and self‐report networks
A memory‐based model of posttraumatic stress disorder: Evaluating basic assumptions underlying the PTSD diagnosis
The challenge of generating causal hypotheses using network models
Comfortably numb? Nonverbal reactions to social exclusion
A dynamical systems view of psychiatric disorders—theory: A review
A new method for constructing networks from binary data
Bayesian estimation for Gaussian graphical models: Structure learning, predictability, and network comparisons
The confidence interval that wasn't: Bootstrapped “confidence intervals” in l1‐regularized partial correlation networks
Learning to live with sampling variability: Expected replicability in partial correlation networks
Back to the basics: Rethinking partial correlation network methodology
On nonregularized estimation of psychological networks