Orthorexia nervosa in dietitians and dietetics students—prevalence, risk factors, and interventions: a scoping review using a systematic approach
Abstract
Context
Orthorexia nervosa (ON) is characterized by compulsive behaviors and increased concerns about healthful eating. Dietitians appear to be especially vulnerable to ON, and it is still debatable whether the disordered eating behaviors motivate individuals to enroll in nutrition programs, or whether these behaviors result from an exaggerated preoccupation with healthy eating triggered during their nutrition studies.
Objective
The aim was to provide an overview of the present state of knowledge about the prevalence, risk factors, and interventions addressing ON among dietitians and dietetics students. More specifically, it was examined whether dietitians and dietetics students differ from students attending different education programs or other health professionals with regard to the severity and risk factors of ON, and whether the extent of ON changes during the progression in the nutrition education years of study.
Data Sources
MEDLINE (Ovid), PubMed, EMBASE (Ovid), PsycInfo (EBSCO), CINAHL (EBSCO), Cochrane, ProQuest Central, CABI, ProQuest Dissertations, Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, and SpringerLink were searched on May 8, 2021, and updated on November 12, 2022.
Data Extraction
Records were screened for eligibility; study characteristics, methodology, and findings of included articles were extracted; and the methodological quality assessed using the AXIS tool. Each step was preceded by a calibration exercise and conducted independently and in duplicate by pairs of 2 reviewers. Any disagreements were resolved through discussions.
Data Analysis
A narrative synthesis was performed, whereby the characteristics, methodologies, and results of included studies were compared.
Conclusions
Results were inconclusive; yet, a general status of the relatively “high” prevalence of ON among dietitians and dietetics students was established, stressing the need for systematic research to understand and mitigate orthorexic tendencies in this group. It is still too early to answer questions pertaining to prevalence, risk factors, interventions, and differences between dietetics students and other majors when it comes to severity and progress of ON throughout the continuing years of study, or between dietitians and other professional groups.
Systematic review registration
Open Science Framework Identifier: DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/BY5KF.

INTRODUCTION
In 1997, Bratman and Knight introduced the term “orthorexia nervosa” (ON) from the Greek ortho (right, correct) and orexis (appetite) to define a pathological fixation on eating proper food. ON describes a state of obsessive thoughts about proper nutrition characterized by a restrictive diet, ritualized patterns of eating, and hypochondriacal fears resulting in rigid avoidance of foods believed to be unhealthy or impure.
Orthorexia nervosa has been defined by the National Eating Disorders Association as an obsession with “healthful” eating characterized by compulsive checking of ingredient lists and nutritional labels, an increase in concern about the health of ingredients, exclusion of an increasing number of food groups, an inability to eat anything but a narrow group of foods that are deemed “healthy” or “pure,” an unusual interest in the healthfulness of what others are eating, spending hours per day thinking about what food might be served at upcoming events, showing high levels of distress when “safe” or “healthy” foods are not available, an obsessive following of food and “healthy lifestyle” blogs on Twitter and Instagram, and body image concerns that may or may not be present.
Although the condition starts as a quest for optimal health, it may lead to nutritional imbalances, medical complications, and poor quality of life. This is coupled with feelings of guilt, self-loathing, and punishment, with the belief that one’s self-esteem is based on their dietary choices.
Several studies have proposed diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of ON; however, up until now, there is still no universal, clinical consensus on the classification of ON. The disorder continues to fail to be recognized within diagnostic criteria and is, to date, not listed either in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), or in the International Classification of Diseases (ICD), and is not officially recognized by the American Psychiatric Association. Individuals struggling with ON appear to share traits for both eating disorders (EDs) and obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), with literature suggesting that the condition may either overlap with OCD or be a subtype of it. With this in mind, the high overlap with other disorders may be a reason why ON is still not recognized as a category on its own.
A group that seems especially vulnerable to ON are dietitians. Dietitians have been suggested to be less healthy than they appear to be, despite the fact that they serve as role models when it comes to healthy eating and weight management and are expected to know everything there is to know about a healthy diet. Being considered such experts, it is their job to identify nutrition imbalances and eating disturbances in other people. Therefore, it is unlikely that they will seek help if they experience eating-related problems themselves. It is possible that EDs are underdiagnosed in nutrition professionals, because they might not recognize that their own eating pattern is problematic and even think that they are doing the right thing with respect to eating. Because of their professional focus on healthy eating, their role model function, and their possible blind spot concerning their own eating behavior, it was hypothesized that nutrition professionals are more prone to develop ON compared with individuals not working in this field. Furthermore, it is still debatable whether the disordered eating behaviors could be a pre-existing motivation to enroll in nutrition programs, or whether they are the result of an exaggerated preoccupation with healthy eating that is being triggered during the course of the study program. Consequently, causality remains unknown, and research is still investigating whether nutrition education could be triggering the development of ON or could be contributing to the resolution of a pathological healthy-eating obsession.
The present review aims to explore the following: (1) the prevalence, risk factors, and interventions addressing ON among dietitians and dietetics students; (2) whether dietitians and dietetics students differ from other students attending other education programs or other health professionals when it comes to the severity of and risk factors for ON; and (3) whether the extent of ON changes during the progression of years of study in nutrition education (ie, whether ON eases or is intensified throughout the years of nutrition studies).

METHODS

Review design and protocol registration
A systematic review was conducted following the standard methods for conducting and reporting systematic reviews: Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) statement. The protocol of the review was registered a priori with Open Science Framework (OSF) registries (DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/BY5KF).

Inclusion and exclusion criteria
The PICOS (Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcome measures, Study design) criteria are described in Table 1.
PICOS criteria for inclusion of studies
Parameter	Criterion	 	Population	Practicing/studying dietitians/nutritionists	 	Intervention	Not applicable	 	Comparator	Not specified	 	Outcome measures	Orthorexia nervosa (prevalence, risk factors, interventions, etc)	 	Study design	Any primary study irrespective of the design (cross-sectional, case-control, cohort, etc)

Search strategy
The databases MEDLINE (Ovid), PubMed, EMBASE (Ovid), PsycInfo (EBSCO), CINAHL (EBSCO), Cochrane, ProQuest Central, CABI, and the registers ProQuest Dissertations, Google Scholar, ScienceDirect, SpringerLink, and SpringerLink Orthorexia Nervosa topical collection were searched on May 8, 2021. A literature search update was launched on November 12, 2022. The search was not limited to any language or publication date. The search entailed 2 concepts: ON and dietitian/nutritionist. For each concept, controlled vocabulary was mapped, such as Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) and key words. The search strategy was validated by a medical information specialist and is available in the Supplementary Material S1 (see the Supporting Information online). The references retrieved were managed using EndNote software, version X6 (Clarivate, Philadelphia, PA).

Selection process
After conducting a calibration exercise (ie, pretesting the screening alignment on 100 articles selected randomly for the abstracts screening and 10 articles for the full-text screening independently, in duplicate, followed by a comparison of their results before proceeding with the total sample of articles, to further ensure the validity of the screening process), a team of 2 reviewers (S.O., clinical psychologist, and C.E., clinical psychologist and dietitian) independently completed title and abstract screening in duplicate. Full texts of citations deemed eligible by both reviewers were retrieved and screened independently in duplicate by a team of 2 reviewers (S.H., pharmacist, statistician, and epidemiologist, and C.E., clinical psychologist and dietitian). The few disagreements that arose were resolved by discussion or with the help of independent reviewers (C.M., psychology researcher and academic, and R.R., nutrition researcher and academic). The references of the included articles were also screened for eligibility following the same process. Contact with experts to collect more information was initiated, but no answer has been received.

Data extraction
A third team of 2 reviewers (D.S., nurse and epidemiologist, and C.E., clinical psychologist and dietitian) extracted independently and in duplicate relevant data from the included studies using a data-extraction sheet pretested using a calibration exercise before the actual data extraction (pretesting the quality-assessment alignment on 5 of the studies selected randomly, independently, in duplicate, and then results were compared before proceeding with all of the articles). Only a few disagreements arose, which were resolved through discussion until consensus. Data on study characteristics, methodology, aims, population, instruments, and findings were retained (Table 2).
Characteristics and results of included studies
Reference	Sample	Method(s)	Measures	Results	 	Agopyan et al (2018)	Sample: 136 female nutrition students; age range: 20.9 ± 2.0 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-11; EAT-40	NS difference in EAT-40 and ORTO-11 for body composition, class level, and place of residence; 70.6% had high ORTO-11; Sig. negative correlation between EAT-40 and ORTO-11	 	Dittfeld et al (2016)	Sample: 229 dietetics (4.8% males) and 201 physiotherapy (12.9% males) students; age range: 18–26 y	Cross-sectional, descriptive	BOT	High BOT scores: 26.6% of dietetics students; 14.9% of physiotherapy students; changes in attitude towards food after enrolling in university: 88.2% of dietetics, 52% of physiotherapy students	 	Korinth et al (2009)	Sample: 219 nutrition students (11% males): first year (123), higher semesters (96)Control group: 114 students from other programs (educational sciences, design and engineering) (13% males): freshmen (68), advanced years (46); age range: 22.5 ± 3.1 y for the first/second semester, and 25.7 ± 3.5 y for higher semester	Cross-sectional, analytical	BOT; Dietary Restraint and Disinhibition Scales from EBQ; FFQ (21 food groups)	Higher levels of dietary restraint among nutrition students; NS difference in disinhibition and ON between nutrition students and controlsLower orthorexic tendencies in advanced nutrition students; NS in healthy food choices among first year students; healthier food choices in more advanced nutrition students vs slightly more unhealthy food choices among controls	 	Harris (2017)	Sample: 73 female students:30 nutrition and dietetics: pre–year 1 (18) and post–year 1 (12); age range: 31.3 ± 8.4 y for pre–year 1 and 32.4 ± 8.1 y for post–year 143 naturopathic medicine: pre–year 1 (25) and post–year 1 (18); age range: 28.8 ± 7.5 y for pre–year 1 and 33.0 ± 9.2 y for post–year 1	Cross-sectional, analytical	185-item online questionnaire consisting of several validated and/or published instruments	Lower dietary restraint, rigid control, and orthorexia scores, and higher intuitive eating and “unconditional permission to eat” among nutrition graduate students at the end of their first year than incoming students; no such difference in naturopathic medicine students; higher levels of dietary restraint and rigid control and lower “unconditional permission to eat” among naturopathic medicine students than nutrition students at the end of their first year; more weekly physical activity and less consumption of added sugar in nutrition than in naturopathic medicine students	 	Busatta et al (2022)	Sample: 90 female participants (30 ED patients, 30 student dietitians, and 30 control subjects, matched for age and sex); age range: 18–29 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; EDE-Q; Symptom Checklist-90–Revised	Sig. higher orthorexic tendencies among ED patients; no sig. difference between student dietitians and general population; positive correlation between ON and ED psychopathology in ED patients, but not in control groups	 	Gleaves et al (2013)	Study 1: 174 UGs from introductory psychology (43%), introductory nutrition (29%), and higher nutrition classes (29%); 32% male; age range: 18–38 y (M = 20, SD = 2.43); study 2: UGs (213) from introductory psychology (46%), introductory nutrition (34%), and higher nutrition classes (20%); 35% male; age range: 18–48 y (M = 20, SD = 2.64)	Cross-sectional, descriptive	Study 1: EHQ; BIDR-40Study 2: EHQ-35; EAT-26; BULIT-R-28; CES-D-20; PAS-22; MOCI-30; IPIP-41	Study 1: Suggested a 3-factor solution: knowledge of healthy eating, problems associated with healthy eating, and feeling positively about healthy eating. Subscales displayed good internal consistency (α = .87 to .91) and test-retest reliability (r = . 74 to .87)Study 2: After eliminating poorly fitting items, model fit was adequate with good internal consistency (α = .82 to .90) and test-retest reliability (r = .72 to .81) of the subscales.	 	Asil and Sürücüoğlu (2015)	Sample: 117 dietitians; 13.7% male; age range: 34 ± 11.2 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; EAT-40; MOCI	Participants with ORTO-15 scores <40 had higher scores for EAT-40 and MOCI; sig. negative correlation between ORTO-15 and EAT-40 scores and BMI values	 	Gubiec (2015)	Sample: 155 students of dietetics from all years and cycle studies; 9.7% male; age range: 22.12 ± 1.8 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; BOT	39% of students were at elevated risk, while 28% of them did not report any orthorexic symptoms; BOT scores analysis: strongest downward tendency in ON between the first and second2 year of bachelor’s degree study; similarly with ORTO-15 during complementary master’s degree study	 	Penaforte et al (2017)	Sample: 141 nutrition students; 9.2% male; age range: 21.5 ± 3.5 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; BSQ	87.2% of students at risk for ON; students with ON: more body dissatisfaction and overweight; no association between ON and course period	 	Souza et al (2012)	Sample: 486 Brazilian dietitians and nutrition college students; 8.4% males; median age: 27 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	DOS-BR; EAT-26; OCI	Positive and moderate correlation of ON with ED symptoms; positive and weak correlation of ON with obsessive-compulsive symptoms	 	Kinzl et al (2006)	Sample: 283 Austrian female dietitians; age range: 22–66 y (M = 36.2)	Cross-sectional, analytical	BOT; FEV	4.6% dietitians reported to have had AN, 12.8% ON, 3.5% BN, and 1.1% BED; orthorexic dietitians had experienced any kind of ED in the past more frequently than their non-orthorexic colleagues; more than 40% of the dietitians had (very) considerable cognitive control over their eating behavior, 15% showed (very) high disinhibition, and 12% experienced (very) strong feelings of hunger	 	Tremelling et al (2017)	Sample: 636 RDNs; 3.3% male (age: NR); years of experience (range: 0–30)	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; EDE-Q	49.5% at risk for ON and 12.9% for an ED, with 8.2% of RDNs self-disclosing treatment for an ED; both the group disclosing ED treatment and the group at risk for ON had a lower mean BMI, lower scores on the ORTO-15, and higher scores on the EDE-Q and all its subscales than the comparison group	 	McDonough (2008)	Sample: 49 nutrition students, 85 health students and 45 non-health students; 9.5% male; age range: 18–40 y (M = 21.28, SD = 2.41)	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; EPSI; EHQ	No sig. differences between nutrition students and other students on measures used to evaluate ON; sig. higher levels of BE, cognitive restraint, excessive exercise, negative attitudes toward obesity and muscle building, and disordered eating behaviors among nutrition students	 	Abdullah et al (2020)	Sample: 421 nutrition students from 6 universities in addition to nutritionists in Jordan; 30.1% male; age range: 18–22 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15	72% ON using the 40-point threshold; 31.8% ON using the 35-point threshold; ON tendency sig. affected by BMI and gender at the 35-point threshold; males had higher ON tendency (39.4%) than females (28.6%)	 	Villa et al (2022)	Sample: 90 Chilean nutrition and dietetics students; 12.2% males; age range: M = 22.2, SD = 2.6 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-11-ES	23.3% at risk of ON; associated variables: second year of major, coming from a charter school, cohabitation limited to ≤1 person; physical activity levels, and time spent on the social network Instagram	 	Grammatikopoulou et al (2018)	Sample: 176 undergraduate nutrition/dietetics students; 20.4% male; age range: 18–30 y (M = 21.7, SD = 1.9)	Cross-sectional, analytical	BOT; 3-day food diary; EADES; mYFAS;	4.5% food addiction and 68.2% ON; no gender differences concerning the prevalence of food addiction and ON, the sum of mYFAS symptoms, or individual EADES factors; orthorexic students: increased BMI, reduced energy, and saturated fat intake; orthorexic men consumed more vegetables; orthorexic behavior: increased BMI, waist circumference, and energy intake; lower BMI associated with higher ability to cope with emotion-and-stress–related eating and increasing appraisal of ability and resources to cope with emotions and stress; emotion-and-stress–related eating was negatively associated with BMI. Appraisal of ability and resources to cope with emotions and stress was associated with the energy intake; age was positively correlated with the appraisal of outside stressors/influences: increased ability to cope with outside stressors among older students	 	Oliveira et al (2021)	Sample: 285 nutrition university students; 8.4% male; age range: 18–23 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; FUSMQ	72% orthorexic behavior; decline observed over the course of studies; diet history and frequent use of social media had a significantly higher ON	 	Serback (2018)	Sample: 596 US Didactic Program in Dietetics (DPD) students (freshman, sophomore, junior, senior, graduate); 4% males; age: NR	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; EHQ; IEQ; ASA-24; HEI-2015	58.7% orthorexic tendencies; freshman at greatest risk and graduate students had the least risk; diet quality did not sig. differ between participants with and without ON risk	 	Alvarenga et al (2011)	Sample: 392 registered dietitians; 3% male; age range: 20–70 y (M = 31.7, SD= 8.9)	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15	Tendency to ON: making food choices conditioned by worry about health status, evaluating food from nutritional quality rather than taste, believing that consuming healthy food may improve appearance, discrediting the influence of mood on eating behavior, and banning food choices considered by them as eating transgressions	 	Guglielmetti et al (2022)	Sample: 671 university students (health-scientific, economic-humanistic, sport sciences, and dietetics and nutrition students); 46% male; age range: 20–23 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15	31.2% had ORTO-15 test scores <35; no differences in ON risk between the 4 courses. Dieting: major ON risk factor for health-scientific, economic-humanistic, and sport sciences students; type of sport practiced: important determinant of ON risk only for the economic-humanistic major; supplement use: statistically different between sport sciences students with or without ON	 	Souza et al (2014)	Sample: 150 female nutrition students; mean age of 23.21 y	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; Stunkard's figure rating scale	74% eutrophic according to BMI classification; 74.7% of nutrition students had body image disturbance; 88.7% at risk for developing orthorexic behavior; no association between variables: orthorexic behavior, grade level, nutritional status, and body image disturbance	 	Gezer and Kabaran (2013)	Sample: 106 female nutrition students	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-11; DQI-I; EAT-40; MOCI; 24-Hour Retrospective	Mean ORTO-11 score: 30.7 ± 4.45; as eating behavior disorder risk increases, ON and OCD risks decrease with statistical sig.; increase in ON risk related to increased obsessive-compulsive behavior risk and decreased ED risk	 	Caferoglu and Toklu (2021)	Sample: 1429 dietitians and dietetics students from all regions in Turkey (74 cities, 49 universities); 9.2% male; age range: 18–65 y (M = 23.20, SD = 4.88)	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-11; EAT-26	59.8% among Turkish dietetics majors; higher ratio in dietetics students (63.8%) than in dietitians (52.9%); graduation associated with 33.1% lower odds of ON; ED could increase the ON risk approximately 5 times; the greater total and subscale (dieting, bulimia, and oral control) scores of EAT-26 were associated with higher ON tendency	 	Çobanoğlu and Akman (2021)	Sample: 205 nutrition students; 10.2% male	Cross-sectional, analytical	ORTO-15; EAT-40; MOCI	EAT-40 scores ≤ 20 in 94% of women and 95.2% of men; EAT-40 score ≥ 21 in 6% of women and 4.8% of men; ORTO-15 score in 72.3% of women and 71.4% of men was ≤ 40; EAT-40 average was 10.25 ± 1.10 in underweight, 9.21 ± 0.42 in normal-weight, and 8.23 ± 0.76 in slightly obese subjects; ORTO-15 average of those with BMI ≤18.49 kg/m2 was 39.59 ± 0.54; with BMI of 18.50–24.99 kg/m2 was 38.30 ± 0.25; and with a BMI of 25.00–29.99 kg/m2 was 39.54 ± 0.75; EAT-40 score increased, the ORTO-15 score decreased, which shows a negative, statistically sig. difference between EAT-40 and ORTO-15 scores
Abbreviations: AN, anorexia nervosa; ASA-24, Automated Self-Administered 24-Hour Dietary Assessment Tool; BED, binge eating disorder; BIDR-40, Balanced Inventory of Desirable Responding; BMI, body mass index; BN, bulimia nervosa; BOT, Bratman Orthorexia Test; BSQ, Body Shape Questionnaire; BULIT-R-28, Bulimia Test–Revised; CES-D-20, Center for Epidemiologic Studies—Depressed Mood Scale; DOS-BR, Brazilian version of the Düsseldorf Orthorexia Scale; DQI-I, Diet Quality Index–International; EADES, Eating and Appraisal Due to Emotion and Stress; EAT-26, Eating Attitudes Test; EAT-40, Eating Attitudes Test; EBQ, Eating Behaviour Questionnaire; ED, eating disorder; EDE-Q, Eating Disorder Questionnaire; EHQ, Eating Habits Questionnaire; EHQ-35; Eating Habits Questionnaire; EPSI, Eating Pathology Symptoms Inventory; FEV, Fragebogen zum Essverhalten (German version of the “Three-Factor Eating Questionnaire”); FFQ, food-frequency questionnaire; FUSMQ, Frequency and Use of Social Media Questionnaire; HEI-2015, Healthy Eating Index; IEQ, Inflexible Eating Questionnaire; IPIP-41, International Personality Item Pool Five Factor Personality Inventory; M, mean; MOCI, Maudsley Obsessive Compulsive Inventory; mYFAS, Modified Yale Food Addiction Scale; NR, not reported; NS, not significant; OCI, Obsessive Compulsive Inventory; ON, orthorexia nervosa; ORTO-11, Orthorexia scale 11 items; ORTO-11-ES, Spanish version of the Orthorexia scale 11 items; ORTO-15, Orthorexia scale 15 items; PAS-22, Personality Assessment Screener; RDN, registered dietitian nutritionist; SD, standard deviation; UG, undergraduate.

Risk-of-bias assessment
After an initial calibration exercise, the same team who extracted the data (D.S. and C.E.) assessed independently and in duplicate the risk of bias of included studies, resolving disagreements through discussion or with the help of a third reviewer. The quality of included studies was evaluated based on the components of the Critical Appraisal tool for Cross-Sectional Studies (AXIS), a tool consisting of 20 components spread between items related to the quality of reporting, quality of study design, and the possible introduction of biases in the study.

Data analysis and synthesis
The reviewers performed a narrative synthesis of the data extracted, in which they compared the characteristics of included studies, their study methodologies, findings, and results. The studies were heterogeneous in terms of population studied, comparators, setting/context, diagnostic tools, and definition of orthorexia, among others, preventing us from pooling data through a meta-analysis.

RESULTS

Results of the search
Out of 5054 records that were identified, 3355 were selected for title and abstract screening and 29 for the full-text screening. Articles were excluded for not pertaining to ON, not being a primary study, not pertaining to dietitians/nutritionists or dietetics/nutrition students, or being an article validating a measurement tool. Finally, there were 24 articles that were included in this review (Fig. 1).
PRISMA flow diagram of the literature search process. *Consider, if feasible to do so, reporting the number of records identified from each database or register searched (rather than the total number across all databases/registers). **If automation tools were used, indicate how many records were excluded by a human and how many were excluded by automation tools. For more information, visit http://www.prisma-statement.org/. Abbreviation: PRISMA, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses.

Characteristics of included studies
Included studies were published between 2006 and 2022 and conducted in 10 countries. The sample size ranged from 106 to 1429. Studied populations included dietitians and nutrition/dietetics graduate and undergraduate students with control groups from other majors, with 18 studies including men. Participants’ age ranged between 18 and 70 years. All studies were quantitative and cross-sectional, and 13 used a convenience sample. The instruments used to diagnose ON included the Bratman Test for Orthorexia (BOT), ORTO-15, ORTO-11, and the Dusseldorf Orthorexia Scale.

Results of included studies

Prevalence of orthorexia nervosa among students/dietitians
The frequency of orthorexic behaviors among nutrition and dietetics students varied between 88.7% and 12.8%. The highest prevalence was observed in samples from Brazil (88.7%), Turkey (72.2%), Greece (72%), and Jordan (68%). Lower prevalences were recorded in Australia (34.9%), Italy (31.2%), and Chile (23.3%).

Impact of nutrition education on orthorexia nervosa
Dittfeld et al and Gleaves et al observed greater predispositions towards developing orthorexia in dietetics students than in physiotherapy and psychology students. In contrast, Korinth et al concluded that, despite the fact that nutrition students tended to restrict their food intake more than other students to control their weight, they did not show increased orthorexic tendencies. Similarly, no significant differences appeared between nutrition and other students in 3 recent studies.

Comparison of orthorexia nervosa between years of study
Korinth et al and de Oliveira et al observed that, over the course of their studies, nutrition students showed a decrease in orthorexic eating behaviors. Gubiec reported lower scores on the BOT and ORTO-15 in graduate students compared with undergraduates. Similarly, Serback showed that freshman students had the greatest risk of developing orthorexic tendencies, while graduate students had the least, and Villa et al reported the second year with a nutrition major as the highest risk factor for ON. In contrast, other studies observed no association between ON and course year. Finally, Harris compared the development of orthorexic tendencies between 2 groups of students: those before enrolling in their respective programs and at the end of their first year. Tendencies of nutrition students decreased, whereas tendencies of naturopathic students remained the same.

Orthorexia nervosa and gender and anthropometric index factors
Four studies addressed ON and gender and reported conflicting results. Using the ORTO-15, Abdullah et al reported a higher prevalence of ON among males at a cutoff of 35; however, this difference disappeared when using a stricter cutoff of 40. Conversely, the use of different tools resulted in different results in the same sample as shown by Gubiec, whereby when using Bratman’s tool, a higher prevalence was noted among females, whereas no difference was reported with ORTO-15. In contrast, while using the same tools (BOT and ORTO-15), other research showed no differences between male and female nutrition students.
With respect to anthropometric measures, results are inconsistent: Agopyan et al, Abdullah et al, Çobanoğlu et al, and Asil and Sürücüoğlu found that the relations between orthorexic tendencies and body mass index category or body composition were nonsignificant. In contrast, using a multivariate analysis, Grammatikopoulou et al revealed that orthorexic behavior was associated with increased body mass index, waist-hip circumference, and energy intake.

Orthorexia nervosa and psychological factors
Four studies identified a significant, negative association between ED and ON scores, whereas 3 studies reported a positive association between ON and ED symptoms, of which Busatta et al’s multivariate analysis estimated that ED could increase by approximately 5 times the odds of ON. An overlap between various forms of ED (ie, anorexia nervosa [AN], bulimia nervosa [BN], and ON) was suggested, whereby orthorexic behavior may be a coping mechanism for a more severe underlying ED, with the transition from AN/BN to ON occurring more frequently than vice versa. Orthorexic dietitians expressed having experienced any kind of ED in the past more frequently than their non-orthorexic colleagues. Studies reported a positive association between ON symptoms and elevated shape and weight concerns. It is noteworthy that de Souza et al found that 74.7% of nutrition students displayed body image disturbances, of whom 88.7% were at risk for developing ON; yet, this association was not statistically significant, and both variables, body image and ON, were not normally distributed.
Asil and Sürücüoğlu, Gezer and Kabaran, and Souza et al reported a higher risk of ON with higher obsessive-compulsive behavior.

Orthorexia nervosa and social/familial factors
Calorie-restricted dieting was highlighted as a major risk factor for orthorexic behavior and ON among nutrition students. Furthermore, greater odds of having ON were noted in subgroups with sedentary and heavy physical activity compared with those who reported light or moderate physical activity. Engagement in aerobic types of sports might be an important determinant of ON risk compared with other types of sports, or no engagement in sports at all. In addition, 1 study explored the effect of cohabitation on ON and reported that living alone or with 1 person appears to be a risk factor compared with individuals living with more than 2 persons. The frequent use of digital social networks related to diet and healthy eating as well as the number of hours spent on Instagram were higher among individuals with orthorexic behavior compared with those who are not at risk.

Quality of included studies
Only 5 studies justified their sample size, and only 9 studies presented an appropriate sample representing the target population, out of which only 4 described a process likely to select participants representative of the target population. Only 2 studies took measures to address and categorize nonresponders. Half of the studies did not detail enabling an evaluation of whether the response rate raised concerns about bias, and only 3 described information on nonresponders. Only 10 studies showed internally consistent results (ie, used reliable tools to assess ON), whereas in the remaining 14 studies, determining this issue was impossible given the limited provided information. Finally, only 14 studies stated clearly that there were no funding sources or conflicts of interest.

DISCUSSION
This systematic review provides insight into the developmental pathway of ON and its contributing factors among nutrition students and practicing dietitians. Only 24 published studies investigating prevalence and risk factors of ON have been identified. Prevalence of ON ranged between 23.3% and 88.7%. In addition to having no universal definition or clinical consensus regarding ON, this review shows extreme heterogeneity with regard to tools, cutoff points, and populations studied. Even when the same tool was used, results were subject to different cutoff points. Furthermore, several studies questioned the psychometric properties of the ORTO-15, suggesting that it may be overestimating ON prevalence and is not effective to detect the severity of orthorexic behaviors and attitudes. Hence, more research is warranted to conclude whether the differences found between studies, countries, and subgroups are valid. Also, future studies in representative samples and with a longitudinal design with control groups can confirm ON risk factors identified in this review.
Clear underlying etiologic and pathophysiologic factors supporting the development of ON could not be identified, but associated risk factors potentially contributing to the understanding of the prevalence of ON in this population have been highlighted.

Gender and anthropometric index factors
In contrast to the ED research findings, there were inconclusive results on gender differences and ON. Two meta-analyses highlighted this inconsistency in which there were minimal or no gender differences in ON symptomatology, offering supporting evidence that ON is distinct from AN in which women were clearly affected more than men. Dell’Osso et al and Brytek-Matera et al explained the equal orthorexic tendencies of men and women in each of their spheres: females are interested more in proper nutrition because they are more careful about their physical appearance and weight control, and are more influenced by the media, whereas males have more interest in health pursuits, as well as muscularity, strength, and power. Another explanation is for ON to be a variant of AN, with an obsession of healthy eating being a better cover for men to engage in restrictive eating. Conclusions on a gender gradient in ON cannot be made at this stage, especially because gender differences in ON are more difficult to detect, partially due to the lack of research in clinically diagnosed individuals.
The association between anthropometric indices and ON was inconsistent across the included studies. This discrepancy might be explained in that individuals who obsess over healthy foods lose moderation and balance in their consumption and become less concerned about their weight and more interested in their food quality rather than quantity. This might be coupled with under- or overeating, resulting in weight loss or gain.

Psychological factors
Correlations may exist not only between ON and EDs but also between ON and OCD. A positive correlation between the risk of ON and risk of OCD among dietitians has been reported, as also shown by McComb and Mills and Merhy et al, suggesting that those who are prone to perfectionism and obsessive-compulsive thoughts and behaviors are at a greater risk of ON. Potentially, just like individuals with OCD who set standards for how they must perform rituals or compulsive behaviors, individuals with ON set very high standards with regard to their diet and food consumption in a way that triggers their thoughts in such a distressing way that they feel the need to perform compulsive behaviors to relieve anxiety caused by the consumption of foods considered unhealthy. Orthorexia nervosa and OCD might, hence, share the same pathology and pathways with 1 key difference, which is the perception of their symptoms. With ON, individuals strive toward a perfect performance of their compulsive behaviors, even though these behaviors are a critical element of their disorder, shame, and distress. Furthermore, neuroticism may significantly relate to ON, as those who are emotionally unstable and have poor affect regulation are more likely to experience ON than others. People with a pathological preoccupation with healthy eating may be more prone to impulsivity, anxiousness, emotional lability, and anger.
Orthorexia nervosa revolves more around the quality of the food consumed and the health of individuals than it does around the amount consumed observed in specified EDs. Precisely estimating the prevalence of ON is challenging without formal diagnostic criteria, which explains the inconsistent results obtained for the association between ON and EDs. Nevertheless, evidence pinpoints an overlap between the 2 conditions, and that ED could increase the risk of developing ON. Orthorexic eating behavior may be a coping mechanism for a more severe underlying ED and the transition from ED to ON occurs more frequently than vice versa. Orthorexia nervosa symptoms are highly prevalent among patients with AN and BN, and tend to increase after treatment. Orthorexia nervosa seems to be associated both with the clinical improvement in AN and BN and the migration towards less severe forms of EDs, representing residual symptomatology responsible for a greater number of relapses and recurrences of EDs. On another note, Zickgraf et al showed that individuals scoring high on ON symptoms report a high proportion of snack food and dessert consumption, which is inconsistent with healthy eating behaviors. With regard to this inconsistent relationship between emotional and uncontrolled eating and ON, Atchison and Zickgraf showed that, while orthorexic individuals engage in unhealthy eating behaviors, it might not be due to loss of control but due to a subjective definition of “healthy” eating, not by the content and quality of food itself but rather by the quantity of food and weight control, regardless of the nutritional content of the foods consumed. This circles back to an underlying ED covered by orthorexic traits.
Our findings that ON symptoms may be associated with body image disturbances and elevated shape and weight concerns could be explained by the motivation that underscores the pursuit of a healthy diet. Individuals with healthy orthorexic tendencies scored significantly higher on indices of positive body image than individuals with ON, suggesting that healthy orthorexia is more likely to be driven by health concerns, whereas unhealthy ON is driven by weight concerns. Individuals with higher levels of positive body image were more inclined to appreciate health and body functionality, hence making healthier food choices, while individuals with a lower positive body image objectify their bodies and dismiss their hunger and satiety cues, hence promoting disordered eating. Even though men have higher levels of positive body image than women, both men and women displayed similar patterns and levels of ON. The drive for muscularity underlies ON among men, as their appearance ideals promote various dieting regimes as healthy ways of achieving a healthy muscular ideal. Since being muscular is often associated with enhanced functionality, men with more muscular physiques may perceive themselves as having higher levels of body functionality, and therefore have higher levels of a positive body image while still presenting higher levels of ON. No evidence for causality can be shown at this time; nevertheless, social media exposure potentially triggers body image dysmorphia, hence ON.

Social/familial factors
Recent data suggest dieting to be associated with ON in a dose–response relationship. Dieting on one’s own seems to hold a higher risk of ON compared with dieting with the help of a dietitian; misconceptions related to dieting could be an underlying factor promoting orthorexic tendencies. It is unclear whether dieting per se or the associated misconceptions trigger orthorexic tendencies, or both, since ON can remain among dieting individuals even with the help of a dietitian, but at a lesser prevalence. This might explain our findings that the more nutrition and dietetics students move forward with their years of studies, the more they do not subscribe to dieting and health misconceptions, and the less they exhibit orthorexic tendencies. Another explanation could be the effect of the type of diet adopted, whereby following a vegetarian/vegan diet is associated with eating behaviors typical of ON, raising the question of whether vegetarianism represents a risk factor for ON. Finally, according to Greville-Harris et al, individuals having ON engage in comparisons to people adopting less healthy eating choices, making them feel superior.
The frequency and type of sport practiced might be an important determinant of developing a disturbed relationship with food. Another study comparing inactive people with athletes showed that higher ON scores were recorded among people practicing endurance sports for more than 150 minutes per week, compared with other sports, potentially explaining the higher prevalence of EDs among aerobic athletes, where low body weight confers a competitive advantage. Guilt about skipping training was among the strongest predictors of ON, a finding that could explain the overcompensation of sedentary people by orthorexic tendencies. In addition, ON is associated with other nondietary concerns, such as physical appearance and frequent exercising. Yet, the health implications of having a sensitive attitude to nutrition together with a high level of physical activity remain largely unknown.
Cohabitation being limited to 1 person or less appears to be a risk factor when compared with individuals who live with more than 2 persons. This suggests social support to be a variable to consider when studying ON, since cohabitation with multiple persons would allow the exchange of experiences through food. Vaccari et al reported that individuals living with roommates and not family members have a higher risk of developing ON, although this was not found for those living alone. This suggests that life in a family context may be more protective regarding the adoption of healthy eating habits. No studies specifically addressing cohabitation status and ON are available; hence, no clear picture about this association can be drawn at this stage.
Higher social media use disorder was significantly associated with more ON. The interplay between social media and ON could be, on one hand, explained by the fact that orthorexic individuals tend to search for a very specific content to gain more insight about their “clean eating,” and hence, end up spending their time obsessing over their healthy eating feeds. On the other hand, there is evidence suggesting that the “Western culture” contributes to a higher-risk environment for the development of behaviors associated with ON. Happiness, media, food and weightloss industries, and beauty ideals, among others, heighten ON; a similar pathway connects the “Western culture” to the development of EDs. The presence of excessively healthy or unhealthy eating patterns diffused through social and conventional media, along with pseudo-scientific nutritional experts spreading information regarding healthy eating, might also be contributing to the development of ON.
Significant involvement with health and fitness accounts on social media substantially influences higher body image appearance comparisons, which, in turn, influences thin-ideal and muscular internalizations, mediating the relationship between involvement with health and fitness accounts on social media and ON tendencies. Individuals who indicate greater involvement with health and fitness accounts on social media also show higher thin-ideal and muscular internalizations, which further contribute to higher ON tendencies.
Nutrition education can affect students’ obsession with healthy eating. A comparison of the prevalence of ON among dietitians with those with other majors was inconclusive in this review, as a higher ON prevalence among dietitians compared with other groups could not be established, despite the higher orthorexic prevalence generally reported among dietitians. Therefore, investigating the belief that dietitians serve as role models and are pressured and pushed towards developing ON in their mission of promoting healthy eating or whether the choice of the “nutrition” major is related to an existing underlying pathological obsession with healthy eating in the first place will play a big role in filling the literature gap.
Between research on dietetics students exhibiting lower dietary restraint, rigid control, and orthorexia scores as they move forward with their years or studies compared with other students and research exposing dietetics students who exhibit the highest risk factors for developing ON during their second year of their major, a conclusion on whether nutrition education might be easing orthorexic tendencies or triggering it could not be drawn. Generally, during the course of their studies, the prevalence of ON among nutrition students tended to decline with a decrease in their obsessive healthy eating behaviors throughout their years of study. With research suggesting that nutrition education may be protective against orthorexic behaviors, the possibility that nutrition education may be protective against ON could be further explored. Speculatively, maturation might also be playing a role in behavioral change when it comes to body image and eating perspectives across the different years of study; these possibilities still need to be explored in future studies.
Although the Center for Research on Eating Disorders at Oxford developed 3 leading treatments for adults with EDs, all of which showed promising results and have been endorsed by the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, there is still no evidence-based treatment for ON and there is limited empirical research on the perceived need for the treatment of individuals with ON. Studies on interventions addressing the condition in this population could not be identified, highlighting a vast literature gap.
To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to explore the literature pertaining to ON among dietitians and dietetics students following the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses) statement and literature searches in systematic reviews. Strengths of this methodology include the adoption of a sensitive search strategy, pre-publishing a protocol with OSF registries, and critically appraising included studies using a validated assessment checklist for cross-sectional studies. In addition to searching multiple databases and not setting limits to publication language or time to increase the comprehensiveness of the search, both gray and published literature were included, and a literature update was conducted to ensure that all available data were covered before article submission. All of the articles found were retrieved and included, including dissertations, and work was conducted in duplicate using pre-tested tools.
Yet, many methodological challenges should be taken into consideration when interpreting the results of this systematic review. The quality of evidence of this review is limited by the variable study quality of the included articles. The majority of the included studies lacked a priori power sample size calculations, randomized recruitment processes, information on nonresponders, and an analysis of the response rate, and less than half of the studies included showed internally consistent results. In addition, ON traits were not systematically studied, and the criteria used to label ON and the actual diagnosis lacked a common clinical consensus. Moreover, different diagnosis instruments were used in each study with different adoptions of cutoff points. Finally, the majority of the studies did not adjust for confounding factors, all of which limit the ability to draw a solid conclusion regarding the associations discussed.
In addition to having no clear definition of ON and no clinical consensus, this review reports extreme heterogeneity when it comes to tools used to diagnose ON and their cutoff points and populations studied. Even when the same tool was used, results were subject to different cutoff points. The ORTO-15 and BOT were the most adopted tools in the included studies.
While ORTO-15 total scores varied between a minimum of 15 and a maximum of 60 points, cutoff points in the included studies varied between 35, 39, 40, and none. Abdullah et al compared cutoffs of 35 and 40 and found that the cutoff of 35 was more reliable. Furthermore, the psychometric properties of the ORTO-15 have been questioned in several studies, pointing out flaws in the test, and suggesting that it may be overestimating ON prevalence. Therefore, the ORTO-15 may not be sufficiently accurate to detect the severity of orthorexic behaviors and attitudes.
In addition, the ORTO-15 was compared with BOT by Gubiec, showing different ON results for the same population. Adding to the inconsistency in the tool used for diagnosis, one of the studies did not mention information regarding the tool used.
More research is needed to conclude whether the differences found between studies, countries, and categories of people are valid, or whether they are biased by the use of different criteria, different instruments, and different cutoff points. With this in mind, the literature needs to address in depth the definition of and tools used to diagnose ON. These results need replication in more representative samples and longitudinal designs with control groups that can confirm the studied elements as ON risk factors.
The nature of ON and its risk factors are still unclear, as many theories and results have arisen. Further research is needed to determine if ON is related to other disorders, such as hypochondria, OCD, and avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder, and if the risk of ON among dietitians is related to their profession or if a study in nutrition in itself attracts certain types of students who are already prone to developing EDs, such as ON. Whether nutrition education/professions trigger individuals or help them overcome their obsessive eating concerns remains an unanswered question. Future studies should also explore themes such as internalization of a healthy eating lifestyle, the effect of social media exposure, and the trending fad diets promoted on nonscientific public platforms.
This review uncovered some evidence of higher prevalence of ON among dietitians compared with other groups of students, with respect to the instruments used, whether they scored relatively high, or whether a considerable score number has been recorded. It is too early for a definite conclusion because a widely acknowledged, uniform instrument to measure ON is still lacking, which hampers comparisons across studies due to the use of different measures. Also, it remains unclear whether this prevalence is really higher than in other professions, as only 3 of the included studies reported to have found differences between nutrition students compared with other students of other majors with respect to ON tendencies using the same ON instrument.
No study examining effective interventions was found, highlighting a large literature gap in this regard. These findings warrant further exploring how ON impacts the practice of dietitians and their patients, and whether inappropriate “orthorexic” tendencies are transmitted to patients and students under the cover of “healthier” practices. Finally, addressing the inference of ON among dietetics students in the education system is a multifaceted challenge that requires collaboration between educational institutions, faculty, students, and healthcare professionals. By promoting a balanced approach to nutrition, raising awareness, and providing support and resources, we can help students in the field of dietetics maintain a healthy relationship with food and nutrition while pursuing their academic and professional goals. We invite the educational and professional communities to think about this issue and reflect on whether this should be part of a formal education and a self-reflection journey of dietetics students about their professional future.

CONCLUSION
Even though results of this review are inconclusive, a general trend of a relatively higher prevalence of ON among dietitians and dietetics students was shown, stressing the urgent need for systematic research to understand and mitigate orthorexic tendencies in this group. The importance of assessment strategies should be emphasized, including the need for official differential diagnosis criteria by the DSM-5/ICD/American Psychiatric Association, validated screening instruments with standardized cutoff scores, high-quality studies, empirical research, and evidence-based practices for a higher credibility, better screening, and adequate interventions to address ON.
It is still too early to answer questions pertaining to prevalence, risk factors, interventions, and differences between dietetics students and those with other majors when it comes to severity and progress of ON throughout the advancement in years of study, or between dietitians and other professional groups. Gaps highlighted in this review warrant setting up a research agenda to explore areas that should be studied before a proper answer to the research questions on ON among dietitians can be formulated.

Supplementary Material

Supporting Information
The following Supporting Information is available through the online version of this article at the publisher’s website.
Supplementary Material S1   Search strategy

REFERENCES
Health food junkie
Orthorexic eating behavior. A new type of disordered eating
The clinical basis of orthorexia nervosa: emerging perspectives
Binge eating, orthorexia nervosa, restrained eating, and quality of life: a population study in Lebanon
Orthorexia nervosa and its association with alexithymia, emotion dysregulation and disordered eating attitudes among Lebanese adults
Definition and diagnostic criteria for orthorexia nervosa: a narrative review of the literature
Orthorexia nervosa: a preliminary study with a proposal for diagnosis and an attempt to measure the dimension of the phenomenon
On orthorexia nervosa: a review of the literature and proposed diagnostic criteria
Microthinking about micronutrients: a case of transition from obsessions about healthy eating to near-fatal “orthorexia nervosa” and proposed diagnostic criteria
A consensus document on definition and diagnostic criteria for orthorexia nervosa
Harrison JE, Weber S, Jakob R, et al. ICD-11 for mortality and morbidity statistics. Available at: https://icd.who.int/browse11/l-m/en#/http%3a%2f%2fid.who.int%2ficd%2fentity%2f1412387537. Accessed June 23, 2023.
Orthorexia nervosa: a frequent eating disordered behavior in athletes
Orthorexia nervosa—an eating disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder or disturbed eating habit?
Association between impulsivity and orthorexia nervosa: any moderating role of maladaptive personality traits?
Assessing the risk of orthorexia in dietetic and physiotherapy students using the BOT (Bratman Test for Orthorexia)
Dietitians and eating disorders: an international issue
Eating disordered behavior in dietetics students and students in other majors
A review of eating disorders and disordered eating amongst nutrition students and dietetic professionals
Measuring “orthorexia”: development of the Eating Habits Questionnaire
Eating behaviour and eating disorders in students of nutrition sciences
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
The relationship between orthorexia nervosa and body composition in female students of the nutrition and dietetics department
Differences in eating and body-related attitudes, beliefs and behaviors among female graduate students in nutrition and dietetics and naturopathic medicine: a pilot study
Orthorexia among patients with eating disorders, student dietitians and general population: a pilot study
Orthorexia nervosa in Turkish dietitians
The problem of orthorexia in a group of students of dietetics
Ortorexia nervosa em estudantes de nutrição: associações com o estado nutricional, satisfação corporal e período cursado
Comportamento de risco para ortorexia nervosa em estudantes de nutrição
Orthorexia nervosa in dieticians
Orthorexia nervosa and eating disorder symptoms in registered dietitian nutritionists in the United States
Prevalence of orthorexia nervosa among nutrition students and nutritionists: pilot study
Orthorexia nervosa risk and associated factors among Chilean nutrition students: a pilot study
Food addiction, orthorexia, and food-related stress among dietetics students
Relação entre comportamentos de risco para ortorexia nervosa, mídias sociais e dietas em estudantes de nutrição
PAPER sample of Brazilian dietitians assessed
Lifestyle-related risk factors of orthorexia can differ among the students of distinct university courses
The Brazilian version of the DOS for the detection of orthorexia nervosa: transcultural adaptation and validation among dietitians and nutrition college students
Beslenme ve diyetetik bölümü kız öğrencileri arasında görülen ortoreksiya nervosa riski [The risk of orthorexia nervosa for female students studying nutrition and dietetics]
Orthorexia nervosa in Turkish dietitians and dietetic students
Consideration of healthy eating obsession (orthorexia nervosa) for students educated in nutrition and dietetics department
Development of a critical appraisal tool to assess the quality of cross-sectional studies (AXIS)
Commentary on “Gender differences in orthorexic eating behaviors: a systematic review and meta-analytic integration
Sex differences in orthorexic eating behaviors: a systematic review and meta-analytical integration
Orthorexia nervosa: relationship with obsessive-compulsive symptoms, disordered eating patterns and body uneasiness among Italian university students
Orthorexia nervosa in a sample of Italian university population
Is orthorexia nervosa a feature of obsessive–compulsive disorder? A multicentric, controlled study
Orthorexia nervosa: a review of psychosocial risk factors
The indirect role of orthorexia nervosa and eating attitudes in the association between perfectionism and muscle dysmorphic disorder in Lebanese male university students—results of a pilot study
Bidimensional structure of the orthorexia: development and initial validation of a new instrument
Orthorexia nervosa and healthy orthorexia as new eating styles
Cross-cultural differences in orthorexic eating behaviors: associations with personality traits
The prevalence of orthorexia nervosa among eating disorder patients after treatment
Disentangling orthorexia nervosa from healthy eating and other eating disorder symptoms: relationships with clinical impairment, comorbidity, and self-reported food choices
Orthorexia nervosa and eating disorder behaviors: a systematic review of the literature
Exploring the role of positive body image in healthy orthorexia and orthorexia nervosa: a gender comparison
Sağlık bilimleri fakültesi öğrencilerinin zayıflama diyetleri, ortoreksiya nervoza ve yaşam kalitesi ilişkisinin değerlendirilmesi
Investigating orthorexia nervosa with the ORTO-R in a sample of university students with or without subthreshold autism spectrum: focus on dietary habits and gender differences
Vegetarian diet and orthorexia nervosa: a review of the literature
What are people’s experiences of orthorexia nervosa? A qualitative study of online blogs
Orthorexia nervosa: a cross-sectional study among athletes competing in endurance sports in northern Italy
Orthorexia nervosa in a sample of Portuguese fitness participants
The mediating role of orthorexia in the relationship between physical activity and fear of COVID-19 among university students in Poland
Health status, physical activity, and orthorexia nervosa: a comparison between exercise science students and business students
The relation between eating disorder symptoms and impairment
Association of social media use disorder and orthorexia nervosa among Lebanese university students: the indirect effect of loneliness and factor structure of the social media use disorder short form and the Jong-Gierveld loneliness scales
Cultural phenomena believed to be associated with orthorexia nervosa—opinion study in Dutch health professionals
Developmental pathway of orthorexia nervosa: factors contributing to progression from healthy eating to excessive preoccupation with healthy eating. Experiences of Dutch health professionals
Socio-cultural power of social media on orthorexia nervosa: an empirical investigation on the mediating role of thin-ideal and muscular internalization, appearance comparison, and body dissatisfaction
Perceived need for treatment associated with orthorexia nervosa symptoms
PRISMA-S: an extension to the PRISMA statement for reporting literature searches in systematic reviews
Orthorexia nervosa: validation of a diagnosis questionnaire