Rethinking Potassium Management in Chronic Kidney Disease—A Modern Approach
Potassium homeostasis is impaired in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) due to alterations in physiological mechanisms and use of agents that modulate the renin angiotensin aldosterone system (RAAS) to slow CKD progression and reduce cardiovascular risk. In recent years, a new paradox has emerged: while dietary potassium restriction has been dogmatically recommended to prevent hyperkalemia, emerging evidence suggests that a more liberated potassium intake may offer potential benefits, particularly in patients with early CKD. This has prompted a paradigm shift towards a more individualized approach to the management of hyperkalemia in CKD. This review aims to provide an overview of the latest management strategies for hyperkalemia in CKD and to summarize the current literature including publications and guidelines recommendations with respect to dietary potassium intake and use of potassium salt substitutes.

1. Potassium Homeostasis in Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease

1.1. Normal Potassium Homeostasis
Potassium is a predominantly intracellular cation, with approximately 2% (~60–80 mmol) of total body potassium (~3000–4000 mmol/L) found in extracellular fluid and the remaining 98% located intracellularly. Plasma potassium concentrations are maintained within a narrow range from 3.5–5.0 mmol/L by (i) matching potassium intake with excretion and (ii) ensuring proper distribution between extracellular and intracellular compartments. Potassium is primarily excreted by the kidneys, while several mechanisms govern its transmembrane distribution.
Insulin, whether secreted in response to a glucose load or administered exogenously, promotes an intracellular shift of potassium by binding to specific cell-surface receptors. This leads to the insertion of Glucose Transporter type 4 (GLUT4) and facilitates glucose uptake in insulin responsive tissues. Insulin also stimulates potassium uptake by increasing the activity of the adenosine triphosphatase sodium/potassium pump (Na+/K+-ATPase). In patients with CKD, insulin-mediated glucose uptake is impaired, but potassium shifts remain largely intact, suggesting subtle differences in the regulation of insulin-mediated glucose and potassium uptake.
Catecholamines bind to β2 receptors, enhancing Na+/K+-ATPase activity and thereby limiting increases in extracellular potassium. Elevated interstitial potassium concentrations induce vasodilation, increasing skeletal muscle blood flow. In contrast, total-body potassium depletion or hypokalemia reduces skeletal muscle perfusion, contributing to the association between hypokalemia and rhabdomyolysis.
Changes in plasma tonicity and acid-base disorders also influence transcellular potassium distribution. An increase in extracellular osmolality creates an osmotic gradient that drives water out of cells, raising intracellular potassium concentration of potassium and promoting potassium efflux through K+ permeable channels. Acidemia, particularly hyperchloremic normal anion gap metabolic acidosis, reduces the transmembrane rate of Na+/H+ exchange via the Na+/H+ exchanger (NHE1) and intracellular shift of HCO3− via Na+/HCO3− cotransporter 1 and 2 (NBCe 1 and 2). This leads to a reduction in intracellular sodium, decreased Na+/K+-ATPase activity, and diminished potassium influx. Concurrently, lower extracellular HCO3− increases Cl− influx by Cl−/HCO3− exchange, while reduced intracellular HCO3− promotes Cl- efflux, both contributing to potassium efflux via K+/Cl− cotransport.
In the kidney, potassium is freely filtered by the glomerulus and ~90% reabsorbed in the proximal tubule (paracellularly) and the ascending loop of Henle via the apical membrane Na+/K+/2Cl− cotransporter (NKCC). This resorptive component of kidney potassium handling is largely independent of dietary potassium intake. Potassium secretion primarily occurs at the Aldosterone-Sensitive Distal Nephron (ASDN), which includes the Distal Convoluted Tubule (DCT), collecting ducts. This is mediated by two types of apical K+ channels and a negative polarized luminal fluid maintained through Na+ reabsorption via apically-located epithelial Na+ channels (ENaC). Aldosterone stimulates ENaC activity through mineralocorticoid receptors, increasing the number of ENaC and the proportion of time the channel remains open. Potassium is then secreted into the lumen through the renal outer medullary potassium channels (ROMK; also referred to as Kir 1.1) in principal cells, and BK channels in principal and intercalated cells of the collecting duct. The latter is upregulated by increases in fluid flow rate, accounting for the flow dependent component of distal potassium secretion. This secretory component of kidney potassium handling is governed by dietary intake, and is influenced by various factors including luminal Na+ delivery and flow rate, plasma potassium concentration, circulating aldosterone and arginine vasopressin levels and acid-base status.
With high dietary potassium intake, increased distal Na+ delivery and tubular flow to the ASDN enhance potassium excretion. Elevated plasma potassium concentration is sensed by basolateral Kir4.1/5.1 channels at the initial portion of the DCT (DCT1), modulating the activity of WNK family and their downstream effectors of SPAK and OxSR1. The reduces Na+/Cl− cotransporter (NCC) activity, increasing distal sodium delivery and flow to the later DCT (DCT2) and the collecting ducts, thereby promoting potassium secretion. Chronic high potassium intake further amplifies this effect via reduced Na+ reabsorption in the thick ascending limb and proximal tubules, due to medullary recycling and interstitial potassium accumulation. This natriuretic effect of a high dietary potassium effect is postulated by Palmer et al. have proposed that this natriuretic effect may underlie the blood pressure lowering benefits of salt substitutes, especially in individuals with high dietary Na+ intake.
Conversely, low dietary potassium intake reduces plasma potassium levels, increases NCC activity in DCT1, and limit potassium secretion by decreasing Na+ delivery and flow to the ASDN. This process has been implicated in the pathogenesis of salt-sensitive hypertension.
Additional regulatory mechanism includes (i) an enteric potassium-sensing pathway and (ii) circadian variation in potassium transporters expression. The splanchnic sensing mechanism detects potassium entry into the gastrointestinal tract and suppresses NCC activity via dephosphorylation independent of plasma potassium or mineralocorticoid levels. Potassium excretion follows a circadian rhythm- lower during the night and early morning, and higher during the day, aligning with dietary potassium intake. This pattern is attributed to diurnal variations in ROMK gene expression, which peaks during daylight and activity periods, while H+/K+ ATPase expression follows an inverse pattern.

1.2. Impaired Renal Excretion
Insult to the ASDN from various forms of kidney injury such as acute tubular necrosis in acute kidney injury (AKI), tubulointerstitial disease or obstructive uropathy, can impair potassium excretion. For example, in patients with obstructive uropathy, renal injury begins as a result of elevated intratubular pressure, leading to tubulointerstitial inflammation and finally structural changes (fibrosis and tubular cell apoptosis) with impairment of tubular function. This includes (i) impaired sodium excretion due to downregulation of sodium channels in the ASDN including Na+/K+ ATPase, NHE1 and sodium-hydrogen exchange 3 (NHE3) and (ii) impaired urinary acidification contributing to the development of metabolic acidosis. Additionally, acute reductions of glomerular filtration rate (GFR) lead to decreased distal sodium delivery and tubular fluid flow, further reducing potassium secretion. Other contributing mechanisms include metabolic acidosis, increased catabolism, and tissue breakdown, which promote transcellular shift or release of intracellular potassium into the extracellular compartment.
In patients with CKD, hyperkalemia is uncommon when GFR > 60 mL/1.73 m2 and increases but increasingly prevalent as GFR declines. In early CKD, potassium homeostasis is preserved through adaptive increase in potassium secretion in the ASDN, akin to the physiological response seen in healthy individuals on a high potassium diet. This functional adaptation is accompanied by structural changes, including cellular hypertrophy, increased mitochondrial density and proliferation of the basolateral membrane in cells in the distal nephron and principal cells of the collecting duct. Elevated serum potassium and mineralocorticoid activity independently initiate this process, which is accompanied by an increase in Na+/K+ ATPase activity. Enhanced distal sodium delivery and tubular fluid flow to the ASDN in remaining functional nephrons also help to maintain the net potassium secretion.
As renal function declines, gastrointestinal potassium secretion, particularly in the colon, becomes increasingly important in maintaining total body potassium. This process involves increased potassium uptake across the basolateral membrane and secretion into the intestinal lumen by the large-conductance Ca2+-activated (KCa1.1) BK channel, regulated by aldosterone and other factors that elevate cyclic adenosine monophosphate in the enterocyte.
When GFR falls below 30 mL/1.73 m2, hyperkalemia gradually develops through several mechanisms
Decreased distal Na+ delivery, as seen in decompensated heart failure or acute glomerulonephritis,
Reduced mineralocorticoid activity, common in diabetes with hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism or due to RAASi therapy,
Abnormal collecting duct function, often associated with tubulointerstitial kidney disease).

2. Management of Hyperkalemia in Chronic Kidney Disease
Hyperkalemia is a common electrolyte disorder in patients with impaired renal function, occurring in the context of AKI or advanced CKD, particularly in patients with GFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2. This is in partly due to the mechanisms previously described and is further exacerbated by pharmacological interventions aimed at slowing CKD progression, specifically, renin-angiotensin aldosterone system inhibitors (RAASi) including angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi), angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARBs) and non-steroidal/steroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (ns-MRAs/MRAs). Other risk factors for hyperkalemia include elevated urine albumin-to-creatinine ratios, diabetes mellitus, heart failure, constipation and medication use (i.e., NSAIDs, COX2-inhibitors, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, beta-blockers, ciclosporin and tacrolimus).

2.1. Potential Implications of Hyperkalemia on Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease

2.1.1. Hyperkalemia and Its Significance in Patients with CKD
There is no clear consensus for the definition of hyperkalemia in current guidelines and literature, it is generally defined as a serum potassium > 5.0–5.5 mmol/L. It can be further classified based on the degree of elevation from mild (serum potassium 5.1–5.4 mmol/L), moderate (serum potassium 5.5–5.9 mmol/L) to severe (serum potassium ≥ 6.0 mmol/L).
Acute hyperkalemia can potentially result in life-threatening cardiac dysrhythmia and cardiac arrest. Chronic dyskalemias, on the other hand, have been associated with adverse outcomes in patients with CKD such as a “U-shaped” pattern with mortality and increased risk of CKD progression. A meta-analysis by Kovesdy et al. involving 27 international cohorts (10 chronic kidney disease included) and 1,217,986 participants, found that hyperkalemia was more prevalent among individuals with lower eGFR and higher albuminuria. Both hypo- and hyperkalemia were associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality.
Beyond its direct clinical consequences, hyperkalemia poses a significant barrier to the optimization of guideline-directed medical therapy. It often necessitates dose reduction or cessation of RAASi, thereby increasing the risk of adverse cardiovascular and renal outcomes, as well as healthcare utilization and costs.
Therefore, the management of hyperkalemia is of great importance, particularly in patients with high risk of CKD progression and attendant risks of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. The 2024 Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Guidelines for Evaluation and Management of CKD recommend a multipronged approach. This includes reviewing concurrent medications, moderation of dietary potassium intake, and considering adjunctive therapies such as sodium bicarbonate supplementation (in patients with metabolic acidosis), diuretics (in those with fluid overload) and potassium binders to enable continued RAASi therapy.

2.1.2. Discontinuation/Dose Reduction of Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors
A systematic review by Floege et al. identified numerous studies involving CKD patients with who required dose reduction or cessation of RAASi due to hyperkalemia (16 studies on CKD patients with sub-optimal RAASi dosing due to hyperkalemia and 44 studies on CKD patients with RAASi cessation due to hyperkalemia). These findings reflect common clinical practice, where prescription or optimization of RAASi dose is often limited by hyperkalemia, particularly in refractory hyperkalemia.
Numerous studies have reported a myriad of adverse cardiorenal outcomes associated with dose reduction or cessation of RAASi in patients with CKD (Table 1). These include major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), cardiovascular mortality, all-cause mortality, CKD progression, increased risks of hospitalization and prolonged hospital stays, particularly among individuals with advanced CKD.

2.1.3. Hyperkalemia-Related Healthcare Utilization, Costs
Given the clinical implications of hyperkalemia with CKD, particularly in patients who require dose reduction or cessation of RAASi prescription, it is unsurprising that affected individual patients with hyperkalemia tend to have higher healthcare utilization and incur greater costs, compared to patients with normokalaemia. A systematic review by Floege et al. identified numerous studies reporting that CKD patients with hyperkalemia were associated with higher healthcare utilization (in terms of greater average hospitalizations and longer hospital length of stay) and costs, regardless of CKD stage, compared to patients with normokalemia.

2.2. Traditional Strategies for Management of Hyperkalemia

2.2.1. Correction of Metabolic Acidosis
A reduction in nephron mass in CKD leads to impaired net acid excretion (contributed by hyperkalemia), ultimately contributing to the development of chronic metabolic acidosis. In turn, metabolic acidosis promotes hyperkalemia by facilitating the transcellular shift of potassium from the intracellular to extracellular compartment in exchange of excess hydrogen ions. Previous literature and clinical guidelines recommend routine sodium bicarbonate supplementation to maintain serum bicarbonate concentration above 22 mmol/L, aiming to prevent complications of chronic metabolic acidosis such as protein-energy wasting, insulin resistance, bone demineralization, and CKD progression. The latest 2024 KDIGO guidelines have since revised this recommendation and instead suggest prescription of sodium bicarbonate only to avoid severe metabolic acidosis (serum HCO3− < 18.0 mmol/L) in adults with CKD. However, the guidelines were vague with respect to their stepwise approach to managing hyperkalemia (serum potassium > 5.5 mmol/L) and did not specify the means or a treatment target when suggesting optimization of serum bicarbonate levels. Given the costs of novel potassium binding resins, we believe that sodium bicarbonate supplementation might still offer a cheaper alternative to managing milder degrees of hyperkalemia by reducing acidemia and increasing sodium delivery to the ASDN. An alternative strategy in the management of metabolic acidosis involves increasing the consumption of fruits and vegetables. This dietary approach is supported by several small randomized controlled trial, demonstrating comparable efficacy and safety to oral sodium bicarbonate in patients with CKD.

2.2.2. Prescription of Diuretics
Loop or thiazide diuretics are commonly prescribed for the management of fluid overload or hypertension in patients with CKD. Loop diuretics are typically the preferred agents in advanced CKD, largely due to traditional belief and older guideline recommendations, based on weak evidence that thiazide diuretics are less effective when the GFR falls below30 mL/min/1.73 m2. However, a growing body of evidence, including a recent randomized, placebo-controlled trial involving 160 patients with stage 4 CKD and poor controlled hypertension, has demonstrated that thiazide-like diuretics, particularly chlorthalidone, can significantly reduce blood pressure in this population. Both loop and thiazide diuretics require higher doses in advanced CKD to achieve a therapeutic effect and exhibit additive effect when used in combination, especially in the management of severe or refractory volume overload. A common adverse drug reaction for these drugs includes hypokalemia, which may paradoxically be beneficial in managing concomitant hyperkalemia.

2.2.3. Dietary Potassium Restriction
Historically, medical practitioners have recommended dietary potassium restriction of 2–3 g/day, despite a lack of strong evidence supporting this practice. With increasing use of emerging medical therapies such as non-steroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists to delay CKD progression, it remains common practice to advise patients to restrict dietary potassium, either with or without the use of novel potassium binding resins, in order to optimize the prescription of RAAS inhibitors. However, a growing body of evidence highlights potential risks of this traditional approach with respect to CKD, adverse cardiovascular outcomes and all-cause mortality (Table 2).
In animal models involving male rats with CKD (compared to controls with normal renal function), low potassium intake led to inflammation, nephromegaly and kidney function decline while the high potassium intake reduces arterial pressure, hyperaldosteronism and kidney fibrosis. Additionally, potassium citrate attenuated the hypertensive effects of a high-potassium diet but did not mitigate its profibrotic impact. These findings suggest that in patients with CKD, both low and high extremes of dietary potassium intake may be harmful, underscoring the need for further research to determine the optimal intake range.
There is growing recognition within the nephrology community of the potential risks associated with routine dietary potassium restriction with emerging evidence supporting the cardiovascular benefits of higher dietary potassium intake suggesting that it is time to rethink our approach to potassium management in patients with CKD. This shift is reflected in the 2024 update of the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes CKD Guidelines, which advocate for a personalized approach that considers the patient’s CKD stage, comorbidities, quality of life, history of hyperkalemia, and sources of dietary potassium, with an emphasis on minimizing intake of avoiding highly processed foods.

2.3. Modern Strategies for Management of Hyperkalemia

2.3.1. Role of Sodium Glucose Transporter 2 Inhibitors (SGLT2i)
SGLT2i induces both osmotic diuresis and natriuresis by inhibiting glucose and sodium reabsorption at the proximal tubule. This increases sodium delivery to the distal convoluted tubule and collecting duct which, thereby promoting potassium excretion. SGLT2i are a cornerstone of optimal medical therapy for patients with diabetes mellitus CKD and heart failure. Notably, beyond their established benefits in reducing cardiovascular and renal adverse outcomes, emerging evidence also suggests that SGLT2i may lower the risk of hyperkalemia in at-risk populations.
A meta-analysis by Neuen et al., which included six studies involving 49,875 participants evaluated the use of SGLT2i in diabetic patients with high cardiovascular risk or with CKD and a showed 16% relative risk reduction of serious hyperkaliemia (serum potassium ≥ 6.0 mmol/L), even in the setting of concomitant RAASi prescriptioin.
A post-hoc analysis of the FIDELIO-DKD study by Agarwal et al. noted that combination therapy with SGLT2i and non-steroidal mineralocorticoid antagonists (nsMRA) finerenone was associated with a lower risk of hyperkalemia. This finding was corroborated by the recent CONFIDENCE randomized, placebo-controlled trial by Agarwal et al. involving 784 diabetic patients with proteinuria, CKD on pre-existing RAASi comparing the use of SGLT2i or nsMRA monotherapy vs. combination therapy with SGLT2i and nsMRA. Combination therapy with SGLT2i and nsMRA not only achieved greater reduction in urine albumin creatinine ratio (uACR) compared to either monotherapy but also demonstrated a lower risk of hyperkalemia than monotherapy with nsMRA.
These findings underscore the potential role of SGLT2i as a valuable adjunct in managing mild hyperkalemia, thereby facilitating the continued use or up-titration of RAASi.

2.3.2. Prescription of K-Binding Resins
Historically, sodium polystyrene sulfonate (SPS) has been used to manage hyperkalemia. However, recent studies have raised concerns about its efficacy in addition to other reports of severe gastrointestinal adverse effects, most notably intestinal necrosis. Safer and more effective therapeutic options like sodium zirconium cyclosilicate (SZC) and patiromer have emerged in recent years for treatment of acute and chronic hyperkalemia in various at-risk populations (Table S1).
Sodium zirconium cyclosilicate (SZC) is a highly selective cation exchanger that entraps potassium in the intestinal tract in exchange for sodium and hydrogen. It is administered as a tasteless, odorless powder mixed with water form an oral suspension, offering a more palatable alternative to the notoriously gritty and unpleasant-tasting SPS. In the treatment of acute hyperkalemia, 10 g of SZC three times a day lowers serum potassium by 0.4 mmol/L (95% CI −0.5 to −0.4) within 2 h, with a mean reduction of serum potassium by 0.7 mmol/L (95% CI −0.7 to −0.6; −12%) at 24 h. The potassium-lowering effect is dose-dependent, and patients with higher baseline potassium levels tend to experience greater reductions. For chronic hyperkalemia, long-term use of SZC has been shown to be effective in maintaining normokalaemia in both CKD patients on RAASi without dietary restriction and ESKD HD population. SZC is also effective in patients with heart failure to allow for maintenance or optimization of MRA dose. Additionally, SZC has been associated with improvement in serum bicarbonate levels, with mean percentage increase of 4–6%, which may confer protective effect among individuals with CKD. Furthermore, SZC has been shown to be a cost-effective treatment for hyperkalemia. Common adverse events of SZC include hypokalemia, particularly during the initial correction phase, where it has been linked to QT interval prolongation, dose-dependent oedema, and gastrointestinal symptoms.
Patiromer is a non-absorbed polymer that binds potassium in exchange with calcium throughout the gastrointestinal tract, thereby enhancing fecal excretion and lowering serum potassium levels. It is effective in treating acute hyperkalemia in high-risk populations, including patients with CKD, heart failure, and diabetes mellitus, and was the first cation-exchanger after SPS to be approved by the Food Drug Administration (FDA). In the OPAL-HK trial, patiromer use while maintaining RAASi resulted in a mean reduction of serum potassium by 1.01 mmol/L at week four, with greater reduction observed in patients with moderate-to-severe hyperkaliemia. Notably, 76% of patients achieved normokalaemia by week 4 without dietary restriction with patiromer. Long-term use over 52 weeks also demonstrated sustained reduction in serum potassium. Additionally, short-term use over 4 weeks in a small cohort of hemodialysis patients demonstrated its efficacy in reducing the episodes of hyperkalemia. Patiromer was generally well tolerated, with common adverse effects like gastrointestinal intolerance and hypomagnesaemia.
Given the efficacy and safety of novel potassium binding resins like SZC and Patiromer, recent guidelines have increasingly supported their use in patients with CKD and hyperkalemia to facilitate the optimization of RAAS inhibitor therapy and delay CKD progression have encouraged the increased use of these agents in patients with CKD and hyperkalemia to enable optimization of medical therapy such as RAASi to delay CKD progression.

3. Liberation of Potassium Restriction and Consideration of Potassium Supplementation/Salt-Substitutes

3.1. Evidence Demonstrating Potential Benefits of High Dietary Potassium Intake
A narrative review by Palmer et al. published in 2016 outlined several potential health benefits associated with high dietary potassium intake. These included reduction in blood pressure and stroke risk, decreased incidence of nephrolithiasis, favorable effects on bone health for the general population and potential improvement in metabolic acidosis and dietary phosphate absorption in patients with CKD. Numerous studies have further strengthened the evidence base supporting the individual and public health benefits of a higher dietary potassium intake, particularly when combined with reduced dietary sodium intake, in improving blood pressure control and preventing the development cardiovascular disease and CKD (Table 3).
In terms of cardiovascular outcomes, a notable study to highlight is an open-label, cluster-randomized trial across 600 villages in rural China, involving 20,995 individuals either aged over 60 years or with a history of stroke and poorly controlled blood pressure. The study demonstrated that using a potassium-based salt substitute, compared with regular salt, significantly reduced the risk of stroke, major adverse cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality, without an increase in serious adverse events attributed to hyperkalemia. However, it is important to note that the study excluded patients who self-reported any history of serious kidney disease and no baseline renal function assessments were performed. These findings were corroborated by a systematic review and meta-analysis encompassing 21 studies and 31,949 participants, which reaffirmed the benefits of salt substitution in lowering blood pressure and reducing the risk of cardiovascular events, cardiovascular mortality and all-cause mortality.
In the general population, a systematic review and meta-analysis of 104 studies involving 2,755,719 patients without baseline CKD found that higher dietary potassium intake was linked to a lower risk of developing CKD. Similarly, a large prospective, registry-based observational cohort study of 317,162 patients without CKD reported that higher potassium intake was associated with lower risk of developing CKD.
However, in patients with established CKD, similar evidence supporting the use of salt substitutes or liberalized dietary potassium intake is lacking. Nonetheless, there is growing skepticism about the validity of the traditional approach of routine dietary potassium intake in this population.
A cross-sectional study including 95 patients with CKD and 117 patients with ESKD undergoing maintenance HD n found no association between higher dietary potassium intake and hyperkalemia in either group. This aligns with findings from a retrospective cohort study of 8043 ESKD patients on maintenance HD, which similarly reported no increased risk hyperkalemia or all-cause mortality with higher dietary potassium intake.
Studies associating Higher Potassium Intake with CKD outcomes and Mortality *.
Study	Population 	Outcomes	 	Mirmiran et al. 2018 	1780 participants in the Tehran Lipid and Glucose study and followed up for 6.3 yr	No difference in risk of incident CKD	 	Kieneker et al. 2016 	5315 Dutch participants aged 28 to 75 yr in the PREVEND study and followed up for a median of 10.3 yr	Reduced risk of incident CKD	 	Kelly et al. 2021 	Meta-analysis of 104 studies involving 2,755,619 patients without baseline CKD 	Reduced risk of incident CKD 	 	He et al. 2016 	3939 participants aged 21–74 yr with CKD (GFR 20–70 mL/min per 1.73 m2) in the CRIC study	Increased risk of CKD progressionNo difference in risk of death	 	>Araki et al. 2015	>623 Japanese patients with diabetes and eGFR ≥ 60 mL/min per 1.73/m2 enrolled between 1996–2003 and followed up until 2013	>Reduced risk of CKD progressionSlower rate of annual eGFR decline	 	>Smyth et al. 2014 	>Post hoc analysis of ONTARGET and TRANSCEND studies; >30,000 patients from 18 countries with vascular disease or diabetes with end-organ damage	>Reduced risk of CKD progression	 	Kim et al. 2019	1821 participants aged 20–75 yr with CKD G1–G5 (non-dialysis) in the KNOW-CKD study	Reduced risk of CKD progression	 	Smyth et al. 2016 	544,635 participants in the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study, aged 51–70 yr	Reduced risk of ESKD and renal mortality	 	Noori et al. 2010 	224 chronic HD patients from the NIED Study	Increased risk of death when comparing extremes of dietary potassium intake	 	Bernier-Jean et al. 2021 	8043 participants in the DIET-HD study with ESKD on maintenance HD 	No difference in risk of death	 	Neal et al. 2021 	Open-label, cluster-randomized trial involving 600 villages and 20,995 individuals in rural China with a history of stroke or aged ≥ 60 years old with poorly controlled blood pressure	Reduced risk of stroke, major adverse cardiovascular events and all-cause mortality 	 	Yin et al. 2022 	Meta-analysis of 21 studies involving 31,949 patients evaluating the effect of salt substitutes on clinical outcomes 	Reduced blood pressure Reduced cardiovascular events, cardiovascular mortality and all-cause mortality 	 	Leonberg-Yoo et al. 2017 	Post hoc analysis of MDRD study 812 patients aged 15–70 yr with CKD G2–G4	Reduced risk of death 	 	Eisenga et al. 2016 	Prospective cohort of 705 stable kidney transplant recipients	Reduced risk of graft failure and death
CRIC, Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort; KNOW-CKD, Korean Cohort Study for Outcome in Patients with CKD; MDRD, Modification of Diet in Renal Disease; NIED, Nutritional and Inflammatory Evaluation in Dialysis; NIH-AARP, National Institutes of Health–American Association of Retired Persons; ONTARGET, Ongoing Telmisartan Alone and in Combination with Ramipril Global Endpoint Trial; PREVEND, Prevention of renal and vascular end-stage disease; TRANSCEND, Telmisartan Randomized Assessment Study in ACE Inhibitor Intolerant Subjects with Cardiovascular Disease. * Adapted from Clase et al. 2020 KDIGO Controversies Conference on Potassium Homeostasis and Management of Dyskalemias in Kidney Diseases.

3.2. Dietary Patterns vs. Nutrient Focus
Numerous publications have highlighted the potential cardio-renal-metabolic benefits of various plant-based dietary approaches, as well as the individual components of these diets, particularly dietary sodium and potassium intake. This growing body of evidence supporting the potential benefits of plant-based diets was acknowledged as a practice point in the 2024 iteration of the KDIGO Clinical Practice Guidelines for CKD, encouraging the medical community to advocate for healthier dietary practices with a higher consumption of plant-based foods compared to animal-based foods and a lower consumption of ultra-processed foods amongst patients with CKD. However, the optimal dietary approach for patients with CKD remains unclear. Plant-based diets encompass a range of patterns, including the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet, the Mediterranean diet, the Plant-Dominant Low-Protein Diet, vegan, vegetarian and whole plant-based diets. Immediate benefits of these diets, with respect to the risk of development of hyperkalemia, include (i) reduced net acid production compared to typical Western diets (which contributes to intracellular movement of potassium) and (ii) improvement of constipation (a known contributor to hyperkalemia, particularly in patients with advanced CKD). Notably, small RCTs have demonstrated that plant-based diets can be as effective as oral sodium bicarbonate supplementation in managing CKD-related metabolic acidosis, without increasing the risk of hyperkalemia, even in patients with more advanced CKD. Additionally, plant-based diets may also have favorable effects on phosphorus metabolism in patients with CKD. A meta-analysis of seven observational studies involving 15,285 participants with CKD further supports the association between plant-based diets and reduced mortality in this population..

3.2.1. Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension
The original DASH study by Appel et al. published in NEJM in 1997, was a randomized controlled trial involving 459 participants with systolic blood pressure < 160 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure of 80–95 mmHg. This study compared combination diet, rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains and low-fat dairy products with reduced saturated and total fat (referred to as the DASH diet) against a control diet. The DASH diet was shown to significantly lower blood pressure, and its findings were subsequently corroborated by numerous studies that followed, leading to its widespread adoption for the prevention and management of hypertension. Additional evidence has demonstrated its cardiorenal benefits, including reduced risk of kidney disease, cardiovascular events, and all-cause mortality (Table 4). Further research has shown that the DASH diet has a lower dietary acid load compared to typical Western diets. Although the original DASH study did not evaluate the impact of sodium intake, the follow-up DASH-Sodium trial demonstrated that combining the DASH diet with reduced dietary sodium intake produced additive effects in lowering blood pressure.

3.2.2. Mediterranean Diet
The Mediterranean Diet is characterized by a high intake of plant-based foods, including cereals, fruits, herbs, legumes, nuts and vegetables, limited consumption of red meat and moderate intake of fish/seafood, eggs, white meat and dairy products. Its principal source of fat is olive oil. This dietary pattern offers numerous benefits for patients with CKD, including improved control of cardiovascular risk factors and a reduced risk of incident CKD and cardiovascular disease (Table 5). The 2020 Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI) Clinical Practice Guidelines for Nutrition in CKD recommend the Mediterranean diet for adults with CKD G1–G5 not on dialysis, as well as for kidney transplant, to improve lipid control. Additionally, for patients with CKD G1–G4, increased consumption of fruit and vegetable is advised to help reduce body weight, blood pressure, and dietary acid load. These recommendations were echoed in the 2024 KDIGO guidelines for CKD, which advocate for a plant-based Mediterranean diet in conjunction with a lipid-modifying therapy to reduce cardiovascular risk. Several review articles, including those by Perez-Torres et al. and D’Alessandro et al., provide practical strategies for adapting the Mediterranean diet to different stages of CKD.

3.3. Food Sources, Bioavailability of Potassium and Food Preparation Methods
When guiding patients towards accessible sources of dietary potassium, many plant-based foods such as bananas, citrus juices, melons, avocados, potatoes and tomatoes, stand out as rich potassium sources. These foods can be easily incorporated into a healthy diet for patients with CKD, offering nutritional benefits beyond potassium content. Notably, severe of these foods are high in carbohydrates, which may stimulate insulin release and help mitigate postprandial increases in plasma potassium concentrations. In contrast, animal-based food typically lacks carbohydrates and may lead to greater elevations in plasma potassium following consumption.
Traditional dietary guidelines for CKD have often restricted the consumption of vegetables and whole grain products due to their relatively high potassium and phosphorus content. Emerging evidence demonstrates that the bio-availability of dietary potassium (and phosphate) in plant-based foods is generally <50%, compared to nearly 100% from ultra-processed foods (rich in potassium additives), meats, dairy products, juices and salt substitutes made with potassium chloride. Processed foods, particularly those containing additives, contribute significantly to dietary potassium and phosphate loads in patients with CKD. In addition, a recent animal model study comparing a high KHCO3 diet to a high KCl diet demonstrated that dietary anions, in particular HCO3−, have a potential role in the prevention of hyperkalemia by increasing urinary potassium excretion through various mechanisms. As such, dietary counselling for patients with CKD should go beyond macronutrients quantity and food preparation methods and instead emphasize the importance of nutrient sources. This sentiment is reflected in the latest 2024 KDIGO guidelines for CKD that encourages the adoption of healthier diets with a higher consumption of plant-based foods and lower consumption of ultra-processed foods.
A systematic review of 65 articles demonstrated that while all food preparation techniques can reduce potassium content, methods involving water, such as boiling or soaking tend to result in greater reductions in potassium (Table 6). However, this review had notable limitations, including significant heterogeneity in study designs with few studies identified for certain cooking techniques. Martinez-Pineda et al. also demonstrated that frozen products achieved greater reductions in potassium content compared to fresh products.

3.4. Clinical Trials and Guidelines

3.4.1. Upcoming Clinical Trials
An ongoing randomized trial with a two-period cross-over design involving 30 patients with CKD and an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 15–45 mL/min/1.73 m2 aims to generate high-quality evidence to support or refute current recommendations for dietary potassium restriction in patients with CKD Stage G3b to G4. At time of publication, the study is still actively recruiting patients.
In parallel, a recent proof-of-concept study by Liebman et al. explored the potential benefits of a 15-day whole-food, plant-based nutrition education program in patients with CKD Stage G3 or G4. Although the observed reductions in blood pressure were not statistically significant, the intervention group demonstrated improvements in body mass, total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein and high-density lipoprotein without increased risk of hyperkalemia compared to controls. These findings are promising but require validation in larger, more diverse populations with a longer follow-up duration to confirm the efficacy and safety of such novel dietary interventions in CKD management.

3.4.2. Current Clinical Practice Guidelines
A review by Xu et al. highlighted inconsistencies across major hypertension and CKD guideline regarding dietary potassium restriction and the use of potassium-enriched salt substitutes. While some guideline supports their use for cardiovascular risk reduction, there remains a widely accepted caution against liberation of potassium restriction and use of salt substitutes in individuals with advanced CKD due to the potential risk of hyperkalemia (Table 7 and Table 8).

4. Our Recommendations
To further optimize cardiovascular outcomes in patients with CKD, we recommend an individualized approach to liberalizing dietary potassium intake, with a focus on substituting ultra-processed and animal-based diets with minimally processed, plant-based food sources. This should be undertaken in consultation with a renal dietitian or accredited nutritional professional, accompanied by close biochemical monitoring, particularly in patients with more advanced CKD, eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2, with either (i) a history of hyperkalemia and/or (ii) use of RAASi (including ACEi/ARB/nsMRA/MRA). Other notable risk factors that contribute to risk of developing hyperkalemia include presence of diabetes, concomitant heart failure, and over-the-counter non-steroid anti-inflammatory drug use. In stable patients without existing hyperkalemia, we would suggest routine monitoring of serum potassium in these patients at least 3–4 times per year.
For individuals identified with hyperkalemia, consideration should be made to raise thresholds for urgent intervention (i.e., warranting accident and emergency visit and/or inpatient hospitalization) for mild or even moderate hyperkalemia (serum K+ < 6.0 mmol/L) in well, asymptomatic individuals without acute kidney injury. Our rationale is that majority of these patients can be assessed and managed safely as outpatients. Our goal should be to implement an affordable strategy for management of hyperkalemia that allows the maintenance of other therapies that either delay CKD progression or mitigate cardiovascular risk.
In patients with chronic hyperkalemia, early use of novel potassium binders can not only facilitate the continuation and optimization of RAASi but can also prevent development of moderate to severe hyperkalemia (serum potassium ≥ 5.6 mmol/L) and its attendant healthcare costs. In these patients requiring titration of medication doses, we would suggest regular monitoring of serum potassium at 2–4 weekly intervals depending on CKD stage, current eGFR and concomitant medications until stable dose of medications achieved to maintain normokalaemia. Subsequent monitoring can then be done at least 3–4 times per year.
Here, we have suggested a multi-pronged approach to management of varying degrees of severity of hyperkalemia (Table 9).
The potential benefits for recommending the routine use of potassium enriched salt substitutes in patients with CKD are less certain given the lack of evidence supporting such practices in our CKD population. Therefore, at present this should only be cautiously considered in individuals with compelling cardiovascular risk or uncontrolled hypertension, if serum potassium remains in the normal range following implementation of the above measures. After introduction of salt substitutes, an individualized monitoring strategy should be employed, considering the patient’s comorbidities and concomitant medications.

5. Future Directions
In the potassium space, more randomized, controlled studies are required to examine the effects of liberal intake on clinically relevant outcomes, as well as to assess the safety of conservative versus aggressive management approaches to serum levels and potential implications for healthcare costs. The scale, complexity, and financial demands of such studies warrant thoughtful collaboration and investment from a broad spectrum of stakeholders, including clinicians, researchers, industry partners and policy makers to ensure meaningful progress for this particularly vulnerable population.

6. Conclusions
The paradigm shift in our approach to management of potassium in patients with CKD can potentially translate to improved patient outcomes in terms of CKD progression and major adverse cardiovascular events. However, the onus is on the medical community to advocate for (i) liberalization of dietary potassium restrictions, particularly in patients with early CKD, (ii) increasing consumption of plant-based foods (and consequently reduction of animal-based and ultra-processed food sources), (iii) optimization of RAASi prescription (with/without prescription of novel potassium binding resins) and (iv) furthering research to identify more generalizable, preferably population-wide, dietary interventions that are efficacious and safe for the CKD population to mitigate their significant residual risks of adverse outcomes, particularly cardiovascular disease-related.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Supplementary Materials
The following supporting information can be downloaded at: , Table S1: Summary of studies on the efficacy of serum potassium reduction with Sodium Zirconium Cyclosilicate and Patiromer.

Author Contributions
Z.X.K., I.W.Z.L. and S.P.T. drafted the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Institutional Review Board Statement
Not applicable.

Informed Consent Statement
Not applicable.

Data Availability Statement
Not applicable.

Conflicts of Interest
Swee Ping Teh received speaker honorarium from AstraZeneca which was donated to the department.

Abbreviations
AKI	Acute Kidney Injury	 	ACEi	Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) 	 	ARB	Angiotensin-receptor blockers	 	ASDN	Aldosterone-sensitive distal nephron	 	CKD	Chronic Kidney Disease	 	CONFIDENCE	Finerenone with Empagliflozin in Chronic Kidney Disease and Type 2 Diabetes	 	DASH	Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension	 	DM	Diabetes Mellitus 	 	eGFR	Estimated glomerular filtration rate	 	ENaC	Epithelial Na+ channels	 	ESKD	End Stage Kidney Disease	 	FIDELIO-DKD	Effect of Finerenone on Chronic Kidney Disease Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes	 	GFR	Glomerular filtration rate	 	HD	Hemodialysis 	 	KDIGO 	Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes	 	MACE	Major adverse cardiovascular events	 	MRA	Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists	 	NCC	Na+/Cl− cotransporter	 	NHE	Sodium-hydrogen exchanger 	 	NKCC	Na+/K+/2Cl− cotransporter	 	nsMRA	Non-steroid mineralocorticoid antagonists	 	PREVEND	Prevention of Renal and Vascular End-Stage Disease Study and the Trials of Hypertension Follow-up Studies	 	RAASi	Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitor	 	ROMK	Renal outer medullary potassium channels	 	SGLT2i	Sodium glucose transporter 2 inhibitors	 	uACR	Urine albumin creatinine ratio
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:

References
Physiology and Pathophysiology of Potassium Homeostasis: Core Curriculum 2019
Two channels for one job
Epithelial sodium transport and its control by aldosterone: The story of our internal environment revisited
Potassium transport—An update
Congenital ureteropelvic junction obstruction: Human disease and animal models
Obstructive uropathy: Overview of the pathogenesis, etiology and management of a prevalent cause of acute kidney injury
Hyperkalemic distal renal tubular acidosis associated with obstructive uropathy
Potassium homeostasis and management of dyskalemia in kidney diseases: Conclusions from a Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Controversies Conference
The frequency of hyperkalemia and its significance in chronic kidney disease
Determinants of the serum potassium concentration in chronic kidney disease
The burden of hyperkalaemia in chronic kidney disease: A systematic literature review
Potassium homeostasis and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitors
KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease
Consensus statement on the management of hyperkalaemia-An Asia-Pacific perspective
European Resuscitation Council Guidelines 2021: Cardiac arrest in special circumstances
Severe hyperkalaemia: Demographics and outcome
Association between serum potassium levels and adverse outcomes in chronic kidney disease: The Fukushima CKD cohort study
Association of Serum Potassium with All-Cause Mortality in Patients with and without Heart Failure, Chronic Kidney Disease, and/or Diabetes
Hyperkalemia-Related Discontinuation of Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors and Clinical Outcomes in CKD: A Population-Based Cohort Study
Serum potassium and adverse outcomes across the range of kidney function: A CKD Prognosis Consortium meta-analysis
Stopping Renin-Angiotensin System Inhibitors in Patients with Advanced CKD and Risk of Adverse Outcomes: A Nationwide Study
Renin-Angiotensin System Inhibition in Advanced Chronic Kidney Disease
Clinical impact of suboptimal RAASi therapy following an episode of hyperkalemia
Clinical outcomes following discontinuation of renin-angiotensin-system inhibitors in patients with type 2 diabetes and advanced chronic kidney disease: A prospective cohort study
Estimated Number Needed to Treat to Avoid a First Hospitalization by Maintaining Instead of Reducing Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitor (RAASi) Therapy after Hyperkalemia
Hyperkalaemia-related reduction of RAASi treatment associates with more subsequent inpatient care
Prevalence of Metabolic Acidosis Among Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease and Hyperkalemia
Summary of KDIGO 2012 CKD Guideline: Behind the scenes, need for guidance, and a framework for moving forward
Treatment of metabolic acidosis in patients with CKD
Urinary ammonia and long-term outcomes in chronic kidney disease
A comparison of treating metabolic acidosis in CKD stage 4 hypertensive kidney disease with fruits and vegetables or sodium bicarbonate
Treatment of metabolic acidosis in patients with stage 3 chronic kidney disease with fruits and vegetables or oral bicarbonate reduces urine angiotensinogen and preserves glomerular filtration rate
Fruit and Vegetable Treatment of Chronic Kidney Disease-Related Metabolic Acidosis Reduces Cardiovascular Risk Better than Sodium Bicarbonate
Nutritional Approaches for the Management of Metabolic Acidosis in Chronic Kidney Disease
The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: The JNC 7 report
Clinical Pharmacology of Antihypertensive Therapy for the Treatment of Hypertension in CKD
Thiazides in advanced chronic kidney disease: Time for a randomized controlled trial
Chlorthalidone for Hypertension in Advanced Chronic Kidney Disease
Revisiting diuretic choice in chronic kidney disease
Dietary Approach to Recurrent or Chronic Hyperkalaemia in Patients with Decreased Kidney Function
Moderate stepwise restriction of potassium intake to reduce risk of hyperkalemia in chronic kidney disease: A literature review
Effect of Finerenone on Chronic Kidney Disease Outcomes in Type 2 Diabetes
Hyperkalemia Risk with Finerenone: Results from the FIDELIO-DKD Trial
Novel Potassium Binders in Reduction of Hyperkalemia and Optimization of RAAS Inhibitors Treatment in Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease or Heart Failure: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis
Utilization of Potassium Binders for the Management of Hyperkalemia in Chronic Kidney Disease: A Position Statement by US Nephrologists
Optimization of potassium management in patients with chronic kidney disease and type 2 diabetes on finerenone
Estimated potassium intake and the progression of chronic kidney disease
24-Hour Urinary Sodium and Potassium Excretion and Cardiovascular Risk
Dietary Potassium Intake and Mortality in a Prospective Hemodialysis Cohort
Dietary potassium intake, kidney function, and survival in a nationally representative cohort
Chronic kidney disease increases the susceptibility to negative effects of low and high potassium intake
Impact of Dietary Potassium Restrictions in CKD on Clinical Outcomes: Benefits of a Plant-Based Diet
Dietary Potassium Intake and Risk of Chronic Kidney Disease Progression in Predialysis Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease: A Systematic Review
Diabetic Nephropathy: Update on Pillars of Therapy Slowing Progression
A New Era in Diabetic Kidney Disease Treatment: The Four Pillars and Strategies to Build Beyond
Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors and Risk of Hyperkalemia in People with Type 2 Diabetes: A Meta-Analysis of Individual Participant Data From Randomized, Controlled Trials
Finerenone with Empagliflozin in Chronic Kidney Disease and Type 2 Diabetes
Effectiveness of Sodium Polystyrene Sulfonate for Short-Term Treatment of Hyperkalemia
Gastrointestinal adverse events with sodium polystyrene sulfonate (Kayexalate) use: A systematic review
Effect of sodium zirconium cyclosilicate on potassium lowering for 28 days among outpatients with hyperkalemia: The HARMONIZE randomized clinical trial
Sodium zirconium cyclosilicate in hyperkalemia
Efficacy and safety of sodium zirconium cyclosilicate in patients with baseline serum potassium level >/= 5.5 mmol/L: Pooled analysis from two phase 3 trials
Sodium Zirconium Cyclosilicate among Individuals with Hyperkalemia: A 12-Month Phase 3 Study
Long-term safety and efficacy of sodium zirconium cyclosilicate for hyperkalaemia in patients with mild/moderate versus severe/end-stage chronic kidney disease: Comparative results from an open-label, Phase 3 study
A Phase 3b, Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study of Sodium Zirconium Cyclosilicate for Reducing the Incidence of Predialysis Hyperkalemia
The randomized DIALIZE-Outcomes trial evaluated sodium zirconium cyclosilicate in hemodialysis
Sodium Zirconium Cyclosilicate for Management of Hyperkalemia During Spironolactone Optimization in Patients With Heart Failure
Cost-effectiveness of sodium zirconium cyclosilicate for advanced chronic kidney patients in Singapore
Patiromer in patients with kidney disease and hyperkalemia receiving RAAS inhibitors
Effect of Patiromer on Serum Potassium Level in Patients with Hyperkalemia and Diabetic Kidney Disease: The AMETHYST-DN Randomized Clinical Trial
Randomized Trial of Patiromer on Efficacy to Reduce Episodic Hyperkalemia in Patients with ESKD Treated with Hemodialysis
Achieving the Benefits of a High-Potassium, Paleolithic Diet, Without the Toxicity
Effect of dose and duration of reduction in dietary sodium on blood pressure levels: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised trials
Potassium Intake and Blood Pressure: A Dose-Response Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials
The hypotensive effect of salt substitutes in stage 2 hypertension: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Salt Reduction to Prevent Hypertension and Cardiovascular Disease: JACC State-of-the-Art Review
Potassium-Enriched Salt Substitutes as a Means to Lower Blood Pressure: Benefits and Risks
Effect of Salt Substitution on Cardiovascular Events and Death
Effects of salt substitutes on clinical outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Modifiable Lifestyle Factors for Primary Prevention of CKD: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis
Higher potassium intake is associated with a lower risk of chronic kidney disease: Population-based prospective study
Does dietary potassium intake associate with hyperkalemia in patients with chronic kidney disease?
Dietary Potassium Intake and All-Cause Mortality in Adults Treated with Hemodialysis
Dietary Sodium to Potassium Ratio and the Incidence of Chronic Kidney Disease in Adults: A Longitudinal Follow-Up Study
Low potassium excretion but not high sodium excretion is associated with increased risk of developing chronic kidney disease
Urinary Sodium and Potassium Excretion and CKD Progression
Urinary Potassium Excretion and Renal and Cardiovascular Complications in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes and Normal Renal Function
The relationship between estimated sodium and potassium excretion and subsequent renal outcomes
Urinary Potassium Excretion and Progression of CKD
Diet and Major Renal Outcomes: A Prospective Cohort Study. The NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study
Dietary potassium intake and mortality in long-term hemodialysis patients
Urine Potassium Excretion, Kidney Failure, and Mortality in CKD
Urinary potassium excretion, renal ammoniagenesis, and risk of graft failure and mortality in renal transplant recipients
Healthy Dietary Patterns and Risk of Mortality and ESRD in CKD: A Meta-Analysis of Cohort Studies
New Insights Into Dietary Approaches to Potassium Management in Chronic Kidney Disease
Management of natural and added dietary phosphorus burden in kidney disease
A clinical trial of the effects of dietary patterns on blood pressure
Effects of comprehensive lifestyle modification on blood pressure control: Main results of the PREMIER clinical trial
Influence of Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet on blood pressure: A systematic review and meta-analysis on randomized controlled trials
Effects of the Dietary Approach to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet on cardiovascular risk factors: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Relation of consistency with the dietary approaches to stop hypertension diet and incidence of heart failure in men aged 45 to 79 years
The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) Diet Pattern and Incident Heart Failure
Adherence to the dietary approaches to stop hypertension (DASH) diet in relation to all-cause and cause-specific mortality: A systematic review and dose-response meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies
Low-sodium Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension-type diet including lean red meat lowers blood pressure in postmenopausal women
Dietary acid load: A novel nutritional target in chronic kidney disease?
Effects on blood pressure of reduced dietary sodium and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) diet
DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) Diet and Risk of Subsequent Kidney Disease
DASH dietary pattern and chronic kidney disease in elderly Korean adults
Diet quality patterns and chronic kidney disease incidence: A UK Biobank cohort study
Adherence to Healthy Dietary Patterns and Risk of CKD Progression and All-Cause Mortality: Findings From the CRIC (Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort) Study
Poor accordance to a DASH dietary pattern is associated with higher risk of ESRD among adults with moderate chronic kidney disease and hypertension
Mediterranean diet as the diet of choice for patients with chronic kidney disease
Fibre Intake in Chronic Kidney Disease: What Fibre Should We Recommend?
Mediterranean Diet for Cardiovascular Risk Reduction in Chronic Kidney Disease
KDOQI Clinical Practice Guideline for Nutrition in CKD: 2020 Update
Mediterranean Diet and Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD): A Practical Approach
Mediterranean Dietary Pattern Adjusted for CKD Patients: The MedRen Diet
Mediterranean diet and the risk of chronic kidney disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Long-term consumption of a mediterranean diet or a low-fat diet on kidney function in coronary heart disease patients: The CORDIOPREV randomized controlled trial
The Effect of the Mediterranean Diet on Metabolic Health: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Controlled Trials in Adults
Safety and impact of the Mediterranean diet in patients with chronic kidney disease: A pilot randomized crossover trial
The “phosphorus pyramid”: A visual tool for dietary phosphate management in dialysis and CKD patients
Are Food Additives a Really Problematic Hidden Source of Potassium for Chronic Kidney Disease Patients?
The Impact of Additives on the Phosphorus, Potassium, and Sodium Content of Commonly Consumed Meat, Poultry, and Fish Products Among Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease
Food additives containing potassium, phosphorus, and sodium in ultra-processed foods: Potential harms to individuals with chronic kidney disease
Understanding sources of dietary phosphorus in the treatment of patients with chronic kidney disease
Modulation of the secretion of potassium by accompanying anions in humans
Dietary anions control potassium excretion: It is more than a poorly absorbable anion effect
Potassium reduction in food by preparation technique for the dietetic management of patients with chronic kidney disease: A review
Reduction of potassium content of green bean pods and chard by culinary processing. Tools for chronic kidney disease
Dietary potassium liberalization with fruit and vegetables versus potassium restriction in people with chronic kidney disease (DK-Lib CKD): A clinical trial protocol
The Effects of a Whole-Food Plant-Based Nutrition Education Program on Blood Pressure and Potassium in Chronic Kidney Disease: A Proof-of-Concept Study
Potassium-Enriched Salt Substitutes: A Review of Recommendations in Clinical Management Guidelines
Studies associating Discontinuation/Dose Reduction of RAASi with Adverse Cardio-Renal Outcomes.
Dose Reduction of RAASi	 	Study	Population 	Outcomes	 	Svensson et al. 2024 	Retrospective multination cohort study involving 40,059 patients (Germany, Spain, Sweden and UK) with CKD and/or heart failure with a history of RAASi related hyperkalemia	Higher risk of 6-month hospitalization	 	Svensson et al. 2024 	Retrospective cohort study involving 28,613 patients (Sweden and Japan) with CKD and/or heart failure with a history of RAASi related hyperkalemia	Longer hospital length of stay/hospitalized days 	 	Kanda et al. 2023 	Retrospective cohort study involving 21,508 patients (Japan and USA) with CKD and/or heart failure with a history of RAASi related hyperkalemia who either (i) discontinued or (ii) down-titrated their RAASi compared to patients who maintained/up-titrated their RAASi dose following the hyperkalemia episode 	Both discontinuation and dose reduction of RAASi was associated with higher risk of cardiorenal composite outcome (heart failure emergency room visits/hospitalizations, progression to ESKD) 	 	Discontinuation of RAASi	 	Study	Population	Outcomes	 	Fu et al. 2021 	Retrospective cohort study involving 10,254 patients (Sweden) who developed advanced CKD, eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 stratified by continuation of RAASi 	Higher risk of MACE and all-cause mortality Lower risk of ESKD 	 	Leon et al. 2022 	Retrospective cohort study involving 78,490 patients (Canada) with CKD with a history of RAASi related hyperkalemia	Higher risk of all-cause mortality, CV mortality and increased risk of dialysis initiation	 	Yang et al. 2023 	Prospective, population-based cohort study involving 10,400 patients (Hong Kong) with type 2 diabetes and advanced CKD, eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 stratified by continuation of RAASi 	Higher risk of MACE, heart failure and ESKD	 	Bhandari et al. 2022 	Multi-center, randomized, controlled trial involving 411 patients with advanced CKD, eGFR < 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 comparing discontinuation vs. continuation of RAASi	No difference in primary outcome of eGFR at 3 yearsNo difference in key secondary outcomes of CKD progression, ESKDReported similar incidence of adverse events with respect to cardiovascular events and deaths, however not adequately powered to detect significant differences in either outcome MACE, all-cause mortality
Studies associating Lower Potassium Intake with CKD outcomes and Mortality *.
Study	Population 	Outcomes	 	Suenaga et al. 2025 	Prospective cohort study involving 4314 participants (Japan) with CKD 	Higher risk of CKD progression 	 	Ma et al. 2022 	Meta-analysis of 6 studies involving 10,709 healthy adult participants * (namely the Health Professionals Follow-up Study, the Nurses’ Health Study, the Nurses’ Health Study II, the Prevention of Renal and Vascular End-Stage Disease Study and the Trials of Hypertension Follow-up Studies)	Higher risk of cardiovascular disease; dose-dependent 	 	Narasaki et al. 2022 	Retrospective cohort study involving 37,893 participants stratified according to normal and impaired kidney function 	Higher risk of all-cause mortality irrespective of kidney function Higher risk of all-cause mortality in patients with CKD when paired with high protein, low fiber and high phosphorus intake 	 	Narasaki et al. 2021	Prospective cohort study involving 415 participants (USA) with ESKD on maintenance HD 	Higher risk of all-cause mortality
* Due to the methodology of this study (e.g., exclusion of patients with CKD from PREVEND study), its study population generally consisted of healthy White participants and therefore generalizability of results to other racial/ethnic groups or to patients with specific conditions like CKD is not possible.
Benefits of DASH Diet.
Study	Population 	Outcomes	 	Saneei et al. 2014 	Systematic review and meta-analysis of 17 randomized, controlled studies involving 2561 participants 	DASH diet significantly reduced systolic blood pressure by 6.74 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure by 3.54 mmHg, particularly amongst participants with hypertension	 	Siervo et al. 2015 	Systematic review and meta-analysis of 20 randomized, controlled studies involving 1917 participants	DASH diet significantly reduced systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure and total cholesterol, particularly amongst participants with increased cardiometabolic risk; these improvements in cardiovascular risk factors predicted ~13% reduction in the 10-year Framingham risk score for cardiovascular disease 	 	Rebholz et al. 2016 	Prospective cohort study involving 14,882 participants from the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study with baseline eGFR ≥ 60 mL/min/1.73 m2	DASH diet associated with lower risk of incident CKD High red meat and processed meat intake (animal-based protein) was associated with higher risk of CKD whereas high nuts, legumes and low-fat dairy product intake (vegetable and dairy sources of protein) was associated with lower risk for CKD	 	Lee et al. 2017 	Retrospective cohort study involving 2408 elderly participants (Korea)NOTE mean age 72.4 ± 5.1 years old; only 23.8% had diabetes mellitus and 13.9% had CKD 	DASH diet associated with lower risk of CKD	 	Maroto-Rodriguez et al. 2025 	Prospective cohort study involving 106,870 participants from the UK Biobank	DASH diet associated with lower risk of CKD 	 	Hu et al. 2021 	Prospective cohort study involving 2403 participants with eGFR 20–70 mL/min/1.73 m2 from the Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort (CRIC) Study cohort 	DASH diet associated with lower risk of CKD progression and all-cause mortality 	 	Banerjee et al. 2019 	Retrospective cohort study involving 1110 participants (USA) with HTN and CKD, eGFR 30–59 mL/min/1.73 m2NOTE study population included participants of Third National Health and Nutritional Examination Survey conducted from 1988 to 1994 before the DASH study was published	DASH diet associated with lower risk of ESKD, particularly in patients with diabetesMediation analyses identified potassium and magnesium intake as strong mediators and dietary acid load and protein intake as partial mediators of the observed association between the DASH diet and ESKD 	 	Soltani et al. 2020 	Systematic review and meta-analysis of 13 prospective cohort studies involving 1,240,308 participants	DASH diet associated with lower risk of all-cause mortality
Benefits of Mediterranean Diet.
Study	Population 	Outcomes	 	Hansrivijit et al. 2020 	Systematic review and meta-analysis of 4 studies involving 8467 participants 	Mediterranean diet reduced risk of incident CKD 	 	Podadera-Herreros et al. 2022	Randomized, controlled trial involving 1002 participants with type 2 diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease and eGFR ≥ 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 from the CORDIOPREV study cohort; comparing Mediterranean diet vs. a low-fat diet	Mediterranean diet reduced rate of eGFR decline, particularly in patients with mildly impaired eGFR 60–89 mL/min/1.73 m2	 	Maroto-Rodriguez et al. 2025 	Prospective cohort study involving 106,870 participants from the UK Biobank	Alternate Mediterranean diet associated with lower risk of CKD 	 	Hu et al. 2021 	Prospective cohort study involving 2403 participants with eGFR 20–70 mL/min/1.73 m2 from the Chronic Renal Insufficiency Cohort (CRIC) Study cohort 	Alternate Mediterranean diet associated with lower risk of CKD progression and all-cause mortality 	 	Papadaki et al. 2020 	Systematic review and meta-analysis of 57 studies involving 36,983 participants 	Mediterranean diet improved metabolic syndrome components/cardiovascular risk factor control in addition to reduced risk of cardiovascular disease and stroke 	 	Kwon et al. 2024 	A pilot, randomized, controlled trial with crossover design involving 50 participants (Korea) with CKD G3–G4; comparing Mediterranean Proper Optimal Balance (MEDi-POB) diet vs. control for 12 weeks 	MEDi-POB diet significantly lowered dietary sodium intake, increased total CO2 levels (indicating reduced dietary acid load) and non-significant increase in dietary potassium intake; there were no significant changes in kidney function, serum and urinary potassium levels—pilot study indicating safety of Mediterranean diet in patients with CKD G3–G4
Food Preparation Techniques and Efficacy in Potassium Reduction.
Cooking Technique	Level of Potassium Reduction 	Suggested Food Group (s)	 	Cooking in water	Highest reduction in potassium (32–71%) 	Most food groups except fish/seafood, cereal and derivates	 	Soaking (and other techniques involving water)	Good efficacy in reduction in potassium (17–60%) 	Cruciferous vegetablesLeafy vegetablesLegumes	 	Steam Cooking	Modest efficacy in reduction in potassium (11–38%) 	Most food groups except cereal and derivates * 	 	Dry Heat Cooking	Lowest efficacy in reduction in potassium	Reserve for use in fruit and derivates, tubers and roots
* NOTE interpret with caution because data/results drawn from a single study.
Dietary Potassium Restriction in CKD Management Guidelines.
Organization	Year 	Recommendation	 	International Guidelines	 	Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes	2024	3.3.2 Use renal dieticians or accredited nutrition providers to educate people with CKD about dietary adaptations regarding sodium, phosphorus, potassium, and protein intake, tailored to their individual needs, and severity of CKD and other comorbid conditions 3.11.5 In early stages of CKD, high intake of foods naturally rich in potassium appears to be protective against disease progression, and dietary restriction of foods naturally containing potassium, such as fruits and vegetables, may be harmful to cardiac health; therefore, such restriction is not endorsed.3.11.5.1 Implement an individualized approach in people with CKD G3–G5 and emergent hyperkalemia that includes dietary and pharmacologic intervention and takes into consideration associated comorbidities and quality of life (QoL). Assessment and education through a renal dietician or an accredited nutrition provider are advised	 	Regional Guidelines	 	Europe Renal Association	2014	Nil recommendations 	 	Caring for Australian & New Zealanders with Kidney Impairment	2013	Early CKD patients with persistent hyperkalemia restrict their dietary potassium intake with the assistance of an appropriately qualified dietician.	 	National Guidelines	 	Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative	2020	In adults with CKD 3–5D or post transplantation, it is reasonable to adjust dietary potassium intake to maintain serum potassium within normal range (OPINION)In adults with CKD 3–5D (2D) or post transplantation (OPINION) with either hyperkalemia or hypokalemia, we suggest that dietary or supplemental potassium intake be based on patient’s individual needs and clinician judgement.
Potassium-Enriched Salt Recommendations in CKD Management Guidelines.
Organization 	Year 	Recommendation	 	International Guidelines	 	Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes	2024	Nil recommendation 	 	Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes	2021	The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH)–type diet or use of salt substitutes that are rich in potassium may not be appropriate for patients with advanced CKD or those with hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism or other causes of impaired potassium excretion because of the potential for hyperkalemia.	 	Regional Guidelines	 	Europe Renal Association	2014	Nil recommendations 	 	Caring for Australian & New Zealanders with Kidney Impairment	2013	Patients with CKD should not use salt substitutes that contain high amounts of potassium salt. Early CKD patients with persistent hyperkalemia restrict their dietary potassium intake with the assistance of an appropriately qualified dietician.	 	National Guidelines	 	Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative	2020	Nil recommendations
A Modern Approach to Management of Hyperkalemia in CKD.
Degree of Hyperkalemia 	Recommendations	 	Mild Serum K+ 5.1–5.4 mmol/L	Address correctable factors Review of concomitant medications (Avoid non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs; review indications and consider alternatives for other concomitant medications associated with increased risk of hyperkalemia include β-adrenergic receptor blockers, digitalis glycoside, heparin, calcineurin inhibitors, trimethoprim and pentamidine)Referral to dietician for assessment of dietary potassium intake and education focused on the least obtrusive dietary modifications and food preparation methodsConsider use of diuretics, particularly in patients with peripheral edema and/or suboptimal blood pressure controlConsider sodium bicarbonate supplementation to maintain serum bicarbonate > 22 mmol/LConsider early initiation of potassium binding resins, preferably PO SZC or Patiromer (although PO SPS remains a viable alternative if other options are not available), especially if patient is planned for initiation or uptitration of dose of RAASi to delay CKD progression Avoid reduction/discontinuation of RAASi 	 	ModerateSerum K+ 5.5–5.9 mmol/L	Address correctable factors as detailed aboveAssessment of symptoms and/or complications related to hyperkalemia Assessment and monitoring might include repeat biochemical testing and should include an electrocardiogramInitiation of potassium binding resins, preferably PO SZC or Patiromer (although PO SPS remains a viable alternative if other options are not available) Example of an initial dose PO SZC 10 g TDS for up to 48 h, followed by maintenance dose from 5 g EOD to maximum dose up to 15 g once daily; NOTE we should aim for the lowest effective maintenance dose that can maintain normokalaemiaInitial repeat testing of serum potassium should be arranged within 3–7 days; earlier date is preferred should RAASi be continuedSubsequent regular monitoring of serum potassium levels every 2–4 weeks while ongoing titration of medication doseConsider reduction/discontinuation of RAASi only if nil correctable factors identified and persistent moderate hyperkalemia despite maximum dose of potassium binding resins prescribed Patients should be counselled regarding potential implications of RAASi dose reduction/discontinuation with regards to CKD and cardiovascular outcomes and this decision should be reviewed at subsequent follow-up visits if patient’s condition allows	 	Severe/Life-threateningSerum K+ ≥ 6.0 mmol/L	Urgent assessment and intervention required in accident and emergency/hospital Assessment and monitoring should include repeat biochemical testing and urgent electrocardiogram/telemetry monitoringTreatment for hyperkalemia including (i) administration of intravenous insulin with 50% dextrose, (ii) administration of IV calcium gluconate and (iii) prescription of potassium binding reins, preferably PO SZC or PatiromerTemporary suspension of RAASi, if anyInitiation of maintenance potassium binding resins, after resolution of acute hyperkalemia episode, preferably PO SZC or Patiromer (although PO SPS remains a viable alternative if other options are not available) Initial repeat testing of serum potassium should be arranged within 3–7 days; earlier date is preferred should RAASi be resumed after normalization of serum potassiumWhen RAASi are temporarily suspended, patients should be reminded to review decision during repeat testing of serum potassium to see when it is safe to resume RAASiSubsequent regular monitoring of serum potassium levels every 2–4 weeks while ongoing titration of medication doseConsider reduction/discontinuation of RAASi only if nil correctable factors identified and persistent moderate hyperkalemia despite maximum dose of potassium binding resins prescribed Patients should be counselled regarding potential implications of RAASi dose reduction/discontinuation with regards to CKD and cardiovascular outcomes and this decision should be reviewed at subsequent follow-up visits if patient’s condition allows