SARS-CoV-2–related MIS-C: A key to the viral and genetic causes of Kawasaki disease?
SARS-CoV-2 is the trigger of MIS-C, which suggests that other viruses may trigger different forms of Kawasaki disease. The discovery of inborn errors of immunity underlying MIS-C would facilitate that of inborn errors of immunity to viruses underlying Kawasaki disease.
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) emerged in April 2020 in communities with high COVID-19 rates. This new condition is heterogenous but resembles Kawasaki disease (KD), a well-known but poorly understood and clinically heterogenous pediatric inflammatory condition for which weak associations have been found with a myriad of viral illnesses. Epidemiological data clearly indicate that SARS-CoV-2 is the trigger for MIS-C, which typically occurs about 1 mo after infection. These findings support the hypothesis of viral triggers for the various forms of classic KD. We further suggest that rare inborn errors of immunity (IEIs) altering the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 may underlie the pathogenesis of MIS-C in some children. The discovery of monogenic IEIs underlying MIS-C would shed light on its pathogenesis, paving the way for a new genetic approach to classic KD, revisited as a heterogeneous collection of IEIs to viruses.

Introduction
As the COVID-19 pandemic continues, it is becoming increasingly clear that severe clinical manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection remain rare in children, accounting for only 1.5% of all COVID-19 hospital admissions. However, in the spring of 2020, clusters of children admitted to the hospital with a multisystem hyperinflammatory syndrome, presenting with fever, abdominal pain and/or rash, myocarditis, and other clinical features reminiscent of Kawasaki disease (KD), were reported in communities with high rates of COVID-19, across Europe, and in North and South America (Fig. 1 and Table 1). Initial reports described a condition they referred to as an atypical form of KD with an incidence 30 times higher than in previous years. This newly identified syndrome was given the name pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS-CoV-2 by the UK Royal College of Pediatrics and Child Health, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization, or COVID-19–associated KD (COVID-KD) by many investigators. MIS-C cases were typically reported 3–6 wk after the peak of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the local population, suggesting a temporal association with the ongoing pandemic. About 84% of MIS-C cases test positive for anti–SARS-CoV-2 antibodies and/or in viral PCR tests, and all reported cases have a history of exposure to SARS-CoV-2. There is, therefore, strong viral and epidemiological evidence to suggest that SARS-CoV-2 is the trigger for MIS-C.
Geographic distribution of COVID-19 and MIS-C cases. (A) Choropleth map of cumulative COVID-19 cases, by country, from World Health Organization data, as of February 11, 2021. (B) Choropleth map of MIS-C cases, by country, as reported in published studies. Countries that have reported cases but have not disclosed the number of cases are denoted as “# not reported.” Only MIS-C cases reported in English-language journals are included. A list of the articles included can be found in Table S1. NA, not applicable.
A summary of the reported MIS-C cases, with information about ethnicitya
Location	Number of cases (M/F)	Ethnicity	Distribution of ethnic groups within the country concerned	References	 	England	58 (38/20)	38% Black	84.9% White British/all other white		 	31% Asian	8% Asian/Asian British	 	21% White	3.5% Black/African/Caribbean/Black British	 	10% Other	1.9% Other ethnicity	 		1.8% Mixed/multiple ethnic groups	 	England	29 (20/9)	41% Caucasian			 	21% Southeast Asian	 	17% Unknown or Multi-ethnic background	 	14% African/Caribbean	 	7% East Asian	 	England	25 (15/10)	40% White			 	36% Black	 	20% Asian	 	4% Other	 	England	15 (11/4)	40% African/Afro-Caribbean			 	40% South Asian	 	13% Mixed	 	7% Other	 	France	16 (8/8)	62% Afro-Caribbean	Data not available		 	25% European	 	12% Middle Eastern	 	France	21 (9/12)	57% Sub-Saharan African/Afro-Caribbean			 	29% European	 	10% Asian	 	5% Middle Eastern	 	US	2,617b (1,544/1,073)	35% Hispanic or Latino	60.1% White		 	31% Black, non-Hispanic	18.5% Hispanic	 	25% White, non-Hispanic	12.2% Black	 	4% Other	5.6% Asian	 	3% Multiple	0.7% American Indian/Alaska Native	 	2% Asian	0.2% Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander	 	0% American Indian/Alaska Native	2.8% Multiple	 	0% Native Hawaiian/Other Pacific Islander
F, female; M, male.
Only papers in English, reporting 15 patients or more, are included in this table.
198 of the 2,617 cases did not report race/ethnicity data. CDC data reported as of March 1, 2021.
The exact incidence of MIS-C remains unknown, due to a lack of comprehensive SARS-CoV-2 testing data for children. A New York–based study reported an incidence of MIS-C of 2/100,000 in individuals age <21 yr in a population with an incidence of confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection of 322/100,000 between March 1 and May 10, 2020. Another study reported a conservative estimate of the incidence of SARS-CoV-2 infection of no more than 5% in children under the age of 15 yr, with MIS-C detected in <2 in every 10,000 infected children. Unlike children with acute severe SARS-CoV-2 infection, most children presenting with MIS-C display no detectable active viral infection by PCR assays in the upper respiratory tract at the time of MIS-C diagnosis. Instead, they display signs of prior SARS-CoV-2 infection or contact with an infected individual ∼1 m before the onset of MIS-C symptoms. The clinical and immunological features of MIS-C and pediatric COVID-19 pneumonia are different, whereas those of MIS-C and KD, both of which are heterogenous inflammatory conditions, overlap. The emergence of MIS-C provided the first clear evidence to support the notion that KD-like inflammatory illness can be triggered by a virus. The case definition of MIS-C is evolving with improvements in our understanding of the spectrum of disease. MIS-C may correspond to a continuous distribution of different clinical entities. A key question that remains is whether there are common pathogenic mechanisms underlying MIS-C and classic KD. The starting point for addressing this question is a comparison of the epidemiological, clinical, and immunological features of MIS-C and KD.

Epidemiology of MIS-C and KD
MIS-C and KD display several notable epidemiological differences. The median age of children with MIS-C is 8–9 yr, whereas most children with KD are under the age of 5 yr with a median age of 3 yr and a peak of incidence in infants <1 yr old. Children who develop MIS-C are generally also older than those with severe pediatric COVID-19, although the lower mean age of patients with severe pediatric COVID-19 is largely due to the high proportion of infants among these patients. In both MIS-C and severe pediatric COVID-19, most of the patients were previously healthy, although a possible association with obesity in adolescents has been suggested. KD affects more boys than girls (sex ratio of ∼1.5:1), whereas no clear sex bias has been observed in MIS-C patients. The fatality rate of MIS-C has been estimated at 1–2%, much higher than that reported for KD (estimated KD case fatality rate of <0.1% in Japan). Interestingly, KD rates appear to be highest in East Asia, whereas individuals of South Asian and Latin American descent appear to be overrepresented in studies of MIS-C performed in the United States and/or Western European countries in which ancestry was reported (Table 1). There has been a striking paucity of MIS-C cases from East Asia, despite the high incidence of KD in this geographic area. Only two cases of MIS-C have been reported to date in South Korea, and no cases have been reported in Japan or China, contrasting with the higher numbers of cases from the Americas, Europe, Africa, South Asia, and the Middle East. Whether this is merely due to a lower number of COVID-19 cases in East Asia remains to be seen, bearing in mind the possibility of ascertainment bias (Fig. 1, A and B). Some areas in Europe saw a marked increase in the incidence of KD-like illnesses during the first wave of the pandemic, whereas South Korea observed no change in KD incidence relative to previous years. Population-related risk factors specific to either condition are therefore plausible.
Environmental factors may contribute to the geographic distribution of MIS-C incidence, but social determinants of health disparities also place particular ethnic minority populations at higher risk of SARS-CoV-2 exposure and associated disease. The contributions of viral, host genetic, and other biological factors to this higher risk remain unclear. It has been suggested that viral factors have contributed to geographic differences in the incidence of MIS-C. Following the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic from East Asia, new variants of SARS-CoV-2 carrying a D839Y/N/E substitution were identified in Europe and the United States. Computational modeling has suggested that the tyrosine substitution at position 839 in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein strengthens the binding of the spike protein to the β variable (Vβ) region of the host T cell receptor, resulting in superantigen characteristics potentially capable of driving the uncontrolled immune activation seen in MIS-C. However, human genetic factors may also underlie the differences in incidence between MIS-C and KD in Western versus Asian countries. Interestingly, KD studies predating COVID-19 suggested differences between ethnic groups for Kawasaki shock syndrome, a condition that affects ∼7% of KD patients. KD shock syndrome has a higher incidence in Western countries than in Asia, consistent with the observed geographic distribution of MIS-C. These striking epidemiological features highlight the need to define the genetic, immunological, and other factors, such as concurrent environmental exposures (SARS-CoV-2 or other factors), underlying MIS-C and KD.

Comparison of the clinical features of MIS-C and KD
Patients with MIS-C were initially described as having conjunctivitis, cheilitis, rash, and shock, immediately inciting comparisons with KD, which has been described as a multisystem inflammatory vasculitis presenting with fever, acute mucocutaneous inflammation, and KD shock syndrome. Indeed, all MIS-C patients present with fever, and about half have a rash and bilateral bulbar conjunctival injection, as observed in KD. The American Heart Association criteria for KD have not been systematically evaluated in all studies on MIS-C, but MIS-C cases seem to be more likely to fulfill the criteria for the incomplete form of KD. Some studies comparing cases of MIS-C with historical cases of KD have confirmed similarities with classic KD in terms of clinical features, but all these studies also highlighted specific features of COVID-KD cases. More than 80% of MIS-C cases present with gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, some even suffering intense abdominal pain with acute pseudosurgical abdomen, peritoneal effusion, and gallbladder hydrops. Neurological symptoms, such as meningitis-like symptoms or encephalitis, are also more frequently observed in MIS-C than in classic KD. These symptoms are observed early in the disease and can be misinterpreted, sometimes leading to unnecessary treatments or surgery. One particular feature specific to MIS-C is the high prevalence of myocarditis associated with cardiogenic-vasoplegic shock. Depending on the definition of myocarditis and the inclusion criteria used (cardiovascular or KD-like illness), cardiac dysfunction has been reported to affect 20–100% of patients. Recent cardiac magnetic resonance imaging data have shown these patients to have a myocardial edema, rather than the necrosis often observed in common viral myocarditis. All these symptoms may reflect local vasculitis and inflammation of the affected organ, and may account for the rapid, syndrome-resolving response to corticosteroid treatment.
The proportion of myocardial functional defects, including the depression of ventricular function, is higher in MIS-C patients than in KD patients, but the rate of coronary artery dilations is similar to that generally reported for KD, although these abnormalities do not often progress to aneurysm. Some MIS-C cohort studies have reported the occurrence of coronary artery dilation and/or aneurysms in 4–20% of patients, as previously reported for KD. However, unlike the coronary artery dilations and/or aneurysms observed in MIS-C, which are typically transient and have an onset that coincides with that of fever, the coronary artery aneurysms seen in KD peak ∼3 wk after fever onset. Importantly, coronary artery abnormalities have been observed not only in the youngest MIS-C patients meeting the full KD criteria, who would be more likely to be considered to have “classic” KD, but also in adolescent patients. Physicians should, therefore, consider treating MIS-C patients with low-dose aspirin and intravenous Ig (IVIG) in addition to appropriate cardiovascular resuscitation and steroids, because IVIG (with or without steroids) is the only treatment that has been shown to reduce coronary complications in KD. MIS-C is also associated with higher levels of inflammatory markers (including C-reactive protein [CRP], procalcitonin, and troponins) and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), more profound lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia rather than the common thrombocytosis of prolonged KD, and higher ferritin levels than are observed in KD. However, all these characteristics are similar to those of the historic KD shock syndrome, the most severe form of KD. Thus, MIS-C has several specific characteristics, but displays a significant clinical overlap with KD, and with KD shock syndrome in particular.

Clinical spectrum of MIS-C
With the progression of the pandemic, the definition of MIS-C has evolved, although definitions still vary between countries and research studies. The CDC defines MIS-C as a persistent fever and inflammation (e.g., increases in the levels of CRP, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, D-dimers, procalcitonin, or the serum concentrations of cytokines, including IL-10 and TNF) in patients <21 yr requiring hospitalization for severe illness with multiple-organ dysfunction (e.g., GI, cardiovascular, dermatological, neurological, nephrological, and/or respiratory). Patients must also either have tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 (serologic test and/or PCR) or have clearly been exposed to SARS-CoV-2. Multiple-organ dysfunction is a typical clinical feature of MIS-C. The dysfunction of at least four organ systems has been reported in >70% of patients. As also discussed above, the most common presenting symptoms include multiple days of fever (>5 d in most cases), GI symptoms (e.g., diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain) and, in some patients, conjunctivitis, neurological symptoms (e.g., headache, confusion, and lethargy) or respiratory symptoms (it is uncommon for these to be primary, and invasive or noninvasive ventilation is required in only a minority of patients). Patients often present with shock and other aspects of impaired cardiovascular function, together with dysfunctions of multiple other systems. This multiple-organ dysfunction necessitates admission to intensive care units for 64–80% of MIS-C patients. At least half these patients require inotropes and/or fluid resuscitation.
These aspects are common to the general MIS-C patient population, but severity and the nature of individual clinical presentations vary widely, and patients can be grouped into different subsets on the basis of different strategies. A recently published consensus management pathway for MIS-C developed in the United Kingdom divides the syndrome into KD-like (based on American Heart Association criteria) and nonspecific inflammatory phenotypes. A second strategy distinguishes between a febrile inflammatory phenotype (lacking shock and without KD criteria), KD-like illness (e.g., meeting complete or incomplete KD criteria but without shock or multisystem involvement), and shock with hyperinflammation. A third strategy for dividing MIS-C patients into three groups was developed on the basis of a latent class analysis. Class 1 (∼35% of patients) has the highest frequency of multiple-organ dysfunction, generally including GI and cardiovascular abnormalities with shock and myocarditis, and laboratory testing abnormalities, including lymphopenia and high CRP, troponin, and BNP levels. Clinically, the features of the patients in this class do not overlap with COVID-19, but some overlap is observed with KD shock syndrome, and there is a resemblance to systemic-onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Class 2 (∼30%) has a larger overlap with typical COVID-19, with more pulmonary syndromes (e.g., cough and/or acute respiratory distress syndrome), higher rates of SARS-CoV-2 PCR positivity, and the highest mortality rate (5%). Finally, class 3 (∼35%) is more similar to KD, with a younger median age, a higher frequency of rash and mucocutaneous alterations, and lower levels of inflammatory markers. Given the clinical parallels, treatment attempts initially focused on approaches already shown to alleviate the symptoms of KD, such as IVIG, steroids, and aspirin. IVIG in addition to methylprednisolone has been shown to be associated with a more favorable course of fever and better cardiac recovery in MIS-C than treatment with IVIG alone. Some teams have also used biological therapies, including antibodies against IL-6 or TNF, and recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA). Despite the severe illness presented by patients, the mean duration of hospital stay is only 6–7 d. Most patients receive medium- to long-term clinical follow-up at the treating institution to monitor for late complications.

Comparison of the immunological features of MIS-C and KD
MIS-C and KD both involve hyperinflammatory responses, presenting clinically with persistent high fever, often accompanied by a visible rash and conjunctivitis. These two conditions remain elusive. They appear to be related but different conditions, with a clinical and immunological overlap (Fig. 2). The pathogenesis of KD remains unclear, but the postinfectious nature of MIS-C, and possibly also of KD, is consistent with an autoinflammatory and/or autoimmune hyperinflammatory process initially triggered by viral infection. The immune response in patients with KD is typically characterized by pro-inflammatory signatures, including increases in IL-1, IL-8, IL-6, and IL-17A levels, marked leukocytosis, eosinophilia, and high levels of monocytes, accompanied by high CRP, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, procalcitonin, alanine aminotransferase, and γ-glutamyl transferase levels. Many of these features are common to MIS-C (including high levels of cytokines, such as IL-1, IL-8, IL-6, etc.), but tend to be stronger in MIS-C patients, and this is particularly true for markers of inflammation (such as CRP, procalcitonin, troponin, and ferritin) and BNP levels. KD-specific increases in the number of IgA plasma cells, and tissue-specific changes, mostly concerning the arterial wall, have been described. Finally, it has been suggested that immune complexes and autoantibodies are involved in the pathogenesis of KD, and probably also in MIS-C, but with markedly different specificities.
A comparison of MIS-C and KD. The common and different clinical and immunological features of MIS-C and KD are shown. The major characteristic similarities or differences between the two conditions are highlighted in red. Th17, T helper type 17 cell.
In a study comparing MIS-C patients with KD patients that have been identified before the COVID-19 pandemic, these two groups of patients were shown to have different cytokine profiles, both during the hyperinflammatory phase and before treatment. The hyperinflammation observed in MIS-C also differs from that seen in acute, severe COVID-19, with lower IL-8 and IL-7 levels in MIS-C. KD patients have high frequencies of T helper type 17 cells in the bloodstream, consistent with their high plasma IL-17A concentrations. This T helper type 17 cell response may, therefore, be a key feature distinguishing between KD and MIS-C hyperinflammation in untreated patients, although other studies have reported high plasma IL-17A levels in MIS-C patients too. The autoantibody profiling of serum from untreated children with MIS-C and KD has revealed many candidate targets, some of which differ between MIS-C and KD. The presence of autoantibodies against DEL-1, a potent anti-inflammatory protein that antagonizes the integrin ICAM-1 and limits vascular inflammation, has been reported in patients with KD, but not in MIS-C patients. By contrast, one study showed that MIS-C patients have autoantibodies against proteins of the casein kinase family. These enzymes are activated in cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 and may play a role in viral replication, and other processes. However, it remains unclear whether these autoantibodies played a role in the disease pathogenesis of KD or MIS-C. It therefore appears likely that both KD and MIS-C are postinfectious inflammatory diseases, with some overlapping clinical and immunological features, but different inflammatory signatures. They are, thus, probably mediated by related but different inflammatory pathways and, possibly, related but different pathogenic mechanisms.

Immunological spectrum of MIS-C
Some potential clues to the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying MIS-C have been identified. As discussed above, increases in the levels of inflammatory markers are variable in MIS-C. A broad spectrum of serum cytokine concentrations displays increases of various magnitudes (e.g., IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-17, IL-18, IFN-γ, and TNF), with specific increases in IL-10 and TNF levels in MIS-C patients relative to patients with severe COVID-19. There is also evidence of a possible role for complement/coagulation in MIS-C, and thrombotic microangiopathy in MIS-C and in some cases of severe pediatric COVID-19, based on increases in C5b-9 levels and on the increase in frequency of Burr cells and schistocytes on peripheral blood smears. The immune profiling of MIS-C patients by a systems biology approach has also revealed other indicators of immune dysfunction. The anti–SARS-CoV-2 antibodies in MIS-C patients effectively neutralize SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, like those from patients convalescing from COVID-19, although antibody levels differ (lower IgM, higher IgA, and anti-spike IgG). Analyses of 92 secreted moieties have identified clear signs of inflammation in the plasma of MIS-C patients. CyTOF-based deep immunophenotyping identified a unique cytokine signature in MIS-C patients that was not present in healthy controls or COVID-19 patients and included strong signatures of inflammation (IL-18 and IL-6), lymphocytic and myeloid chemotaxis and activation (CCL3, CCL4, and CDCP1), and mucosal immune dysregulation (IL-17A, CCL20, and CCL28). Interestingly, most recent immunological analyses of MIS-C have revealed a spectrum of immunological features, including changes in cytokine levels, with similarities and differences between subgroups of patients paralleling those between clinical subgroups.
In addition, the mass cytometry immunophenotyping of peripheral mononuclear cells from MIS-C patients revealed decreases in the frequencies of nonclassical monocytes, and subsets of natural killer (NK) and T lymphocytes, suggesting extravasation to peripheral organs. There is also evidence of significant T cell dysregulation in MIS-C, particularly for CD8 T cells, including increases in the populations of activated T cells (e.g., frequency of CD8 HLA-DR+CD38+ cells) similar to that seen in adults with severe COVID-19, together with an increase in the frequency of PD-1+CD39+CD8+ T cells in MIS-C. Moreover, HLA-DR levels on γδ and CD4+CCR7+ T cells, and CD64 (FcγRI) levels on neutrophils and monocytes, are high, indicating myeloid cell activation. Furthermore, an efflux of immature neutrophils with low CD10 and CD62L into the periphery has also been observed. Autoantibodies targeting the principal organs affected in MIS-C, including the GI tract, immune cells, cardiac and endothelial tissue, and some previously described autoantigens such as anti-La, have been described, although it remains unclear whether these autoantibodies are specifically relevant to the pathogenesis of MIS-C. Finally, a profound expansion of some specific T cell receptor β variable (TRBV) genes, including TRBV11.2 (encoding Vβ 21.3), correlated with MIS-C severity and serum cytokine levels, has been observed in MIS-C patients and some adult COVID-19 patients with hyperinflammation as a major presenting phenotype ( Preprint). This observation is suggestive of superantigen-mediated activation as a key determinant of autoimmunity and hyperinflammation.

MIS-C may be a new presentation of KD triggered by a single virus
The pathogenesis of KD has remained enigmatic since its first description in 1967, resisting the assaults of both virologists, who tested the hypothesis of a virus-triggered inflammatory disease, and geneticists, who performed genome-wide association studies (GWASs) to test the hypothesis of a polygenic inflammatory disease. Many studies have provided anecdotal and suggestive, but not conclusive, evidence that KD can be triggered by viruses. Interestingly, common coronaviruses have been suggested as a possible trigger for KD, but they accounted, at the time, for <10% of the viral infections associated with KD each year, and contradictory findings have been reported. Clearly, no virus “causes” KD with sufficient penetrance or in a sufficiently high proportion of cases to be identified as the principal trigger. There are two possible interpretations of these findings. Either known viruses do not trigger KD, or a great many known or unknown viruses trigger KD. One fact is indisputable: KD is not caused by a single known virus, or even a narrow set of known viruses, in the way that fulminant viral hepatitis is caused by the hepatitis A, B, and E viruses, for example. In parallel, many studies have also reported modest and suggestive, but not conclusive, genetic associations with KD. Again, no particular genotype “causes” KD with sufficient penetrance or in a sufficient proportion of cases to be identified as causal. Again, there are two possible interpretations. Either KD is not determined by germline variants, or its genetic component follows a mode of inheritance that has not yet been tested.
The parallel failures of virologists and geneticists, tackling hypotheses in apparent opposition, are intriguing and possibly related. It could be speculated that KD is not itself a disease, but a spectrum of conditions caused by various viral and genetic factors. This would be consistent with its clinical and immunological heterogeneity. Moreover, the evidence that MIS-C can be caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection provides proof of principle for a viral etiology for at least one Kawasaki-like syndrome, suggesting that KD may also be caused by other viruses. MIS-C is itself clinically and immunologically heterogenous, suggesting that the greater heterogeneity of KD may be due, in part, to diverse viral etiologies. Does this discovery exclude the genetic hypothesis? On the contrary, it probably provides additional support for this hypothesis, as various life-threatening viral illnesses of childhood can be caused by “lacunar” inborn errors of immunity (IEIs). Moreover, it will probably facilitate the discovery of IEIs underlying KD, a task that might be rendered difficult by multiple viral etiologies, “multiplying” genetic heterogeneity, which is already high for each viral illness studied. By focusing on MIS-C, which may, in many ways, be considered as COVID-KD, we may be able to identify IEIs that result in vasculitis upon infection with SARS-CoV-2. Unlike inborn errors of type I IFNs, which result in disseminated COVID-19, with pulmonary and systemic inflammation ∼10 d after infection a consequence of viral spread with insufficient type I IFN immunity in the first few days of infection, inborn errors underlying MIS-C may not affect normal viral control, but result in excessive inflammation of the vessels at about day 30. Both the spatial and temporal aspects of MIS-C are intriguing. The genome-wide search for single-gene or digenic rare IEIs should clarify this important question and shed light on the mechanism of MIS-C, thereby paving the way for new studies of KD in other patients.

Human genetic studies of KD: GWAS
Four GWASs on KD have identified several significant genome-wide hits (Table 2). An association of the missense variant (H131R) of FCGR2A with KD was first reported in European and East Asian cohorts, and later replicated in a GWAS on independent East Asian populations. The major A allele (encoding histidine) was found to be associated with a higher risk of KD, with an odds ratio of 1.32. FCGR2A encodes the FcγRIIA protein (CD32a), which belongs to a family of IgG receptors expressed on many immune cells, including NK cells, macrophages, and neutrophils. It is involved in cell activation and the uptake of immune complexes. The H131R substitution affects binding affinity, and can be used to stratify individuals as strong or weak responders to IgG subclasses. ITPKC, reported by as the second locus implicated in KD, was initially identified by linkage disequilibrium mapping in both Japanese and US children. The associated SNP, rs28493229, was shown to affect the splicing efficiency of the ITPKC mRNA, and the C allele reducing splicing was associated with an increase in the risk of KD, with an odds ratio of 1.52. ITPKC encodes inositol-trisphosphate 3-kinase, an enzyme responsible for down-regulating the calcium response in immune cells, thereby decreasing T cell activation.
Genome-wide significant variants associated with KD susceptibility
Chr:position	SNP	Gene	Effect	Odds ratio	Risk allele frequency in 1000 Genomes, European/East Asian populations	References	 	1:161479745	rs1801274	FCGR2A	Missense (H131R)	1.32a	0.49/0.72		 	4:185568113	rs2720378	CASP3	Intron	1.20	0.73/0.30		 	6:27869631	rs1873212	TRX-CAT1-7	Downstream	1.2	0.07/0.17		 	6:28248594	rs1778477	PGBD1	Upstream	1.30	0.83/0.86		 	6:30411903	rs1264516	LOC105375012	Downstream	1.24	0.44/0.67		 	6:31533378	rs2857602	LTA	Intron	1.28	0.40/0.34		 	6:32300809	rs3129960	C6orf10	Intron	1.37	0.15/0.15		 	6:32658079	rs7775228	HLA-DQB1	Upstream	1.26	0.16/0.23		 	6:32763514	rs2857151	HLA-DQB2–H-DOB	Intergenic	1.47b	0.67/0.69		 	6:32782605	rs2071473	HLA-DOB	Intron	1.26	0.39/0.43		 	8:11343973	rs2736340c	BLK	Upstream	1.55	0.24/0.72		 	14:107152027	rs4774175	IGHV1-69	Downstream	1.20	0.40/0.48		 	19:41224204	rs28493229d	ITPKC	Intron	1.52a/1.41	0.12/0.065		 	20:44746982	rs1883832e	CD40	5′ UTR	1.28	0.74/0.57
This table lists variants reaching genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10−8) in the primary GWAS in which they were identified or in a follow up meta-analysis of the three Asian GWASs. Chr, chromosome; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism; UTR, untranslated region.
Odds ratio in the combined discovery GWAS and replication cohorts from the primary publication.
Odds ratio in the discovery GWAS from the primary publication.
In linkage disequilibrium (r2 > 0.5) in the 1000 Genomes Chinese and Japanese populations with rs2254546, rs2618476, and rs6993775.
In linkage disequilibrium (r2 > 0.5) in the 1000 Genomes Chinese and Japanese populations with rs2233152.
In linkage disequilibrium (r2 > 0.5) in the 1000 Genomes Chinese and Japanese populations with rs1569723 and rs4813003.
Three subsequent GWASs conducted in Japanese, Taiwanese, and Korean populations reported associations with a cluster of variants in the vicinity of the BLK gene. BLK is a src family B lymphoid tyrosine kinase present in B cells that transduces signals downstream from the B cell receptor. Significant associations were also reported for two noncoding variants in strong linkage disequilibrium close to CD40, a member of the TNF receptor (TNFR) superfamily, in the Taiwanese and Japanese GWASs. Significant genome-wide associations were also detected for SNPs in HLA class II genes in the Japanese population, whereas analyses performed with specific HLA class I alleles yielded nonreproducible results. Finally, a recent follow-up study of the three East Asian GWASs identified several additional significant loci (; Table 2). In particular, a higher risk of KD was found to be associated with the high-expression alleles of SNPs located in the Ig heavy variable gene (IGHV) cluster. Several of these associations with common variants suggest a role for B cells and/or endogenous Igs in KD pathogenesis. However, these epidemiological genetic studies have revealed only some of the factors involved, resulting in a 1.2- to 1.5-fold increase in disease risk. Thus, after many years of GWAS studies on KD, now might be the right time to consider alternative genetic hypotheses and approaches to tackling this question.

Monogenic disorders underlying virus-triggered hyperinflammatory disease: The example of hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
Virus-triggered hyperinflammation can be studied through a monogenic IEI approach, and HLH provides an example. HLH is a severe, often fatal condition characterized by extreme immune activation, as demonstrated by the infiltration of activated leukocytes into various organs; increases in serum concentrations of soluble CD25, IL-18, CXCL9, IFN-γ, ferritin, and triglycerides; hypofibrinogenemia; and low NK cell cytotoxicity. Viruses are associated with the onset of active HLH in most cases. Infections with herpes viruses, especially EBV and CMV, are most frequently associated with the pathogenesis of this disease. The discovery of a series of well-defined monogenic IEIs has illustrated the pathogenic mechanism of HLH. On one hand, variants of PRF1 (encoding perforin) or UNC13D, STX11, STXBP2, LYST, RAB27A, or AP3B1, all of which encode molecules crucial for the trafficking/exocytosis of cytotoxic granules, cause isolated HLH with high penetrance, due to an impairment of granule-mediated cytotoxicity in CD8+ T cells and NK cells. On the other hand, germline inactivating variants of SH2D1A (encoding SAP), CD27, or TNFRSF9 (4-1BB) cause HLH in 25–60% of affected individuals, together with additional clinical sequelae (hypogammaglobulinemia, B cell lymphoma). These IEIs are unique in that affected individuals are often healthy and do not develop HLH until they become infected with specific viruses, typically EBV. These discoveries established that HLH results from germline variants disabling the appropriate activation of cytotoxic lymphocytes (CD8+ T cells, NK cells) to lyse pathogen-infected APCs, thereby preventing the rapid killing and efficient clearance of these APCs, leading to hyperimmune activation.
HLH can also result from hemizygous inactivating mutations of XIAP (due to EBV in ∼50% of cases) or monoallelic activating mutations of NLRC4. Mutations of XIAP or NLRC4 dysregulate inflammasome activation, leading to excessive and sustained production of IL-1β, IL-18, and CXCL9. Moreover, monoallelic mutations of CDC42 were recently reported to cause multisystemic inflammation, including HLH. Levels of inflammatory mediators, IL-1β, IL-18, IFN-γ, and CXCL9, are very high in the serum of CDC42-deficient patients, and the constitutive production of these factors by bone marrow cells is also higher in patients than in healthy donors. Consistent with these observations, treatment with inhibitors of IL-1 or IFN-γ was found to be effective in some cases of CDC42 deficiency. CDC42 deficiency may impair cytotoxic lymphocyte function and promote the production of inflammatory mediators, thereby fueling a cytokine storm. In XIAP deficiency, and perhaps in other deficiencies, colitis may be a separate form of severe inflammatory disease that can result from certain viral infections. Thus, an array of severe inflammatory conditions may emerge following viral infections in individuals with certain monogenic lesions.

Monogenic IEIs may underlie MIS-C in some children
MIS-C affects previously healthy children and adolescents, with most other subjects from the same age group infected with SARS-CoV-2 presenting only very mild illness or remaining asymptomatic. We recently showed that single-gene inborn errors of type I IFN immunity or neutralizing autoantibodies against type I IFNs can underlie life-threatening COVID-19 pneumonia in at least 10% of patients ( Preprint). We now suggest that some children may develop MIS-C because of a rare monogenic or digenic IEI that is clinically silent until infection with SARS-CoV-2, which triggers an inflammatory response. This hypothesis is consistent with previous findings of monogenic IEIs in other virus-triggered hyperinflammation diseases (i.e., HLH triggered by EBV). One key question is whether MIS-C has immunopathogenic mechanisms in common with KD, or even other childhood autoimmune and/or autoinflammatory conditions. The common and unique clinical, immunological, and laboratory features of these conditions (Fig. 2) suggest probable overlaps in their immunopathogenesis, at least to some extent. However, there are probably also different mechanisms at work, given the differences in the features of these conditions. As discussed above, the most intriguing and relevant comparison might be that between MIS-C and KD, the first being triggered by a single virus (SARS-CoV-2) whereas the second may perhaps be triggered by various infectious agents, such as other viruses (including other coronaviruses). Furthermore, despite being triggered by a single virus, MIS-C appears to be a clinically heterogeneous condition, making it possible to classify patients into subgroups on the basis of major clinical and immunological differences, as described above. The search for monogenic and digenic IEIs conferring a predisposition to MIS-C in previously healthy children and young adults should therefore focus primarily on the testing of genetic hypotheses in a genome-wide, agnostic manner, while bearing in mind the characteristic epidemiological, clinical, and immunological features of the condition, to facilitate the identification of candidate disease-causing genes.
MIS-C may display both genetic homogeneity (the same gene mutated in two or more families) and genetic heterogeneity (one gene per family), and both physiological homogeneity (mutated genes immunologically related) and physiological heterogeneity (unrelated). Some disorders may be autosomal, whereas others are X-linked, and the traits involved may be recessive, dominant, or codominant. Depending on the gene, variants may be loss- or gain-of-function. Given the low incidence of this condition in the general population, the causal gene variants are probably equally rare. Clinical penetrance may be full or incomplete, depending on the nature of the gene defect. Incomplete penetrance may suggest that some cases are digenic, or even oligogenic. Some gene defects may have an age-dependent presentation, which may be particularly relevant here, given the age difference between MIS-C and KD patients. Finally, some defects may be present in specific ancestries. We anticipate that the discovery of monogenic IEI underlying MIS-C will unravel the molecular and cellular basis of the immunopathogenesis of the different classes of MIS-C in previously healthy children and young adults. Although generally considered to be a vasculitis, different types of disorders may be causal in the different clinical subgroups classified by the development of myocarditis, neurological symptoms, mild pneumonia symptoms, or Kawasaki-like symptoms only. The tragic pandemic of COVID-19 has provided us with a unique opportunity to discover the immunopathogenesis of a severe inflammatory disease triggered by a single virus via a monogenic approach.

Concluding remarks
Agnostic testing of genetic hypotheses can be used to search for rare monogenic or digenic IEIs conferring a predisposition to MIS-C, at both the cohort population and individual patient levels (https://www.covidhge.com). Not only should different genetic hypotheses be tested with genomic data from patients with MIS-C, but these data should also be analyzed in parallel with proper cohorts of controls consisting of healthy children and young adults who have encountered SARS-CoV-2 infection but remained asymptomatic or developed only a mild clinical syndrome. Moreover, COVID-19 pneumonia, neurological COVID-19, and MIS-C are probably caused by different types of human genetic disorders. However, it is tempting to think that the multisystem inflammatory syndrome in adults that has emerged very recently may have some causative IEIs in common with MIS-C. It is also possible that “COVID toes,” a cutaneous inflammatory syndrome affecting patients of all ages, but mostly children and young adults, are caused by IEIs that are different but connected to those underlying MIS-C. Genetic analyses of these different SARS-CoV-2–related conditions can be performed in parallel, to identify the IEIs specific to each condition. Finally, genomic data from children with MIS-C may be analyzed in combination with or independently from data for children with KD. These two conditions may have some genetic causes in common if they share immunopathogenic mechanisms. Alternatively, monogenic and digenic IEIs may be detected more readily in genetic and/or physiological homogeneity approaches, for a condition triggered by a single virus, such as MIS-C. This will provide a basis for genetic diagnosis and counseling, while guiding the design of preventive and therapeutic interventions against MIS-C in children and young adults. It will also pave the way for studies of classic KD, which remains enigmatic, and other childhood autoimmune and/or autoinflammatory postinfectious conditions (e.g., acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, rheumatic fever, and Henoch-Schönlein purpura) through a rare IEI approach that will become as clinically important for children with KD or Kawasaki-like disease as the identification of the causal infectious triggers.

Online supplemental material
Table S1 lists reported MIS-C cases with geographic distribution.

Supplementary Material

References
Neurologic and Radiographic Findings Associated With COVID-19 Infection in Children
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Associated with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2: A Systematic Review
Epidemiology, Treatments, and Cardiac Complications in Patients with Kawasaki Disease: The Nationwide Survey in Japan, 2017-2018
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children: A systematic review
Gastrointestinal Symptoms Followed by Shock in a Febrile 7-Year-Old Child during the COVID-19 Pandemic
ACUTE APPENDICITIS MIMICKING MULTISYSTEM INFLAMMATORY SYNDROME IN CHILDREN: CASE REPORT AND REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children, the Real Disease of COVID-19 in Pediatrics - A Multicenter Case Series From Al-Ahsa, Saudi Arabia
Review of Cardiac Involvement in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children
SARS-CoV-2 antibody responses in children with MIS-C and mild and severe COVID-19
Comparison of baseline laboratory findings of macrophage activation syndrome complicating systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis and multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
Hyperinflammatory shock related to COVID-19 in a patient presenting with multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children: First case from Iran
Markers of a recent bocavirus infection in children with Kawasaki disease: “a year prospective study”
Autoantibodies against type I IFNs in patients with life-threatening COVID-19
Auto-antibodies to type I IFNs can underlie adverse reactions to yellow fever live attenuated vaccine
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: An International Survey
Addition of Corticosteroids to Immunoglobulins Is Associated With Recovery of Cardiac Function in Multi-Inflammatory Syndrome in Children
Acute Heart Failure in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children in the Context of Global SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic
SARS-CoV-2-related paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome, an epidemiological study, France, 1 March to 17 May 2020
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children in the United States
Coronary artery dilation among patients presenting with systemic-onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Cardiac MRI in Children with Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Associated with COVID-19
The Global Phosphorylation Landscape of SARS-CoV-2 Infection
How Viruses Contribute to the Pathogenesis of Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis
Specificity and affinity of human Fcgamma receptors and their polymorphic variants for human IgG subclasses
Systemic Inflammation and Myelofibrosis in a Patient with Takenouchi-Kosaki Syndrome due to CDC42 Tyr64Cys Mutation
Cytokine Profile in an Adolescent With Pediatric Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Temporally Related to COVID-19
Kawasaki syndrome
Pediatric hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Characteristics, Cardiac Involvement, and Outcomes of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome of Childhood Associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 Infection
Peripheral immunophenotypes in children with multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection
The human genetic determinism of life-threatening infectious diseases: genetic heterogeneity and physiological homogeneity?
Lethal Infectious Diseases as Inborn Errors of Immunity: Toward a Synthesis of the Germ and Genetic Theories
A Global Effort to Define the Human Genetics of Protective Immunity to SARS-CoV-2 Infection
Primary cytomegalovirus infection, atypical Kawasaki disease, and coronary aneurysms in 2 infants
Superantigenic character of an insert unique to SARS-CoV-2 spike supported by skewed TCR repertoire in patients with hyperinflammation
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Related to COVID-19 in Previously Healthy Children and Adolescents in New York City
Cardiac Abnormalities Seen in Pediatric Patients During the SARS-CoV2 Pandemic: An International Experience
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome With Complete Kawasaki Disease Features Associated With SARS-CoV-2 Infection in a Young Adult. A Case Report
The Immunology of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children with COVID-19
Intensive care admissions of children with paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS-CoV-2 (PIMS-TS) in the UK: a multicentre observational study
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Associated With Coronavirus Disease in Children: A Multi-centered Study in Belem, Para, Brazil
Epidemiological and Clinical Profile of Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome - Temporally Associated with SARS-CoV-2 (PIMS-TS) in Indian Children
Dissecting Kawasaki disease: a state-of-the-art review
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children and COVID-19 are distinct presentations of SARS-CoV-2
Features of 20 133 UK patients in hospital with covid-19 using the ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol: prospective observational cohort study
SARS-CoV-2 in cardiac tissue of a child with COVID-19-related multisystem inflammatory syndrome
Blinded case-control study of the relationship between human coronavirus NL63 and Kawasaki syndrome
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children in New York State
Association between a novel human coronavirus and Kawasaki disease
Similarities and differences between the immunopathogenesis of COVID-19-related pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome and Kawasaki disease
Kawasaki Disease-Like Features in 10 Pediatric COVID-19 Cases: A Retrospective Study
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in a Child Associated with Coronavirus Disease 19 in the Brazilian Amazon: Fatal Outcome in an Infant
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in U.S. Children and Adolescents
Presentation, Treatment Response and Short-Term Outcomes in Paediatric Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Temporally Associated with SARS-CoV-2 (PIMS-TS)
Case Report: Case Series of Children With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Following SARS-CoV-2 Infection in Switzerland
Cardiac Dysfunction in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: A Call to Action
Characteristics and outcomes of neonatal SARS-CoV-2 infection in the UK: a prospective national cohort study using active surveillance
Severe autoinflammation in 4 patients with C-terminal variants in cell division control protein 42 homolog (CDC42) successfully treated with IL-1β inhibition
COVID-19-Related Giant Coronary Aneurysms in an Infant with Multisystem Inflammatory Disorder in Children: The First Case Report from the United Arab Emirates and the Arab Region
COVID-19-Associated Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children - United States, March-July 2020
COVID-19 in children and adolescents in Europe: a multinational, multicentre cohort study
Immunological assessment of pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome related to COVID-19
Mapping Systemic Inflammation and Antibody Responses in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C)
A national consensus management pathway for paediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with COVID-19 (PIMS-TS): results of a national Delphi process
American College of Rheumatology Clinical Guidance for Pediatric Patients with Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) Associated with SARS-CoV-2 and Hyperinflammation in COVID-19. Version 2
Focus on “COVID Toes”
Hospitalizations for Kawasaki syndrome among children in the United States, 1997-2007
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children related to COVID-19: a systematic review
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children With COVID-19 in Mumbai, India
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Associated with COVID 19 Treated with Oral Steroid
Familial and acquired hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
Longitudinal Echocardiographic Assessment of Coronary Arteries and Left Ventricular Function following Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children
The T helper type 17/regulatory T cell imbalance in patients with acute Kawasaki disease
Association of an IGHV3-66 gene variant with Kawasaki disease
COVID-19 and Kawasaki Disease: Novel Virus and Novel Case
Concomitant respiratory viral infections in children with Kawasaki disease
Recognition of a Kawasaki disease shock syndrome
Long-term consequences of Kawasaki disease. A 10- to 21-year follow-up study of 594 patients
[Acute febrile mucocutaneous syndrome with lymphoid involvement with specific desquamation of the fingers and toes in children]
A new infantile acute febrile mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome (MLNS) prevailing in Japan
Genome-wide association study identifies FCGR2A as a susceptibility locus for Kawasaki disease
A genome-wide association analysis identifies NMNAT2 and HCP5 as susceptibility loci for Kawasaki disease
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children Related to COVID-19: the First Case in Korea
Defining Association between COVID-19 and the Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children through the Pandemic
Case Report: Systemic Inflammatory Response and Fast Recovery in a Pediatric Patient With COVID-19
Immunogenetics of Kawasaki disease
Erythema multiforme and Kawasaki disease associated with COVID-19 infection in children
Neurological Manifestations in Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome Temporally Associated with SARS-CoV-2 (PIMS-TS)
A novel disorder involving dyshematopoiesis, inflammation, and HLH due to aberrant CDC42 function
Two new susceptibility loci for Kawasaki disease identified through genome-wide association analysis
Distinct clinical and immunological features of SARS-CoV-2-induced multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
The Importance of Early Recognition, Timely Management, and the Role of Healthcare Providers in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children
Kawasaki disease lacks association with human coronavirus NL63 and human bocavirus
Kawasaki disease shock syndrome: clinical characteristics and possible use of IL-6, IL-10 and IFN-γ as biomarkers for early recognition
SARS-CoV-2-Induced Kawasaki-Like Hyperinflammatory Syndrome: A Novel COVID Phenotype in Children
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) during SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in Brazil: a multicenter, prospective cohort study
Acute Appendicitis in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children With COVID-19
A framework for understanding Kawasaki disease pathogenesis
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection in 45 children: a first report from Iran
How Should We Classify Kawasaki Disease?
Echocardiographic Findings in Pediatric Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Associated With COVID-19 in the United States
SARS-CoV-2-Related Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome in Children: Different or Shared Etiology and Pathophysiology as Kawasaki Disease?
Diagnosis, Treatment, and Long-Term Management of Kawasaki Disease: A Scientific Statement for Health Professionals From the American Heart Association
Low-Dose Dexamethasone Following IVIG in Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome in Temporal Association with COVID-19 (PIMS-TC)
Kawasaki Disease: The Role of Immune Complexes Revisited
Gastrointestinal Symptoms as a Major Presentation Component of a Novel Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children That Is Related to Coronavirus Disease 2019: A Single Center Experience of 44 Cases
Multi-Inflammatory Syndrome in Children related to SARS-CoV-2 in Spain
Superantigenic TCR Vbeta 21.3 signature in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
Case Series of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Adults Associated with SARS-CoV-2 Infection - United Kingdom and United States, March-August 2020
Kawasaki disease: epidemiology and the lessons from it
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) in an Adolescent that Developed Coronary Aneurysms: A Case Report and Review of the Literature
Kawasaki Disease
COVID-19 multisystem inflammatory syndrome in three teenagers with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection
Intravenous immunoglobulin for the treatment of Kawasaki disease in children
Office for National Statistics.
Molecular genetics of Kawasaki disease
ITPKC functional polymorphism associated with Kawasaki disease susceptibility and formation of coronary artery aneurysms
A genome-wide association study identifies three new risk loci for Kawasaki disease
Emergence of Kawasaki disease related to SARS-CoV-2 infection in an epicentre of the French COVID-19 epidemic: a time-series analysis
Association of Intravenous Immunoglobulins Plus Methylprednisolone vs Immunoglobulins Alone With Course of Fever in Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children during the COVID-19 pandemic in Turkey: first report from the Eastern Mediterranean
Identification of a unique TCR repertoire, consistent with a superantigen selection process in Children with Multi-system Inflammatory Syndrome.
Paediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome temporally associated with SARS-CoV-2 mimicking Kawasaki disease (Kawa-COVID-19): a multicentre cohort
Multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children & adolescents (MIS-C): A systematic review of clinical features and presentation
Immune dysregulation and autoreactivity correlate with disease severity in SARS-CoV-2-associated multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children
Paediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome: Temporally Associated with SARS-CoV-2 (PIMS-TS): Cardiac Features, Management and Short-Term Outcomes at a UK Tertiary Paediatric Hospital
Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome With Central Nervous System Involvement and Hypocomplementemia Following SARS-COV-2 Infection
A case series of children and young people admitted to a tertiary care hospital in Germany with COVID-19
Hyperinflammatory shock in children during COVID-19 pandemic
IgA plasma cells in vascular tissue of patients with Kawasaki syndrome
A Protein Epitope Targeted by the Antibody Response to Kawasaki Disease
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with COVID-19 in children in Pakistan
Clinical characteristics of 10 children with a pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome associated with COVID-19 in Iran
Human coronavirus NL63 is not detected in the respiratory tracts of children with acute Kawasaki disease
DEL-1 restrains osteoclastogenesis and inhibits inflammatory bone loss in nonhuman primates
A fatal course of multiple inflammatory syndrome in children coinfection with dengue. A case report from Indonesia
Kawasaki Disease
The Growing Spectrum of Human Diseases Caused by Inherited CDC42 Mutations
Clinical characteristics of children and young people admitted to hospital with covid-19 in United Kingdom: prospective multicentre observational cohort study
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children related to COVID-19: An update regarding the presentation of two critically ill patients
Pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with COVID-19: a spectrum of diseases with many names
Primary immunodeficiencies reveal the molecular requirements for effective host defense against EBV infection
Multimodality cardiac evaluation in children and young adults with multisystem inflammation associated with COVID-19
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C): Report of the clinical and epidemiological characteristics of cases in Santiago de Chile during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
Association between SARS-CoV-2 infection and Kawasaki-like multisystem inflammatory syndrome: a retrospective matched case-control study, Paris, France, April to May 2020
Kawasaki-like multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children during the covid-19 pandemic in Paris, France: prospective observational study
Distinctive Features of Kawasaki Disease Following SARS-CoV-2 Infection: a Controlled Study in Paris, France
The first case of pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection (PIMS-TS) in Poland, complicated by giant coronary artery aneurysms
Type I IFN immunoprofiling in COVID-19 patients
Time Course of Coronary Artery Aneurysms in Kawasaki Disease
Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Surveillance and COVID-19 in Latin America
Acute Cardiovascular Manifestations in 286 Children With Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome Associated With COVID-19 Infection in Europe
Longitudinal single-cell epitope and RNA-sequencing reveals the immunological impact of type 1 interferon autoantibodies in critical COVID-19
Deep immune profiling of MIS-C demonstrates marked but transient immune activation compared to adult and pediatric COVID-19
An outbreak of severe Kawasaki-like disease at the Italian epicentre of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic: an observational cohort study
Kawasaki-like disease: emerging complication during the COVID-19 pandemic
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children in South Africa
Clinical Characteristics of 58 Children With a Pediatric Inflammatory Multisystem Syndrome Temporally Associated With SARS-CoV-2
Covid-19 in Peru: from supervised walks for children to the first case of Kawasaki-like syndrome
Dermatological manifestation of pediatrics multisystem inflammatory syndrome associated with COVID-19 in a 3-year-old girl
Life-Threatening COVID-19: Defective Interferons Unleash Excessive Inflammation
Inborn errors of type I IFN immunity in patients with life-threatening COVID-19