Placebo effects in functional dyspepsia: Causes and implications for clinical trials
Abstract
Placebo responses to an apparently inactive intervention are of interest from a scientific perspective as they suggest possible mechanism(s) at work beyond the intervention itself. They are also of interest from a clinical trials perspective since high rates of placebo response limit the potential to demonstrate worthwhile efficacy of a new intervention. This mini‐review was motivated by the work of Bosman and colleagues(Neurogastroenterol Motil, 2022, and e14474) that is published in this issue of the journal in which they report on a systematic review and meta‐analysis of placebo response in functional dyspepsia clinical trials. The review sets the scene for their work by putting it in the context of other disorders of brain–gut interaction and extra‐gastrointestinal disorders. The review canvasses potential mechanisms of placebo response.
Interactions between biological and psychological processes in the brain during placebo response.
Content available: Author Interview
Watch the interview with the author.

OVERVIEW
The article by Bosman and colleagues in this issue of the journal reports on a systematic review and meta‐analysis of the placebo effect in functional dyspepsia clinical trials of pharmacological agents. The topic is important not only to the science of the development of pharmacological treatments but also to their application in clinical practice, for reasons that will be outlined shortly. The term “placebo” is complicated by multiple definitions and multiple applications of the term which may be incompatible between contexts. Although therapies that we would regard today as “sham” have been used at least as far back as the ancient Greek cultures, a placebo implies a deliberate use of a therapy that is not thought to have any active component. By this definition, non‐evidence based but sincerely believed therapies are not placebo therapies although they may be sham therapies. Religious‐based interventions are an example of such therapies that are still in use by some today.
In their paper, Bosman and colleagues report relatively high rates of placebo response (39.6%) when a symptom reduction target is used and approximately half that when being symptom‐free post therapy is the target. Despite extensive attempts to identify predictors of the placebo response, only lower baseline symptom burden was identified as predictive.
These findings are consistent with a previous meta‐analysis of 58 functional dyspepsia clinical trials in which an average 44% placebo response was reported for symptom improvement and 15.6% for complete symptomatic relief. Similar rates have also been found in irritable bowel syndrome where a 2010 meta‐analysis of 73 clinical trials reported a 37.5% placebo response rate for symptomatic improvement, while Ballou and colleagues reported a 29% placebo response rate in chronic constipation when abdominal pain was the endpoint and Nee and colleagues reported pooled placebo response rate from 13% to 26% depending on which endpoint was considered. All this is to say that although the extent of placebo response does vary between individual trials, overall it is strong and consistent across a number of disorders of gut‐brain interaction (DGBI)s. Nor are strong placebo effects limited to gastrointestinal disorders, placebo response rates of 18%–67% have been reported in generalized anxiety disorder.
The purpose of this review is to put the methods and findings of the Bosman et al. article into context by disentangling definitional and methodological issues surrounding the placebo effect and setting their findings against previous work in functional dyspepsia and related fields.

THEORETICAL DEFINITION
The term placebo comes from Latin and means “I shall please”. Its application in modern medical research implies a tablet or other intervention that looks, tastes, feels and is in all other respects indistinguishable from an active intervention but has no apparent benefit from a biological or pharmacological perspective and may only yield benefit from giving a patient the impression of receiving a therapy that may improve their condition. That is to say, the patient may be pleased or reassured by the idea of receiving something that seems to be a therapy. Under a purely biomedical model in which a disease process is controlled entirely by biological and/or biochemical processes, response rates to placebo therapy should be very close to zero. That rates of placebo response in functional dyspepsia trials are routinely observed to be 30%–50% is our first clue that placebo response is not operating under a purely biomedical model.
It is useful to distinguish two terms that are commonly used when discussing placebos, placebo effect and placebo response. While they are related, there are also important operational and conceptual differences between these terms. What we are most concerned about in this review, and the subject of the Bosman article, is placebo response. This is typically defined in functional dyspepsia clinical trials by patients meeting some threshold for improvement in a primary outcome measure, often a specific symptom or a measure of combined symptom burden, such as the Leuven Postprandial Distress Scale or the Nepean Dyspepsia Index. The response definition will be set a priori, that is before the trial commences, and will be deemed to correspond to a clinically significant improvement. Hence the importance of a placebo response comes from the fact that patients receiving this apparently inactive therapy are experiencing a clinically significant improvement in their condition rather than merely a small, inconsequential variation in symptoms.
The placebo effect, on the other hand, is typically a quantitative measure of change in an outcome that is reported as a standardized mean difference, Cohen's d or just the mean change in the measure. Like any effect size measure, placebo effects are often thought of as being small, medium, or large. In itself the measure of effect size in the placebo arm of a trial is uncontroversial. However, the term effect when applied to a placebo therapy is quite controversial with the controversy arising from the causal implication of the term effect. The controversy has its origins in the work of Howard Beecher who reanalyzed the placebo arm of 15 studies and found placebo responses in 35% of patients. Beecher attributed the response rates to some unspecified effect, in a causal sense, of the placebo therapy. Others have since disputed both the accuracy of the empirical evidence presented by Beecher and his causal conclusions.

CONTROVERSIES IN PLACEBO RESPONSE
It appears that the terms placebo and control are used interchangeably in functional dyspepsia clinical trials. The placebo arm of a randomized clinical trial serves as a reference point (control) to which the active therapy arm(s) are compared. As noted earlier, the principle is that the placebo has no active therapeutic benefit. However, whether the placebo/control arm of a trial actually is inactive may be in question. Lessons can be learned from the early trials of psychological therapies in IBS where patients randomized to the active therapy yielded clinically useful response rates but so did the placebo arm. An example is the trial by Boyce and colleagues in which cognitive behavior therapy is compared with relaxation training and routine clinical care. The improvements in many outcomes reported were similar in the CBT and relaxation training arms. Although in the trial design, relaxation was thought of as a sham CBT, it is possible that relaxation training shared some active elements of CBT or other, related psychological therapies, including mindfulness‐based therapy which has been shown to be effective but was not well recognized at the time. This is however an important lesson from previous placebo‐controlled trials, that just because an apparent placebo therapy does not include the active therapy under investigation, this does not mean that it does not include some other form of active element.
The causal interpretation of placebo response is centrally important in understanding the phenomenon. If a placebo therapy is in some way the cause of symptomatic improvement in functional dyspepsia symptoms that is a fundamentally important piece of information for both development of effective therapies and for the design of clinical trials. There is of course an extensive literature on evaluation of causation, including the often‐cited seminal work of Austin Bradford‐Hill who sought to disentangle the effect of smoking from other environmental factors on lung cancer and in doing so developed what are known today as the Hill criteria for causality. One of Hill's nine criteria is coherence, meaning that a causal interpretation should not conflict with any other known possible causes. In the case of functional dyspepsia symptoms, it is known that they remit and relapse in the absence of any medical intervention. Hence an alternate explanation of a placebo response is just that it reflects the natural history of the disorder, rather than being a causal effect of receiving a placebo therapy. From this, it would follow that the difference in placebo response rate between active and placebo arms of a given trial is an accurate reflection of the effect of the active therapy over‐and‐above natural history, or “doing nothing.”
However, this interpretation of the active—placebo difference in response rates makes an assumption, that whatever process operates during placebo therapy operates equally during active therapy. One way in which this might not be true is if the active therapy acts directly and causally on the underlying source of symptoms and hence annuls the effect of natural history. While this possibility is difficult to evaluate, the assumption that the difference between active and placebo is the only response that can be attributed to the active therapy is fundamentally important since it limits our estimates of therapeutic efficacy and in doing so underscores the importance of understanding the placebo response. Hence it would be reasonable to view the difference between active and placebo therapy arms as the minimum effect size that can be attributed to the active therapy. One consequence of this analysis is about estimation of the true effect of the active intervention, but another is the sample size required to adequately power a given clinical trial. As the difference between active and placebo arms of a trial reduces the effect size, with all else held constant, the required sample size increases, and it increases by the square of the decrease in effect size. Take a simple example of a quantitative outcome in a two‐group parallel design randomized clinical trial. The sample size equation (power function) is:The effect size is represented in the denominator of the equation, and it is the squared term that means n increases or decreases by the square of the change in effect size. Hence if the effect size is halved because of a high placebo effect, the sample size increases by 4‐fold. If we convert the effect size to a standardized measure such as Cohen's d, for d = 0.5 (moderate effect size), α = 0.05, power = 0.8 a total of n = 128 subjects are required. If we halve that effect size to 0.25 the corresponding sample size required is n = 506, a much more challenging recruitment task in most settings. From this perspective, understanding causes of placebo effect, and minimizing it, would have strong benefits to the practical aspects of functional dyspepsia clinical trials.

POSSIBLE MECHANISMS OF THE PLACEBO EFFECT

Neurobiological mechanisms
As noted earlier, understanding possible causes of the placebo effect and placebo response is of central importance in the design of future functional dyspepsia clinical trials. There are some good data available in some areas. One mechanism that is quite well understood is via neurobiological pathways, particularly in the production of endogenous opioids that reduce pain and related symptoms. Strong placebo effects have been observed in conditions where pain is the primary symptom targeted by the intervention and is clearly relevant to functional dyspepsia where epigastric pain is a central feature. The role of endogenous opioids was first demonstrated in a seminal paper by Levine in 1978 in which they demonstrated that a strong placebo effect on reported pain after a dental procedure was completely blocked by administration of the opioid antagonist naloxone. On the flip side, it has been demonstrated that a nocebo effect, pain without cause, can be induced by expectancy but then blocked by the anxiolytic effect of a benzodiazepine (diazepam). More recently Benedetti and colleagues used positron emission tomography (PET) to demonstrate dopamine release in patients who responded to placebo treatment in Parkinson's Disease where motor control was the outcome. Specific brain regions have been associated with placebo effect in a number of psychological traits, particularly anxiety and depression. Huneke and colleagues identified responses in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and posterior insula, in addition to other regions. This body of work suggests that there are measurable neurobiological responses to the administration of placebo therapy that operate according to plausible mechanisms, and therefore, at least in specific circumstances, the placebo effect is a real phenomenon.

Psychological mechanisms
The evidence for the involvement of endogenous opioids in placebo analgesia is strong but it is worth considering how this feature of the descending pain modulation system is triggered and whether or not there are other mechanisms involved. Two psychological processes for which there is strong evidence are classical conditioning and expectancy. Classical conditioning is a long‐established process in psychology in which an effect or outcome becomes strongly associated with a specific cue. In the context of functional dyspepsia, a patient might be given a true active medication, such as an opioid analgesic for pain or an H2 blocker for acid suppression. The medication might be presented in tablet form of a specific size, shape, color, and markings. After taking the tablet a number of times and experiencing relief, the patient comes to associate ingesting the tablet with a desirable outcome. If the patient is then given a tablet of the same size, shape, color, and so on but one which omits any active pharmacological agent, and the patient still experiences relief then a placebo response has been induced by conditioning the patient to believe that relief comes from a specific tablet. Empirical evidence of conditioning in functional dyspepsia symptom perception comes from brain imaging studies where activation of the cingulate cortex has been shown to be relevant and is also involved in conditioning as well as autonomic functions. Conditioning has also been shown to influence how sensations are perceived after food ingestion in functional dyspepsia.
Expectancy refers to a patient's expectation of the outcome of treatment, with higher expectations generally associated with higher probably of treatment success. Zhou and colleagues assert that expectancy is an involuntary process in which no specific, conscious effort is required on the patient's part to invoke. The expectancy effect is composed of two parts, how large the effect of a placebo treatment is expected to be and how high is the probability of that effect occurring expected to be. Hence a patient who expects complete symptom relief and assigns a high probability of that occurring is more likely to feel symptom relief than another patient who does not hold those expectations. Expectancy has been shown to be associated with symptom relief in peptic ulcer disease and expectancy effects have been demonstrated via the influence of fat‐labelling versus actual fat content in symptoms produced after ingestion in functional dyspepsia patients.
Activation of the descending pain modulation system with its attendant release of endogenous opioids, classical conditioning and expectancy all have good evidence supporting their role in the placebo effect. In addition, however, there is evidence that they work collectively to induce placebo effects. Kirsch and colleagues demonstrated that classical conditioning can induce higher expectation of treatment success and further demonstrated, through mediation analysis, that the association between conditioning and symptom reduction was mediated via expectancy. Furthermore, the placebo effect of a therapy cannot be induced by classical conditioning if the patient has not undergone a conditioning process before undergoing the therapy although transfer of learning from past therapeutic success might carry‐over to new therapies and induce positive expectancy. Relevant factors also extend beyond conditioning/expectancy and endogenous opioids to learning and social cognition, which have been demonstrated to be relevant to placebo effects.

Natural history
Another thus far underappreciated aspect are natural fluctuations of symptom severity in DGBI that are frequently observed in the clinical setting. While patients are likely to present and seek medical attention when symptoms are severe, regression to the mean is likely to occur after an episode of more severe symptoms. Since patients are frequently recruited into clinical trials immediately after they have presented (or had diagnostic workup), it is likely that they will experience an improvement of symptoms. This spontaneous remission to the mean may augment the response to placebo and active medication (Figure 1).
Natural changes in symptom severity over time in the context of a treatment trial

Summary of mechanisms
Figure 2 summarizes the potential causes of placebo effect/response in functional dyspepsia trials and how they might operate. One way of looking at the mechanisms is as an uncontrolled cross‐over trial in which any individual may experience none or multiple of these mechanisms and may experience them simultaneously or in sequence. Many patients enrolled in trials will not experience a placebo response and remain firmly in the “no benefit” path (Figure 2). Others may enter the trial pre‐conditioned to expect a therapeutic benefit and therefore do so, often quite early in the trial and potentially by activating neurobiological mechanisms, such as the production of endogenous opioids. Others still may enter the trial at the peak symptom burden stage of their own cycle and would naturally experience a reduction in symptoms over the course of the clinical trial. Of course, it is possible that those individuals experience a natural reduction in symptom burden after their peak by activating neurobiological mechanisms or through conditioning and expectation.
Possible mechanisms of placebo effect. It is a schematic of potential mechanisms of placebo response and illustrates their possible interactions.

SUMMARY
The article featured in this issue of the journal by Bosman and colleagues is consistent with past literature on the rate of placebo response in functional dyspepsia, other disorders of brain–gut interaction and other health conditions. Attempts to identify predictors of placebo response in DGBI clinical trials from baseline patient features have only had limited success. Potentially, this is because the key drivers of the placebo response is a combination natural history (regression to the mean) and neurobiological effects which are, in turn, driven in part by psychological processes invoked by exposure to a potential therapy. The proposal of Bosman et al. to consider in future trials an entry criterion based on minimal level of symptom severity to decrease the placebo response is worthwhile to consider. On the other hand, symptom severity needs to be seen in a broader context since more severe symptoms are associated with overlap of different DGBI and a symptom severity criterion could introduce a selection bias towards patients with overlap of DGBI.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Michael Jones: Co‐conceived of the review, lead the manuscript writing; Gerald Holtmann: Co‐conceived of the review, contributed to the manuscript writing.

FUNDING INFORMATION
No funding declared.

REFERENCES
Placebo response in pharmacological trials in patients with functional dyspepsia—a systematic review and meta‐analysis
Religious healing and the Asclepius cult: a case of placebo effects
Intercessory prayer for the alleviation of ill health
Meta‐analysis: placebo response and its determinants in functional dyspepsia
Meta‐analysis: factors affecting placebo response rate in the irritable bowel syndrome
Factors associated with response to placebo in patients with irritable bowel syndrome and constipation
Placebo response in chronic idiopathic constipation: a systematic review and meta‐analysis
Placebo response in anxiety disorders
Placebo effects and their determinants in gastrointestinal disorders
Powerful placebo: the dark side of the randomised controlled trial
Validation of the Leuven postprandial distress scale, a questionnaire for symptom assessment in the functional dyspepsia/postprandial distress syndrome
Development of a new dyspepsia impact scale: the Nepean dyspepsia index
The powerful placebo
The powerful placebo effect: fact or fiction?
Is there logic in the placebo?
A randomized controlled trial of cognitive behavior therapy, relaxation training, and routine clinical care for the irritable bowel syndrome
Exposure and mindfulness based therapy for irritable bowel syndrome‐‐an open pilot study
The environment and disease: association or causation?
Functional dyspepsia
Introduction to sample size determination and power analysis for clinical trials
Strong placebo response thwarts painkiller trials
The placebo effect in pain therapies
Gastroduodenal Disorders
The mechanism of placebo analgesia
The biochemical and neuroendocrine bases of the Hyperalgesic nocebo effect
Neurobiological mechanisms of the placebo effect
Functional neuroimaging correlates of placebo response in patients with depressive or anxiety disorders: a systematic review
Neuropharmacological dissection of placebo analgesia: expectation‐activated opioid systems versus conditioning‐activated specific subsystems
How classical conditioning shapes placebo analgesia: hidden versus open conditioning
Classical conditioning without verbal suggestions elicits placebo analgesia and nocebo hyperalgesia
Classical conditioning and expectancy in placebo hypoalgesia: a randomized controlled study in patients with atopic dermatitis and persons with healthy skin
Identifying neural patterns of functional dyspepsia using multivariate pattern analysis: a resting‐state FMRI study
Gastrointestinal contributions to the postprandial experience
The influence of expectancy level and personal characteristics on placebo effects: psychological underpinnings
Symptom relief and the placebo effect in the trial of an anti‐peptic drug
Fat label compared with fat content: gastrointestinal symptoms and brain activity in functional dyspepsia patients and healthy controls
Expectancy and conditioning in placebo analgesia: separate or connected processes?
Mechanisms of the placebo effect and of conditioning
The neuroscience of placebo effects: connecting context, learning and health
Placebo responses and placebo effects in functional gastrointestinal disorders
Asia‐Pacific guidelines for managing functional dyspepsia overlapping with other gastrointestinal symptoms
Overlap of irritable bowel syndrome and functional dyspepsia in the clinical setting: prevalence and risk factors