Assessment of the 5-year evaluation for 1st call members of the European Reference Network on Rare Endocrine Conditions (Endo-ERN)
Background
The European Reference Networks on Rare Endocrine Diseases (Endo-ERN) and member healthcare providers (HCPs) both are mandated to undergo periodical evaluation of their performance every 5 years. This evaluation is to ensure the continued high standards of ERN HCPs and gauges network progress. The first 5-year evaluation took place in 2022 for healthcare providers that joined Endo-ERN as full members in 2017. As the first implementation of this methodology, it must be reviewed and refined before the next 5-year evaluation.
Aim
To investigate how the evaluation process could have impacted the changes in scores beyond merit of the HCP.
Methods
This mixed-methods retrospective study and content analysis (CA) was used to examine the self-evaluation results from HCPs, comparing the draft and final scores earned.
Results
Fifty-eight HCPs that were subjected to the 5-year evaluation were included, with 14 receiving on-site audit. Final scores of HCPs who received an on-site audit were significantly higher than draft scores in only one area, concerning ‘quality and safety’ (W = 105, P < 0.0001). CA found five different concepts potentially causing this difference. HCPs with on-site audit commented ‘No evidence is provided’ online frequently. In follow-up, 61% of HCPs who received the on-site audit felt the on-site visit added value; however, in parallel, 55% felt that the on-site audit is not necessary.
Conclusions
An on-site audit has some added value for evaluation activities; however, it can place unnecessary burden on healthcare professionals in the current structure. This study now provides five key recommendations to improve the next ERN 5-year evaluation.

Introduction
Rare diseases are often complex and require lifelong, personalized care. Although the prevalence of individual rare diseases within a single country is relatively low, collectively, they affect approximately 6–8% of the European Union’s (EU) population. Due to the necessity of specialized expertise, patients with rare diseases frequently encounter barriers to accessing appropriate healthcare in terms of diagnosis, treatment, and management. Therefore, the EU supported the establishment of the European Reference Networks (ERNs) in 2011 as a network connecting HCPs or specialized centres across EU member states and Norway under Directive 2011/24/EU. Since 2017, the networks connect experts and representatives from reference centres called healthcare providers (HCPs) to consult on rare patient cases that require support, identify gaps in treatment and care needs for patients, and develop resources for the medical professionals caring for them.
For ensuring the quality of expertise, the ERNs require continuous monitoring and evaluation. When the ERNs were established, it was mandated that an evaluation would be conducted every five years after their initial approval to determine the worth or significance of the work and actions developed by the ERNs. This followed the procedures set out in the Evaluation Practices of the European Commission for Projects, a dedicated manual. The first ERN evaluation was conducted in 2022–2023, based on objectives formulated in 2011 and the dedicated ERN evaluation process called the Assessment, Monitoring, Evaluation and Quality Improvement System (AMEQUIS). This process was built taking into consideration that evaluation exercises by their very nature should learn and grow alongside a project to gauge progress accurately and, therefore, should always fall into an iterative cycle.
Following this first ERN-wide evaluation, an important question arises regarding the continued applicability of the objectives and measures formulated more than a decade earlier. The 5-year evaluation was intended to assess compliance and progress towards achieving the network objectives and serves to reassess the measurable elements (MEs) of care that formed the initial assessment criteria met to become a member of the network. The process was officially launched as of November 2022 following a published review of ‘practices and methods on the assessment of highly specialized healthcare providers’ and a series of dedicated AMEQUIS workshop sessions to create a procedural ERN evaluation manual for all stakeholders to follow. The 5-year evaluation was divided over four timed phases for member HCPs (Fig. 1). The majority of the work for HCPs took place within phase 2, self-evaluation, and phase 3, independent evaluation body (IEB) technical evaluation, which included a large online data submission and on-site audit, respectively.
Four phases of the 5-year evaluation process (Endo-ERN, 2025; https://health.ec.europa.eu/rare-diseases-and-european-reference-networks/european-reference-networks/erns-evaluation_en).
The European Reference Network on Rare Endocrine Conditions (Endo-ERN) is the largest ERN with 105 member HCPs, estimated to take care of over 60,000 patients. The Endo-ERN’s primary mission is to reduce and ultimately abolish healthcare inequalities across the EU for patients with rare endocrine conditions. Since 2022, the Endo-ERN has grown to 105 HCPs, representing 28 countries, up from 71 initially (63 EU and 8 UK members) included in the first call for membership in 2017. Applications for full membership are only accepted via a call launched by the European Commission, in principle no sooner than every 5 years. As the first call members were 5 years into their membership of the network, they were subjected to the legally mandated evaluation.
The 5-year evaluation was conducted by an IEB and included self-evaluation for member healthcare providers (HCPs) and on-site audits to selected members. The 3.7 million euro contract was awarded to IDOM Consulting, Engineering, Architecture, S.A.U. Leader. The final report generated by the IEB resulted in a report highlighting the strengths of the ERN system and noting areas for further improvement, with all networks shown to successfully have met the requirements set out in Article 12(2) Directive 2011/24/EU. However, the evaluation process encountered significant challenges, including the unexpected voluntary withdrawals of several HCPs, primarily due to the substantial workload associated with the self-evaluation. This would suggest that results regarding the scores could have been influenced by external factors outside of merit, for instance availability of administrative support for ERN activities. In addition, for the on-site audits, the selection of members was supposed to be randomized according to the evaluation manual; however, the selection process was, at least in part, also influenced by ERN coordination who were given the opportunity to suggest specific HCPs for on-site audit with no defining criteria as to who should be selected. This raises questions on the intended purpose of such on-site visits – are they simply intended to be a double check for the already supplied online evidence? Even if this is the case, it could create bias in the 5-year evaluation as HCPs who underwent on-site audits had the opportunity to interact with the evaluators or be advised on what to provide as more evidence, potentially leading to higher final scores compared to those who only completed the online self-evaluation assessment.
Furthermore, limited research has been conducted on the factors that contribute to a successful assessment and audit of processes. Further research showed that providing feedback through audits was effective but also had some unexpected consequences. The aim of this study was to provide an analysis from the first 5-year evaluation process and outcome of the results obtained from the Endo-ERN and to provide recommendations for future periodical evaluations of ERNs.

Methods
We perform retrospective analyses on the results of the 5-year evaluation for ERNs, which was a mandated review of submitted evidence supplied by members. We followed a sequential explanatory mixed-methods study design, analysing the evaluation submissions completed by each Endo-ERN member healthcare provider (HCP) subjected to the first 5-year evaluation (n = 63). This study proceeded with two connected research questions, namely did the different opportunities for evaluation, receiving both self-evaluation and on-site audit, impact the final result of the HCP’s evaluation? If yes, what areas of this evaluation did it impact and in what way?

5-year evaluation process
Each HCP completed a self-evaluation during stage 2 of the evaluation (see Fig. 1), providing numerical scores (0, 1, 2, or N/A), text comments, and evidence on 64 MEs into 7 operational criteria (OC; Table 1). This resulted in an individual draft scoring and report per HCP prior to stage 3 of the evaluation, with some draft scores indicating an unsatisfactory score that would require an improvement plan. All HCPs then had the opportunity to make written comments on the draft scores for 2 months before the final scoring, and reports were issued during stage 4.
Areas of operational criteria for all measurable elements for ERN HCPs.
Evaluation criteria for HCP teams	 	Area	Criteria, n	MEs, n	Core MEs, n	 	Patient-centred care	9	19	8	 	Organization and management	5	10	4	 	Research, education, and training	2	11	6	 	Exchange of expertise, ICT, and eHealth	3	7	3	 	Quality and safety	2	9	2	 	Competence, experience, and outcomes of care	1	4	4	 	Human resources	2	4	2	 	Total	24	64	29
Sourced from: European Commission ERN Evaluation Manual (2019a), pp.11. (https://ern-lung.eu/wp-content/uploads/2022/10/Evaluation-Manual_030222.pdf).
In addition to the submitted documents in stage 2, an on-site audit was required of 15–20% of member HCPs per ERN as stage 3. According to the evaluation manual, which HCPs were subjected to this audit was to be decided randomly by the IEB and, in discussions, it was noted that a stratified sampling would be preferred to include HCPs in various countries. Each ERN coordinator was invited to suggest specific HCPs for audit with justification; however, it is not dictated in the manual or final report how this input or the stratified sampling was taken into account in the on-site audit HCP selection. Notably, evaluators during the on-site audit could alter draft scores of HCPs.

Statistical and content analyses

Statistical analysis
To investigate where any significant differences occurred between scores at draft and final points, specifically within each OC, paired sample t-tests were used. The non-parametric alternative, the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, was used where data were not normally distributed. The analysis was conducted using the software program SPSS 28, and significance was set at <0.05.

Content analysis
The results of the statistical analysis informed which content differed significantly following comments. As the data were pre-themed and included responses from an international cohort, content analysis was used to systemically analyse further operational criteria that showed a significant improvement between draft and final scores. A team of two researchers created a codebook for manual coding of comment data, with three iterations following an initial draft based on the evaluation manual and two follow-up comparison checks to ensure continuity of definition, application of the codes to the original text, and reduction of subjectivity. The iterative refinement process of the codebook involved consolidating similar phrases into broader categories. The final codebook comprised 111 codes, 24 categories, and 5 concepts.
A follow-up questionnaire was administered to the HCPs that received an on-site audit to expand on the findings of the content analysis and obtain first-hand feedback on the practical requirements of the on-site audit. The survey was administered through EUSurvey (EUSurvey is a freely available tool that was utilized during the 5-year evaluation and other EU projects to issue brief questionnaires or surveys).

Ethical considerations
This study involved a retrospective analysis of data submitted to the independent evaluators and the Endo-ERN for the first ERN 5-year evaluation process and adheres to the GDPR principles. All analyses were performed on aggregated data with no identification of members or link to individual institutional results. The data were provided by the independent evaluation body, IDOM-ACSA, who were granted permission to do so by Directorate-General for Health and Food Safety (DG Sante) who oversee all ERN activities on behalf of the European Commission. In addition, an opt-out option for the scientific part of this evaluation project was given to all member Endo-ERN healthcare providers both during the annual continuous monitoring exercise and at the Endo-ERN General Assembly 2024. Data access was limited to the primary investigators and the two researchers performing the analyses.

Results
In 2022, 63 HCPs within the Endo-ERN were mandated to participate in the 5-year evaluation process. Following exclusions due to incomplete self-evaluations (n = 3) and voluntary withdrawal (n = 1), and a HCP merger into another member (n = 1), 58 HCPs were included in the final analysis. Of these, 14 HCPs received on-site audits, while 44 did not.
Within the Endo-ERN, all 58 HCPs received reports with a draft score following the online self-evaluation, of which 44 received a satisfactory result and 14 were marked needing improvement (NI) (Fig. 2). Prior to the draft scores being published, 14 HCPs were selected by the IEB to receive an on-site audit, in accordance with the evaluation manual. Before selection, each ERN received a request to highlight any HCPs with a greater reason to have or be exempt from an on-site audit. As you can see in Fig. 2, all Endo-ERN HCPs obtained a satisfactory result in the final reports.
HCP categories based on results of the 5-year evaluation during the evaluation process.
Self-evaluation by HCPs consisted of 64 MEs (see Table 1) that each received a score of 0 (not developed), 1 (partly developed), 2 (fully developed), or NA (not applicable). These MEs were spread over seven categories called operational criteria (OC). The baseline characteristics of both draft and final scores for all 58 HCPs across the seven operational criteria (OC) are given in Table 2.
Descriptives of all HCP scores: draft and final (n = 58).
Operational criteria	Draft	Final	 	Min.	Max.*	SD	Median	Min.	Max.*	SD	Median	 	1 Patient-centred care	13	38	5.6	35	28	38	2.2	37	 	2 Organization and management	5	20	3.1	15	4	20	2.8	17	 	3 Research, education, and training	11	22	2.7	20	18	22	1.1	21	 	4 Exchange of expertise, information systems, and eHealth	5	14	1.7	12	9	14	1.4	14	 	5 Quality and safety	2	16	2.8	13.5	8	18	1.9	16.5	 	6 Competence, experience, and outcomes of care	1	8	1.6	8	5	8	0.8	8	 	7 Human resources	1	8	1.5	8	5	8	0.8	8
Each operational criterion has different numbers of MEs, and each can be scored 0, 1, or 2 points.
A comparison of total draft and final scores for all HCPs showed that changes were unidirectional, as scores increased or remained the same between the draft and final results (Fig. 3). Analysis of the individual OC revealed significant differences between draft and final scores for almost all OC.
Difference between the total draft scores and total final scores awarded by evaluators for all HCPs, grouped as on-site audit (yellow) and needs improvement (green). Those with a difference between draft and final score all had a higher final score than the draft score.
All 58 Endo-ERN HCPs received a satisfactory final score. The only formal action HCPs could take to improve their score between draft and final was to submit additional comments for individual MEs. HCPs who had an on-site audit had direct interaction with evaluators after the online evaluation before the draft scores were released.
Analysis of the HCPs who received an on-site audit, however, showed a significant increase in OC5 (quality and safety) draft to final scores, W(14) = 105, P < 0.001 (Fig. 4). This indicated that further analysis of comments in OC5 was warranted.
Comparison of draft and final scores per operational criteria (top row: OC1, OC2, and OC3; bottom row: OC4, OC6, and OC7; and rightmost = OC5, the only OC with a significant difference between draft and final scores) for HCPs who received an on-site audit.

Content analysis
Operational criteria 5 (OC5) quality and safety has 9 MEs, the comments of which were subjected to content analysis. Applying the codebook developed by the research team, five main concepts emerged from the text of the HCP comments. We compared HCPs with on-site audits to those without (see also Table 3). In order to ensure a valid comparison between these two groups, the proportionality of the total occurrence of codes within each concept per group was calculated.
Overview of occurrence of codes in the five concepts for HCPs with and without an on-site audit.
Concept	All (n = 58)	On-site audit (n = 14)	No on-site audit (n = 44)	 	n*	%†	n	%	n	%	 	1 National/local existing audit	40	1.5%	8	1.5%	32	1.5%	 	2 Online/submission based only	1,620	62.2%	316	59.9%	1,304	62.7%	 	3 Internal procedures/procedure established	811	31.1%	170	32.2%	641	30.8%	 	4 Justified on-site audit	85	3.3%	22	4.2%	63	3.0%	 	5 Other referral to formal body	49	1.9%	11	2.1%	38	1.8%	 	Total	2,605		527		2,078
Occurrence of codes per concept per grouping.
Proportion out of total codes per grouping (all, on-site audit, and no on-site audit).
An examination of the five most frequently mentioned codes across all MEs in the on-site audit group and no on-site audit group within OC5 revealed that ‘referral to document’ consistently appeared among the top five across all groups. However, a key distinction emerged between both groups. HCPs with on-site audits included ‘evaluation of policy’ in their top five codes, while those without audits included ‘referral to website’. This distinction shows that evaluators had a different basis to rely on scoring an ME. The presence of ‘referral to website’ code indicates that, in the absence of an on-site audit, evaluators are directed to specific online sources to locate and check evidence.
A questionnaire was administered to all HCPs with an on-site audit requesting further information on their experience of the on-site audit. 11 out of the 14 on-site HCPs responded. If HCPs responded multiple times, an average of the score was used for analysis.
HCPs with an on-site audit had a relatively higher proportion of codes in concept 4, ‘justified on-site audit’, compared to HCPs without an on-site audit. Both HCPs with and without an on-site audit had the highest proportion of codes in concept 2, ‘online submission of supporting documents’. A description and explanation of each concept derived from the codes is below, in no particular order.

Concept 1: referral to national/local on-site audit process
This concept included mentions of audit processes conducted within HCPs, apart from the 5-year evaluation, divided into two categories: ‘audit from formal body’ and ‘internal on-site audit’. The categories refer to the mention of other audits that the HCP had received.
‘In our HCP every department is routinely audited for quality and safety on a regular basis’ or ‘quality and risk management verifies its knowledge and application during audits’.
This was the smallest concept identified (1.5% for both on-site and non-on-site audit HCPs), comprising two categories and three codes (see codebook in Supplementary material (see section on Supplementary materials given at the end of the article)). Across the analysed comments, the type of audit, whether internal or external, national or local, was often unspecified. HCPs made general references to audits without providing detailed information about their nature, frequency, or scope. For instance:
‘They (IEB) already had visited our HCP (member of another ERN) and knew that most of what we had prepared very fully fine’.
In another example, HCPs referred generally to a ‘quality audit’ without clarifying whether this involved internal HCP audits or external. As a result, this concept was coded based on general references to national or local audits without further qualification. A respondent from the questionnaire pointed out:
Many HCPs participate in multiple ERNs and, as a result, undergo audits for different centres. HCPs participating in multiple ERNs may undergo repetitive audits, with the respondent describing this as ‘a waste of time’.

Concept 2: online submission of documents
‘The strategy for quality and safety is described in the attached file (see Document [Name of document])’.
This concept encompasses the different supporting documents submitted via the online self-evaluation for the 5-year evaluation. These documents are evidence to support the HCP’s answers to the MEs. This online-provided evidence indirectly lessens a need for an on-site audit as relevant information has been provided online. All categories in this concept refer to official documentation, such as policy, guidelines, evaluations, and protocols. The core of the concept is that the HCP is able to show that they have the documentation and can submit sufficient evidence online. For example, one stated:
‘Results are available on our website: [website link]’.
Compared to other concepts, ‘online/submission based only’ was the most prevalent (see Table 3). Since the self-evaluation procedure asks HCPs to submit such evidence, it is expected that this concept occurs more frequently. It includes instances where HCPs directed evaluators to uploaded documents, e.g. ‘See page 9 of attachment’ or provided access to online data:
In some cases, HCPs specified the type of strategy submitted, e.g. ‘quality and safety strategy’, whereas others simply wrote ‘strategy’. These differences were captured at the code level but not distinguished at the category level as the strategy type was determined by the ME in question or specific evidence type requested. Although documentation can still be reviewed during an on-site audit, HCPs indicated that in many cases, this was unnecessary. For instance, ‘See certification attached’ suggest that the certification is already available for review online.

Concept 3: internal procedure/procedures established
‘[Name HCP] outlines a yearly plan for quality management and constantly implements training and information activities on targeted quality management procedures, and preventive and corrective measures to be implemented’.
This concept includes references to internal procedures or policies that HCPs report as implemented but have not substantiated with concrete evidence. All categories in this concept refer to actions that are done with policy, guidelines, evaluations, protocols, etc., without providing direct evidence of it. The absence of documentation suggests that on-site audits may be required to verify the actual implementation of these policies. This could also result in a lower score for a given ME (a 1 instead of 2) and trigger the ‘needs improvement’ result. For example, one HCP noted:
‘Quality and safety improvement strategies are in place’.
While this indicates ongoing activity, no supporting evidence or report was provided. This concept moves beyond merely stating the existence of a policy, but it addresses whether the policy is actually implemented. HCPs often stated that policies or strategies were in place or regularly evaluated, but in most cases, did not provide evidence beyond the policy documents themselves. For example:
Such statements necessitate further verification, typically through on-site audits, to ensure that policies, guidelines, or training programmes are actively implemented and followed in practice.

Concept 4: justified on-site audit
‘This is part of the patient medical record and we cannot share more than limited data’.
This concept captures situations where HCPs were unable to provide evidence either because the policy does not exist or because information could not be shared due to privacy regulations, thereby justifying the need for on-site audit visit. HCPs with on-site audits had the highest occurrence proportion in this concept, suggesting that these HCPs more often acknowledged the necessity of on-site verification. Within this concept, two primary justification types emerged. The first is data privacy concerns, as in the comment:
‘There is not procedure implemented to provide information [externally] on adverse events’.
The second is the absence of a policy or evaluation itself, as indicated by:
In such cases, an on-site audit could assess how the HCP manages these situations in practice. This reflects the two categories in this concept being ‘implying audit needed to check’ and ‘not available/missing’.
‘No specific ERN guidelines regarding our fields of expertise’.
Moreover, some HCPs noted the absence of ERN guidelines at the time of evaluation, as illustrated by:
This meant that HCPs may have followed alternative high-quality or endorsed guidelines not detailed in the online submission, which can be checked during an on-site audit. Interestingly, HCPs providing similar responses sometimes received different evaluation scores, indicating potential inconsistencies in the evaluator interpretation of enough evidence. This may be due to human error or variability among evaluators.

Concept 5: other referral to formal body
‘All [country] HCPs are evaluated in terms of quality and safety by the health authority’.
This final concept includes references to other formal bodies, both internal and external, that were not fully captured within the other identified concepts. The referring body was sometimes an internal HCP unit and sometimes an external authority, although HCPs rarely specified the scope or outcome of these checks. For example:
‘Clinical risk unit carries our refresher courses to make all healthcare personnel aware of the ministerial recommendations, procedures and tools’.
Among HCPs with on-site audits, internal and external bodies were referenced with a similar frequency. However, HCPs without on-site audits referred twice as often to internal formal bodies compared to external. An example of referring to an internal formal body:

Questionnaire to on-site-audit HCPs
‘I had very few expectations, as we had received an overwhelming amount of information which in general was very difficult to translate into practicalities’.
The questionnaire delved more in depth into the experiences of HCPs about the on-site audit. On average, HCPs reported feeling well-prepared for the on-site audit (84%). However, a number of HCPs highlighted that they were uncertain about what to expect due to the large amount of information communicated. As one respondent stated:
‘It allowed us to present our work in context, clarify specific aspects of our activities, and receive constructive feedback’.
Despite this uncertainty, HCPs reported that their expectations were generally met (73%). The perceived added value of the on-site audit, beyond the online self-evaluation, was 61%. One respondent cited the following example of added value:
‘Several very good examples of expert centers activities could be shown as these were not necessarily captured by the self-evaluation. Moreover, local protocols in the institutional protected system could not be shared during the self-evaluation, but could be assessed with the auditors being present at the HCP’.
Another respondent noted:
‘A lot of clinical team members were present the whole day, and only had to answer 1 question (which was already included in the self-evaluation documents), which was very disproportionate and redundant’.
This aligns with the finding that, on average, 73% of the respondents experienced the on-site audit as fully or mostly complementary to the online self-evaluation. Some HCPs expressed missing the added value of the on-site audit process:
‘To obtain the availability of a sufficient number of patient representatives’ and ‘Direct contact with patients – problems with our Ethics Committee’.
HCPs were asked to assess the added value of the main components of the on-site audit. Among these, interviews with patient representatives were rated lowest (35%). Several HCPs identified challenges related to these interviews, for example:
Concerns were also raised regarding the reliability and representativeness of patient interviews given the language barrier and the innate willingness of a patient to be interviewed, already providing a biased sample of a patient satisfied enough with their care to be willing to volunteer their personal time.
As shown in Fig. 5, the highest-ranked recommendation was that only HCPs with an unsatisfactory draft score will receive on-site audits. In contrast, maintaining the current process, as used in the 5-year evaluation in 2022/2023, received the lowest support, indicating a desire for adjustments in the process.
Suggested recommendations ranked by the respondents.
‘An improved digital evaluation would have resolved most open queries’, ‘The audit was very time-consuming compared to the little added value’ and ‘An on-site audit is not necessary when the questions are explained clearly’.
55% of HCPs indicated that the on-site audit is not necessary, while 45% considered it necessary. Those who felt it was not necessary argued that:
‘It provides a more accurate and comprehensive understanding of how processes are implemented in practice’,
‘The on-site audit helped to identify weak points and gave the opportunity to make improvements’,
‘The necessity of an on-site audit may depend on the centre performance’.
Conversely, HCPs supporting the on-site audit emphasized its benefits:
‘I would suggest not going through all documents uploaded during the self-evaluation phase but only focus on those measurable elements that were scored low or were unavailable’.
One HCP proposed:

Discussion
This study provides the first analysis and lessons that can be learnt from the first 5-year evaluation process and its outcome of Endo-ERN. The study clearly demonstrates how the evaluation process could have impacted changes in scores beyond merit of the HCP and provides clear recommendations on which aspects of the 5-year evaluation could be altered to reduce burden while still fulfilling its purpose. Two questions were specifically addressed, namely did the different opportunities for evaluation, receiving both self-evaluation and on-site audit, impact the final result of the HCP’s evaluation? If yes, what areas of this evaluation did it impact, and in what way? This was achieved through a critical analysis of how the evaluation process could have impacted the changes in scores beyond the merit of the HCP. From this, we aimed to derive what, if any, aspects of the 5-year evaluation could be altered to reduce burden while still fulfilling its purpose.
This study is the first analysis of the EU-level evaluation of the ERNs, investigating how the evaluation process could have impacted the changes in scores beyond the merit of the HCP. These findings suggest that an on-site audit likely indirectly impacts the final scores, as reflected by a significant difference between the draft and final scores in criterion 5 (OC5, ‘quality and safety’). According to the IEB and evaluation manual, only additional comments could have changed scores between draft and final reports, although our findings suggest that an on-site audit could have affected a HCP’s final scoring indirectly. In addition, HCPs answered that they could not provide all the evidence in the online self-evaluation, implying on-site audits are needed, provided that all evidence remains required. Multiple challenges were reported with the current on-site audit process, and by extension the evaluation process itself, that will need to be adequately addressed to improve the quality and effectiveness of on-site audits in the future.

Selection criteria for on-site audit
First, analysis investigated the significant improvement between draft OC5 and final OC5 scores. Notably, 13 out of 14 HCPs in the on-site audit group received a satisfactory draft score, technically eliminating the need for additional comments to pass the evaluation. This raises the question of why an on-site audit was necessary for these HCPs in the first place. It may be that randomization of HCP selection for such an activity is not the most productive or efficient method for obtaining clarity on the current state of ERN HCP membership. On-site audit evaluators could only alter draft scores of HCPs based on their findings. However, increased engagement with the evaluators could explain the score enhancements from draft to final reports, as it provides opportunities for clarification, contextualization, or reinterpretation of the MEs during the in-person document review and visit.
On-site audits gave some HCPs the opportunity to receive feedback on the type of evidence to submit, as well as interact with the evaluators to better understand the changes to make during the comment period. This further supports that an on-site audit for those who require improvement plans only would better serve the objectives of the 5-year evaluation as exemplified by concepts 3 and 4. This would serve the added value of reducing unnecessary workload on HCPs that do not require improvement of their scores beyond the online submission. The high degree to which online submission of documents was possible in this process, alongside the low number of OC that showed a significant difference following comments, increases the likelihood that evaluators have sufficient access to necessary evidence in this step for a majority of HCPs. This is reinforced by concept 2 findings and suggests that an on-site audit is not essential in such cases. Such interpretation is consistent with the findings of Beaussier et al., who highlighted the variability in how quality of care is assessed across different countries with different resources. Given the diversity in quality indicators between countries, as well as human and administrative support, a standardized evaluation approach may not be universally applicable.

Impact and purpose of the on-site audit
Very few active healthcare evaluations and audits are grounded in existing theoretical frameworks, and although the 5-year evaluation methodology was created alongside AMEQUIS, the reasoning or functional purpose of an on-site visit remains unclear. Such a visit is a regularly applied step in evaluations of funded projects within the European Commission, as reflected by its inclusion in the general evaluation manual. In the past, visits to sites where projects are actively taking place would have been a necessary part of any evaluation since online submissions were not possible. However, given the advancements in the past decades, in particular in communication remotely since the COVID-19 pandemic, the added value for such visits should be more clearly defined. Several researchers have recommended the use of public health or similar theoretical frameworks to clarify the observed variations in audit and evaluation effectiveness and to understand the underlying mechanisms leading to improvement.
Furthermore, limited research has been conducted on the factors that contribute to a successful assessment and audit of processes in a given HCP, which suggests that providing feedback through audits was effective but also had some unexpected consequences. Although the selection of HCPs for on-site audits was geographically representative, the overall representation of the broader Endo-ERN remains uncertain. Notably, only one HCP out of the 14 (7%) that received an on-site audit scored an unsatisfactory draft score, compared to 13 HCPs (30%) with an unsatisfactory draft score out of the 44 HCPs without on-site audits, suggesting that the sample of HCPs with on-site audit may have included a disproportionate number of high-performing HCPs. The document review reinforced the idea that online self-evaluation alone may not reveal all the necessary evidence, particularly with regard to protected private data, less specific, or subjective indicators. This implies that an on-site audit is required for the 5-year evaluation to be fairly and effectively implemented for HCPs with different national and local mandated data protections. This explains why OC5, quality and safety, mostly reported ‘No evidence is provided’. The impact of on-site audits is not only an improvement in scores but also adverse experiences, as previously researched. Since the preparations and the audit itself are very specific, clinician’s time is required. This affects the audit experiences and impacts the HCP’s practice. These observations raise important questions about the optimal format and function of on-site audits within the 5-year evaluation and the duplicated efforts as suggested by concepts 1 and 5.

Factors to consider in future
Practical factors could have influenced the scores of HCPs, as well as audit effectiveness, in addition to those examined in this study, such as HCP resources, financial flexibility, and membership of multiple ERNs. Many HCPs are members of multiple ERNs and reported having received two on-site audits. After the first on-site audit, HCPs know what to expect and how to best prepare. This influences the impact of the on-site audit. It is also noteworthy that the scores of HCPs could only increase following the comments period on the draft report. The nature of evaluation and audit is to give an honest critical reflection, and therefore, it should be subject to possible reduction. Moreover, our findings indicate that national and local audits, as well as audits conducted for other ERNs, may serve as a valid source of evidence in the online self-evaluation phase. A future recommendation would be to eliminate redundancies and duplicated work, limiting the on-site audit to one per HCP. A further reduction in workload is possible by integrating national-level evaluations by governing authorities or established medical societies. This would require future research into which MEs are covered by individual national evaluations or a more extensive review of evidence by evaluators in IEB.

Practical consideration and limits
A notable experience of Endo-ERN HCPs were difficulties with on-site patient interviews, either because they could not find willing patients to participate, and needed a last-minute translator or because the institutional ethics committee did not allow them to conduct the interview. With the interests of patients in mind, another recommendation is to remove the patient interview in the HCPs given the users of the networks are healthcare professionals primarily. Patients are indirect beneficiaries of ERN activities and, as such, are not expected to consistently interact with the network itself, unless seeking resources/information. Finally, it is important to note that conducting patient interviews is time-intensive and often requires translation services, which were not funded.
A limitation of the generalizability of our findings to other ERNs is that each network could apply different selection criteria for the list of HCPs they recommended or abstain from providing to the IEB for on-site audit. An improvement in score could represent longer exposure to the MEs in question and reinterpretation of evidence rather than actual improvements in the quality of patient care or of the HCP. Scores may also be affected by the different resources and time that HCPs have for the on-site audit. Similarly, not all countries in Europe have the same level of English proficiency, which can create a language barrier affecting qualitative data analysis.

Conclusion
A major strength of this study is clearly that this is the first time that a systematic and in-depth assessment has been performed that critically assessed the impact of an on-site audit within a large international healthcare network being represented across all EU member states. Most HCPs with unsatisfactory draft scores did not receive an on-site audit and could have benefitted from the additional engagement with evaluators for clarification on what is needed. It would be valuable to get a deeper understanding of the results for HCPs with an unsatisfactory draft score and how they enhanced their scores to all receive a satisfactory result in the end. While on-site audits play a valuable role in complementing online self-evaluations, their design and implementation requires tailor-made refinements to ensure optimal efficiency and meaningful impact across the ERNs.

List of recommendations
Based on the findings of research conducted by Endo-ERN, it is recommended that the on-site audit be maintained as a component of the 5-year evaluation of ERN members. However, to enhance its effectiveness and reduce the administrative burden on participating HCPs, several structural and procedural revisions are proposed. These recommendations are outlined below.
Individual options/recommendations for evaluation and on-site audit structure improvement: i) HCPs receiving on-site audits do not have to submit the online self-evaluation. ii) Only HCPs with an improvement plan can receive on-site audits. iii) Keep the same on-site audit process and add that the HCPs that receive an on-site audit should differ every 5 years.	 	The following details recommendations for online evaluation and on-site audit process improvement.On-site audit1. Remove interview with HCP patients. i) The users of the network are healthcare professionals; therefore, they could provide more insights for evaluating the network’s performance. ii) Patient interviews introduce bias, as patients are indirect beneficiaries and do not interact with the network itself. iii) Conducting patient interviews is time-intensive and often requires translation services, which were not funded.2. Minimize time commitment i) Limit on-site audits to one day to verify the necessary evidence and save costs.Online self-evaluation3. Eliminate redundancies and duplicated work. i) One audit per HCP, i.e. if HCPs host multiple ERN centres, a single audit should be sufficient. ii) Focus on evidence that could not feasibly be submitted through the online platform. iii) Differentiate requirements based on a pre-assigned evaluation type, as HCPs participating in both the self-evaluation and the on-site audit faced a double workload in the 2023 evaluation.4. Utilize existing evaluations i) Integrate national-level evaluations that regularly assess general HCP quality. Prior to implementation, a comprehensive comparison of national standards is needed. All individual MEs requiring proof of national checks can be replaced by one ME. ii) Focus the evaluation specifically on ERN membership criteria, as the purpose of the 5-year evaluation is to assess ERN-related performance, not general HCP quality. iii) Separate evaluations for HCP members and clinical centres members given the Stark difference in responsibilities of both within a HCP.5. Refine ME criteria for online submission i) Limit requests for evidence that can be submitted online and remove evidence requests that contradict data protection regulations (e.g. GDPR) or are impractical to submit electronically, e.g. anonymized patient record. ii) Provide clear guidance on required evidence, including the expected form and standard of evidence. For instance, if an ME requires proof that ‘staff are aware of the adverse event policy’, it should clarify whether written confirmation suffices or whether documented training is required.

Supplementary materials

Declaration of interest
EKW works in the employment of the Endo-ERN as the Evaluation Manger and PhD candidate and worked in this role during the first ERN 5-year evaluation.

Funding
This work was generated within the  – Project ID No. 101156495.

References
Health services interventions to improve the quality of care in rare disease: a scoping review
Shaping the future of rare diseases after a global health emergency: organisational points to consider
ENDO-ERN on rare endocrine conditions: Endo-ERN in its fifth year: a pinch of care, science, curiosity and new horizons
Development of models of care coordination for rare conditions: a qualitative study
European Reference Networks for rare diseases: what is the conceptual framework?
Introduction to Endo-ERN–scope and mission
Directive 2011/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2011 on the application of patients’ rights in cross-border healthcare
Evaluating the quality of medical care
The role of evaluation in iterative learning and implementation of quality of care interventions
Will European Reference Networks herald a new era of care for patients with rare and complex diseases?
Supporting international networks through platforms for standardised data collection – The European Registries for Rare Endocrine Conditions (EuRRECa) model
Understanding how and why audits work in improving the quality of hospital care: a systematic realist review
Channelling the force of audit and feedback: averting the dark side
Content analysis: method, applications, and issues
Steering by their own lights: why regulators across Europe use different indicators to measure healthcare quality
“Evaluating the quality of medical care”: Donabedian’s classic article 50 years later
Fostering continuous quality improvement in a European rare disease network
Theory-based and evidence-based design of audit and feedback programmes: examples from two clinical intervention studies
What do we know about how to do audit and feedback? Pitfalls in applying evidence from a systematic review
Audit and feedback: effects on professional practice
No more ‘business as usual’ with audit and feedback interventions: towards an agenda for a reinvigorated intervention