Evaluation of the measurement properties of intimate partner violence screening instruments for the general population: A COSMIN-based international systematic review
Aim
To systematically appraise, compare, and summarize the measurement properties of intimate partner violence screening instruments for the general population and provide recommendations.
Methods
We searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global and EBSCO Psychology Behavioral Sciences Collection from their establishment to March 2024 using systematic search strategies. The methodological quality of the instruments that met the inclusion criteria and their measurement properties were assessed using the COSMIN methodology, and the COSMIN recommendations were followed. We reported this study using PRISMA 2020 checklist.
Results
A total of 23 studies were eventually included, and 18 instruments were identified. The evaluation of the methodological quality indicates poor content validity but good structural validity; however, that of the criterion validity in most of the studies was inadequate. Measurement error and responsiveness were not assessed. Four screening instruments could be used in the interim. The remaining 14 instruments were not recommended for use.
Conclusions
The overall methodological quality of most of the assessed instruments was insufficient. A rigorous intimate partner violence screening instrument with good measurement properties is urgently required to identify and screen for intimate partner violence in the general population.
PROSPERO number
CRD42022365247.

Introduction
Intimate partner violence (IPV) is a major public health issue that affects the human rights of people in various cultures and societies. IPV refers to the infliction of physical, psychological, or sexual harm by a partner or ex-partner. It encompasses physical violence, sexual violence, emotional-psychological abuse, and controlling behaviors according to the World Health Organization. Intimate partners may include couples, ex-couples, boyfriends/girlfriends, dating partners, sexual partners, or other romantic type of relationship. They can also be current or former partners, of the same or opposite sex, and may or may not be cohabitating. The term “domestic violence” is a broader term that contains the abuse of children or the elderly or the abuse by any member from the family, while it was used in many countries to refer to intimate partner violence. In this study, we therefore conducted a database search using the term “Intimate Partner Violence.”
In a study by the World Health Organization, 27% of women aged 15–49 years had been subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by their partners, and 13% of them had experienced such events in the previous 12-month period. IPV can result in negative physical and emotional outcomes for the people who experience violence and their families. The physical health consequences include acute illnesses and chronic and pain-based disorders, such as respiratory, urinary tract, and sexually transmitted illnesses, insomnia, headache, menstrual-related disorders, pelvic pain, and functional gastrointestinal and reproductive diseases. Mental health issues are also reported among people who are experiencing or have experienced IPV, and these can have potentially serious consequences. Anxiety, depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, and suicide are all common among this population. Importantly, the severity of these mental health issues tends to escalate with the severity of the IPV experienced.
In 2009, a systematic review summarized existing psychometric data of four IPV screening instruments in healthcare settings based on the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force criteria. Whereas results showed the psychometric properties of all screening instruments were not well-established. In 2012, another systematic review identified two most feasible IPV screening instruments in primary healthcare settings in Afghanistan and Pakistan using the modified versions of the critical appraisal skills pro-gramme criteria not focused on the psychometric properties. However, in 2016, there was a systematic review focused on the psychological properties of IPV screening instruments to screen men and women in mental health settings using the effective public health practice project criteria, which identified ten IPV screening instruments. In 2022, a systematic review focused on risk assessment instruments for IPV not screening IPV instruments, but this systematic review noted implications for prediction and prevention on IPV and gave us future research directions on summarizing risk assessment instruments for IPV. In 2022, there were two important systematic review summarizing the psychometric properties using the COnsensus-based Standards for the selection of health Measurement INstruments (COSMIN) methodology, but one focused on all psychometric properties of dating violence screening instruments among adolescents and young people between 15 and 24 years of age, another only evaluated reliability and/or validity of included all IPV screening instruments.
Multiple instruments have been developed to screen for IPV, whereas the latest information on their comprehensively methodological quality and psychometric properties have not been assessed. Moreover, the components of IPV screening instruments have not been compared. Researchers and health professionals therefore face challenges regarding which IPV screening instruments to use. Although most IPV screening currently targets women, study still showed that men may also be the victims of IPV. In this study, we hope to explore the methodological properties of IPV screening instruments targeting general population in non-specific population. Therefore, we will include the studies on IPV screening instruments targeting both males and females.
To the best of our knowledge, a systematic review of IPV screening instruments and, specifically, the measurement properties of IPV screening instruments for the general population have not been conducted. The main purpose of this systematic review was therefore to identify the current IPV screening instruments in use for the general population and to evaluate their measurement properties based on the COSMIN methodology for systematic reviews of patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) and the COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist for systematic reviews of PROMs. We believe that our critical evaluation of the measurement properties of IPV screening instruments will provide useful practical references for other researchers and health professionals who have an interest in IPV among the general population.

Methods

Study design
This systematic review was conducted according to the COSMIN guideline for systematic reviews of PROMs and reported in accordance with the PRISMA 2020 checklist. The COSMIN guideline provides methodology on addressing the risk of bias in studies that aimed at instruments developing, rating their measurement properties, evaluating the overall quality of evidence for each measurement property, and providing recommendations based on the overall quality evidence. The methodology of the current study was based on our published protocol (10.3390/ijerph20021541). The protocol for this study was registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO; number CRD42022365247). Our study did not involve human participants or animals, ethical approval was not applicable.

Search methods
In March 2024, comprehensively searching in PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global (PQDT Global), and EBSCO Psychology Behavioral Sciences Collection (PBSC) published databases was done. The Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms and 2 keywords in the title (Intimate Partner Violence; Screening Instruments) and abstract were combined with the Boolean operators “AND” and “OR” for the search following a group discussion and assistance from librarians. The search strategies were refined and optimized for each database. An example is shown about the detailed search strategy for the PubMed database in Table 1. The reference lists of review articles identified in the literature search were checked for relevant studies.
An example of the search strategies used in PubMed.
#	Search phrase	 	#1	Intimate partner violence [Mesh] OR Spouse Abuse [Mesh]	 	#2	Spouse Abuse [T/A] OR Intimate partner violence[T/A] OR IPV[T/A] OR Partner Violence, Intimate[T/A] OR Violence, Intimate Partner[T/A] OR Intimate Partner Abuse[T/A] OR Abuse, Intimate Partner[T/A] OR Partner Abuse, Intimate[T/A] OR Dating Violence[T/A] OR Violence, Dating[T/A]	 	#3	Mass Screening [Mesh] OR Multiphasic Screening [Mesh]	 	#4	Screening instrument* [T/A] OR Screening tool* [T/A]	 	#5	Mass Screening* [T/A] OR Screening*, Mass [T/A] OR Screening* [T/A]	 	#6	Multiphasic Screening* [T/A] OR Screening*, Multiphasic [T/A] OR Automated Multiphasic Health Testing [T/A]	 	#7	Screened [T/A] OR detect [T/A] OR detected [T/A] OR detection [T/A]	 	#8	(#1) OR (#2)	 	#9	(#3) OR (#4) OR (#5) OR (#6) OR (#7)	 	#10	(#8) AND (#9)

Inclusion and/or exclusion criteria
In this study, we included primary studies that (1) reported screening IPV instruments designed for people in the general population who were victims of IPV, (2) described the processes of development and/or evaluation of one or more measurement properties for the eligible instrument(s), (3) had full-text availability, and (4) articles were published in English. According to the COSMIN guideline, we excluded original studies that used the IPV screening instruments only for outcomes measurements not evaluating measurement properties.

Study selection
After conducting the search, we used EndNote to manage the references and remove duplicates. We then imported the articles into Joanna Briggs Institute SUMARI search filters to identify the studies with psychometric properties linked to terms related to IPV screening instruments. Two independent researchers (Q.X. and K.C.) undertook the first manual filtering of the articles’ titles and abstracts based on the eligibility criteria. The full-text articles not excluded in the second manual screening phase were read independently by two researchers (Y.L. and G.W.). All different opinions between the researchers were resolved under the help of the third researcher (S.O.).

Data extraction
First, we customized the data extraction table following a discussion in the research group. Then, two researchers (Y.L. and G.W.) separately extracted the corresponding data based on the content of the data extraction table. Finally, the third researcher (J.C.) would examine the extracted data and address any differences encountered. Furthermore, when more than one primary article evaluated the same participants (or the evaluated participants overlapped), information was retrieved from the article that evaluated the larger sample, and the remaining articles were filtered to obtain additional information that was not provided in the main article.
The extracted data included (in Tables 3 and 4): (1) general information about the included studies, such as the publication year and first author’s name; (2) the basic characteristics of the identified instruments, including the name of the instrument, original language, target population, country and available translated version, participants and settings, mode of administration, number of participants (N), item generation, number of items, range of scores, and response options; (3) the results of the measurement properties of the identified instruments, namely, structural validity, internal consistency, cross-cultural validity/measurement invariance, reliability, measurement error, criterion validity, hypothesis testing, and responsiveness; and (4) the feasibility of the instrument, which was not a measurement property but indicated the ease of use of the PROM in its specific context and depended on the acceptability of the research objects, the time and cost to complete the scale, and the scale quality. The feasibility of all the included instruments would be compared to identify the most appropriate screening instruments from those in the same category.

Quality appraisal and data synthesis
Two researchers (Y.L. and G.W.) independently assessed the measurement properties of the IPV screening instruments using the COSMIN methodology. The third researcher (J.C.) handled any disagreements related to the process. The quality assessment process was divided into three steps: (1) an evaluation of the methodological quality of the included studies; (2) an overall rating of the measurement properties of the included IPV screening instruments; (3) a grading of the quality of the generated evidence. The results of the assessments of the methodological quality of the included studies and the measurement properties of the included IPV screening instruments are shown in Table 5. A detailed description follows.
After first identifying which measurement properties were used in each article, we applied the COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist to assess the methodological quality of the studies included, which encompassed the development of the IPV screening instruments. Each study’s quality was assessed independently based on the specific measurement properties, utilizing the corresponding COSMIN box. The quality of each study was rated from “inadequate” to “very good”.
Second, we used the updated criteria for good measurement properties to rate the results for the measurement properties of each study. Each result was categorized as either “-” (insufficiency), “?” (indeterminacy), or "+" (sufficiency). Subsequently, the results for each measurement property were aggregated, and the combined or summarized results per measurement property per PROM were re-evaluated utilizing the same criteria. The overall rating of the pooled or summarized results was presented as follows: (1) “+” (sufficient) was given if >75% of the results met the criteria; (2) “-” (insufficient) was given if >75% of the results did not meet the criteria; (3) “±” (inconsistent) was given if no results exceeded 75% and it was not possible to properly explain the inconsistency; and (4) “?” (indeterminate) was given if all the single results were indeterminate.
Third, according to the modified Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation approach based on the COSMIN guidelines for the systematic reviews of PROMs, the quality of the evidence was graded from high to very low, which indicated whether the pooled or summarized results were trustworthy, and this was determined by risk of bias, inconsistency, imprecision, and indirectness.

Recommendations formation
To provide evidenced-based suggestions on the use of IPV screening instruments for researchers, we classified the PROMs into three categories in line with the recommendations in the COSMIN guidelines. Consequently, if a PROM demonstrated sufficient evidence of content validity (at any level) along with at least satisfactory evidence of internal consistency, it was categorized as "A". However, if a measurement property lacked sufficiency despite possessing high-quality evidence, the PROM was categorized as "C". When the PROM was neither A nor C, the PROM would be classified as “B”.
It is noticeable that the PROMs in category A are recommended, but those in category C are not. Of course, the PROMs in category B that have the best content validity could also be used in the interim, but it would be necessary to evaluate the quality of these PROMs further so that better evidence can be provided. Notably, we will give our recommendations comprehensively considering evaluation of the measurement properties and the instrument’s feasibility.

Results

Search results summary
A total of 9719 records were initially identified through the systematic data search: 2927 in PubMed, 100 in Embase, 6103 in Web of Science, 285 in PQDT Global, and 304 in EBSCO PBSC. After removing the duplicates, screening the titles and abstracts, retrieving the full-text articles, and identifying records from the references of the included studies, 23 studies were eventually included in this systematic review. The process of searching and selection are depicted in Fig 1.
The process of research searching and selection.

Characteristics of the included studies
The included studies were published in English between 1997 and 2022. From these studies, we identified 18 instruments that were specifically developed or translated to screen for IPV in the general population: Partner Violence Screen (PVS), the modified version of Partner Violence Screen (M-PVS), the revised Conflict Tactics Scale (CTS-2), Abuse Assessment Tool (AAT), Abuse Screening Inventory (ASI), Abuse Behavior Inventory (ABI), the Assessment Screen to Identify Survivors Toolkit for Gender Based Violence (ASIST-GBV), Women’s Coerced First Sexual Intercourse (WCFSI), the short form of Sexual Coercion in Intimate Relationships Scale (SCIRS-SF), The South Asian Violence Screen (SAVS), a screening instrument for domestic violence (a screening instrument for DV), a single violence question, Haj-Yahia’s questionnaire, Humiliation-Afraid-Rape-Kick (HARK), NorVold Domestic Abuse Questionnaire (NORAQ), the short form of Psychological Maltreatment of Women Inventory (PMWI-SF), the short version of Multidimensional Scale of Dating Violence (MSDV-2.0), and Intimate Partner Violence—Brief Self-Screener (IBV-BSS). The detailed information of included studies and instruments is presented in Table 2.
The number of included studies and instruments.
Included instrument	Author, Year	 	full name	acronym	 	Partner Violence Screen	PVS	Harriet 2006	 	Kim 1997	 	Trevor 2005	 	the modified version of Partner Violence Screen	M-PVS	Nuberg 2008	 	the revised Conflict Tactics Scale	CTS-2	Maria 2014	 	Claudia 2002	 	Helen 2015	 	Trevor 2005	 	Abuse Assessment Tool	AAT	Leila 2006	 	Abuse Screening Inventory	ASI	KATARINA 2007	 	Abuse Behavior Inventory	ABI	Zink 2007	 	the Assessment Screen to Identify Survivors Toolkit for Gender Based Violence	ASIST-GBV	Wirtz 2016	 	Alexander 2016	 	Women’s Coerced First Sexual Intercourse	WCFSI	Shan Shan He 2013	 	the short form of Sexual Coercion in Intimate Relationships Scale	SCIRS-SF	Guilherme 2021	 	The South Asian Violence Screen	SAVS	Lenore 2021	 	a screening instrument for domestic violence	a screen instrument for DV	Taghi 2016	 	a single violence question	a single violence question	Young-Ju 2017	 	Haj-Yahia’s questionnaire	Haj-Yahia’s questionnaire	Sahar 2022	 	Humiliation-Afraid-Rape-Kick	HARK	Hardip 2007	 	NorVold Domestic Abuse Questionnaire	NORAQ	Linda 2011	 	the short form of Psychological Maltreatment of Women Inventory	PMWI-SF	Rita 2018	 	the short version of Multidimensional Scale of Dating Violence	MSDV-2.0	Maria 2022	 	Intimate Partner Violence—Brief Self-Screener	IPV-BSS	Victoria 2021
The general information of the included instruments is performed in Tables 3 and 4. Out of the 23 included studies, a total of 18 IPV screening instruments were reported. The 18 instruments were mainly (17 instruments) original developed in English. Among them, M-PVS was translated from English to German, CTS-2 was translated into two languages, namely Italian and Portuguese, WCFSI was translated from English to Chinese, SCIRS-SF was translated from English into Portuguese, a single violence question was translated from Spanish to English, Haj-Yahia’s questionnaire was translated from English into Persian, NORAQ was translated from English into Arabic, PMWI-SF was translated from English into Portuguese, and MSDV-2.0 was translated from English into Spanish. The other instruments used a single language (English or Persian) and tested in their target population. The 18 instruments’ target populations contained women or married women, couples, intimate/romantic/dating relationships, and community populations among general population. Six screening instruments were tested in women and men, and twelve screening instruments only tested in women. Item generation was based on existing IPV screening instruments, literature reviews, reviews of material from service organizations, and/or scholarly work. Fifteen instruments could be administered by self-report, and three instruments required face-to-face interviews. The number of items included in the instruments were diverse and ranged from 1 to 78. The response options were also varied, such as yes or no, 5-point-Likert, or dichotomous.
Description of the included IPV screening instruments.
Instrument	Categories of Questions	Number of Items	Item generation	Mode of Administration	Response Options	Range of Scores	 	PVS	①+safety	3	the original version of PVS	self-report	yes or no	not applicable	 	3	not applicable	yes or no	not applicable	 	3	the original version of PVS	yes or no	not applicable	 	M-PVS	①	5	the original version of PVS	interview	yes or no	not applicable	 	CTS-2	①②③④	78	the original version of CTS	self-report	8-point-likert-type	78~624	 	①②③④	78	the original version of CTS	8-point-likert-type	78~624	 	①③④	32	the original version of CTS	8-point-likert-type	32~256	 	①②③	78	the original version of CTS	7-point-likert-type	0~468	 	AAT	①②③④	67	the finding of a qualitative study and literature review	self-report	5-point-likert-type	0~268	 	ASI	①②③	16	the texted version of ASI	interview	11-point-likert-type and yes or no	not applicable	 	ABI	①③	29	not applicable	self-report	5-point-likert-type	29~145	 	ASIST-GBV	①②③④	7	the qualitive research and systematic review	self-report	yes or no	not applicable	 		7	the qualitive research and systematic review	yes or no	not applicable	 	WCFSI	①②③④	33	the original version of SCIRS	self-report	6-point-likert-type	0~215	 	SCIRS-SF	②	9	the original version of SCIRS	self-report	6-point-likert-type	0~45	 	SAVS	①③	14	literature review & the first author’s over 20-year experience	self-report	5-point-likert-type	14~70	 	a screen instrument for DV	①②③	20	HITS & VAWI	self-report	5-point-likert-type	0~80	 	a single violence question	①	1	The partner table	interview	yes or no	not applicable	 	Haj-Yahia’s questionnaire	①②③④	32	CTS+PMWI+MWA+ISA+ABI	self-report	dichotomous scale	not applicable	 	HARK	①②③④	4	AAS	self-report	yes = 1 & no = 0	0~4	 	NORAQ	①②③	10	the English version of NORAQ	self-report	yes or no	not applicable	 	PMWI-SF	①②③	14	the Portuguese version of PMWI	self-report	5-point-likert-type	14~70	 	MSDV-2.0	①②③④	42	the original version of MSDV and new items related to online violence and sexual violence	self-report	5-point-likert-type	42~210	 	IPV-BSS	①②③④	4	WHO-IPV	self-report	yes or no or not applicable	not applicable
①physical violence; ② sexual violence; ③emotional-psychological abuse; ④controlling behaviors
The language and participants of the included IPV screening instruments.
Instrument	Original Language	Target Population	Country & Available Translated Version	Participants & Settings	N	 	PVS	English	all noncritical English-speaking women	Canada & English	English-speaking women & health care settings	1602	 	Denver & English	all noncritical English-speaking women & hospital-based ED	322	 	America & English	male victims of IPV & ED	116	 	M-PVS	English	women in different institutions from German-speaking countries	Basel & German	German-language women & psychiatric clinic settings	115	 	CTS-2	English	couples in general population	Italy & Italian	non-abused women and victims of IPV & primary health care centers and women’s shelters	209	 	Rio de Janeiro & Portuguese	pregnant women and premature childbirth & Brazilian context	774	 	Victoria & English	separated couples & Family mediation settings	121	 	America & English	male victims of IPV & ED	116	 	AAT	English	Jamaican women	Jamaica & English	Jamaican women & primary health care clinics and crisis centers	205	 	ASI	English	random female Swedish sample	Sweden & English	randomized sample of women & health care settings	699	 	ABI	English	English-speaking women	Ohio & English	White, African, and American Women & primary care waiting rooms	392	 	ASIST-GBV	English	refugees and internally displaced persons	Ethiopia and Colombia & English	female refugees and internally displaced persons & humanitarian settings	503	 	Ethiopia and Colombia & English	998	 	WCFSI	English	intimate relationships	China & Chinese	university students & heterosexual dating settings	927	 	SCIRS-SF	English	heterosexual romantic relationships	America and Brazil & Portuguese	Brazilians & heterosexual dating settings	181	 	SAVS	English	South Asian immigrant women	Chicago & English	SAI women & most recent relationships	116	 	a screen instrument for DV	Persian	Iranian married women	Iran & Persian	married Iranian women & health and social research settings	334	 	a single violence question	English	Latina women	Chicago & Spanish or English	Mexican and Puerto-Rican women & community-based healthcare settings	657	 	Haj-Yahia’s questionnaire	English	female population	Iran & Persian	married women & community-based settings	471	 	HARK	English	women in general practice	London & English	women in general practice waiting rooms & clinical settings	232	 	NORAQ	English	Arab and Middle Eastern women	Jordan & Arabic	Arab and Middle Eastern women & health -maternal and health care centers	175	 	PMWI-SF	English	Portuguese women	Portugal & Portuguese	colleague students & university-based settings	506	 	MSDV-2.0	English	dating relationships	Andalusia & Spanish	university students & educational settings	1091	 	IPV-BSS	English	large-scale community populations	Kenya & English	women clients in mental health agencies & clinical and community settings	8674

Methodological quality and measurement property ratings
The methodological quality and measurement property ratings assessed against the criteria for good measurement properties for each instrument based on the GRADE criteria as well as the PROMs categories are presented in Table 5. The two most frequently reported measurement properties in the included studies were internal consistency and criterion validity. The two least frequently reported measurement properties in the included studies were cross-culture validity and hypotheses testing. Two measurement properties (i.e., measurement error and responsiveness) were not assessed. In terms of methodological quality, the structural validity of the studies in this systematic review was rated as “very good,” “adequate,” or “doubtful.” The most of the studies’ internal consistency, reliability, and cross-cultural validity were rated as “very good.” The methodological quality of the hypothesis testing was found to be “very good” in only one study, while the methodological quality of the criterion validity of most of the studies was “inadequate.”
Methodological quality and measurement property ratings of included instruments.
Instrument	Structural validity	Internal consistence	Cross-cultural validity	Reliability	Criterion validity	Hypotheses testing	Level of evidence for measurement property	PROM category	 	n	meth qual	Result (Rating)	n	meth qual	Result (Rating)	n	meth qual	Result (Rating)	n	meth qual	Result (Rating)	n	meth qual	Result (Rating)	n	meth qual	Result (Rating)	 	IPV-BSS				544		(+)													High	C	 	SCIRS-SF	508		(+)	508		(+)										508		(-)	Moderate	C	 	SAVS				116		(+)							116		(+)				High	C	 	a screen instrument for DV	334		(+)	334		(+)				334		(+)							High	B	 	Haj-Yahia’s questionnaire	471		(+)	471		(+)				471		(+)							High	B	 	NORAQ				171		(+)													High	B	 	PMWI-SF	506		(-)	506		(+)				506		(+)	506		(+)				Moderate	C	 	MSDV-2.0	1091		(?)	1091		(+)				1091		(+)							High	B	 	ABI				400		(+)							400		(+)				High	C	 	ASIST-GBV				503		(+)	503		(+)										High	C	 				998	998										 	WCFSI				927		(+)													High	C	 	AAT				205		(+)													Low	C	 	ASI													699		(?)				Very low	C	 	a single violence question													657		(?)				Very low	C	 	HARK													232		(?)				Very low	C	 	PVS													2461		(?)				Very low	C	 													322				 													116				 	M-PVS													115		(?)				Very low	C	 	CTS-2	209		(-)	209		(+)													Very low	C	 				768		(+)				165		(+)							 				121		(+)													 													116		(?)
Red = very good; yellow = adequate, blue = doubtful, green = inadequate

Recommendations
We developed our recommendations based on the COSMIN guidelines. We classified screening instruments for domestic violence, Haj-Yahia’s questionnaire, NorVold Domestic Abuse Questionnaire, and the short version of Multidimensional Scale of Dating Violence in category “B”, so they can be used in the interim until better evidence can be provided. Considering the inadequate methodological of the content validity of the studies, the other 14 instruments are not recommended to use.

Discussion
In this review, we identified 18 instruments that had been developed to screen for IPV in the general population. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to critically evaluate the methodological quality of individual IPV screening instruments and the quality of their measurement properties based on the COSMIN methodology. In this review, four instruments were classified as category “B” and could be used in the interim, and 14 instruments were classified as category “C” and cannot be recommended for use. Further studies are therefore needed to develop instruments that can better screen for IPV in the general population. Although multiple instruments have been used to screen IPV in the general population, many issues still need to be resolved.
A lack of content validity with sufficient methodological quality may affect all the other measurement properties, which represents the relevance, comprehensiveness, and comprehensibility of an instrument. It is essential for an IPV screening instrument to have sufficient content validity, as this contributes to the overall quality of the screening. None of the studies adhered to the minimum requirement recommended by the COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist that 30 experts evaluate the content validity of an instrument. According to many systematic reviews based on COSMIN methods, it is common for content validity to be of a doubtful or inadequate methodological quality. In our opinion, there are two reasons for this phenomenon. First, researchers may overlook the basic criteria and importance of evaluating the content validity of an instrument as per the COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist. Second, the minimum number of experts suggested in the COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist to assess content validity is difficult for researchers to achieve.
The evaluation of structural validity usually uses confirmatory factor analysis and exploratory factor analysis based on the classical test theory. Confirmatory factor analysis is superior to exploratory factor analysis in determining the methodological quality of structural validity according to the COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist. In this systematic review, confirmatory factor analysis was used to test the structural validity of five instruments, and confirmatory factor analysis and exploratory factor analysis were used in one. Because no detailed exploratory factor analysis criteria were provided to assess structural validity, we made our final judgements using the confirmatory factor analysis results. Detailed criteria for assessing the results of studies that use exploratory factor analysis should be reported in the COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist in the future so that the methodological quality of instruments can be assessed comprehensively based on the results of confirmatory factor analysis and exploratory factor analysis, and the consistency and comparability of the results can be maintained.
In our review, 11 studies reported the criterion validity of 9 instruments, and the methodological quality of these studies were either very good or inadequate. The common issue regarding the inadequate methodological quality of the criterion validity was that the researchers did not calculate the correlations or the area under the receiver operating curve. Based on the COSMIN guideline, we suggest that researchers select a reasonable “gold standard” to calculate the correlations with the IPV screening instruments they have developed or plot the area under the receiver operating curve to better reflect the criterion validity.
Only one study in our systematic review clearly reported the measurement properties of the comparable instruments when conducting hypothesis testing of the construct validity. When a newly developed instrument is compared to another instrument, the construct of the comparable instrument should be known, and the instrument itself should be of sufficient quality. Future studies should also report the measurement properties of the comparative instruments when developing IPV screening instruments.
Through the above analysis, future studies on developing IPV screening instruments can consider the following points: 1) recognize the importance of content validity and 30 experts evaluate the content validity of an instrument, 2) use confirmatory factor analysis to test structural validity, 3) select an appropriate “gold standard” to calculate the correlations or the area under the receiver operating curve to reflect criteria validity, 4) compare the measurement properties between new IPV screening instruments and other existed IPV screening instruments, and 5) report all measurement properties as much as possible according to the COSMIN guideline, which will benefit the IPV screening instruments elevating from category “B” to “A”.
Additionally, the IPV screening instruments in our review could be administered via self-report or face-to-face interviews. We had difficulty identifying which method would be better for screening IPV in the general population. Due to cultural factors, irrespective of whether self-report or face-to-face interviews are used, this population often does not actively disclose their experiences of IPV in their daily lives and even conceal the fact of experiencing IPV. It is noticeable that a cross-sectional study among general population has suggested women reported higher levels of concerns and psychological distress than men. We therefore suggest that future studies using IPV screening instruments should combine self-report and face-to-face interviews to compare the prevalence of IPV among women and men in the general population. The IPV screening instruments in our review had many response options, which means there is no unified standard with which to determine the severity of IPV or to measure the cut-off scores of IPV screening instruments. As we mentioned before, because of unwilling disclosing or concealing the experiences of IPV, the results of screening cannot meet the cut-off scores, leading to the prevalence of IPV would be underestimated. In future studies, we hope that researchers will establish a rigorous standard that considers the severity of IPV as well as consistent cut-off scores.

Limitations
This systematic review had some limitations that need to be acknowledged. First, we only searched five published databases using refined and optimized search strategies, so some articles may have been overlooked. In future studies, more diverse databases should be utilized to ensure a more comprehensive search for articles. Second, we were not able to obtain the measurement errors and responsiveness information from the included instruments. We therefore recommend that, in future studies, researchers examine the measurement properties of the developed IPV screening instruments using the COSMIN methodology as a guideline.

Implications for future research and clinical practice
This systematic review gives several areas of research on nursing practice that need further exploration. Establishing a unified standard for determining the severity of IPV is essential for consistent assessment and intervention. Further research should focus on developing and validating such standards to ensure accurate identification and classification of IPV cases. Future research is needed to determine cut-off scores for IPV screening instruments, which will enhance the effectiveness of screening protocols by providing clear thresholds for identifying individuals at risk of or experiencing IPV. Futural study is also needed to develop screening instruments on different types of IPV following the COSMIN guideline, which can ensure ensures the reliability, validity, and responsiveness of screening tools across diverse populations and settings.
Implementing standardized assessment for the psychological properties of IPV screening instruments based on COSMIN methodology can help nurses and healthcare professionals to select an appropriate instrument to enhance the identification of IPV in general population. Our findings can inform the development of healthcare policies aimed at addressing IPV. Policymakers can use evidence-based recommendations to advocate for the implementation of comprehensive IPV screening programs and the integration of IPV services into healthcare systems. The safety of general population that experiencing or have experienced IPV will hopefully increase, when these advances are made in the process of healthcare, practice, policy, and research.

Conclusion
This is the first systematic review to provide a comprehensive overview of the quality of the measurement properties and methodological quality of IPV screening instruments for the general population. Based on the COSMIN guideline, the four instruments in category “B” can be used as interim measures; however, the quality of these PROMs will need to be assessed in future studies so that better evidence can be provided. The overall methodological quality of majority of the evaluated instruments was insufficient. While the methodological quality of the structural validity, internal consistency, and reliability of most of the studies was very good, the methodological quality of the criterion validity and content validity was inadequate. Based on the results of this systematic review, we recommend that nursing and healthcare researchers follow the COSMIN guideline when developing IPV screening instruments. A rigorous IPV screening instrument with good measurement properties is urgently required to identify and screen for IPV in the general population.

Supporting information

References
Prevalence and associated factors of intimate partner violence among pregnant women attending health care facilities, Northern Ethiopia: comparative cross-sectional study
Intimate Partner Violence
Intimate partner violence and associated factors among reproductive age women in Liberia: a cross-sectional study using a recent Liberian demographic and health survey
Prevalence and changes of intimate partner violence against women aged 15 to 49 years in 53 low-income and middle-income countries from 2000 to 2021: a secondary analysis of population-based surveys
WHO. Understanding and Addressing Violence Against Woman 2012 [http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/77432/1/WHO/_RHR_12.36_eng.pdf
Intimate Partner Violence and Sexual Violence
Global, regional, and national prevalence estimates of physical or sexual, or both, intimate partner violence against women in 2018
Health consequences of intimate partner violence
Intimate Partner Violence and Women’s Health
Intimate partner violence: prevalence, health consequences, and intervention
The Impact of Masculine Ideologies on Heterosexual Men’s Experiences of Intimate Partner Violence: A Qualitative Exploration
Improving the mental health of women intimate partner violence survivors: Findings from a realist review of psychosocial interventions
Intimate partner violence screening tools: a systematic review
Effective gender-based violence screening tools for use in primary health care settings in Afghanistan and Pakistan: a systematic review
Measures for screening for intimate partner violence: a systematic review
Risk Assessment Instruments for Intimate Partner Femicide: A Systematic Review
Instruments used to measure dating violence: A systematic review of psychometric properties
Evaluating Measures of Intimate Partner Violence Using Consensus-Based Standards of Validity
Barriers to Men’s Help Seeking for Intimate Partner Violence
COSMIN guideline for systematic reviews of patient-reported outcome measures
COSMIN methodology for evaluating the content validity of patient-reported outcome measures: a Delphi study
COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist for systematic reviews of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures
The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews
Intimate Partner Violence Screening Instruments: A Protocol for a COSMIN-Based Systematic Review
Accuracy of 3 brief screening questions for detecting partner violence in the emergency department
Approaches to screening for intimate partner violence in health care settings: a randomized trial
Male victims of partner violence: prevalence and accuracy of screening tools
Screening domestic violence. A German-language screening instrument for domestic violence against women
Screening for Partner Violence Among Family Mediation Clients: Differentiating Types of Abuse
Cross-cultural measurement equivalence of the Revised Conflict Tactics Scales (CTS2) Portuguese version used to identify violence within couples
Detecting Domestic Violence: Italian Validation of Revised Conflict Tactics Scale (CTS-2)
McWhinney-Dehaney L. The development and psychometric testing of the Risk for Abuse Assessment Scale and the Abuse Assessment Tool for use in Jamaican women2006.
Validation of the Abuse Screening Inventory (ASI)
Abuse behavior inventory: cutpoint, validity, and characterization of discrepancies
Psychometric properties and reliability of the Assessment Screen to Identify Survivors Toolkit for Gender Based Violence (ASIST-GBV): results from humanitarian settings in Ethiopia and Colombia
A revision of the sexual coercion in intimate relationships scale for young adults in China
Sexual Coercion, Mate Retention, and Relationship Satisfaction in Brazilian and American Romantic Relationships
A Validated Screening Instrument for Identifying Intimate Partner Violence in South Asian Immigrant Women
Psychometric Properties of a Screening Instrument for Domestic Violence in a Sample of Iranian Women
Validity of Single Question for Screening Intimate Partner Violence among Urban Latina Women
Psychometric properties of Haj-Yahia’s questionnaire of violence against women in a sample of married women in Tehran, Iran
The sensitivity and specificity of four questions (HARK) to identify intimate partner violence: a diagnostic accuracy study in general practice
Screening for domestic violence in Jordan: validation of an Arabic version of a domestic violence against women questionnaire
Screening Tool for Psychological Intimate Partner Violence: Portuguese Validation of the Psychological Maltreatment of Women Inventory
Short version of the Multidimensional Scale of Dating Violence (MSDV 2.0) in Spanish-language: Instrument development and psychometric evaluation
Toward Community Coverage on Self-Screening, Diagnosis, and Help-Seeking Behavior for Both Gender Victims of Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) in a Kenyan Setting: The Development of IPV-Brief Self-Screener (IPV-BSS) Version of the WHO-IPV Instrument
Measures of central sensitization and their measurement properties in musculoskeletal trauma: A systematic review
Instruments to assess self-neglect among older adults: A systematic review of measurement properties
Intimate partner violence in the shadow of COVID-19 and its associations with stress, function and support among the Israeli general population
10.1371/journal.pone.0310297.r001

Decision Letter 0
Federici
Stefano
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
24 Jun 2024
PONE-D-24-17901The best intimate partner violence screening instruments for the general population: a COSMIN-based systematic reviewPLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Chen,
Thank you for submitting your manuscript to PLOS ONE. After careful consideration, we feel that it has merit but does not fully meet PLOS ONE’s publication criteria as it currently stands. Therefore, we invite you to submit a revised version of the manuscript that addresses the points raised during the review process.
Although both reviewers found the topic of the study interesting, they also identified numerous methodological shortcomings and a potential limited impact on the international scientific community. The manuscript requires extensive revision and integration of information to ensure its scientific acceptability and suitability for publication.
Please submit your revised manuscript by Aug 07 2024 11:59PM. If you will need more time than this to complete your revisions, please reply to this message or contact the journal office at plosone@plos.org. When you're ready to submit your revision, log on to https://www.editorialmanager.com/pone/ and select the 'Submissions Needing Revision' folder to locate your manuscript file.
A rebuttal letter that responds to each point raised by the academic editor and reviewer(s). You should upload this letter as a separate file labeled 'Response to Reviewers'.
A marked-up copy of your manuscript that highlights changes made to the original version. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Revised Manuscript with Track Changes'.
An unmarked version of your revised paper without tracked changes. You should upload this as a separate file labeled 'Manuscript'.
Please include the following items when submitting your revised manuscript:
If you would like to make changes to your financial disclosure, please include your updated statement in your cover letter. Guidelines for resubmitting your figure files are available below the reviewer comments at the end of this letter.
If applicable, we recommend that you deposit your laboratory protocols in protocols.io to enhance the reproducibility of your results. Protocols.io assigns your protocol its own identifier (DOI) so that it can be cited independently in the future. For instructions see: https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/submission-guidelines#loc-laboratory-protocols. Additionally, PLOS ONE offers an option for publishing peer-reviewed Lab Protocol articles, which describe protocols hosted on protocols.io. Read more information on sharing protocols at https://plos.org/protocols?utm_medium=editorial-email&utm_source=authorletters&utm_campaign=protocols.
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript.
Kind regards,
Stefano Federici, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Journal Requirements:
When submitting your revision, we need you to address these additional requirements.
1. Please ensure that your manuscript meets PLOS ONE's style requirements, including those for file naming. The PLOS ONE style templates can be found at
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=wjVg/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_main_body.pdf and
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/s/file?id=ba62/PLOSOne_formatting_sample_title_authors_affiliations.pdf
2. PLOS requires an ORCID iD for the corresponding author in Editorial Manager on papers submitted after December 6th, 2016. Please ensure that you have an ORCID iD and that it is validated in Editorial Manager. To do this, go to ‘Update my Information’ (in the upper left-hand corner of the main menu), and click on the Fetch/Validate link next to the ORCID field. This will take you to the ORCID site and allow you to create a new iD or authenticate a pre-existing iD in Editorial Manager. Please see the following video for instructions on linking an ORCID iD to your Editorial Manager account: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xcclfuvtxQ
3. Thank you for stating the following financial disclosure: "This research was funded by the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (grant number 2022JJ40641) and the Changsha Natural Science Foundation (grant number kq2202114), which provided support for the design of this study."
Please state what role the funders took in the study.  If the funders had no role, please state: ""The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.""
If this statement is not correct you must amend it as needed.
Please include this amended Role of Funder statement in your cover letter; we will change the online submission form on your behalf.
Additional Editor Comments:
Although both reviewers found the topic of the study interesting, they also identified numerous methodological shortcomings and a potential limited impact on the international scientific community. The manuscript requires extensive revision and integration of information to ensure its scientific acceptability and suitability for publication.
[Note: HTML markup is below. Please do not edit.]
Reviewers' comments:
Reviewer's Responses to Questions
Comments to the Author
1. Is the manuscript technically sound, and do the data support the conclusions?
The manuscript must describe a technically sound piece of scientific research with data that supports the conclusions. Experiments must have been conducted rigorously, with appropriate controls, replication, and sample sizes. The conclusions must be drawn appropriately based on the data presented.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: Partly
**********
2. Has the statistical analysis been performed appropriately and rigorously?
Reviewer #1: N/A
Reviewer #2: N/A
**********
3. Have the authors made all data underlying the findings in their manuscript fully available?
The PLOS Data policy requires authors to make all data underlying the findings described in their manuscript fully available without restriction, with rare exception (please refer to the Data Availability Statement in the manuscript PDF file). The data should be provided as part of the manuscript or its supporting information, or deposited to a public repository. For example, in addition to summary statistics, the data points behind means, medians and variance measures should be available. If there are restrictions on publicly sharing data—e.g. participant privacy or use of data from a third party—those must be specified.
Reviewer #1: Yes
Reviewer #2: Yes
**********
4. Is the manuscript presented in an intelligible fashion and written in standard English?
PLOS ONE does not copyedit accepted manuscripts, so the language in submitted articles must be clear, correct, and unambiguous. Any typographical or grammatical errors should be corrected at revision, so please note any specific errors here.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
5. Review Comments to the Author
Please use the space provided to explain your answers to the questions above. You may also include additional comments for the author, including concerns about dual publication, research ethics, or publication ethics. (Please upload your review as an attachment if it exceeds 20,000 characters)
Reviewer #1: I believe that the topic is important, however, the authors did not make a strong enough case for why this article is important. Also, the word "best" should be avoided and replaced with a term more appropriate for academic works and audiences. Finally, was this an international/global review (I think it was), and if so, the authors should consider a thorough review of cultural factors related to screening instruments for IPV.
Reviewer #2: General
This paper assumes that the reader knows a lot about psychometrics and COSMIN. Both topics are quite complex and especially as COSMIN is not that well known outside of psychometrics, it would be useful to provide the reader with more information to help them interpret the manuscript. The manuscript would benefit from a table or figure explaining concepts such as construct validity, internal consistency etc and how COSMIN ideally wants these to be measured by studies and what is considered to be less adequate (e.g. that for reliability a study would receive a sufficient rating if the ICC or weighted Kappa ≥ 0.70, the study would be insufficient if the ICC or weighted Kappa was < 0.70 and would be indeterminate is neither ICC nor weighted Kappa was recorded).
I really liked the discussion section of this manuscript, but there should be more information to help the reader before this point.
Abstract
Aim: don’t think need added part of, "for their users". Recommendations is fine.
PQDT and EBSCO PBSC should be in full, not the acronym.
Introduction
Line 46: What do you mean by other relationship types? I would assume it’s some form of romantic/dating or sexual relationship? This needs to be made clear.
Line 47 – 49: The sentence about domestic violence isn’t as easy to understand as it could be. Suggest that you explain that you’re going to refer to the concept as intimate partner violence, rather than domestic violence as you’re only looking at instruments that address abuse between romantic/dating partners rather than abuse between family members (e.g. abuse of children or elderly relatives).
Line 52 – 57: When you say the physical health consequences of IPV are well documented and the mental health consequences are frequently documented, what do you mean? Are there differences between the amount of evidence available for physical and mental health? Are associations between IPV and physical health better established? Or are the links between IPV and physical and mental health equally well evidenced? The wording of this part of the manuscript implies a hierarchy of evidence, but I'm not sure if that's what you meant.
Line 63: "Because of the difficulty of meeting the cut-offs" – I’m not sure what you mean by this. This should be clearly explained.
Line 89: I wouldn’t give the example of female patients. State that you include studies on IPV screening instruments targeting both males and females.
Some of the phrasing in the introduction needs a re-think. It can be quite difficult to follow.
Methods
Provide references for COSMIN.
COSMIN addresses the psychometric properties of measurement instruments. The risk of bias tool is an adaptation of the checklist and its four-point rating system into a version exclusively for use in systematic reviews of Patient Reported Outcome Measures and assesses risk of bias of studies on measurement properties – Mokkink et al (2018) COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist for systematic reviews of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures. Qual Life Res. It’s not specifically about IPV screening instruments, as could be interpreted here.
Line 114/115 – why did you contact the author of each included study to review the search results?
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria isn't detailed enough, use PICO (population, interventions, comparators and outcomes).
I would be more inclined to say people who are victims/survivors of IPV rather than people who were suffering from IPV.
Were reference lists of review articles identiﬁed in the literature search checked for relevant studies?
Were there exclusions for language?
Study selection
Examples of the Joanna Briggs Institute SUMARI search filters used would be helpful for someone replicating the review.
Who reviewed the titles and abstracts?
Data abstraction
This is more of a computer science term, I would title as data extraction.
PROM needs writing out in full the first time it’s mentioned.
Characteristics of the included studies
Were the instruments tested mainly with males or females? or a mixture of both?
Methodological quality and measurement property ratings
What were the psychometric properties that were reported the least in the studies?
More information is needed to explain why the measurement properties were given the ratings that they were. What was presented in the studies for the internal consistency, reliability and cross-cultural validity to be rated as very good? What was missing for criterion validity to be rated inadequate?
Should be clearer how many studies measured each psychometric property for each instrument, I assume with 18 instruments and 23 studies, most instruments will have only been assessed by one study, but this isn’t clear. A table, figure or some reporting would help with this. Readers should understand this before the discussion.
Discussion
Some discussion of what evidence is currently missing that would elevate existing measures from a B to an A may be interesting, especially with regards to directions for future research.
Generally the discussion section is very well written. My only comment is that the rest of the paper refers to IPV among both men and women, but the discussion only mentions women being reluctant to report.
The discussion would benefit from some inclusion about the majority of instruments only being tested with women.
Table 2
Table 2 may benefit from more detail about the thematic content of the instruments. For example, categories of questions. Alternatively, this could be a supplementary table.
Table 2 and 3
The acronym and full name of each instrument would be useful here, so the reader don't have to look back to the main text.
Table 3
Make it clear the levels of evidence is using the GRADE criteria.
There are spelling mistakes in the figure presented.
**********
6. PLOS authors have the option to publish the peer review history of their article (what does this mean?). If published, this will include your full peer review and any attached files.
If you choose “no”, your identity will remain anonymous but your review may still be made public.
Do you want your identity to be public for this peer review? For information about this choice, including consent withdrawal, please see our Privacy Policy.
Reviewer #1: No
Reviewer #2: No
**********
[NOTE: If reviewer comments were submitted as an attachment file, they will be attached to this email and accessible via the submission site. Please log into your account, locate the manuscript record, and check for the action link "View Attachments". If this link does not appear, there are no attachment files.]
While revising your submission, please upload your figure files to the Preflight Analysis and Conversion Engine (PACE) digital diagnostic tool, https://pacev2.apexcovantage.com/. PACE helps ensure that figures meet PLOS requirements. To use PACE, you must first register as a user. Registration is free. Then, login and navigate to the UPLOAD tab, where you will find detailed instructions on how to use the tool. If you encounter any issues or have any questions when using PACE, please email PLOS at figures@plos.org. Please note that Supporting Information files do not need this step.
10.1371/journal.pone.0310297.r002

Author response to Decision Letter 0
13 Aug 2024
Dear Editor-in-Chief and reviewers，
Thank you for the quick and positive feedback for the manuscript. We sincerely thank the editor and reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions on further revisions to improve the quality of this manuscript. Appended to this letter is our point-by-point responses to the comments and suggestions. Changes made in the manuscript are marked in red in the uploaded files. A clean and a track-change copies of the revised manuscript and supporting information files have been uploaded. The response to reviewers have been uploaded.
We hope that you find our responses satisfactory, and that the manuscript is now acceptable for publication in the PLOS ONE.
Yours sincerely,
Jiarui CHEN
Xiangya School of Nursing,
Central South University
Reviewer 1:
1. I believe that the topic is important, however, the authors did not make a strong enough case for why this article is important. Also, the word "best" should be avoided and replaced with a term more appropriate for academic works and audiences. Finally, was this an international/global review (I think it was), and if so, the authors should consider a thorough review of cultural factors related to screening instruments for IPV.
Response: Thank you very much for your comments. We have noticed that using “best” is not appropriate in our manuscript. The title revision is as follows: “Evaluation of the measurement properties of intimate partner violence screening instruments for the general population: a COSMIN-based international systematic review”. -Page 1 lines 1-2.
Moreover, for culture factors, we added corresponding contents in the part of results. The revision is as follows: “Out of the 23 included studies, a total of 18 IPV screening instruments were reported. The 18 instruments were mainly (17 instruments) original developed in English. Among them, M-PVS was translated from English to German, CTS-2 was translated into two languages, namely Italian and Portuguese, WCFSI was translated from English to Chinese, SCIRS-SF was translated from English into Portuguese, a single violence question was translated from Spanish to English, Haj-Yahia's questionnaire was translated from English into Persian, NORAQ was translated from English into Arabic, PMWI-SF was translated from English into Portuguese, and MSDV-2.0 was translated from English into Spanish. The other instruments used a single language (English or Persian) and tested in their target population. The 18 instruments’ target populations contained women or married women, couples, intimate/romantic/dating relationships, and community populations among general population.” -Page 11 to 12 lines 203-213.
We consider that the translated IPV screening instruments could be tested in corresponding participants different from their target population, which could proof this IPV screening instruments adopted their culture.
Reviewer 2:
1. This paper assumes that the reader knows a lot about psychometrics and COSMIN. Both topics are quite complex and especially as COSMIN is not that well known outside of psychometrics, it would be useful to provide the reader with more information to help them interpret the manuscript. The manuscript would benefit from a table or figure explaining concepts such as construct validity, internal consistency etc. and how COSMIN ideally wants these to be measured by studies and what is considered to be less adequate (e.g. that for reliability a study would receive a sufficient rating if the ICC or weighted Kappa ≥ 0.70, the study would be insufficient if the ICC or weighted Kappa was < 0.70 and would be indeterminate is neither ICC nor weighted Kappa was recorded).
Response: Thank you for your opinions. After your comments, we have noticed that we haven’t add the published protocol of this review as a reference, Actually, before we conducted the full review, we have published a protocol titled on “Intimate Partner Violence Screening Instruments: A Protocol for a COSMIN-Based Systematic Review” (DOI: 10.3390/ijerph20021541). Therefore, the methodology of our study was based on this protocol, the contents of these concepts such as construct validity, internal consistency etc. and how COSMIN ideally wants these to be measured by studies and what is less adequate were not repeated in our manuscript. We have added corresponding explanations in the method part as follows: “The methodology of the current study was based on our published protocol (DOI: 10.3390/ijerph20021541). The protocol (24) for this study was registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO; number CRD42022365247 (24)).” –Page 5 lines 98-100.
2. Abstract
Aim: don’t think need added part of, "for their users". Recommendations is fine.
PQDT and EBSCO PBSC should be in full, not the acronym.
Response: Thanks for your suggestions. The revisions are as follows: “Aim: To systematically appraise, compare, and summarize the measurement properties of intimate partner violence screening instruments for the general population and provide recommendations based on COSMIN guideline.
Methods: We searched PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global and EBSCO Psychology Behavioral Sciences Collection from their establishment to March 2024 using systematic search strategies.” -Page 2 lines 24-28.
3. Introduction
Line 46: What do you mean by other relationship types? I would assume it’s some form of romantic/dating or sexual relationship? This needs to be made clear.
Response: Thank you very much for your suggestions. According to your suggestions, we read again the literature. We apologized for the confusions. The revision is as follows: “ Intimate partners may include couples, ex-couples, boyfriends/girlfriends, dating partners, sexual partners, or other romantic type of relationship.” -Page 3 lines 46-47.
4. Line 47 – 49: The sentence about domestic violence isn’t as easy to understand as it could be. Suggest that you explain that you’re going to refer to the concept as intimate partner violence, rather than domestic violence as you’re only looking at instruments that address abuse between romantic/dating partners rather than abuse between family members (e.g. abuse of children or elderly relatives).
Response: Thank you for your comments, we apologized for the confusions. The revision is as follows: “The term “domestic violence” is a broader term that contains the abuse of children or the elderly or the abuse by any member from the family, while it was used in many countries to refer to intimate partner violence (5)” -Page 3 lines 48-50.
5. Line 52 – 57: When you say the physical health consequences of IPV are well documented and the mental health consequences are frequently documented, what do you mean? Are there differences between the amount of evidence available for physical and mental health? Are associations between IPV and physical health better established? Or are the links between IPV and physical and mental health equally well evidenced? The wording of this part of the manuscript implies a hierarchy of evidence, but I'm not sure if that's what you meant.
Response: Thanks for your comments. After group discussion, we recognized that you are right. The revision is as follows: In a study by the World Health Organization, 27% of women aged 15–49 years had been subjected to physical and/or sexual violence by their partners, and 13% of them had experienced such events in the previous 12-month period (7). IPV can result in negative physical and emotional outcomes for the people who experience violence and their families (2). The physical health consequences include acute illnesses and chronic and pain-based disorders, such as respiratory, urinary tract, and sexually transmitted illnesses, insomnia, headache, menstrual-related disorders, pelvic pain, and functional gastrointestinal and reproductive diseases (8-10). Mental health issues are also reported among people who are experiencing or have experienced IPV, and these can have potentially serious consequences. Anxiety, depression, posttraumatic stress disorder, and suicide are all common among this population (11, 12). Importantly, the severity of these mental health issues tends to escalate with the severity of the IPV experienced.” -Page 3 lines 52-61.
6. Line 63: "Because of the difficulty of meeting the cut-offs" – I’m not sure what you mean by this. This should be clearly explained.
Response: Thanks for your comments. We have added the explanation in the part of discussion in our manuscript, the added contents are as follows: “ The IPV screening instruments in our review had many response options (41, 45, 46), which means there is no unified standard with which to determine the severity of IPV or to measure the cut-off scores of IPV screening instruments. As we mentioned before, because of unwilling disclosing or concealing the experiences of IPV, the results of screening cannot meet the cut-off scores, leading to the prevalence of IPV would be underestimated. In future studies, we hope that researchers will establish a rigorous standard that considers the severity of IPV as well as consistent cut-off scores.” -Page 21 lines 332-337.
7. Line 89: I wouldn’t give the example of female patients. State that you include studies on IPV screening instruments targeting both males and females.
Response: Thanks for your comments. We have noticed our expression was described unclearly. The revisions are as follows: “In this study, we hope to explore the methodological properties of IPV screening instruments targeting general population in non-specific population. Therefore, we will include the studies on IPV screening instruments targeting both males and females.” -Page 4 lines 81-83.
8. Methods
Provide references for COSMIN.
COSMIN addresses the psychometric properties of measurement instruments. The risk of bias tool is an adaptation of the checklist and its four-point rating system into a version exclusively for use in systematic reviews of Patient Reported Outcome Measures and assesses risk of bias of studies on measurement properties – Mokkink et al (2018) COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist for systematic reviews of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures. Qual Life Res. It’s not specifically about IPV screening instruments, as could be interpreted here.
Response: Thank you very much for your suggestion. The revised content is as follows: “The COSMIN guideline (20) provides methodology on addressing the risk of bias in studies that aimed at instruments developing, rating their measurement properties, evaluating the overall quality of evidence for each measurement property, and providing recommendations based on the overall quality evidence. The protocol for the current study was registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO; number CRD42022365247).” -Page 5 lines 95-98.
9. Line 114/115 – why did you contact the author of each included study to review the search results? Were reference lists of review articles identiﬁed in the literature search checked for relevant studies?
Response: Thanks for your question. We apologized for the expression unclear. The revised content is as follows: “ The reference lists of review articles identiﬁed in the literature search were checked for relevant studies. ” -Page 5 line 108.
10. Inclusion/Exclusion criteria isn't detailed enough, use PICO (population, interventions, comparators and outcomes).
I would be more inclined to say people who are victims/survivors of IPV rather than people who were suffering from IPV.
Were there exclusions for language?
Response: Thanks for your suggestions. Because we don’t cite our published protocol in our manuscript, we apologized for the confusions. The contents on PICO in our protocol are as follows: “In this study, we adapted the ‘objectives’ section of PRISMA 2020 checklist by changing ‘Population(s), Interventions, Comparators and Outcomes’ into ‘Construct, Populations, Type of Instruments and Measurement Properties’. The main search concepts are the consequences of IPV (Construct), people who suffer from IPV (Population), PROMs (Type of instrument(s)), and measurement properties.”
Additionally, the questions for languages we wrote in the inclusion criteria, the revisions are as follows: “Therefore, we included primary studies that (1) reported screening IPV instruments designed for people in the general population who were victims of IPV, (2) described the processes of development and/or evaluation of one or more measurement properties for the eligible instrument(s), (3) had full-text availability, and (4) articles were published in English. According to the COSMIN guideline, we excluded original studies that used the IPV screening instruments only for outcomes measurements not evaluating measurement properties.” -Page 6 lines 112-116.
11. Study selection
Examples of the Joanna Briggs Institute SUMARI search filters used would be helpful for someone replicating the review.
Response: Thanks for your suggestions. We used the Joanna Briggs Institute SUMARI search filter in our study, which was helpful for us. We wrote in our manuscript; the content is as follows: “We then imported the articles into Joanna Briggs Institute SUMARI search filters to identify the studies with psychometric properties linked to terms related to IPV screening instruments.” -Page 7 lines 118-120.
12. Who reviewed the titles and abstracts?
Response: Thanks for your question. We have added the researchers who reviewed the titles and abstracts in our manuscripts, and the researchers who extracted data and conducted quality appraisal and data synthesis, the revisions are as follows: “ Two independent researchers (Q.X. and K.C.) undertook the first manual filtering of the articles’ titles and abstracts based on the eligibility criteria. The full-text articles not excluded in the second manual screening phase were read independently by two researchers (Y.L. and G.W.). All different opinions between the researchers were resolved under the help of the third researcher (S.O.).” -Page 7 lines 120-123.
“First, we customized the data extraction table following a discussion in the research group. Then, two researchers (Y.L. and G.W.) separately extracted the corresponding data based on the content of the data extraction table. Finally, the third researcher (J.C.) would examine the extracted data and address any differences encountered.” -Page 7 lines 125-127.
“Two researchers (Y.L. and G.W.) independently assessed the measurement properties of the IPV screening instruments using the COSMIN methodology. The third researcher (J.C.) handled any disagreements related to the process.” -Page 8 lines 143-145.
13. Data abstraction
This is more of a computer science term, I would title as data extraction.
PROM needs writing out in full the first time it’s mentioned.
Response: Thanks for your opinions. The title revision is as follows: “ Data extraction”-Page 7 line 124. Additionally, the first time we mentioned PROMs, we have written out in full in the introduction, the content is as follows: “ The main purpose of this systematic review was therefore to identify the current IPV screening instruments in use for the general population and to evaluate their measurement properties based on the COSMIN methodology for systematic reviews of patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) (20, 21) and the COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist for systematic reviews of PROMs (22).” -Pages 4 to 5 lines 85-89.
14. Characteristics of the included studies
Were the instruments tested mainly with males or females? or a mixture of both?
Response: Thanks for your questions. We have noticed that our expression was unclear, the revision is as follows: “Six screening instruments were tested in women and men, and twelve screening instruments only tested in women.” -Page 12 lines 212-213.
15. Methodological quality and measurement property ratings
What were the psychometric properties that were reported the least in the studies?
Response: Thanks for your questions. We have added the content in our manuscript that is as follows: “The two least frequently reported measurement properties in the included studies
10.1371/journal.pone.0310297.r003

Decision Letter 1
Federici
Stefano
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
29 Aug 2024
Evaluation of the measurement properties of intimate partner violence screening instruments for the general population: a COSMIN-based international systematic review
PONE-D-24-17901R1
Dear Dr. Chen,
We’re pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been judged scientifically suitable for publication and will be formally accepted for publication once it meets all outstanding technical requirements.
Within one week, you’ll receive an e-mail detailing the required amendments. When these have been addressed, you’ll receive a formal acceptance letter and your manuscript will be scheduled for publication.
An invoice will be generated when your article is formally accepted. Please note, if your institution has a publishing partnership with PLOS and your article meets the relevant criteria, all or part of your publication costs will be covered. Please make sure your user information is up-to-date by logging into Editorial Manager at Editorial Manager® and clicking the ‘Update My Information' link at the top of the page. If you have any questions relating to publication charges, please contact our Author Billing department directly at authorbilling@plos.org.
If your institution or institutions have a press office, please notify them about your upcoming paper to help maximize its impact. If they’ll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team as soon as possible -- no later than 48 hours after receiving the formal acceptance. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
Kind regards,
Stefano Federici, Ph.D.
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE
Additional Editor Comments (optional):
Although both reviewers were invited to comment on the original version, they were unable to participate in a second round for personal reasons. Having carefully reviewed the authors' responses to the reviewers and the changes made to the text, it is my assessment that the manuscript has been significantly enhanced and is now suitable for publication.
Reviewers' comments:
10.1371/journal.pone.0310297.r004

Acceptance letter
Federici
Stefano
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.
25 Sep 2024
PONE-D-24-17901R1
PLOS ONE
Dear Dr. Chen,
I'm pleased to inform you that your manuscript has been deemed suitable for publication in PLOS ONE. Congratulations! Your manuscript is now being handed over to our production team.
At this stage, our production department will prepare your paper for publication. This includes ensuring the following:
* All references, tables, and figures are properly cited
* All relevant supporting information is included in the manuscript submission,
* There are no issues that prevent the paper from being properly typeset
If revisions are needed, the production department will contact you directly to resolve them. If no revisions are needed, you will receive an email when the publication date has been set. At this time, we do not offer pre-publication proofs to authors during production of the accepted work. Please keep in mind that we are working through a large volume of accepted articles, so please give us a few weeks to review your paper and let you know the next and final steps.
Lastly, if your institution or institutions have a press office, please let them know about your upcoming paper now to help maximize its impact. If they'll be preparing press materials, please inform our press team within the next 48 hours. Your manuscript will remain under strict press embargo until 2 pm Eastern Time on the date of publication. For more information, please contact onepress@plos.org.
If we can help with anything else, please email us at customercare@plos.org.
Thank you for submitting your work to PLOS ONE and supporting open access.
Kind regards,
PLOS ONE Editorial Office Staff
on behalf of
Prof. Stefano Federici
Academic Editor
PLOS ONE