Analysis of the causes of poor incision healing after hip and knee surgery and review of the literature
Objective
A retrospective study was conducted to analyze the specific causes and literature review of patients who developed poor incision healing problems after hip and knee surgery.
Methods
This was a retrospective analysis of 250 patients admitted to the Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology of the Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine from October 1, 2022 to August 14, 2023 for hip and knee surgery. Among them, patients, 27 males and 39 females, were found to have poor incision healing after surgery; their ages ranged from 22 – 79 years, with an average of 58.71 years; and the patients developed symptoms of poor surgical incision healing from 1 – 8 months after surgery, with an average of 2.3 months. The causes of poor incision healing after hip and knee surgery were analyzed with reference to previously documented clinical data and relevant literature.
Results
According to this data, it was concluded that the surgeon's inexperience in surgical incision suturing, unskilled suturing technique, inaccurate suture selection, etc., led to the occurrence of surgical incision healing problems, which accounted for 77.28% of the cases. The patient's age, lifestyle habits, BMI, and other underlying diseases (e.g., diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, etc.) caused poor postoperative incision healing in 22.73% of cases.
Conclusion
Poor intraoperative suturing by the surgeon was the main cause of poor incision healing after hip and knee arthroplasty, which can be avoided by good suturing and strict postoperative dressing changes and nursing care.
Supplementary Information
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12891-025-08420-6.

Introduction
Total hip arthroplasty (THA) and total knee arthroplasty (TKA) are major surgical procedures in orthopedics and traumatology, and they are among the most effective methods for the treatment of joints and joint reconstruction. The surgical incisions for THA and TKA are large, with lengths of up to 10–15 cm. They are characterized by their location at large joints, high mobility, and high tension. Among the various orthopedic surgeries, THA and TKA are the most traumatic surgeries, and poor postoperative incision healing is affected by many factors: (1) the patient's own factors, such as age, sex, underlying diseases, personal habits and nutritional status, etc.; (2) medical factors, such as surgical methods, time, and suture techniques, etc.. The problem of poor incision healing results in great pain and a heavy economic burden on patients, and at the same time, it also poses considerable challenges to clinicians. Therefore, the problem of incision healing after hip and knee surgery deserves close attention. To minimize the problem of poor incision healing after surgery, we counted 66 patients with poor incision healing after hip and knee arthroplasty in our hospital, analyzed the reasons and reviewed the literature to provide clinical experience in diagnosis and treatment. The retrospective analysis was as follows.

Materials and methods

Population study
A retrospective analysis of 250 patients admitted to the Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology of the Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Traditional Chinese Medicine from October 1, 2022, to August 14, 2023 revealed 66 patients who presented with postoperative hip and knee incision malhealing problems: 27 males and 39 females aged 22–79 years, with an average age of 58.71 years. All patients were completed by the same group of experienced surgeons, and patients had the same dressing material and manner of dressing change after surgery. All patients had peri-incision dehiscence 1–3 months after hip and knee surgery, and some of them had a small amount of oozing near the dehiscence. One patient had fever, and after taking antipyretic medicine, the temperature gradually decreased; the remaining patients were investigated for C-reactive protein (CRP), absolute neutrophil value, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), etc. The results were summarized as follows: CRP, absolute neutrophil value, ESR and other test indices were normal, suggesting that there was no infection.
We defined poor incision healing in this way according to previous studies: inclusion criteria: ① oozing on the 3rd day or more after surgery, with oozing lasting for at least 3 days; ② oozing fluid was reddish or yellowish in nature, with clear color and no purulent secretion; ③ oozing fluid was confirmed to have no bacterial growth by microbiological culture; ④ the area of penetration of incisional dressings was not less than 2 cm × 2 cm; ⑤ there was no redness, swelling and elevation of skin temperature in the peripheral area of the incision.
Exclusion criteria: ① patients' privacy, not willing to cooperate with this study; ② patients with poor incision healing transferred to other hospitals for treatment.

Results
Schematic diagram of different causes of poor postoperative incision healing a excessive patient obesity; b too loose and poorly aligned pisiform line suture; c postoperative thread dislodgement; d too tight pisiform line suture, chronic cutting; e nonabsorbable, bare pisiform line, suture too close to the skin; f premature absorption of external 3–0 absorbable line; g too much 2–0 absorbable line and external 3–0 absorbable line leading to kink reaction; h proximal suture line, subcutaneous suture is too loose; i skin suture not perfectly aligned; j poor subcutaneous suture resulting in
We compared the degree of incision healing after hip and knee surgery and the patients' preoperative and postoperative indicators and statistically analyzed the causes of poor incision healing. Among the 66 patients, 54 underwent hip surgery, and 12 underwent knee surgery. Among the 66 cases of poor incision healing, 15 cases were caused by the patient's own underlying diseases (diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, anemia, excessive obesity, etc.); 9 cases were caused by too loose and poor alignment of the ichthyic threads; 9 cases were caused by dislodgment of the threads in the postoperative period; 6 cases were caused by too tight ichthyic threads, which were chronically cut; 6 cases were caused by nonabsorbable and exposed absorbable fishbone suture, and the subcutaneous suture was too close to the skin; 6 cases were caused by premature absorption of the external 3–0 absorbable suture; 6 cases were caused by the reaction of the thread knots due to the excessive amount of the 2–0 absorbable suture and the external 3–0 absorbable suture; 3 case was caused by the proximal subcutaneous suture being too loose; and 3 case was caused by the skin suture being poorly aligned; and 3 case was caused by the subcutaneous suture being poorly aligned. See Fig. 1.

Typical case
a Persistent oozing from the incision was observed after THA; b the first day after debridement; c a reaction to the thread nodes was observed after debridement; d the redness and swelling of the wound was reduced after alcohol gauze was applied wetly; e the patient's incision underwent intermittent removal of the stitches; f after the removal of the stitches, a fissure was still present at the 3rd and 5th stitches of the proximal incision of the right hip, and the skin incision had not yet completely healed; g the incision had healed gradually; h the patient was seen to be healing at the 1-week postoperative follow-up visit
The patient, a 41-year-old woman, underwent right anterior approach total hip arthroplasty on July 6, 2023 and was found to have a small amount of oozing fluid near the incision after the operation. The patient was obese (Body Mass Index, BMI = 35.16 kg/m2), and the skin folds near the incision were obvious, so the possibility of fat liquefaction around the incision was considered. She underwent "right proximal total hip arthroplasty with local skin and subcutaneous tissue debridement and closure" on July 18, 2023, with slight redness and swelling at the incision after the operation, no obvious oozing, and no obvious symptoms of fat liquefaction. On July 30, 2023, the patient's incision was again red and swollen, and the reaction of the thread knot was obvious; thus, the redness and swelling were relieved after alcohol gauze was applied wetly to the wound, and the patient's skin incision was removed intermittently from August 1, 2023. After the removal of the thread, a crack at the 3rd and 5th stitches of the proximal right hip and the skin incision had not completely healed. After that, the patient was given daily wet compresses with alcohol gauze and localized growth factor gel, the incision gradually healed, and the patient was discharged from the hospital after 3 days. At the 1-week follow-up after discharge, the patient's wound was filled with connective tissue, and a scar formed, indicating good healing. See Fig. 2.

Data analysis
Causes and composition ratios of poor incision healing after hip and knee arthroplasty
Causes of poor healing of hip and knee incisions	Number of cases (cases)	Component ratio (%)	 	The patient's own disease alone affects healing	15	22.73	 	Postoperative thread detachment	9	13.64	 	Fishbone threads are not absorbed and bare	6	9.09	 	Premature absorption of external 3–0 line	6	9.09	 	Chronic cutting with too tight a suture on the herringbone line	6	9.09	 	Excessive sutures lead to thread-knot reactions	6	9.09	 	External skin sutures not perfectly aligned	12	18.18	 	Proximal subcutaneous suture too loose	3	4.55	 	subcutaneous malalignment	3	4.55	 	Total	66	100
We analyzed the causes and composition ratios of 66 patients with poor postoperative incision healing in the hip and knee joints according to the data of the present clinical statistics (see Table 1) and reported that poor postoperative healing due to problems with incision suture technology accounted for approximately 59.09%; poor postoperative healing due to purely the patient's own factors accounted for approximately 22.73%; and poor postoperative healing due to absorption problems caused by incorrect selection of the suture line accounted for approximately 18.18%. The percentage of poor healing was approximately 18.18% due to absorption problems caused by the wrong choice of suture. In addition, approximately 77.28% of the cases were due to surgeon suture problems and risk selection errors.
On the basis of these findings, we conclude that the main causes of poor incision healing according to this statistic are the surgeon's lack of surgical experience, unskilled suturing techniques, and inaccurate selection of intraoperative sutures. Second, the differences in the patients' ability to absorb sutures, as well as the patients' own age, lifestyle habits, BMI, and other underlying diseases (diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis, etc.), are also important reasons for poor postoperative incision healing. In addition, most of the patients included in this study underwent direct anterior approach (DAA), which is considered to be more prone to poor incision healing than TKA and posterior approach THA because of differences in tension and other reasons. In particular, when suturing with absorbable fishbone sutures, the upper section of the incision is prone to subcutaneous fat liquefaction, which in turn results in poor postoperative incision healing.

Discussion
Postoperative incision dehiscence and oozing are the main risk factors for periprosthetic joint infection, which deserve extra clinical attention. A domestic study of 210 patients with poor incision healing after TKA revealed that the suture method was a strong influencing factor (Odds Ratio, OR = 7.967) for the development of poor incision healing after TKA. In this study, we used mainly continuous and interrupted sutures. Compared with interrupted suturing, continuous suturing has the advantages of eliminating the need to tie knots during suturing, reducing the operation time, and causing less tissue damage. However, a foreign study of 582 patients who underwent TKA surgery with different suture methods reported that the use of multiple layers of continuous absorbable barbed suture could lead to an increase in incisional complications. The reason may be due to intraoperative stimulation of the tissue, causing increased tension in the tissue, which leads to suture breakage; the incision easily cracks, increases tissue tension, and easily leads to the formation of residual cavities in the incision, the formation of a large amount of blood and fluid accumulation. In this study, poor incision healing due to improper suturing accounted for 59.09% of all causes, suggesting that we should be more careful in choosing suture methods for our patients.
Previous studies have identified diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, morbid obesity, cardiopulmonary disease, and coagulation disorders as risk factors for poor healing. Among these factors, obesity and diabetes mellitus are two of the most common factors. One study showed that a multifactorial Cox regression line controlling for age and sex was associated with a 39% increase in the risk of incisional dehiscence for every 3-unit increase in BMI. When obese patients are comorbid with diabetes mellitus, their risk of complications such as incision infection and poor healing is greatly increased. Patients in this study had the heaviest percentage (22.73%) of all causes of poor healing due to purely per se disease affecting healing, which deserves our attention. In addition, in most current hip and knee arthroplasty treatments for elderly patients, due to the age at which body function decreases and poor immunity, some patients have a history of smoking, a history of previous joint surgery, long-term use of hormone drugs, etc., which leads to a greater probability of poor healing and infection of the incision in the postoperative period. For medical personnel, inoperative or postoperative cleaning and disinfection are not in place, aseptic operations are not standardized, etc., which will also lead to a significant increase in the risk of poor postoperative incision healing. Over-application or irrational use of antimicrobial drugs before and after surgery can disrupt the balance of normal flora in the body. This will lead to a decrease in the patient's ability to resist foreign germs, resulting in poor healing of the incision at the surgical site.
Many factors affect the healing of hip and knee surgical incisions. In addition to the above factors, the authors believe that the choice of surgical incision location is also an important factor affecting the healing of the suture.
Current statistics indicate that direct anterior total hip replacement incisions are more likely to lead to poor incision healing. In particular, when fishbone sutures are used to close the subcutaneous space of direct anterior total hip arthroplasty, the upper part of the incision is prone to subcutaneous fat liquefaction, which leads to poor postoperative incision healing. According to the statistics of this study, relative to the posterior lateral approach, the direct anterior approach results in a shorter incision, with an average of 10.6 cm, whereas the posterior approach results in an average incision length of 17.4 cm. The direct anterior approach has a longer operative time than the other approaches do, with less intraoperative bleeding, faster postoperative recovery, a lower risk of postoperative adverse complications, and less pain, but it can lead to many wound complications, with approximately 1.6% of patients requiring reoperation, whereas the rate of wound complications requiring reoperation is significantly lower for the posterior posterolateral approach than for the direct anterior approach. Most of the postoperative wound complications after direct anterior approach were infected or noninfected superficial hematoma, persistent wound drainage or acute prosthetic joint infection, and delayed incision healing. However, the posterior lateral approach was only 0.2%, which was much lower than the choice of direct anterior approach for surgery. In addition, owing to the high mobility of the hip joint, the high curvature near the groin and the relatively thin skin at the surgical site with high shear forces, the risk of incision dehiscence is increased when the incision is made close to the lumbar groove crease. In addition, the local sweat glands in the hip joint are high, and the skin is easily moist, which is not conducive to incision healing. The direct anterior approach has the highest water content in the subcutaneous tissue, and the fat is many and thick, which can easily lead to subcutaneous fat liquefaction in the incision, which leads to an increased chance of infection of the incision and slows the rate of healing of the incision. A comparative study of factors of poor incision healing after anterior and posterior approach THA surgery has not been performed in this study, and we hypothesize that DAA surgery is prone to poor incision healing compared to PLA surgery incisions, but that smaller surgical incisions have a higher rate of incision healing at the same surgical position.
In addition to the factors of patient obesity, improper operation during surgery, such as mishandling of the electric knife, prolonged operation time leading to prolonged exposure of the incision, and incomplete intraoperative hemostasis leading to chronic hemorrhage, can also cause fat liquefaction. Most of the cases in this study were due to poor surgical incision suturing, which led to postoperative incision healing problems, such as the following: the skin and subcutaneous sutures were not perfectly aligned, the subcutaneous tissues were too tightly sutured with fishbone sutures, and the proximal subcutaneous sutures were too loose. Owing to the fact that the 1–0 absorbable fishbone thread is too thick, the subcutaneous suture is not easy to absorb and is coupled with too tight a suture, resulting in an incision in the upper section of the subcutaneous fat liquefaction being likely to occur, which can easily lead to poor postoperative incision healing. Therefore, in the author's opinion, when the incision is sutured, every effort should be made to avoid suturing tightly under the skin and not in the dermis. In addition, the interval created by file changes during DAA surgery should relax the bone prying of the anterior superior iliac spine slightly, which may lead to problems with incisions close to the anterior superior iliac spine if the skin is allowed to remain in a constant state of tension and ischemia. A good suture should be used to ensure that the tissues are closely aligned and maintain sufficient tension strength; the tissues can be smoothly repaired until the incision heals, and the incision suture heals without affecting its normal physiological function. In the author's opinion, to achieve good suturing, attention should be given to the following: 1, preoperative skin marker marking; 2, appropriate trimming of adipose tissue; 3, adequate cleaning of the bursa and synovial membrane around the hip and knee joints; 4, if necessary, recommended the use of 2–0 absorptive barbed wire suture subcutaneously; and 5, proximal epidermal suture of the hip joint using a direct pull-up approach rather than mattress suture. In addition, previous studies have found that the use of negative pressure trauma therapy and nasal oxygen catheters, among others, are beneficial for wound healing after total knee arthroplasty.
In summary, there are more reasons affecting poor incision healing after knee and hip arthroplasty. According to the results of the present statistics, the most important cause of poor postoperative incision healing in direct anterior approach hip arthroplasty is the suture problem of the incision (such as over-tightening, over-loosening, and poor alignment of the incision, which leads to poor healing in the postoperative period). Additionally, the doctor's lack of surgical experience, the incorrect selection of suture threads, and the lack of proficiency in the sewing technique lead to postoperative incision healing, resulting in poor incision healing. The majority of the patients with this statistic experienced poor incision healing after direct anterior approach THA; relatively speaking, the incisions used for knee replacement and posterior hip replacement had a significantly lower incidence of incision dehiscence than did the direct anterior approach. Second, patients’ age, BMI, lifestyle habits, hemoglobin and albumin levels, and diseases, such as diabetes mellitus and rheumatoid arthritis, can suggest an increased risk of poor incision healing after hip and knee arthroplasty, which can have good predictive value for disease healing.

Wrap-up
In conclusion, poor intraoperative suturing is the main cause of poor incision healing after hip and knee arthroplasty, which can be avoided through good suturing and strict postoperative medication changes and nursing care. This was a retrospective study with a small sample size and limited data. We will continue to investigate the factors affecting poor incision healing after hip and knee arthroplasty and provide a more theoretical basis for the development of preventive and control measures for poor incision healing after hip and knee arthroplasty.

Supplementary Information

Abbreviations
THA
Total hip arthroplasty
TKA
Total knee arthroplasty
CRP
C-reactive protein
ESR
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
BMI
Body mass index
DAA
Direct anterior approach
OR
Odds Ratio
Publisher’s Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Jirong Shen, Tianwei Xia and Xun Cao contributed equally to this work.

Authors’ contributions
JZ, and XC contributed to the conception and design of the study. JH, SZ, FZ, and TX collected the data. YW, TX, and JS critically revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. All the authors reviewed the manuscript.

Funding
No funding was provided for this study.

Data availability
The data can be obtained from the corresponding author according to reasonable requirements.

Declarations

Ethics approval and consent to participate
This study complied with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of the Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University (2023NL-298–03). Each participant received a written informed consent.

Consent for publication
Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for the publication of any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Clinical study of new domestic knee prosthesis for total knee arthroplasty
Cott CEH, Clement ND, Davis ET, et al. Modern total hip arthro plasty:peak of perfection or room for improvement.Bone Joint J. 2022;104(2):189–192.
Analysis of factors affecting poor incision healing after artificial knee arthroplasty
Progress of research on factors influencing poor incision healing after artificial knee arthroplasty[J]
Persistent wound drainage after primary total knee arthroplasty
Analysis of factors associated with poor healing of abdominal incision in cesarean section
Persistent wound drainage among total joint arthroplasty patients receiving aspirin vs coumadin
Analysis of risk factors for noninfectious oozing from the incision after total knee surface arthroplasty
Application effect of barbed wire in tissue suture of knee arthroplasty[J]
Are there lower complication rates with bidirectional barbed suture in total knee arthroplasty incision closure? A randomized clinical trial[J]
Progress of research on factors affecting the healing of skin incision in artificial total knee replacement
Management of skin necrosis around incision following total knee arthroplasty
Effect of intraoperative factors on postoperative abdominal incision fat liquefaction during cesarean section
Analysis of relevant risk factors affecting incision healing after knee arthroplasty
Jahng KH, Bas MA, Rodriguez JA, Cooper HJ. Risk Factors for Wound Complications After Direct Anterior Approach Hip Arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty. 2016;31(11):2583–7. 10.1016/j.arth.2016.04.030.
Risk factors for periprosthetic joint infection following primary total hip or knee arthroplasty: a meta-analysis
A retrospective study of poor incision healing after total knee arthroplasty
Wilson JM, Hadley ML, Ledford CK, Bingham JS, Taunton MJ. The Fate of the Patient With Superficial Dehiscence Following Direct Anterior Total Hip Arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty. 2023;38(7 Suppl 2):S420–S425. 10.1016/j.arth.2023.04.044.
Purcell RL, Parks NL, Cody JP, Hamilton WG. Comparison of Wound Complications and Deep Infections With Direct Anterior and Posterior Approaches in Obese Hip Arthroplasty Patients. J Arthroplasty. 2018;33(1):220–3. 10.1016/j.arth.2017.07.047.
Analysis of risk factors for incision infection after artificial joint replacement for hip and knee osteoarthritis
Observation on the effect of external application of traditional Chinese medicine sealing pack to prevent poor healing of incision after tibiofibular fracture
Analysis of hospital infection factors and preventive countermeasures in orthopedic trauma patients
Reconsideration of prophylactic antibiotics in total knee arthroplasty
Operative wound complications following total ankle arthroplasty
Bilateral total knee arthroplasty: progress of simultaneous and staged replacement[J]
Meermans G, Konan S, Das R, Volpin A, Haddad FS. The direct anterior approach in total hip arthroplasty: a systematic review of the literature. Bone Joint J. 2017;99-B(6):732–40. 10.1302/0301-620X.99B6.38053.
Christensen CP, Karthikeyan T, Jacobs CA. Greater prevalence of wound complications requiring reoperation with direct anterior approach total hip arthroplasty. J Arthroplasty. 2014;29(9):1839–41. 10.1016/j.arth.2014.04.036.
Comparison of the clinical efficacy of two treatment methods for patients with fatty liquefaction of abdominal incision in open abdominal surgery[J]
Investigation and analysis of risk factors for abdominal surgical incision infection in obstetrics and gynecology and countermeasures for prevention[J]
Clinical treatment experience of abdominal incision fat liquefaction in gynecological surgery patients
Li Shunchang. Treatment experience of 10 cases of subcutaneous fat liquefaction at the operation port[J]. China Community Physician (Medical Semi-Monthly). 2008(17):49.
Application of absorbable biologic sutures in general surgery
The use of negative-pressure wound therapy after total knee arthroplasty is effective for reducing complications and the need for reintervention
Helito CP, Junqueira JJ, Gobbi RG, Angelini FJ, Rezende MU, Tírico LE, Demange MK, Mota e Albuquerque RF, Pécora JR, Camanho GL. Effect of postoperative use of nasal oxygen catheter supplementation in wound healing following total knee arthroplasty. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2014;69(11):735–9. 10.6061/clinics/2014(11)05. PMID: 25518030; PMCID: PMC4255075.