Perioperative Risk: Short Review of Current Approach in Non Cardiac Surgery
The rate of major surgery is constantly increasing worldwide, and approximately 85% are non-cardiac surgery. More than half of patients over 45 years presenting for non-cardiac surgical interventions have cardiovascular risk factors, and the most common: chronic coronary syndrome and history of stroke. The preoperative cardiovascular risk is determined by the comorbidities, the clinical condition before the intervention, the urgency, duration or type. Cardiovascular risk scores are necessary tools to prevent perioperative cardiovascular morbidity and mortality and the most frequently used are Lee/RCRI (Revised Cardiac Risk Index), APACHE II (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation), POSSUM (Physiological and Operative Severity Score for the enumeration of Mortality and Morbidity), The American University of Beirut (AUB)-HAS2. To reduce the perioperative risk, there is a need for an appropriate preoperative risk assessment, as well as the choice of the type and timing of surgical intervention. Quantification of surgical risk as low, intermediate, and high is useful in identifying the group of patients who are at risk of complications such as myocardial infarction, thrombosis, arrhythmias, heart failure, stroke or even death. Currently there are not enough studies that can differentiate the risk according to gender, race, elective versus emergency procedure, the value of cardiac biomarkers.

1. Introduction
Worldwide, non-cardiac surgical interventions (NCS) are continuously increasing due to the aging of the population, reaching up to 85%. At the same time, the mean age for the first cardiovascular event is decreasing. Patients undergoing non-cardiac surgical interventions have multiple comorbidities, and most frequently we encounter chronic coronary syndrome and stroke. This category of patients has a higher risk of major perioperative adverse cardiovascular events. In a study that included adults over 45 years of age who underwent non-cardiac surgery, 1 out of 33 patients suffered a myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke or death. The highest rate of cardiovascular events was found in orthopedic, vascular and general surgeries.
The patient associated risk and type of surgery determines the risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, so an adequate preoperative risk assessment is very important. Choosing the surgery or procedure with the lowest possible risk can decrease the total risk which should be as close as possible to the lower left corner (Figure 1, Table 1).
Cardiovascular risk scores are necessary tools to prevent perioperative cardiovascular morbidity and mortality and the most frequently used are Lee/RCRI (Revised Cardiac Risk Index), APACHE II (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation), POSSUM (Physiological and Operative Severity Score for the enumeration of Mortality and Morbidity), The American University of Beirut (AUB)-HAS2. The Lee index created by revising the Goldman index, was designed to assess the 30-day risk of mortality, myocardial infarction, or cardiac arrest. All these predictive tools can be calculated with scoring calculators online or use software systems in hospitals that automate the process based on real-time patient data.
Creatinine ≥ 2 mg/dL = 177 mmol/L
History of heart failure (pulmonary edema, bilateral rales, gallop, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, redistribution of pulmonary circulation on chest X-ray)
Insulin-requiring diabetes mellitus
Intrathoracic, intraperitoneal or supra-inguinal vascular surgery
Stroke or TIA in the past
Ischemic heart disease (history of myocardial infarction, positive exercise test, ECG with pathological Q waves, precordial pain due to ischemia, use of nitrate medication (Table 2).
The RCRI score comprises 6 variables:
history of cardiovascular disease,
angina/dyspnea,
age ≥ 75 years,
hemoglobin < 12 mg/dL,
vascular intervention,
surgical emergency.
The American University of Beirut (AUB)-HAS2 Cardiovascular Risk is a new risk score that has been proven superior to the RCRI (Revised Cardiac Risk Index) score. It comprises 6 components:
Each criterion is given 1 point, classifying patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery into three risk groups: low (score 0–1), intermediate (score 2–3) and high (score > 3), with strong discriminative power to predict all-cause mortality, myocardial infarction, or stroke 30 days after surgery. The AUB-HAS2 score has been able to identify a large group of low-risk patients (score = 0) who generally do not require special preoperative cardiovascular evaluation or postoperative monitoring.
APACHE II (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation) is a mortality estimation tool used for patients admitted to intensive care units. The data used should be from the beginning of the admission (first 24 h) and should be the higher value.
Rectal temperature
Mean arterial pressure (mmHg)
Heart Rate (beats/min)
Respiratory rate (breaths/min)
Oxygenation (PaO2/FiO2)
Arterial pH
Serum sodium (mmol/L)
Serum potassium (mmol/L)
Serum creatinine (mg/dL)
Hematocrit (%)
White blood cell count
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
The variables used to calculate the score:
It uses a point score based on 12 values of routine physiological measurements, age and history of severe organ insufficiency or immunocompromised status to provide a general measure of disease severity. An increasing score (range 0 to 71) indicate an increasing risk of hospital death (Table 3).
POSSUM (Physiological and Operative Severity Score for the enumeration of Mortality and Morbidity) is a scoring tool to predict morbidity and mortality based only on clinical criteria. The original POSSUM was modified by researchers in Portsmouth, and it was found that it may overpredict mortality and the P-POSSUM model is now preferred.
The physiological severity includes:
As the name suggests, it includes two main categories:
Age: <61, 61–70, >70
Cardiac signs: No failure, diuretic, digoxin, angina, hypertension medication, raised jugular venous pressure or cardiomegaly on X-ray
Respiratory: No dyspnea, dyspnea on exertion, limiting dyspnea, dyspnea at rest (rate > 30/min).
Systolic blood pressure (mmHg)
Pulse (beats/min)
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS)
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
White cell count (×109/L)
Urea (mmol/L)
Sodium (mmol/L)
Potassium (mmol/L)
Electrocardiography (Normal, Atrial fibrillation, 5 ectopic beats/min, any abnormal rhythm)
The operative severity score include:
Operative severity (Minor, moderate, major, major+)
Number of procedures: 1, 2, 2+
Total blood loss (mL)
Peritoneal soiling: None, minor (serous fluid), local pus, free bowel content, pus or blood
Malignancy: Yes/No
Mode of surgery: Elective, emergency: Resuscitation of >2 h possible, operation within 24 h, Emergency: Immediate surgery, within 2 h.
The higher the total score, the greater the predicted risk of mortality and higher the likelihood of postoperative complications.

2. Summary of the Evidence
The latest guidelines of European Society of Cardiology—ESC (2022), AHA/ACC American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology (2024), The Thrombosis Canada clinical guides and Canadian Cardiovascular Society (2017) about management of patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery showed variability in definitions of low, moderate and high risk. This proves that there are gaps in the perception of risk, and currently there is no precise tool for its estimation.
All major guidelines recommend stepwise approach: an initial detailed history and physical examination to identify existing or undiagnosed cardiovascular diseases, followed by the assessment of surgical urgency, the type of intervention, and the estimation of overall medical and surgical risk using a validated tool, such as the Revised Cardiac Risk Index (RCRI). Pre-operative 12-lead ECG is not routinely recommended in low-risk, but it is recommended in patients who are aged ≥65 years or have known CVD, CV risk factors, or symptoms of CVD and scheduled to intermediate/high-risk NCS. Patients with a risk of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE) <1% can undergo surgery, while the rest should undergo additional investigations, depending on several factors.
We have developed a simplified algorithm for the rapid management of patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery, based on the timing of the surgery and the associated risk (Figure 2).
An urgent non-cardiac surgical intervention should be performed without any delay to save life or organ function and should be performed without further cardiac tests. For time-sensitive surgery, a more detailed evaluation is required, including patient history, a complete clinical examination, and the assessment of perioperative risk using a previously described prediction tool. The presence of comorbidities, age over 65 years or smoking affects the overall risk, which can be classified as:
Low risk—the patient will undergo the NCS.
Elevated risk—an electrocardiogram needs to be performed, and cardiac biomarkers need to be collected. If these investigations are normal, the patient can proceed to surgery. If the ECG and/or biomarkers are abnormal or if the patient presents signs or symptoms of CV diseases (angina, dyspnea, cardiac murmurs, leg edema, family history of genetic diseases), as in high-risk, a transthoracic echocardiography must be performed. If no significant changes are found, NCS can be performed. However, if there is left ventricular systolic dysfunction, further non-invasive stress tests are necessary. CCTA must be performed if the patient has acute chest pain but without delaying the intervention.
Regarding elective non-cardiac surgery, the same steps are followed, with all the necessary cardiac investigations performed prior to the intervention with the goal minimizing perioperative risk.
The model performance of preoperative assessment tools can be evaluated by the Area Under the Curve (AUC) of the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve, which measures the discriminative ability of a model in predicting an outcome (such as mortality or complications). The AUC ranges from 0 to 1, with values closer to 1 indicating better performance (Table 4).

2.1. Biomarkers
High-sensitivity cardiac troponin T/I (Hs-cTn T/I) quantifies myocardial injury,
BNP and NT-proBNP quantifies the hemodynamic stress of the cardiac wall.
Hs-cTn T/I and BNP/NT-proBNP complement clinical assessment and ECG in risk prediction Hs-cTn T/I and BNP/NT-proBNP concentrations are higher in patients with stress-induced myocardial ischemia.
Preoperative and postoperative levels of natriuretic peptides have been independent predictors of death or non-fatal myocardial infarction at 30 days. In patients known to have cardiovascular risk factors or cardiovascular disease, or signs and symptoms of cardiac origin, it is recommended to measure BNP/NT-proBNP/hs-cTn before non-cardiac surgeries with medium and high risk.
The CCS recommends NT-proBNP or BNP testing before non-cardiac surgeries in patients who are 65 years or older, those between 45 and 64 years with significant cardiovascular disease, or those with an RCRI score ≥ 1 (Strong Recommendation; Moderate Quality Evidence). Troponin is recommended to be measured daily for 48–72 h postoperatively in patients with a >5% risk of cardiovascular events.
The VISION study demonstrated that an elevated level of troponin in the postoperative period was the strongest predictor of 30-day mortality. Most ischemic events remain asymptomatic and were only detected through postoperative troponin monitoring.

2.2. Echocardiography
low functional capacity,
heart murmurs,
increased NTproBNP/BNP,
unexplained signs and symptoms.
Pre-operative FOCUS examination reduced all-cause mortality and help to triage candidates for standard TTE. It is recommended for patients who present a high-risk intervention and have:
A preoperative diastolic dysfunction increases the risk of pulmonary edema, heart failure and myocardial infarction in the postoperative period.

2.3. Functional Capacity
Functional capacity measured in metabolic equivalents (METs), represents an essential step of the preoperative cardiac risk assessment algorithm and 4 METs considered the threshold for severely depressed functional capacity. It cand be measured by asking patients if they can climb 2 flights of stairs (>4 METs) or by using an instrument such as the Duke Activity Status Index (DASI), tool to assess functional capacity based on patients’ reported ability to perform a set of 12 daily activities.

2.4. Coronary CT Angiography (CCTA)
Patients who may benefit from CCTA are those that have a high-risk surgery and present with elevated perioperative cardiovascular risk, as calculated by using a validated tool (level of evidence B). It may be useful to exclude atherosclerotic plaque and obstructive CAD in patients with acute chest pain and no known CAD. By contrast, no benefit of perioperative revascularization of CAD has been demonstrated; furthermore, it delayed the surgical intervention without reducing the risk of MACE.

2.5. Coronary Angiography
This investigation is not recommended routinely—it should be performed only in patients with a very high risk (level of evidence C). There are many contradictory studies regarding this topic, but none have been conducted on a large patient cohort. The indications for invasive angiography should remain the same as for patients in the non-surgical setting, and it is preferable that they be treated prior to interventions.

2.6. Management of Medication

2.6.1. Antiplatelets
Regarding preoperative cessation of antiplatelet therapy, it is necessary to weigh in the risk of bleeding against the risk of thrombosis. For patients taking aspirin as primary prevention, interruption is possible if the ischemic risk is low or moderate. If the bleeding risk is low, aspirin may be continued perioperatively, but in those with a high bleeding risk, it should be stopped 7 days before the procedure and restarted within 24 h post-surgery if adequate hemostasis has been achieved (Table 5). In patients who had undergone interventional revascularization and are on P2Y12 inhibitor therapy in combination with aspirin, interruption of one of these can be done after 6 months for elective PCI and at 12 months for acute coronary syndrome (ACS), thus recommending the postponement of elective surgeries. If this is not possible, it is recommended that a minimum of 1 month of dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) is administered, with the continuation of aspirin perioperatively. In patients with PCI, it has been shown that the benefit outweighs the perioperative hemorrhagic risk, recommending the continuation of aspirin at a low dose. P2Y12 inhibitors in monotherapy should be interrupted 7 days prior for clopidogrel, 3–5 days prior for ticagrelor, and 7 days prior for prasugrel, only when the hemorrhagic risk is increased. According to the American guideline, patients who are undergoing non-cardiac surgery but are within 6 months of PCI and require DAPT, can have bridging therapy with Cangrelor.

2.6.2. Oral Anticoagulants
All guidelines, ESC, AHA/ACC, The Thrombosis Canada support that it is safe to perform surgeries with minimal bleeding risk without interrupting oral anticoagulation therapy.
In patients on vitamin K antagonists (VKA) treatment for mechanical valve prostheses, if the surgical intervention is of minor bleeding risk, it can be performed without interruption. However, if the bleeding risk is high and requires an INR < 1.5, the VKA will be interrupted and overlapped with heparin. If the prosthesis is in the aortic position, is a newer generation bileaflet prosthesis, and the rhythm is sinus, the VKA can be stopped without overlap.
In patients on VKA for atrial fibrillation or venous thromboembolism, the intervention can be performed without interrupting the anticoagulant if the risk is low. If the risk is increased, warfarin will be interrupted 3–5 days prior NCS.
If the surgery is urgent, in patients taking VKA, the reversal of vitamin K antagonists is necessary using vitamin K, prothrombin complex concentrate, or plasma administration.
Direct oral anticoagulants (DOAC) available include dabigatran, apixaban, rivaroxaban, and edoxaban. Idarucizumab antagonizes the effect of dabigatran, being the only approved antagonist in urgent surgical interventions. Andexanet alpha, the antagonist for the other anticoagulants, has only been studied in patients with acute hemorrhage.
The perioperative management of direct oral anticoagulants should be conducted based on procedural factors (the bleeding risk of the intervention, timing of the surgery) as well as patient-specific factors (bleeding history, thrombotic risk, renal function). We made a comparison between the approaches of the 3 guidelines, adjusted for renal function (Table 6, Table 7 and Table 8).

2.6.3. Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors (RAASi)
Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) and angiotensin receptor blocker (ARBs) are widely used medications for patients with hypertension and/or heart failure. Preoperative interruption has been studied and found that it is more frequently associated with perioperative hypertension, while the continuation of therapy has led to hypotension. Discontinuation of these drugs 24 h before surgery may be beneficial to limit intraoperative hypotension, but in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) perioperative continuation is reasonable. Restarting the medication should be done as soon as possible.

2.6.4. Beta-Blockers
If the patients are taking beta-blockers, it is recommended to maintain this treatment, as stopping it preoperatively may lead to increased mortality; this recommendation is present in all three guidelines. Routine initiation of beta-blockers peri-operatively is not recommended, but in high risk NCS for patients who have two/more risk factors, initiation of beta-blockers at least 1 week before surgery might be beneficial.

2.6.5. Calcium Channel Blockers
Treatment with calcium channel blockers (CCBs) has reduced the rates of perioperative death and myocardial infarction, but it is recommended to decrease the dosage the day of the intervention to minimize the incidence of hypotension. There has been an increased mortality in patients taking dihydropyridines undergoing emergency interventions for aortic aneurysm.

2.6.6. Statins
Statins are recommended to be continued in patients with high cardiovascular risk, while the initiation of statin therapy preoperatively is not recommended.

2.6.7. Sodium–Glucose Co-Transporter-2 Inhibitors (SGLT-2)
This class of medications is increasingly used in patients with heart failure, diabetes mellitus, or kidney disease. It is recommended to stop the medication 3–4 days postoperatively due to the risk of euglycemic diabetic ketoacidosis.

3. Discussion
The cardiovascular risk associated with non-cardiac surgeries remains an unclear area, with insufficient studies. Current guidelines, although constantly updated, still contain gaps in evidence. This is supported by the fact that the ESC guidelines contain 53% level C recommendations (consensus of the experts and/or small studies, retrospective studies, registries), while only 12% are at evidence level A (data derived from multiple randomized clinical trials or meta-analyses), and 35% at evidence level B (data derived from a single randomized clinical trial or large non-randomized studies). In the AHA/ACC guidelines, the recommendations at level A are much lower, at 3%, while the level B evidence, based on one or more randomized or non-randomized studies (75% are non-randomized), accounts for 54%. Level C evidence, based on limited data or consensus of expert opinion, totaled 43%. The CCS guidelines are based on recommendations with 48% low-quality evidence, 36% moderate-quality evidence, and 16% high-quality evidence (Figure 3). From this analysis, it appears that the guidelines’ recommendations are less evidence based and more experts’ opinion. A more precise instrument for calculating perioperative risk is necessary, one that can encompass all aspects related to both the patient and the surgical intervention. The measurement of preoperative cardiac biomarkers is a first step for the prevention of cardiovascular events, but it is still insufficiently applied. Echocardiography should be performed on all patients with high cardiovascular risk over the age of 45 for the early diagnosis of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction or CCD.

4. Conclusions
Surgical morbidity and mortality can be reduced or prevented through a careful preoperative evaluation, optimization of the patient’s medication, precise surgical techniques and appropriate postoperative care. Predicting postoperative outcomes using various risk assessment tools is essential, as a patient’s physiological status reflects their capacity to withstand the stress of surgery and recover without complications. Risk scores provide valuable insight into the patient’s potential for adverse events, guiding clinical decisions and helping ensure better management throughout the surgical process. We have presented the key messages of this review in Table 9.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, A.B. and C.G.; methodology, A.B.; software, A.B.; validation, A.B., C.G. and D.F.; formal analysis, D.F.; investigation, A.B.; resources, A.B.; data curation, D.F.; writing—original draft preparation, A.B.; writing—review and editing, C.G.; visualization, D.F.; supervision, D.F.; project administration, D.F.; funding acquisition, C.G. All authors performed equal work to the first author. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

References
Estimate of the global volume of surgery in 2012: An assessment supporting improved health outcomes
Trends in cardiovascular risk factor and disease prevalence in patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery
2022 ESC Guidelines on cardiovascular assessment and management of patients undergoing non-cardiac surgery
2024 AHA/AC/ACS/ASNC/HRS/SCA/SCCT/SCMR/SVM guideline for perioperative cardiovascular management for noncardiac surgery: A report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Tools and scores for general and cardiovascular perioperative risk assessment: A narrative review
Derivation and prospective validation of a simple index for prediction of cardiac risk of major noncardiac surgery
AUB-HAS2 Cardiovascular Risk Index: Performance in Surgical Subpopulations and Comparison to the Revised Cardiac Risk Index
A New Index for Pre-Operative Cardiovascular Evaluation
Preoperative Assessment and Management of Cardiovascular Risk in Patients Undergoing Non-Cardiac Surgery: Implementing a Systematic Stepwise Approach during the COVID-19 Pandemic Era
APACHE II: A severity of disease classification system
Physiological and operative severity score for the enumeration of mortality and morbidity scoring systems for assessment of patient outcome and impact of surgeons’ and anesthesiologists’ performance in hepatopancreaticobiliary surgery
Clinical Guides
Canadian Cardiovascular Society Guidelines on Perioperative Cardiac Risk Assessment and Management for Patients Who Undergo Noncardiac Surgery
Preoperative Cardiac Risk Assessment
BASEL-PMI Investigators. Incidence of major adverse cardiac events following non-cardiac surgery
High-sensitivity cardiac troponin T in prediction and diagnosis of myocardial infarction and long-term mortality after noncardiac surgery
Role of B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and NT-proBNP in clinical routine
Perioperative Cardiovascular Risk Assessment and Management for Noncardiac Surgery: A Review
Preoperative N-Terminal Pro-B-Type Natriuretic Peptide and Cardiovascular Events After Noncardiac Surgery: A Cohort Study
Incremental value of high-sensitive troponin T in addition to the revised cardiac index for peri-operative risk stratification in non-cardiac surgery
Prognostic performance of preoperative cardiac troponin and perioperative changes in cardiac troponin for the prediction of major adverse cardiac events and mortality in noncardiac surgery: A systematic review and meta-analysis
TropoVasc and BASEL-PMI Investigators. Comparison of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I and T for the prediction of cardiac complications after non-cardiac surgery
Using High-Sensitivity Cardiac Troponin for the Exclusion of Inducible Myocardial Ischemia in Symptomatic Patients: A Cohort Study
Prospective Validation of a Biomarker-Based Rule Out Strategy for Functionally Relevant Coronary Artery Disease
Natriuretic Peptides and Troponins to Predict Cardiovascular Events in Patients Undergoing Major Non-Cardiac Surgery
Cardiac Health After Surgery (CHASE) Investigators. Myocardial injury after noncardiac surgery and its association with short-term mortality
Myocardial injury after noncardiac surgery: A large, international, prospective cohort study establishing diagnostic criteria, characteristics, predictors, and 30-day outcomes
Association between postoperative troponin levels and 30-day mortality among patients undergoing noncardiac surgery
A Prospective International Multicentre Cohort Study of Intraoperative Heart Rate and Systolic Blood Pressure and Myocardial Injury After Noncardiac Surgery: Results of the VISION Study
A meta-analysis comparing the prognostic accuracy of six diagnostic tests for predicting perioperative cardiac risk in patients undergoing major vascular surgery
One-year results of the pilot multicentre randomised trial of preoperative focused cardiac ultrasound in hip fracture surgery
The impact of focused transthoracic echocardiography in the pre-operative clinic
Echocardiography for assessing cardiac risk in patients having noncardiac surgery. Study of Perioperative Ischemia Research Group
Perioperative Diastolic Dysfunction in Patients Undergoing Noncardiac Surgery Is an Independent Risk Factor for Cardiovascular Events: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis
Metabolic equivalents (METS) in exercise testing, exercise prescription, and evaluation of functional capacity
Association between self-reported functional capacity and major adverse cardiac events in patients at elevated risk undergoing noncardiac surgery: A prospective diagnostic cohort study
Integration of the Duke Activity Status Index into preoperative risk evaluation: A multicentre prospective cohort study
2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons
Assessment of perioperative cardiac risk of patients undergoing noncardiac surgery using coronary computed tomographic angiography
Coronary-artery revascularization before elective major vascular surgery
Long-term results of a randomized controlled trial analyzing the role of systematic pre-operative coronary angiography before elective carotid endarterectomy in patients with asymptomatic coronary artery disease
ESC Scientific Document Group. 2023 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes
ESC Scientific Document Group. 2024 ESC Guidelines for the management of chronic coronary syndromes
Association between major perioperative hemorrhage and stroke or Q-wave myocardial infarction
ESC National Cardiac Societies; ESC Scientific Document Group. 2021 ESC Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice
Continuation versus discontinuation of antiplatelet therapy for bleeding and ischaemic events in adults undergoing non-cardiac surgery
2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline for the Management of Patients with Chronic Coronary Disease: A Report of the American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Dual Antiplatelet Therapy After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention and Drug-Eluting Stents: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis
Recovery time of platelet function after aspirin withdrawal
Brilinta (Ticagrelor) Tablets for Oral Use 2011
Effient (Prasugrel) Tablets Prescribing Information
Plavix (Clopidogrel Bisulfate) Tablets Prescribing Information
BRIDGE Investigators. Bridging antiplatelet therapy with cangrelor in patients undergoing cardiac surgery: A randomized controlled trial
2020 ACC/AHA Guideline for the Management of Patients with Valvular Heart Disease: Executive Summary: A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
A systematic review and meta-analysis of periprocedural bridging for patients with mechanical heart valves undergoing non-cardiac interventions
Antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy for valvular disease: Antithrombotic Therapy and Prevention of Thrombosis, 9th ed: American College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines
Meta-analysis of continuous oral anticoagulants versus heparin bridging in patients undergoing CIED surgery: Reappraisal after the BRUISE study
The BRIDGE trial: What the hospitalist should know
Vitamin K Antagonist Reversal for Urgent Surgery Using 4-Factor Prothrombin Complex Concentrates: A Randomized Clinical Trial
Idarucizumab for Dabigatran Reversal-Full Cohort Analysis
ANNEXA-4 Investigators. Final Study Report of Andexanet Alfa for Major Bleeding with Factor Xa Inhibitors
Predictors of preprocedural direct oral anticoagulant levels in patients having an elective surgery or procedure
Predictors of pre-procedural concentrations of direct oral anticoagulants: A prospective multicentre study
Prospective Randomized Evaluation of Preoperative Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibition (PREOP-ACEI)
Stopping Perioperative ACE-inhibitors or angiotensin-II receptor blockers (SPACE) trial investigators. Discontinuation vs. continuation of renin-angiotensin system inhibition before non-cardiac surgery: The SPACE trial
A Systematic Review of Outcomes Associated with Withholding or Continuing Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Angiotensin Receptor Blockers Before Noncardiac Surgery
Influence of chronic angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition on anesthetic induction
Should the angiotensin II antagonists be discontinued before surgery?
Perioperative beta-blockers for preventing surgery-related mortality and morbidity in adults undergoing non-cardiac surgery
Surgical Care and Outcomes Assessment Program (SCOAP) Collaborative. β-blocker continuation after noncardiac surgery: A report from the surgical care and outcomes assessment program
Duration of preoperative β-blockade and outcomes after major elective noncardiac surgery
Blood pressure lowering effect of calcium channel blockers on perioperative hypertension: A systematic review and meta-analysis
Dihydropiridine calcium-channel blockers and perioperative mortality in aortic aneurysm surgery
Association of Perioperative Statin Use with Mortality and Morbidity After Major Noncardiac Surgery
Perioperative diabetic ketoacidosis associated with sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors: A systematic review
Preoperative Cessation of SGLT2i
Total risk estimated by the interaction between the surgical risk and the patient’s cardiovascular risk. The red arrows signify the probability of perioperative cardiovascular complications (adapted according to the ESC 2022 guidelines).
Pre-operative assessment before non-cardiac surgery.
Level of evidence AHA/ACC and ESC.
Total CV risk.
Factors Related to the Surgical Intervention	Factors Related to the Patient	 	Type of surgeryUrgencyImmediateUrgentTime-sensitiveElectiveBleeding risk	Age	 	Smoking 	 	Thrombotic risk	 	Comorbidities	 	Chronic medication	 	Renal function
Risk of major cardiac events.
RCRI Score	Risk of Major Cardiac Events (95% CI)	 	0	3.9% (2.8–5.4%)	 	1	6.0% (4.9–7.4%)	 	2	10.1% (8.1–12.6%)	 	≥3	15% (11.1–20.0%)
Hospital mortality rates.
APACHE II Score	Nonoperative	Postoperative	 	0–4	4%	1%	 	5–9	8%	3%	 	10–14	15%	7%	 	15–19	25%	12%	 	20–24	40%	30%	 	25–29	55%	35%	 	30–34	73%	73%	 	>34	85%	88%
Model performance (AUC).
Risk Score Calculators	Model Performance (AUC)	 	RCRI Index (Revised Cardiac Risk Index)	0.70–0.80	 	AUB-HAS2 (The American University of Beirut)	0.70–0.75	 	APACHE II (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II)	0.75–0.85	 	POSSUM (Physiological and Operative Severity Score for the enumeration of Mortality and Morbidity)	0.70–0.80
Bleeding risk (adapted according to the ESC 2022 guide).
Minor Bleeding Risk	Low Bleeding Risk	High Bleeding Risk	 	Cataract or glaucoma procedureDental procedures: extractions (1–3 teeth), periodontal surgery, implant positioning, endodontic procedures, subgingival scaling/cleaningEndoscopy without biopsy or resectionSuperficial surgery	Abdominal surgery: cholecystectomy, hernia repair, colon resectionBreast surgeryComplex dental procedures (multiple tooth extractions)Endoscopy with simple biopsyGastroscopy or colonoscopy with simple biopsyLarge-bore needles proceduresNon-cataract ophthalmic surgerySmall orthopedic surgery (foot, hand arthroscopy)	Abdominal surgery with liver biopsy, extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsyExtensive cancer surgeryNeuraxial anesthesiaNeurosurgeryMajor orthopedic surgeryProcedures with vascular organ biopsy (kidney or prostate)Reconstructive plastic surgerySpecific interventions (colon polypectomy, lumbar puncture)Thoracic surgery, lung resection surgeryUrological surgeryVascular surgery
Perioperative management of direct oral anticoagulants-ESC.
NCS Minor Risk	NCS Low Risk	NCS High Risk	 	Dabigatran, Apixaban	May skip the evening dose −1 day and restart 6h after surgery	Skip DOAC −1 day and restart in the evening	Skip DOAC −2 days and restart 48–72 h after surgery *	 	Rivaroxaban, Edoxaban	Normal	Skip DOAC −1 day and restart in the evening	Skip DOAC −2 days and restart 48–72 h after surgery *	 	Dabigatran EGFR < 50 mL/min	Normal	Stop > 48 h	Stop > 96 h	 	Apixaban, Edoxaban, Rivaroxaban, EGFR < 50 mL/min	Normal	Stop > 24 h	Stop > 48 h
* Consider prophylactic dose of heparin perioperatively; NCS = non cardiac surgery; DOAC: direct oral anticoagulants, EGFR = estimated glomerular filtration rate.
Perioperative management of direct oral anticoagulants-AHA/ACC.
NCS Minor Risk	NCS Low Risk	NCS High Risk	 	Apixaban, Edoxaban, Rivaroxaban	Normal	Skip DOAC −1 day and restart +1 day	Skip DOAC −2 day and restart +3 day	 	Dabigatran	Normal	Skip DOAC −1 day and restart +1 day	Skip DOAC −2 day and restart +3 day	 	Apixaban, Edoxaban, Rivaroxaban, EGFR < 50 mL/min 	Normal	Skip DOAC −2 day and restart +1 day	Skip DOAC −3 day and restart +3 day	 	Dabigatran EGFR < 50 mL/min	Normal	Skip DOAC −2 day and restart +1 day	Skip DOAC −4 day and restart +3 day
NCS = non cardiac surgery; DOAC: direct oral anticoagulants, EGFR = estimated glomerular filtration rate.
Perioperative management of direct oral anticoagulants-CCS.
NCS Minor Risk	NCS Low Risk	NCS High Risk	 	Apixaban, Edoxaban, Rivaroxaban, Dabigatran	Normal	Skip DOAC −1 day and restart 3–4 h post-operative	Skip DOAC −2 day and restart +2 day	 	Dabigatran EGFR < 50 mL/min	Normal	Skip DOAC −2 day and restart 3–4 h post-operative	Skip DOAC −4 day and restart +2 day
NCS = non cardiac surgery; DOAC: direct oral anticoagulants, EGFR = estimated glomerular filtration rate.
Main recommendations/Gaps in evidence.
Main Recommendations	Gaps in Evidence	 	An adequate pre-operative risk assessment may reduce the risk of complications;Clinical examination is at least as important as paraclinical investigation;Selection of type and time of the intervention is essential;TTE is recommended before NCS on patients with sign or symptoms of CVD and elevated NT-pro BNP/BNPApirin should be stopped 7 days before the procedure on patient with high bleeding risk;Patients on DAPT can stop P2Y12 after 6 months for elective PCI and at 12 months for acute coronary syndrome;Surgeries with minimal bleeding risk should be performed without interrupting oral anticoagulation therapy;Bridging with heparin is necessary only on patients with high bleeding risk and mechanical prosthetic heart;Routine initiation of beta-blockers peri-operatively is not recommended.	A more precise instrument for calculating perioperative risk;Studies to better evaluate gender inequalities in risk assessment; Strategies to reduce the incidence of peri-operative atrial fibrillationStudies for indication of anticoagulation of peri-operative atrial fibrillation;Insufficient studies for antihypertensive medication, comparisons between drugs, and long-term safety;Evaluation of patients with severe pulmonary hypertension who undergo NCS.