Diarrhea induced by insufficient fat absorption in weaned piglets: Causes and nutrition regulation
Fat is one of the three macronutrients and a significant energy source for piglets. It plays a positive role in maintaining intestinal health and improving production performance. During the weaning period, physiological, stress and diet-related factors influence the absorption of fat in piglets, leading to damage to the intestinal barrier, diarrhea and even death. Signaling pathways, such as fatty acid translocase (CD36), pregnane X receptor (PXR), and AMP-dependent protein kinase (AMPK), are responsible for regulating intestinal fat uptake and maintaining intestinal barrier function. Therefore, this review mainly elaborates on the reasons for diarrhea induced by insufficient fat absorption and related signaling pathways in weaned-piglets, with an emphasis on the intestinal fat absorption disorder. Moreover, we focus on introducing nutritional strategies that can promote intestinal fat absorption in piglets with insufficient fat absorption-related diarrhea, such as lipase, amino acids, and probiotics.

Introduction
Early weaned strategy has been widely applied in pig production, contributing to the improvement the productivity and efficiency of pig-farms. However, during the weaning period, physiological, stress and diet-related changes affect the absorption of dietary fat in piglets, leading to dysfunction of intestinal barrier function, diarrhea, growth retardation, and even death in piglets. In this regard, the development of the pig farming industry has been severely hampered. Fat, as an important source of energy, plays a crucial role in maintaining animal intestinal health and promoting growth. In livestock and poultry, lipids are generally fed piglets to provide energy and improve fat absorption. Triglycerides are the main fat component in pig diet, and most of the fatty acids in the feed are bound to triglycerides. However, factors, such as carbon chain length and unsaturated fatty acid to saturated fatty acid ratio, influence the abundance of bacteria in piglets, which may result in inadequate fat absorption, even worsen piglet diarrhea, and diminishing growth. To address such issues, feed additives such as lipase, functional amino acids, and probiotics, are widely used to regulate digestion, absorption, and metabolism of fat and other nutrients, which prevent piglet diarrhea and promote growth. In this review, we first describe the absorption process of fat in intestinal epithelial cells and its related disorders. Secondly, we discuss molecular mechanisms that regulate intestinal fat absorption, and nutritional solutions that assist in maintaining the intestinal health of weaned piglets, such as lipase, amino acids, and probiotics.

The absorption process of fat and reasons of fat absorption disorders in piglets

The absorption process of fat in intestinal epithelial cells
Fat is a concentrated source of energy, providing more than twice the calories per gram compared to carbohydrates and proteins. In terms of its composition, fat is composed of triglycerides, which consist of glycerol and fatty acids. Fat absorption mainly occurs in the small intestine. Medium- and short-chain triglycerides have a low esterification rate and stronger affinity for water than long-chain triglycerides. Most of them are directly absorbed without undergoing hydrolysis by lipase, and enter into blood circulation through intestinal epithelial cells. However, long-chain triglycerides require emulsification by bile salts in the intestine, transport into the intestinal epithelial cells by fatty acid transporters, and then resynthesize into triglycerides in the cells before entering the circulation system. Fatty acid translocase (CD36) is responsible for transferring long-chain fatty acids to fatty acid transporter 4 (FAFT4), which then conducts transmembrane transport of long-chain fatty acids by FAFT4.

The connection between insufficient fat absorption and diarrhea
Reasons of fat absorption disorders in weaned piglets.
Fig. 1
In pig production, early weaning strategy is typically applied to improve the breeding efficiency of pigs. However, piglets have underdeveloped intestinal systems before and after weaning, with low activity of enzymes such as lipase, which results in poor digestion, absorption, wastage of nutrients and diarrhea (Fig. 1). In addition, weaning stress damages the intestinal barrier function of piglets and affects their physiological functions, especially their digestive and absorptive functions, and thus lowering the absorption of fat. The integrity of intestinal morphology and structure is the basis for the digestion and absorption of nutrients in the intestine. Stress and inadequate energy intake induce intestinal barrier damage in piglets, leading to intestinal inflammation, a reduction in the effective absorption area of nutrients, malabsorption of nutrients and poor growth performance. Weaning stress can also increase the risk of diseases caused by bacteria such as Escherichia coli and Salmonella, disrupt the gut microbiota, reduce the digestion and absorption of fat, and cause post-weaning diarrhea. Furthermore, diarrhea activates the NF-κB signaling pathway, which regulates the inflammatory response and markedly diminishes the absorption of intestinal fatty acids in piglets, particularly medium-chain fatty acids. Under stress, the activity of lipase is significantly decreased, with pancreatic lipase activity at weaning only 1/300 of that at 8 weeks of age. After weaning, lipase activity reaches its lowest point on day 5 and then begins to rise from day 7 to 9, but it still does not reach the pre-weaning levels. The abundance of small intestine fatty acid transport protein also significantly decreases on day 3 and 7 after weaning, which weaken the digestion and absorption of lipids in the intestine. Moreover, piglet diet changes from liquid milk, which is rich in easily digested and absorbed fat (with an apparent digestibility rate of 96%) to solid feed with less fat content, causing a decrease in feed and energy intake after weaning. Fat is one of nutrients that has the greatest change in the weaning period and the damage to intestinal function significantly affected the absorption and metabolism of nutrients such as fat, carbohydrates and proteins after weaning. These all seriously affect the digestion, absorption and utilization of lipid substances in piglet feed, leading to insufficient energy intake and intestinal barrier dysfunction, exacerbating the weaning stress of piglets. When piglets cannot obtain sufficient energy from feed, they can only mobilize the body fat to meet their energy needs. However, the host fat reserves of weaning piglets cannot provide sufficient energy to meet their survival and growth needs. Furthermore, during rapid growth and development stage after weaning, the increase in fat absorption of piglet can provide enough energy to improve improving piglets' stress resistance and later-stage fat deposition.

Signaling pathways promoting intestinal fat absorption
Fatty acids uptake through CD36, PXR, and AMPK signaling pathways. CD36 = fatty acid translocase; PXR = pregnane X receptor; AMPK = AMP-dependent protein kinase; FATPs = fatty acid transport proteins; FABPs = fatty acid binding proteins.
Fig. 2
In the gut, fatty acids promote lipid uptake through CD36, pregnane X receptor (PXR), and AMP-dependent protein kinase (AMPK) signaling pathways, delivering energy to cells and promoting gut health. When CD36 and PXR are knocked out, the intestine barrier is impaired and increased susceptibility to inflammation (Fig. 2).

CD36 signaling pathway
In the small intestine, dietary fat is digested by pancreatic lipase to produce fatty acids, which are then transported to intestinal epithelial cells and extra intestinal tissues by CD36, fatty acid transport proteins (FATPs), and fatty acid binding proteins (FABPs). CD36, which is located on the cell membrane, is a scavenger receptor expressed in multiple cell types. It primarily transports fatty acids and low-density lipoprotein, and mediates immune recognition, inflammation, molecular adhesion, and cell apoptosis. CD36 absorbs fatty acids in an endocytosis manner. Palmitoyl transferases (DHHC4 and DHHC5) palmitoylate CD36 on the Golgi apparatus and cytoplasmic membrane, respectively, to maintain its plasma membrane localization and promote its fatty acid absorption activity. Furthermore, during the process of fatty acid absorption, CD36 requires to undergo depalmitoylation for endocytosis to transport fatty acids into cells. Dysfunction of CD36 in intestine leads to abnormalities in fat absorption, which increases susceptibility to inflammation. CD36 knockout mice exhibits chronic neutrophil infiltration, inflammation, barrier dysfunction, reduced fat uptake, impaired lipid secretion, and chylomicron clearance in the intestine. When the expression of CD36 in the intestine increases, it can promote the absorption of fatty acids and intestinal development, especially arachidonic acid and linoleic acid, increase intramuscular fat content in lean pigs, and improve meat quality. In addition, CD36 binds fatty acids and enters cells to transport them to mitochondria, converting anaerobic metabolism into aerobic metabolism, providing energy to cells and promoting immunity in Salmonella-infected mice. Inhibition of CD36 expression reduces the uptake of fatty acids, resulting in insufficient energy supply and increased mouse mortality.

PXR signaling pathway
The PXR is a xenobiotic sensor that acts as a transcription factor in the nucleus to protect cells from toxic damage. PXR is highly expressed in the liver and intestine, where it activates transcription factors such as CD36, increases lipid uptake and reduces fatty acid oxidation. Moreover, PXR inhibits inflammatory signaling pathways, such as NF-κB, regulates immune responses, and improves intestinal mucosal damage. Studies have demonstrated that PXR is a regulator of intestinal homeostasis, and its deficiency is a preliminary driving factor for inflammation-induced intestinal barrier damage and increased permeability. When PXR is knocked out systemically or specifically in the intestine in mice, hyperlipidemia does not occur, and lipid uptake is absent. PXR activation regulates the gene expression of CD36 and cholesterol biosynthesis enzyme squalene epoxidase, leading to an increase in lipid uptake and cholesterol biosynthesis in cells. In addition, the down-regulation of PXR reduces the expression of fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4) and the accumulation of cellular lipids, while overexpression of PXR promotes lipid accumulation and FABP4 expression. FABP4, also known as adipocyte fatty acid binding protein, belongs to a family of intracellular lipid transport proteins that reversibly bind to lipids and transport them to specific areas within cells, such as lipid droplets, endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria or peroxisomes, as well as the cytoplasm or other enzymes.

AMPK signaling pathway
AMPK is a critical energy sensor, involving in multiple physiological processes. The demand for energy in the host activates AMPK, which induces the recruitment of CD36, leading to an increase in fatty acid absorption and β-oxidation. Therefore, AMPK promotes the uptake of long-chain fatty acids by intestinal epithelial cells, and its absence impairs the uptake of fatty acids in the intestine. The mechanism involves up-regulation of CD36 expression and promotion of CD36 translocation to the plasma membrane to facilitate the uptake of intestinal fatty acids. On the other hand, CD36 inhibits the expression of AMPK, and releases this inhibition by binding with fatty acids, thereby maintaining the cellular fatty acid homeostasis.

Nutritional regulation

Fat
As one of three macronutrients, fat is an important energy source in pig diets due to its high energy content. Fatty acids are also important components of physiological activities such as inflammatory response, hormone synthesis, and cell membrane structure, which have a positive effect on maintaining intestinal health and improving production performance. Dietary supplementation of an appropriate amount of fat promotes feed intake and improves energy digestibility in weaned piglets. However, with increasing amounts of fat, feed intake and fat digestibility decreases. This is because different sources of fat result in differences in carbon chain length, saturation, unsaturated fatty acid to saturated fatty acid ratio, and free fatty acid content, leading to significant differences in fat absorption and digestion by piglets. Medium-chain triglycerides have a low esterification rate and are directly absorbed without enzymatic hydrolysis, thus are easily oxidized to provide energy and pass through the mitochondrial membrane. Lipase has a slower hydrolysis rate for long-chain triglycerides than that for medium-chain triglycerides. Therefore, the absorption rate of fatty acids is negatively correlated with carbon chain length, and shorter chains are more easily absorbed. In addition, both short-chain and medium-chain fatty acids have antibacterial properties, which prevent pathogenic bacteria from overgrowing in the gastrointestinal tract. Generally, unsaturated fatty acids are more easily digestible than saturated fatty acids, which can be attributed to unsaturated fatty acid bonds have higher energy than saturated fatty acids, promoting the metabolism of saturated fatty acids. revealed that a mixture of lard, soybean oil, and coconut oil was preferred by weaned piglets soon after weaning, and feed conversion efficiency was better than that of a single oil. The mechanism is because the proportion of unsaturated fatty acids to saturated fatty acids is higher in this blend, and the proportion of medium- and short-chain fatty acids is more easily absorbed, similar to the composition of breast milk fatty acids. Therefore, during the weaning piglet stage, it is generally necessary to mix several types of lipids to approximate the composition of breast milk fatty acids as much as possible, in order to improve fat absorption in piglets and be better adapt to weaning.

Lipase
Lipase, also known as lipid degrading enzyme, can gradually hydrolyze triglycerides into glycerol and fatty acids for absorption and utilization by the body. Weaned piglets have a low fat digestion and absorption rate due to weaning stress and physiological factors that lead to insufficient secretion of endogenous lipases, such as pancreatic lipase and gastric lipase. Theoretically, dietary supplementation of exogenous lipase can supply the deficiency of endogenous lipase, alleviate weaning stress in piglets, and improve their fat absorption disorders. At the same time, exogenous lipase can lower the incidence of intestinal diseases, especially nutrition-related diarrhea caused by poor fat digestion. Some studies found that lipase enhanced growth performance, digestive enzyme activity, nutrient digestibility and intestinal morphology in weaned piglets. However, compared with studies on phytase and other enzymes, the application research of lipase in weaned piglets is relatively rare.

Emulsifier
There is a significant difference in the apparent digestibility of fat between breast milk and feed for piglets, with one important reason being that breast milk fat is extensively emulsified. However, weaned piglets may not fully emulsify the fat in their feed due to insufficient bile secretion caused by weaning stress. Bile salts are excellent emulsifiers that can emulsify fat and form lipid particles, which increases the contact area between pancreatic lipase and fat, facilitates the action of lipases, and promotes fat digestion and absorption. Exogenous addition of bile salts improves the growth performance, liver glucose and lipid metabolism, intestinal epithelial integrity and regulates the redox status of weaned piglets.

Amino acids and their metabolites
Weaned piglets have reduced feed intake and weakened ability to digest and absorb fat, leading to inadequate energy supply in the intestine. Amino acids are important nutrients, which are preferentially used by the small intestine and are the main source of energy for intestinal mucosa. For instance, ornithine enters the urea cycle in the body and is a precursor of arginine, citrulline, and proline, as well as a direct precursor of polyamines (spermidine, spermine, and putrescine), which can promote growth hormone secretion and young animal growth. Polyamines are momentary sources of cellular energy that reduce intestinal damage and lower inflammation, thereby alleviating weaning stress. In addition, ornithine significantly increases the gene expression of CD36 in the liver, which alleviates chronic inflammation induced by obesity. Supplementation of arginine in the diet improves pregnancy-induced insulin resistance, increases maternal concentrations of arginine and ornithine, placental glucose and fatty acid transport-related gene expression (including CD36), and promotes offspring growth and health. Alpha-ketoglutarate is a central molecule in the tricarboxylic acid cycle and a precursor of glutamate and glutamine, which is an important source of energy for intestinal cells. It plays an important role in regulating lipid metabolism and protecting the intestinal mucosal barrier. Studies have revealed that alpha-ketoglutarate activates the PXR signaling pathway, inhibits the NF-κB signaling pathway, repairs damaged intestinal mucosa, and exerts immune functions in the intestine. Alpha-ketoglutarate also increases intracellular levels of alpha-ketoglutarate, restores the function of aging stem cells, promotes the generation of brown and beige adipocytes in elderly mice, maintains the health of adipose tissue, suppresses chronic inflammation, and extends lifespan. In our previous studies, we confirmed that ornithine-alpha-ketoglutarate, a complex salt of amino acids formed by the ionic bonding of ornithine and α-ketoglutarate, promoted the expression of CD36 and fat deposition in intestinal organoids, alleviated diarrhea and chronic oxidative stress (some of the data has not been published yet). Based on the above, amino acids can maintain intestinal barrier function, thereby promoting intestinal fat absorption and growth in weaned piglets.

Probiotics
Microbes play a vital role in the absorption of dietary fat in the gut, especially in the small intestine where they regulate host fat digestion and transportation. Germ-free mice fed a high-fat diet exhibits higher fecal lipid levels compared to normal mice. found that providing a high-fat diet resulted in fat malabsorption, particularly impairing lipid digestion and absorption in the small intestine of germ-free mice. High-fat diet in mice promotes the growth of specific microbial families such as Clostridiaceae and Streptococcaceae, which enhances fat absorption. Introducing microbes that aid in fat digestion to germ-free mice results in increased fat absorption even when fed a low-fat diet again. Mechanistically, gut bacteria promote fat absorption by activating adipocytes, producing chylomicrons, and emulsifying lipids. Lactobacilli and their metabolites also promote intestinal lipid absorption, decrease fat oxidation, and increase host fat. However, some probiotics like Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG compete with host fatty acids for intestinal absorption, and inhibit the metabolism and absorption of fatty acids in the intestine of mice, thereby preventing fatty acid uptake and obesity. Propionibacterium freudenreichii subsp. shermanii enhances intestinal cell fat uptake and storage, while E. coli aids in lipid breakdown and reduces chylomicron circulation.
Native pig breeds exhibit better fat absorption and diarrhea resistance abilities. For instance, Shaziling pigs have high levels of Lactobacillus reuteri, Bifidobacterium adolescentis, and Butyrivibrio fibrisolvens, especially L. reuteri, which increases CD36 and peroxisome proliferator activated receptor γ expression and promotes lean pig fat deposition while improving meat quality. Tibetan pigs possess high levels of Lactic acid bacteria, Bifidobacteria, and Solobacterium, promoting fat deposition, disease resistance, and stress tolerance. Fecal transplantation of Laiwu pigs into Duroc × Landrace × Yorkshire pigs increase Bacteroides uniformis, Treponema_pectinovorum, Sphaerochaeta globosa, Hydrogenoanaerobacterium saccharovorans, and Pyramidobacter piscolens in the gut, and consequently promoting fat deposition in the gut and liver.

Concluding remarks
Fat absorption alleviates intestinal barrier dysfunction and diarrhea in weaned piglets. In this review, we summarize the reasons for intestinal fat absorption disorders in weaned piglets and discuss the regulatory mechanisms of CD36, PXR, and AMPK signaling pathways. In addition, dietary fats, lipases, amino acids, and probiotics can regulate intestinal fat absorption and intestinal barrier function, reducing the occurrence of diarrhea. The review mainly describes a theoretical basis for regulating intestinal fat absorption in weaned piglets and elaborates nutritional regulation methods to prevent diarrhea induced by insufficient fat absorption disorders.

Author contributions
Yuying Li and Pengjun Shi: Investigation, Writing–original draft preparation. Kang Yao, Qian Lin, Mansheng Wang and Hui Diao: Writing–reviewing and editing. Zhenping Hou and Wenjie Tang: Conceptualization, Writing–reviewing and editing.

Declaration of competing interest
We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, and there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the content of this paper.

References
Role of the gut in lipid homeostasis
Dietary lipid sources and levels for weanling pigs
Alpha-ketoglutarate, an endogenous metabolite, extends lifespan and compresses morbidity in aging mice
Bovine milk-derived emulsifiers increase triglyceride absorption in newborn formula-fed pigs
PHLPP1 promotes neutral lipid accumulation through AMPK/ChREBP-dependent lipid uptake and fatty acid synthesis pathways
PXR as the tipping point between innate immune response, microbial infections, and drug metabolism
Hydrolyzed yeast supplementation to newly weaned piglets: growth performance, gut health, and microbial fermentation
The biological stress of early weaned piglets
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency: prevalence, diagnosis, and management
Small intestinal microbiota: the neglected stepchild needed for fat digestion and absorption
Effect of coated lipase supplementation on growth, digestion and intestinal morphology in weaning piglets
CD36 deficiency impairs the small intestinal barrier and induces subclinical inflammation in mice
Dietary fat and gut microbiota: mechanisms involved in obesity control
Development of digestive enzymes in the piglet from birth to 8 weeks. I. Pancreas and pancreatic enzymes
Bone metabolism in obese rats programmed by early weaning
CD36 deficiency impairs intestinal lipid secretion and clearance of chylomicrons from the blood
Gut microbiota dysbiosis in postweaning piglets: understanding the keys to health
Selective transport of long-chain fatty acids by FAT/CD36 in skeletal muscle of broilers
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor efavirenz activates PXR to induce hypercholesterolemia and hepatic steatosis
CD36 facilitates fatty acid uptake by dynamic palmitoylation-regulated endocytosis
The physiological basis and nutritional function of alpha-ketoglutarate
Functions of pregnane X receptor in self-detoxification
Fat deposition deficiency is critical for the high mortality of pre-weanling newborn piglets
Weaning stress in piglets alters the expression of intestinal proteins involved in fat absorption
Variations in enzyme activity in stomach and pancreatic tissue and digesta in piglets around weaning
Exocrine pancreatic secretion is stimulated in piglets fed fish oil compared with those fed coconut oil or lard
Bile acid composition regulates GPR119-dependent intestinal lipid sensing and food intake regulation in mice
Intestinal lipid absorption and lipoprotein formation
A protective mechanism of probiotic Lactobacillus against hepatic steatosis via reducing host intestinal fatty acid absorption
Dietary medium-chain fatty acid and Bacillus in combination alleviate weaning stress of piglets by regulating intestinal microbiota and barrier function
Effect of supplementation fat during the last 3 weeks of uterine life and the preweaning period on performance, ruminal fermentation, blood metabolites, passive immunity and health of the newborn calf
Sophorolipid protects against early-weaning syndrome by improving the gut microenvironment in early-weaned piglets
Nutritional management of gut health in pigs around weaning
Effects of dietary fatty acids on gut health and function of pigs pre- and post-weaning
Ornithine α-ketoglutarate alleviates inflammation via regulating ileal mucosa microbiota and metabolites in enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli-infected pigs
CD36 favours fat sensing and transport to govern lipid metabolism
Effects of ornithine α-ketoglutarate on growth performance and gut microbiota in a chronic oxidative stress pig model induced by d-galactose
Application of porcine lipase secreted by pichia pastoris to improve fat digestion and growth performance of postweaning piglets
Antimicrobial peptide KR-32 alleviates Escherichia coli K88-induced fatty acid malabsorption by improving expression of fatty acid transporter protein 4 (FATP4)1
Effects of dietary energy and lipase levels on nutrient digestibility, digestive physiology and noxious gas emission in weaning pigs
Dietary bile acid supplementation in weaned piglets with intrauterine growth retardation improves colonic microbiota, metabolic activity, and epithelial function
Dietary bile acid supplementation alters plasma biochemical and hormone indicators, intestinal digestive capacity, and microbiota of piglets with normal birth weight and intrauterine growth retardation
Dietary bile acids supplementation modulates immune response, antioxidant capacity, glucose, and lipid metabolism in normal and intrauterine growth retardation piglets
AIDA selectively mediates downregulation of fat synthesis enzymes by ERAD to retard intestinal fat absorption and prevent obesity
Gut microbial profiles and the role in lipid metabolism in Shaziling pigs
Small intestine microbiota regulate host digestive and absorptive adaptive responses to dietary lipids
Nutritional interventions and the gut microbiome in children
Free fatty-acid transport via CD36 drives beta-oxidation-mediated hematopoietic stem cell response to infection
AMPK and exercise: glucose uptake and insulin sensitivity
Lactobacillus brevis OPK-3 from kimchi prevents obesity and modulates the expression of adipogenic and pro-inflammatory genes in adipose tissue of diet-induced obese mice
Effects of the use of α-amylase and lipase enzymes on the productive performance of recently weaned piglets
Oxidative ornithine metabolism supports non-inflammatory C. difficile colonization
Germ-free C57BL/6J mice are resistant to high-fat-diet-induced insulin resistance and have altered cholesterol metabolism
Palm oil encapsulated by homogenizing and spray drying enhances nutrient digestibility and attenuates diarrhoea of piglets
Effects of dietary arginine supplementation in pregnant mares on maternal metabolism, placental structure and function and foal growth
Regulation of AMPK activation by CD36 links fatty acid uptake to beta-oxidation
Prenatal exposure to maternal low or high protein diets induces modest changes in the adipose tissue proteome of newborn piglets
Antibiotics suppress activation of intestinal mucosal mast cells and reduce dietary lipid absorption in Sprague-Dawley rats
Healthy gut microbiome composition enhances disease resistance and fat deposition in Tibetan pigs
Early weaning leads to the remodeling of lipid profile in piglet jejunal crypt cells during post-weaning days
Endothelial cell CD36 optimizes tissue fatty acid uptake
Dietary structured lipids for post-weaning piglets: fat digestibility, nitrogen retention and fatty acid profiles of tissues
Effects of dicyclohexyl phthalate exposure on PXR activation and lipid homeostasis in mice
Role of nuclear receptor PXR in immune cells and inflammatory diseases
Screening of microbes associated with swine growth and fat deposition traits across the intestinal tract
Disentangling host-microbiota regulation of lipid secretion by enterocytes: insights from commensals Lactobacillus paracasei and Escherichia coli
Alpha-ketoglutarate for adipose tissue rejuvenation
An increased dietary supply of medium-chain fatty acids during early weaning in rodents prevents excessive fat accumulation in adulthood
DHHC4 and DHHC5 facilitate fatty acid uptake by palmitoylating and targeting CD36 to the plasma membrane
CD36 tango in cancer: signaling pathways and functions
Serum biochemical parameters and amino acids metabolism are altered in piglets by early-weaning and proline and putrescine supplementations
Dietary fat preference and effects on performance of piglets at weaning
AMPK facilitates intestinal long-chain fatty acid uptake by manipulating CD36 expression and translocation
Integrated analysis of multi-tissues lipidome and gut microbiome reveals microbiota-induced shifts on lipid metabolism in pigs
Dietary fatty acids in gut health: absorption, metabolism and function
Effects of a moderate-fat diet that is enriched with fish oil on intestinal lipid absorption in a senescence-accelerated prone mouse model
PXR-mediated expression of FABP4 promotes valproate-induced lipid accumulation in HepG2 cells
Longitudinal development of the gut microbiota in healthy and diarrheic piglets induced by age-related dietary changes
Effects of lipase on the growth performance and nutrient digestibility of weaned piglets
Effects of early intervention with sodium butyrate on lipid metabolism-related gene expression and liver metabolite profiles in neonatal piglets
Stress-induced regulators of intestinal fat absorption
High-protein diet prevents fat mass increase after dieting by counteracting Lactobacillus-enhanced lipid absorption
Hepatic fatty acid transporter Cd36 is a common target of LXR, PXR, and PPARgamma in promoting steatosis
Effects of dietary serine supplementation on intestinal integrity, inflammation and oxidative status in early-weaned piglets
Mettl3 deficiency sustains long-chain fatty acid absorption through suppressing Traf6-dependent inflammation response
Peer review under responsibility of Chinese Association of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine.