Thrombus composition in ischaemic stroke: histological and radiological evaluation, and implications for acute clinical management
Ischaemic stroke is one of the key causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Although rapid reperfusion through thrombolysis or mechanical thrombectomy is the cornerstone of acute management, the efficacy of these interventions is influenced by the underlying composition of the occluding thrombus, which varies widely. Histological examination of retrieved thrombi allows the determination of thrombus composition and may inform aetiology and secondary prevention strategies. Additionally, radiological features may provide valuable pre-treatment insights into thrombus composition to help predict treatment success. This narrative review discusses histological and radiological indicators of thrombus composition, and how this may predict success of thrombolysis and thrombectomy. Furthermore, it discusses how these insights can be applied in the diagnostic work-up of embolic stroke of undetermined source (ESUS), and the potential utility of emerging biomarkers relating to thrombus formation, in order to optimise secondary prevention strategies.
Graphical Abstract

Introduction
Globally, stroke is the second-leading cause of death and the third-leading cause of death and disability combined. Changing demographics means that this burden is likely to rise: in the United Kingdom, the number of strokes is projected to increase by 60% between 2015 and 2035, with the number of stroke survivors more than doubling over the same period. A similar rise in the worldwide incidence of stroke is also predicted. This underscores the urgent need to optimize both hyperacute management and secondary prevention strategies to reduce the future burden of stroke.
Approximately 85% of all strokes are ischaemic strokes, where blockage of cerebral arteries leads to reduced blood supply and, if untreated, subsequent neuronal injury and cell death. The primary goal of hyperacute treatment is the swift restoration of cerebral perfusion, thereby minimising the extent of irreversible brain tissue loss and improving functional outcomes. Currently, the two mainstays of reperfusion treatment are intravenous thrombolysis using tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), and mechanical thrombectomy (MT); a neurointerventional procedure where the blood clot is physically extracted from the occluded vessel. Following acute management, the identification of index stroke aetiology aids in choosing appropriate secondary prevention to reduce the likelihood of stroke recurrence.
With the increasing use of mechanical thrombectomy in clinical practice, the ability to retrieve thrombi provides an opportunity for histopathological evaluation of thrombus composition. Additionally, advances in hyperacute stroke imaging, such as CT perfusion imaging, multiphase or delayed-phase CT angiography (CTA) and diffusion-weighted MRI, allow more detailed assessment of thrombus features, cerebral perfusion deficits, and overall tissue viability. Finally, blood biomarkers indicating inflammation, cardiac dysfunction, and endothelial injury are now more routinely available in acute clinical settings.
Faced with an individual with an acute ischaemic stroke, clinicians now have a much richer set of information at their disposal. This review uniquely synthesises information from histological studies, imaging studies and emerging blood biomarkers. We also discuss novel technologies advancing thrombus analysis, including radiomics, high-resolution scanning electron microscopy and quantitative PCR. We explore how these insights into thrombus composition and formation can be integrated to guide clinical decision-making both around hyperacute stroke management and secondary prevention.

How does thrombus composition differ between stroke aetiologies?
The various aetiologies of acute ischaemic stroke reflect fundamentally different sites of thrombus formation. Major stroke subtypes, as delineated in the Trial of Org 10,172 in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST) classification, include embolic strokes secondary to large artery atherosclerosis and cardiogenic embolism. The site of thrombus formation may influence the relative proportions and spatial distribution of the three primary clot components: red blood cells (RBCs), fibrin, and platelets. Other substantial components, including von Willebrand factor (vWF), leukocytes, neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), and extracellular DNA are increasingly recognised. As a result of mechanical thrombectomy becoming a standard intervention for acute ischaemic stroke, retrieved thrombi are now available for histopathological analysis, offering the potential for further insights into stroke aetiology.
In the traditional view of the pathophysiology of clot formation within the heart, thrombus formation occurs secondary to damage to the endocardium and stasis within the left atrial appendage (often seen in cardiac diseases such as atrial fibrillation, valvular disease, or cardiomyopathies). Longer dwell times in the left atrial appendage enables progressive clot organization with increased accumulation and cross-linking of fibrin, as well as the incorporation of shattered or compressed red cells. Such clots are older, more stable, and more dense. In contrast, thrombus formation in large arteries occurs more rapidly and under high shear stress. Here, plasma lipoproteins, carrying an excess of cholesterol, penetrate sites with endothelial damage, triggering sub-endothelial collagen exposure and platelet activation and aggregation. Such agglutinative thrombi are torn away from the vessel wall soon after formation by turbulent and high-velocity blood flow, resulting in a looser, lesser-organised thrombus with fewer fibrin and more intact red cells.
The distinct thrombogenic processes and signatures according to stroke aetiologies is supported by several histopathologic studies and a recent systematic review suggesting a higher proportion and density of fibrin being present in cardioembolic thrombi. This is supported by clinical studies highlighting the need for different anti-thrombotic strategies according to aetiology: antiplatelet therapies (with increasing use of dual-antiplatelet strategies) are the key pharmacological management for reducing recurrent large artery atherosclerosis strokes, whereas anticoagulation has been shown to be superior to antiplatelets in reducing recurrent cardioembolic risk (with one large meta-analysis indicating a stroke risk reduction in atrial fibrillation of 64% and 22% with warfarin and antiplatelets respectively)
The proportion of RBCs within a thrombus has also been extensively studied in relation to stroke aetiology. Several large-scale studies, the largest of which analysed clots from 1350 patients, reported higher proportions of intact RBCs in thrombi from large artery atherosclerosis compared to thrombi from a cardioembolic source However, some smaller, older studies report contradictory findings, with higher proportions of RBCs in cardioembolic thrombi, whilst other studies report no significant differences in RBC proportions between aetiologies at all. One explanation for these disparate findings may be that clots undergo in situ ageing, reorganisation, and fibrin retraction post-retrieval, which may alter histological characteristics and complicate assessment of their composition.
Key findings regarding thrombus composition in histological studies
Key finding	Studies supporting this finding	 	Higher fibrin in cardioembolic thrombi	Liao et al. (2020), Sporns et al. (2017), Fitzgerald et al. (2021), Ahn et al. (2016), Maekawa et al. (2018), Boeckh-Behrens et al. (2016), Hund et al. (2023), Huang et al. (2022), Khismatullin et al. (2020) 	 	Higher RBCs in large artery thrombi	Liao et al. (2020), Sporns et al. (2017), Fitzgerald et al. (2021), Ahn et al. (2016), Maekawa et al. (2018), Boeckh-Behrens et al. (2016), Hund et al. (2023), Brinjikji et al. (2021), Niesten et al. (2014) 	 	Central platelet clustering in cardioembolic thrombi, peripheral platelet distribution in large artery thrombi	Ahn et al. (2016), Kim et al. (2020)
The evidence for the constituent proportion of platelets in thrombi varying according to stroke aetiology is unconvincing. The majority of studies reporting no significant association between stroke aetiology and platelet proportion, whereas only one study identified a higher proportion of platelets in clots from a large artery source compared to a cardioembolic source. However, several studies report that in clots from a large artery atherosclerosis source, platelets are distributed more peripherally, in contrast to the central clustering observed in cardioembolic clots. This difference in platelet distribution may be attributed to the distinct flow dynamics in each site: in large arteries, high shear forces push platelets towards the vessel wall, leading to peripheral distribution of platelets in clots. Conversely, in the heart, where flow is slower, platelets tend to aggregate centrally, forming clusters in the centre of the clot. An overview of key findings from histological studies regarding thrombus composition is shown in Table 1.
The contribution of other components, including neutrophils, vWF, NETs, and extracellular DNA, is increasingly recognised. Emerging evidence suggests that cardioembolic thrombi contain greater leukocyte, DNA, and NET content. This may be a result of the longer dwell times and blood stasis in the atria due to atrial fibrillation and low blood flow velocity. These conditions promote prolonged periods of thrombus formation, during which thrombus organization, fibrin accumulation, and fibrin cross-linking occur.
Several histological techniques may be employed to analyse the composition of thrombi post-retrieval. Standard techniques such as haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and Martius, Scarlet and Blue (MSB), which visualises fibrin, have been widely used in studies describing the proportion and distribution of red blood cells, fibrin and platelets. Specific proteins, such as von Willebrand factor, can be visualised with immunohistochemistry. Advanced analysis methods have also been used, including high-resolution scanning electron microscopy for three-dimensional ultrastructural analysis, and quantitative PCR or proteomics for detecting specific molecular markers such as NETs.
Understanding the relationship between clot composition and stroke aetiology is particularly useful for the diagnostic workup of an embolic stroke of undetermined source (ESUS). Evidence from the above histopathological studies suggest that thrombi in ESUS frequently have histologic features very similar to that of cardioembolic thrombi. This suggests that many strokes of undetermined source are cardioembolic in aetiology, with the paroxysmal nature of some cases of atrial fibrillation limiting detection in the diagnostic work-up. Histological and radiological features that may aid in the workup of ESUS are discussed further below.
Importantly, it is worth noting an inherent limitation of all studies relying on histological examination of thrombi retrieved with mechanical thrombectomy: histological analysis is only possible on clots that have been successfully retrieved. This introduces a key bias, where the composition of resilient, un-extractable thrombi remains unknown. In the future, advanced imaging and molecular analysis methods may play a greater role in the examination of retrieved thrombi: techniques applied successfully so far include high-resolution scanning electron microscopy, quantitative PCR analysis, and gene ontology.
These limitations highlight the potential utility of in vivo thrombus analysis, particularly through radiological assessment of clot characteristics. Not only would this allow analysis of thrombi that were unable to be aspirated, but may also have a role in prognostication and guiding treatment decisions in the acute setting.

How does radiological analysis reflect clot composition and aetiology?
a hyperdense artery sign,
a lower clot burden score (reflecting thrombus extent, from multisegment vessel occlusion to normal),
a more proximal thrombus location,
a shorter distance from the internal carotid artery terminus,
higher absolute thrombus attenuation (indicating increased density on CT),
longer thrombi.
In a first episode of stroke, prior to histological information being available, radiological findings may provide clues to thrombus composition and the underlying aetiology. For instance, a sub-study from the MR CLEAN registry found that non-cardioembolic strokes (in comparison to cardioembolic strokes) are more commonly associated with specific radiological features including:
A non-contrast CT head demonstrating a hyperdense left middle cerebral artery indicative of thrombus (white arrows)
Interestingly, in addition to being associated with non-cardioembolic strokes, the hyperdense artery sign on non-contrast CT has also been shown to indicate RBC-rich thrombi. This corresponds with the previously discussed associations between non-cardioembolic strokes and RBC-rich thrombi, linking radiological findings to both stroke aetiology and thrombus composition. An example of the hyperdense artery sign is shown in Fig. 1. On gradient-echo MRI, a specialised MRI sequence which is particularly sensitive to magnetic components such as RBCs, the blooming artifact – where areas of clot appear larger than they actually are – has been associated with RBC-rich thrombi. This occurs because the deoxyhaemoglobin and methaemoglobin content in RBCs disrupt the local magnetic field, leading to signal dropout and exaggerating the true size on final images.
In addition to specific signs, three radiological parameters are have been investigated to predict clot composition and provide insights into stroke aetiology: thrombus density, clot perviousness, and radiomic features.
Assessment of ex vivo thrombi with D dual-energy CT, a technique which uses two different X-ray energy levels to differentiate tissue types, demonstrated that RBC-rich thrombi had higher clot attenuation in Hounsfield units, suggesting increased thrombus density, compared to fibrin/platelet-rich thrombi. In a further study, higher attenuation on non-contrast CT was associated with RBC-rich thrombi, which were associated with a large artery atherosclerotic source. Another study using microCT to assess retrieved clots found differential clot densities in RBC-rich, intermediate, and WBC-rich clots.
Thrombus perviousness, assessed via single-phase or dynamic CTA, reflects the ease with which blood is able to flow through a clot and has been linked to thrombus composition and clinical outcomes following thrombectomy. One retrospective analysis by Benson et al. reported that clot perviousness on CTA, defined as an increase of ≥ 10 Hounsfield units on CTA compared with NCCT, was associated with RBC-rich clots, whereas impervious clots were more likely to be fibrin- and WBC-rich. However, some studies contradicted these findings, showing that pervious clots were higher in fibrin/platelet content. This discrepancy may arise from the heterogeneous nature of clots, which could have influenced the reference region chosen for perviousness measurement in these studies.
The increased use of machine learning and radiomics in acute stroke imaging has the potential to be exploited for thrombus evaluation. Several radiomic features have shown correlations with red blood cell, fibrin, and platelet content in thrombi, offering a more reliable prediction of cardioembolic stroke than routine radiological parameters. A recent systematic review highlighted the clinical utility of radiomic measures and clot imaging, suggesting that automatic detection and segmentation of clots are essential for clinical integration. Further methodological evaluation of predictive radiomics models is needed.
Other imaging modalities also offer future potential for in vivo thrombus evaluation. For instance, a preclinical study using diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) in a porcine model showed that DRS could reliably determine clot composition in vivo. Positron-emission tomography (PET) is a highly sensitive imaging technique that uses radiotracers to detect pathophysiology of interest in vivo, and a number of emerging radiotracers have been developed specific to different thrombus components that may facilitate thrombus detection and evaluation.

How do histological and radiological factors affect efficacy of thrombolysis and mechanical thrombectomy?
The mainstays of hyperacute treatment in acute ischaemic stroke involve reperfusion strategies, either through systemic thrombolysis, where fibrinolytic agents such as alteplase are administered, or mechanical thrombectomy, which involves physical retrieval of thrombus from the affected artery. The clinical applicability of these treatments is patient-specific and governed by distinct criteria, which have been updated over time in response to emerging evidence. Histological and radiological features may provide clues to thrombus composition and the likely efficacy of thrombolysis and mechanical thrombectomy.
As previously discussed, histological analysis of retrieved thrombi has provided key information about clot composition, which may affect treatment responsiveness to thrombolysis and thrombectomy. In particular, clots with higher RBC content have been found to be more responsive to thrombolysis with tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) both in clinical studies and external thrombolysis attempts with retrieved human thrombi. In the latter study, it was demonstrated that the low responsiveness to tPA in fibrin-rich, RBC-poor thrombi may be overcome by targeting non-fibrin components, e.g. with N,N-diacetyl-L-cystine or DNase-1.
Several considerations may explain the increased susceptibility of RBC-rich thrombi to thrombolysis, compared to fibrin-rich thrombi. It has been suggested that the presence of large amounts of intact RBCs may disrupt the gross fibrin network structure, leading to looser clot architecture. Additionally, older work has shown that fibrin pores enlarge in the presence of RBCs, thereby increasing permeability and allowing improved access of thrombolytic agents.
Similar to thrombolysis, the treatment response to thrombectomy also appears to be affected by thrombus composition. Thrombi rich in RBCs are associated with a higher likelihood of successful recanalization and improved clinical outcomes following mechanical thrombectomy. The reasons for this variation in treatment responsiveness are again thought to be related to thrombus composition. RBCs, where water is the main component, are more viscous, whereas fibrin is more elastic. Decreased stiffness of RBC-rich clots may improve clot-device interaction by allowing thrombectomy devices to more easily grasp and retrieve the thrombi. One study simulating stent retriever manipulation on thrombi of varying consistencies showed that fibrin-rich clots have higher friction coefficients with the vessel wall, making these clots more adherent to the vessel wall and therefore more resistant to device traction. Interestingly, these friction coefficients rapidly increased following repeated stent retriever manipulation, echoing clinical experience that multiple attempts make resilient thrombi more sticky and less responsive to subsequent thrombectomy attempts. However, the increased fragility of RBC-rich clots may have a downside: recent data suggests that they are more prone to fragmentation, leading to an increased risk of secondary distal embolization and necessitating proximal flow arrest with balloon catheters prior to attempting retrieval. Further insights into the differential properties of thrombi with different compositions may lead to more targeted and individualised approaches to thrombectomy, both in terms of strategy and device choice.
Finally, it is worth noting that other key components of thrombi, including WBCs, platelets, extracellular DNA, and NETs may also affect the efficacy of reperfusion therapies. For instance, in a rat model, platelet-rich thrombi were shown to be more resistant to tPA. Similarly, platelet-rich clots were shown to be associated with poorer recanalization rates following mechanical thrombectomy, and it has been suggested that pre-treatment with antiplatelet therapy or vWF inhibition via targeting the glycoprotein Ib-vWF interaction could improve the efficacy of mechanical thrombectomy in such scenarios. Additionally, a higher percentage of WBCs in a thrombus was associated with extended time to recanalization and poorer neurological recovery post-mechanical thrombectomy.
Prior to histopathological information being available, radiological features may provide clues to the success of reperfusion therapy. For instance, a meta-analysis of twelve studies demonstrated that the hyperdense artery sign on non-contrast CT imaging is significantly associated with successful recanalization in patients who underwent mechanical thrombectomy. However, no association was shown with clinical outcome.
Thrombus perviousness, assessed via single-phase CTA, has been shown to predict clinical outcomes. A subsequent study suggested that multiphase CTA, which captures temporal changes in blood flow, could be a better predictor of clinical outcomes following reperfusion therapy. Thrombus perviousness was also linked to successful recanalisation following intravenous tPA treatment. However, one study found that thrombus perviousness measured by multiphase CTA did not predict first-pass recanalisation or successful revascularisation in patients treated with a stent retriever. Data from the COMPASS trial further indicated that clot perviousness was associated with first-pass aspiration success.
Comparison of RBC-rich thrombi and fibrin-rich thrombi
The radiological approach to thrombus composition continues to evolve. A nested case–control study of 67 patients with a large vessel occlusion assessed 326 predefined radiomics features that describe thrombus characteristics, such as first-order statistics, shape, size, and high-order statistical textural features. It used these radiomic features to train a linear support vector machine classifier, a commonly used supervised machine learning algorithm, to successfully predict successful recanalization with intravenous alteplase. Another study identified nine radiomic features, reflecting clot heterogeneity, coarseness and texture in varying ways, that were predictive of first-attempt recanalisation with thromboaspiration. Larger studies in radiomics and clot composition are needed to clarify their utility. An overview of histological, radiological and reperfusion features of RBC-rich and fibrin-rich clots is shown in Fig. 2.

How may clot analysis guide the work-up and secondary prevention of embolic stroke of undetermined source?
Evaluation of the thrombus – either through histological or radiological means – may have implications beyond acute treatment efficacy, such as improved diagnostics to guide secondary prevention. Selecting the appropriate secondary prevention strategy requires an understanding of the underlying aetiology in the individual patient. As per the Trial of Org 10,172 in Acute Stroke Treatment (TOAST) criteria, embolic strokes of undetermined source (ESUS, sometimes called cryptogenic) are non-lacunar strokes where no underlying aetiology is found after evaluation, or where multiple potential aetiologies are present. Approximately 25% of ischaemic strokes are cryptogenic, and thrombus analysis to help determine the underlying aetiology has the potential to improve secondary prevention measures.
The cohort of ESUS patients is a heterogeneous one, encompassing numerous potential underlying aetiologies, and characterised by a significant risk of recurrence. Evaluation of patients with an unclear aetiology of ischaemic stroke may include continuous heart rhythm monitoring, transthoracic echocardiography, and screening for malignancy or thrombotic tendency, along with multiple other potential investigations. Yet despite these investigations, which can be costly and can be delayed by availability, it remains common that no source for the stroke is identified. Hence, radiological or histological examination of the thrombus may provide valuable insights into the likely stroke aetiology.
Flowchart of investigations and secondary prevention strategies based on thrombus composition analysis. Abbreviations: DOACs (Direct Oral Anticoagulants), CT (Computed Tomography), MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging), PET (Positron Emission Tomography), TTE (Transthoracic Echocardiography), US (Ultrasound), PFO (Patent Foramen Ovale)
Given the heterogeneity of ESUS aetiologies, the optimal treatment of ESUS remains unclear. Reflecting a hypothesis that ESUS likely reflects paroxysmal atrial fibrillation that has not yet been detected, a number of studies have investigated empirical anticoagulation in ESUS cohorts. However, the failure of empirical anticoagulation to demonstrate superiority over aspirin in trials such as ATTICUS and RE-SPECT ESUS highlights the challenges posed by this heterogeneity. It is likely that subgroups within the ESUS trial population – such as those with non-stenotic atherosclerosis – may not benefit from anticoagulation, thereby diluting the overall treatment effect. Thrombus composition analysis therefore has the potential to refine patient stratification for trials. In a clinical context, thrombus analysis may provide the ability to target investigations more appropriately, improve their diagnostic yield, and reduce waiting times for investigations in order to provide more timely diagnoses and initiation of appropriate secondary prevention. An overview of suggested investigations and subsequent secondary prevention strategies, based on thrombus composition analysis, is shown in Fig. 3.

Thrombus analysis to guide management in the presence of competing stroke aetiologies
As well as instances where no cause has been identified, ESUS may also include ischaemic strokes where concurrent aetiologies co-exist, such as the presence of atrial fibrillation and carotid atherosclerosis within the same individual.
Causative large artery atherosclerosis tends to be diagnosed where there is extracranial carotid artery stenosis of ≥ 50%. However, non-stenotic but symptomatic carotid plaques, as well as plaques in the aorta are also potential sources of thrombi. Visualising the area from the aortic arch to the intracranial vessels, and identification of high-risk plaque, features is therefore required. Magnetic resonance and computed tomography angiography, alone, or in combination with positron emission tomography, can identify high-risk plaque features and underlying processes, such as inflammation and microcalcification. These processes are also potential targets to reduce plaque destabilisation and stroke recurrence, though the availability of advanced imaging techniques and their radiation exposure limits their widespread adoption for ESUS stroke work-ups. Consequently, more accessible thrombus evaluation may provide surrogate markers of active but sub-threshold atheroma that has gone undetected. In addition, the use of thrombus analysis to identify an atherosclerotic cause of stroke could be used in the research setting to better phenotype the aetiology of the stroke as an inclusion criterion in future trials regarding treatment of atherosclerosis (where mistaken inclusion of non-atherosclerotic aetiologies may dilute treatment effects).
A substantial fraction of patients with ESUS have atrial fibrillation detected during long term follow up, but the clinical significance of these episodes, and need for anticoagulation, is unclear, and may relate to the burden of atrial fibrillation. In addition, patients may have a concurrent potential cause for their stroke, which may complicate diagnosis and management. Where thrombus analysis suggests a cardioembolic origin, identification of the location of the thrombus and the underlying aetiology are required, as these have implications for optimal secondary prevention. Current investigation techniques, such as echocardiography and cardiac rhythm monitoring, have their limitations, including high demand leading to delays in investigation, while having a low diagnostic yield in a general ischaemic stroke population.
Using thrombus analysis to select patients for relevant investigations may reduce overall demand, while increasing diagnostic yield. Given the routine use of interval neuroimaging in these patients, additional imaging could be included to streamline investigation of potential cardioembolic causes. An example is cardiac computed tomography (CT) imaging at the time of neuroimaging, which may help detect the presence of intra-cardiac thrombi, and other risk factors. Identification of atrial fibrillation through prolonged cardiac rhythm monitoring may be more clinically relevant in this population.

Can thrombus analysis guide investigations into rarer aetiologies of stroke?
Reliable identification of venous emboli would allow the prioritisation of investigations into their source and route into the arterial circulation. Currently, clinical and imaging features are used to quantify the likelihood of a PFO-related stroke. Positive identification of a venous origin of a thrombus would alter the clinical relevance of the presence of a PFO, and the risk–benefit calculation regarding PFO closure. This group could potentially also provide an enriched population for screening for thrombophilia.
Analysis of thrombus contents may provide a tissue diagnosis in infectious causes of stroke, allowing earlier definitive antimicrobial administration. Further analysis methods may also provide insights as to underlying aetiologies, allowing the targeting of investigations, including screening for malignancy in those with tumour cells within the thrombus. The presence of specific features within the thrombus could also increase the yield of screening, such as with incorporated antibodies with syphilis or antiphospholipid syndrome, or leukocyte enzymes in the case of Fabry disease.
As discussed previously, histological analysis of thrombus composition can provide clues to the likely aetiology (Fig. 2). This can subsequently inform investigations and secondary prevention strategies, an overview of which is shown in Fig. 3.

Future outlook: how could serum biomarkers inform aetiology and guide clinical decision-making?
As outlined above, the histological and radiological appearances of thrombi have the potential to support decision making in ischaemic stroke and advancements in large vessel occlusion identification and retrieval techniques will further our existing knowledge on thrombus architecture and radiological appearance in ischaemic stroke. However, these techniques are limited to instances where a large vessel occlusion is present, accounting for approximately 30% of all ischaemic stroke cases.
As a result, serum biomarkers, often inexpensive and accessible, have been studied as an option to support clinical decision making in stroke. Currently, more than 150 candidate stroke biomarkers have been identified in ischaemic stroke. Although there is a lack of published literature which link serum biomarkers to thrombus structure and composition, can clinicians still use serum biomarkers to detect the presence of a large vessel occlusion and to predict stroke aetiology?.

Detection of large vessel occlusion
NETs are large extracellularly placed nuclear and mitochondrial DNA scaffolds studded with cytotoxic histones and proteases, that are created when neutrophils become activated under inflammatory conditions. NETs act as a scaffold for red blood cells, platelets, and pro-coagulant proteins and as a result, are a major constituent of ischaemic stroke thrombi. ELISA assays are available that can quantify levels of NETs, by using surrogate markers such as cell-free DNA (cfDNA), myeloperoxidase-histone complexes, DNase activity, and circulating citrullinated histone H3 (citH3). As further NET- biomarkers are identified, clinicians may be able to use these to predict the presence of a large vessel occlusion in stroke patients.
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), a protein present in the soma and end-feet of astrocytes, has been identified as a promising candidate for differentiating haemorrhagic from ischaemic stroke. During the first 6 h after a stroke, the serum concentration of GFAP is not only significantly higher in haemorrhagic stroke patients compared to ischaemic stroke but is also correlated to haemorrhage volume, allowing better differentiation of stroke type during the earliest stages of clinical assessment. Interestingly, when GFAP is combined in an assay with other sensitive markers for ischaemic stroke, such as d-dimer it can be used as a sensitive predictor of the presence of large vessel occlusion.

Prediction of stroke aetiology
Currently no specific blood biomarker has consistently demonstrated the ability to predict ischaemic stroke aetiology. For example, evidence suggests that inflammatory biomarkers like C-reactive protein (CRP), IL (interleukin)-6, IL-1b, TNF-a and D-dimer alongside cardiac biomarkers such as B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) or its N-terminal fragment, NT-pro-BNP are all associated with cardioembolic stroke. However, CRP has also been implicated in large artery stroke due to atherothrombosis and small vessel strokes have been demonstrated to be associated with IL-6. Furthermore, IL-6 and -16 have also been detected in high levels in large vessel stroke, highlighting the complexity of using biomarkers alone for aetiology prediction. This overlap in biomarkers is not unexpected. Patients who are at risk of ishcaemic stroke have multiple overlapping vascular risk factors that increase the risk of stroke from various pathologies, making it difficult to specify stroke aetiology using a single biomarker. Furthermore, inflammatory pathways associated with vascular diseases result in the activation of a complex cascade of mediators, leading to multiple biomarkers being detectable at high levels in the blood.
In summary, serum biomarkers have the potential to be a powerful tool in supporting decision making in stroke patients. As this field evolves, the cross over application of high-throughput omics technologies will continue to uncover the complex and comprehensive interactions between biomarkers, thrombus formation and composition, and stroke pathology. Future research will need to prospectively enrol larger cohorts of patients, particularly with ESUS, to identify candidate biomarkers and combine it with histological analysis of stroke thrombi and radiological data to comprehensively understand the mechanisms of thrombosis in stroke.

Conclusion
The heterogeneous nature of ischaemic stroke aetiologies, tailored nature of secondary prevention strategies, and expanding provision of acute reperfusion therapies is increasingly reliant on precision-based decision-making. Radiological and histological evaluation of the thrombus – information already available in the clinical domain – has the potential to facilitate better phenotyping of strokes whilst informing prognostication and acute treatment strategies.
Publisher's Note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Author contribution
NRE, ED, AA, SB and II conceptualised the review. NRE, ED, AA, SB and II wrote the first draft. NRE provided overall supervision. ED coordinated writing and integrated sections. All authors reviewed the final draft prior to submission.

Funding
SB is supported by a Research Training Fellowship from The Dunhill Medical Trust [JBGS22\20]. NRE is supported by a Stroke Association Senior Clinical Lectureship [SA-SCL-MED-22\100006] and by the NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre (NIHR203312). AA is supported by the Royal College of Radiologist’s Kodak fellowship. II is employed by Boehringer Ingelheim. However, Boehringer have had no input into this work.
Dunhill Medical Trust,JBGS22\20,Shiv Bhakta,Stroke Association (UK),SA-SCL-MED-22\100006,Nicholas R Evans,NIHR Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre,NIHR203312,Nicholas R Evans,Royal College of Radiologists,Kodak fellowship,Abhishekh H Ashok

Declarations

Conflicting interests
None.

References
World stroke organization (WSO): global stroke fact sheet 2022
The future incidence, prevalence and costs of stroke in the UK
Projected global trends in ischemic stroke incidence, deaths and disability-adjusted life years from 2020 to 2030
Stroke statistics | Stroke Association [Internet]. [cited 2024 Oct 2]. Available from: https://www.stroke.org.uk/stroke/statistics
Classification of subtype of acute ischemic stroke. Definitions for use in a multicenter clinical trial. TOAST. Trial of org 10172 in acute stroke treatment
A randomized trial of intraarterial treatment for acute ischemic stroke
Randomized assessment of rapid endovascular treatment of ischemic stroke
Endovascular therapy for ischemic stroke with perfusion-imaging selection
Stent-retriever thrombectomy after intravenous t-PA vs. t-PA alone in stroke
Thrombectomy within 8 hours after symptom onset in ischemic stroke
Differences in pathological composition among large artery occlusion cerebral thrombi, valvular heart disease atrial thrombi and carotid endarterectomy plaques
Ischemic stroke: what does the histological composition tell us about the origin of the thrombus?
Thrombus composition and efficacy of thrombolysis and thrombectomy in acute ischemic stroke
First approach to distinguish between cardiac and arteriosclerotic emboli of individual stroke patients applying the histological THROMBEX-classification rule
New perspectives on atrial fibrillation and stroke
Per-pass analysis of acute ischemic stroke clots: impact of stroke etiology on extracted clot area and histological composition
Histologic features of acute thrombi retrieved from stroke patients during mechanical reperfusion therapy
Erythrocyte-Rich thrombus is associated with reduced number of maneuvers and procedure time in patients with acute ischemic stroke undergoing mechanical thrombectomy
Thrombus histology suggests cardioembolic cause in cryptogenic stroke
Association between thrombus composition and stroke etiology in the Mr Clean registry biobank
Is composition of brain clot retrieved by mechanical thrombectomy associated with stroke aetiology and clinical outcomes in acute ischemic stroke?—A systematic review and meta-analysis
Quantitative morphology of cerebral thrombi related to intravital contraction and clinical features of ischemic stroke
Evans NR, Bhakta S, Chowdhury MM, Markus H, Warburton E. Management of carotid atherosclerosis in stroke. Pract Neurol [Internet]. 2024 Apr 8 [cited 2024 Jul 31]; Available from: https://pn.bmj.com/content/early/2024/04/08/pn-2023-003918
Meta-analysis: antithrombotic therapy to prevent stroke in patients who have nonvalvular atrial fibrillation
Association between clot composition and stroke origin in mechanical thrombectomy patients: analysis of the stroke thromboembolism registry of imaging and pathology
Histopathologic composition of cerebral thrombi of acute stroke patients is correlated with stroke subtype and thrombus attenuation
Histologic analysis of retrieved clots in acute ischemic stroke: correlation with stroke etiology and gradient-Echo MRI
Thrombus components in cardioembolic and atherothrombotic strokes
High red blood cell composition in clots is associated with successful recanalization during intra-arterial thrombectomy
CT and MRI early vessel signs reflect clot composition in acute stroke
Analysis of thrombi retrieved from cerebral arteries of patients with acute ischemic stroke
Per-Pass analysis of thrombus composition in patients with acute ischemic stroke undergoing mechanical thrombectomy
Platelet-Rich emboli in cerebral large vessel occlusion are associated with a large artery atherosclerosis source
Development of a predictive scale for cardioembolic stroke using extracted thrombi and angiographic findings
DNA content in ischemic stroke thrombi can help identify cardioembolic strokes among strokes of undetermined cause
Neutrophil extracellular traps in ischemic stroke thrombi
Diverse thrombus composition in thrombectomy stroke patients with longer time to recanalization time
High-resolution scanning electron microscopy for the analysis of three-dimensional ultrastructure of clots in acute ischemic stroke
A high resolution scanning electron microscopy analysis of intracranial thrombi embedded along the stent retrievers
The thrombus proteome in stroke reveals a key role of the innate immune system and new insights associated with its etiology, severity, and prognosis
How clot composition influences fibrinolysis in the acute phase of stroke: a proteomic study of cerebral thrombi
Isolation of RNA from acute ischemic stroke clots retrieved by mechanical thrombectomy
Gene expression profiles of ischemic stroke clots retrieved by mechanical thrombectomy are associated with disease etiology
Stroke etiology and thrombus computed tomography characteristics in patients with acute ischemic stroke: a Mr clean registry substudy
Orbit image analysis machine learning software can be used for the histological quantification of acute ischemic stroke blood clots
Radiology-pathology correlations of intracranial clots: current theories, clinical applications, and future directions
Multimaterial decomposition in dual-energy CT for characterization of clots from acute ischemic stroke patients
Dumitriu LaGrange D, Braunersreuther V, Wanke I, Berberat J, Luthman S, Fitzgerald S, et al. MicroCT Can Characterize Clots Retrieved With Mechanical Thrombectomy From Acute Ischemic Stroke Patients–A Preliminary Report. Front Neurol [Internet]. 2022 Mar 7 [cited 2024 Oct 4];13. Available from: https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neurology/articles/10.3389/fneur.2022.824091/full
Thrombus permeability on dynamic CTA predicts good outcome after reperfusion therapy
Clot permeability and histopathology: is a clot’s perviousness on CT imaging correlated with its histologic composition?
Thrombus permeability is associated with improved functional outcome and recanalization in patients with ischemic stroke
Thrombus permeability in admission computed tomographic imaging indicates stroke pathogenesis based on thrombus histology
Increased perviousness on CT for acute ischemic stroke is associated with fibrin/platelet-rich clots
Clot-based radiomics model for cardioembolic stroke prediction with CT imaging before recanalization: a multicenter study
Predictive value of clot imaging in acute ischemic stroke: a systematic review of artificial intelligence and conventional studies
Identifying clot composition using intravascular diffuse reflectance spectroscopy in a porcine model of endovascular thrombectomy
PET imaging of the neurovascular interface in cerebrovascular disease
Integrated cardiovascular assessment of atherosclerosis using PET/MRI
Detection and characterization of thrombosis in humans using fibrin-targeted positron emission tomography and magnetic resonance
Non-invasive in vivo imaging of acute thrombosis: development of a novel factor XIIIa radiotracer
A phase 1, first-in-human study of 18F-GP1 positron emission tomography for imaging acute arterial thrombosis
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor imaging with 18F-GP1 positron emission tomography for acute venous thromboembolism: an open-label, non-randomized, first-in-human phase 1 study
J L, H S, M B, M R, M B, A M, et al. 18F-GP1, a Novel PET tracer designed for high-sensitivity, low-background detection of thrombi. J Nucl Med Off Publ Soc Nucl Med [Internet]. 2017 Jul [cited 2024 Oct 30];58(7). Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28302764/
Overview | Stroke and transient ischaemic attack in over 16s: diagnosis and initial management | Guidance | NICE [Internet]. NICE; 2019 [cited 2024 Oct 4]. Available from: https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng128
Erythrocyte fraction within retrieved thrombi contributes to thrombolytic response in acute ischemic stroke
R-tPA resistance is specific for platelet-rich stroke thrombi and can be overcome by targeting nonfibrin components
Fibrin network structure and clot mechanical properties are altered by incorporation of erythrocytes
Fibrin has larger pores when formed in the presence of erythrocytes
Histopathologic analysis of retrieved thrombi associated with successful reperfusion after acute stroke thrombectomy
Thrombus histology as it relates to mechanical thrombectomy: a meta-analysis and systematic review
Correlation of imaging and histopathology of thrombi in acute ischemic stroke with etiology and outcome: a systematic review
Clot friction variation with fibrin content; implications for resistance to thrombectomy
Blood clot fracture properties are dependent on red blood cell and fibrin content
Platelet rich clots are resistant to lysis by thrombolytic therapy in a rat model of embolic stroke
The relationship of platelet-to-lymphocyte ratio with clinical outcome and final infarct core in acute ischemic stroke patients who have undergone endovascular therapy
The impact of histological clot composition in embolic stroke
Hyperdense sign as a predictor for successful recanalization and clinical outcome in acute ischemic stroke: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Permeable thrombi are associated with higher intravenous recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator treatment success in patients with acute ischemic stroke
Thrombus perviousness is not associated with first-pass revascularization using stent retrievers
Clot perviousness is associated with first pass success of aspiration thrombectomy in the COMPASS trial
Radiomics-based intracranial thrombus features on CT and CTA predict recanalization with intravenous alteplase in patients with acute ischemic stroke
Clot-Based radiomics predict a mechanical thrombectomy strategy for successful recanalization in acute ischemic stroke
National Clinical Guideline for Stroke [Internet]. National Clinical Guideline for Stroke. [cited 2024 Oct 2]. Available from: https://www.strokeguideline.org/
Distribution and temporal trends from 1993 to 2015 of ischemic stroke subtypes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Cardiogenic embolism to the brain
Embolic stroke of undetermined source: a systematic review and clinical update
Embolic strokes of undetermined source: the case for a new clinical construct
The evolving concept of cryptogenic stroke
Embolic strokes of undetermined source: a clinical consensus statement of the ESC council on stroke, the European association of cardiovascular imaging and the european heart rhythm association of the ESC
Rivaroxaban for stroke prevention after embolic stroke of undetermined source
Dabigatran for prevention of stroke after embolic stroke of undetermined source
Apixaban versus aspirin for embolic stroke of undetermined source
Autopsy prevalence of intracranial atherosclerosis in patients with fatal stroke
Prognosis of vertebrobasilar transient ischaemic attack and minor stroke
Aortic arch plaques and risk of recurrent stroke and death
The role of non-stenosing carotid artery plaques in embolic stroke of undetermined source, is it a silent offender? A review of literature
Contemporary carotid imaging: from degree of stenosis to plaque vulnerability
Novel targets for molecular imaging of inflammatory processes of carotid atherosclerosis: a systematic review
Carotid atherosclerotic plaque microcalcification is independently associated with recurrent neurovascular events: a pilot study
ISRCTN - ISRCTN12685153: SOLVE: Sodium valproate to prevent stroke [Internet]. [cited 2024 Oct 2]. Available from: https://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN12685153
Evans N, Bhakta S. Using minocycline to help to identify carotid artery disease that may cause future strokes [Internet]. [cited 2024 Oct 2]. Available from: https://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN68072469
Targeting inflammation in atherosclerosis - from experimental insights to the clinic
Dual-tracer positron-emission tomography for identification of culprit carotid plaques and pathophysiology in vivo
Long-term colchicine for the prevention of vascular recurrent events in non-cardioembolic stroke (CONVINCE): a randomised controlled trial
Embolic stroke of undetermined source: approaches in risk stratification for cardioembolism
Duration of device-detected subclinical atrial fibrillation and occurrence of stroke in ASSERT
The contribution of competing mechanisms in stroke despite anticoagulation in patients with atrial fibrillation
Cardiac workup of ischemic stroke: can we improve our diagnostic yield?
Revolution in acute ischaemic stroke care: a practical guide to mechanical thrombectomy
Diagnostic yield of ECG-Gated cardiac CT in theacute phase of ischemic stroke vstransthoracic echocardiography
Patent foramen ovale management for secondary stroke prevention: state-of-the-art appraisal of current evidence
Acute ischemic stroke treatment in infective endocarditis: systematic review
Cancer prediction with machine learning of thrombi from thrombectomy in stroke: multicenter development and validation
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic profiling of thrombotic material obtained by endovascular thrombectomy in patients with ischemic stroke
Prevalence of large vessel occlusion in patients presenting with acute ischemic stroke: a 10-year systematic review of the literature
Acute stroke biomarkers: are we there yet?
Neutrophil extracellular traps kill bacteria
Netosis and inflammasomes in large vessel occlusion thrombi
Neutrophil extracellular traps in thrombi retrieved during interventional treatment of ischemic arterial diseases
Targeting neutrophil extracellular traps for stroke prognosis: a promising path
Glial fibrillary acidic protein for the early diagnosis of intracerebral hemorrhage: systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic test accuracy
The use of serum glial fibrillary acidic protein test as a promising tool for intracerebral hemorrhage diagnosis in Chinese patients and prediction of the short-term functional outcomes
Glial fibrillary acidic protein serum levels distinguish between intracerebral hemorrhage and cerebral ischemia in the early phase of stroke
Prospective validation of glial fibrillary acidic protein, d-Dimer, and clinical scales for acute large-vessel occlusion ischemic stroke detection
Plasma measurement of D-dimer levels for the early diagnosis of ischemic stroke subtypes
Blood-based biomarkers are associated with different ischemic stroke mechanisms and enable rapid classification between cardioembolic and atherosclerosis etiologies
Interleukin-6 signaling effects on ischemic stroke and other cardiovascular outcomes: a mendelian randomization study
Inflammation biomarkers in acute ischemic stroke according to different etiologies
Kb M, X J, V A, Pv M. Cascade of immune mechanism and consequences of inflammatory disorders. Phytomedicine Int J Phytother Phytopharm [Internet]. 2021 Oct [cited 2024 Oct 4];91. Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34511264/