A comprehensive evaluation of the left atrium using cardiovascular magnetic resonance
Atrial disease or myopathy is a growing concept in cardiovascular medicine, particularly in the context of atrial fibrillation, as well as amyloidosis and heart failure. Among cardiac imaging modalities, cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) is particularly well suited for a comprehensive assessment of atrial myopathy, including tissue characterization and hemodynamics. The goal of this review article is to describe clinical applications and make recommendations on pulse sequences as well as imaging parameters to assess the left atrium and left atrial appendage. Furthermore, we aimed to create an overview of current and promising future emerging applications of left atrium-specific CMR pulse sequences focusing on both electrophysiologic (EP) and non-EP applications.
Graphical abstract

Introduction
While once viewed merely as a conduit for oxygenated blood from the lungs to the left ventricle (LV), the importance of the left atrium (LA) in health and disease is now being increasingly recognized. In 1995, Benjamin et al. described the associations between left atrial enlargement with stroke and death based on the Framingham Heart Study. While their analysis was based on echocardiographic data, it also laid the foundation for cohort studies to include other imaging modalities, including cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR). Over the last almost 30 years, CMR enabled multiparametric assessment of the heart, mainly focusing on the LV. Recent technical advancements, including an increase in spatial resolution, have paved the way for more sophisticated assessments of the LA. In parallel, the concept of atrial myopathy was introduced to describe a “pathological left atrium,” impacted by the spectrum of conditions such as aging, electrophysiological remodeling, inflammation, atrial fibrillation (AF), and amyloidosis. Therefore, CMR promises to help identify new mechanisms of atrial myopathy.
A summary of clinical applications or indications of CMR in patients with atrial myopathy.
Table 1
Disease	Current clinical applications	Emerging research topics	 	AF	Pulmonary vein mapping, LA/LAA thrombus	Left atrial fibrosis, EAT, LA hemodynamics, intraprocedural LA scar, contrast-enhanced and unenhanced black-blood anatomy	 	AF, HFpEF, HCM, cardiac toxicity, MR	LA morphology and function and longitudinal strain	LA circumferential strain	 	Incidental findings	LA mass		 	Acquired diseases	Mitral regurgitation		 	Congenital	ASD/PFO assessment
MR mitral regurgitation, ASD atrial septal defect, PFO patent foramen ovale, CMR cardiovascular magnetic resonance, AF atrial fibrillation, HFpEF heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, HCM hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, EAT epicardial adipose tissue, LA left atrium, LAA left atrial appendage
A summary of different CMR pulse sequences and their recommended settings.
Table 2
Pulse sequence	Key technical considerations	 	bSSFP cine	Cover the whole LA; if severe arrhythmia, consider real-time cine	 	3D LGE	Isotropic spatial resolution <2.0 mm3; scan time <10 min	 	4D/5D flow	Isotropic spatial resolution ∼2.0 mm3; temporal resolution 40 ms or better; retrospective ECG gating to capture atrial contraction; if severe arrhythmia, consider 5D (arrhythmia-resolved) flow	 	Unenhanced 3D Black-Blood	Minimize the echo train duration to avoid motion artifacts by using parallel imaging, partial Fourier, and high sampling bandwidth	 	Contrast-enhanced 3D Black-Blood	Can use inversion pulse to impart T1 weighting. Extra dummy pulses may be required post contrast to obtain uniform dark blood signal	 	EAT	2D ECG-trigged k-space segmented 2- or 3-point Dixon with in-plane spatial resolution 2 mm × 2 mm or better	 	TWILITE	2-RR triggering; TI∼700 ms at 3T for blood signal suppression; 1.25 × 1 × 25 × 8 mm resolution for 2D and 1.25 × 1.25 × 2.5 mm for 3D with <115 ms acquisition window
CMR cardiovascular magnetic resonance, bSSFP balanced steady-state free precession, LA left atrium, 3D three-dimensional, LGE late gadolinium enhancement, 4D four-dimensional, 5D five-dimensional, ECG electrocardiogram, EAT epicardial adipose tissue, TWILITE T1-weighted long-inversion time, TI inversion time
In this review, we describe clinical applications and make recommendations on pulse sequences as well as imaging parameters to assess the LA and LA appendage (LAA). Furthermore, we aimed to create an overview of current and promising future emerging applications (Table 1) of LA-specific CMR pulse sequences (Table 2) focusing on both electrophysiologic (EP) and non-EP applications.

Clinical applications of LA CMR

Pulmonary vein ablation therapy for AF
The earliest CMR methods evolved with the discovery of the LA’s role in AF and the development of AF therapies. It represents the most common sustained cardiac rhythm disorder, which is estimated to affect 60 million individuals worldwide, with rising prevalence and incidence. In 1998, Haïssaguerre et al. described the phenomenon of spontaneous initiation of AF by ectopic beats originating in the pulmonary veins. This discovery became the foundation for pulmonary venous (PV) ablation procedures. From an imaging perspective, the visualization of PV and atrial anatomy using CMR —for pre-ablation planning and peri-operative treatment guidance—represents the most common indications of CMR focusing on the LA today.
Example PV map of a patient scheduled for AF ablation. RSPV right superior pulmonary vein, MPV middle pulmonary vein (anatomic variant), RIPV right inferior pulmonary vein, LSPV left superior pulmonary vein, LIPV left inferior pulmonary vein
Fig. 1
Current imaging recommendations primarily suggest breath-held three-dimensional (3D) contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) in coronal orientation; although, time-resolved multiphase MRA may allow for better visualization of PV veins potentially improving ablation mapping. In patients with renal insufficiency, unenhanced methods such as T2-prepared, 3D balanced steady-state free precession (bSSFP) MRA might also be useful. Fig. 1 shows example PV mapping images obtained using time-resolved angiography for the visualization of PVs.
Reporting recommendations of the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (SCMR) suggest to report PV vein anatomy, mentioning common trunks and accessory PV. Post-ablation imaging should also include the presence or absence of stenosis, though this will be less of an issue with recently approved pulsed-field ablation with less collateral tissue damage. Also, the PV with closest proximity to the esophagus should be noted. Area of maximum (pre-ablation) or minimum (in presence of stenosis) ostial diameters of the PV should also be reported.

Comparison with other imaging modalities
Current performance of CT, ultrasound, and CMR for planning AF ablation.
Table 3
CT	CMR	Echo	 	Pulmonary vein mapping	+	√	−	 	Thrombus detection	√	√	+	 	Advantages	Fast scan, EAT quantification	Comprehensive exam (may include 3D LGE, cine, 4D flow, Dixon)	Heart chamber size and function evaluation in a limited window	 	Disadvantages	Radiation	Longer scan time	Sedation
Excellent (+); acceptable (√); poor (−)
CT computed tomography, CMR cardiovascular magnetic resonance, EAT epicardial adipose tissue, 3D three-dimensional, LGE late gadolinium enhancement, 4D four-dimensional
LAA thrombus (arrow) identified in a patient with AF undergoing CMR for evaluation of cardiomyopathy. (Left) Ill-defined low signal intensity is seen in the LAA on bSSFP cine. (Right) Due to lack of contrast uptake, the thrombus is of low signal intens on LGE images. Additionally, LGE is seen in the LV apex. bSSFP balanced steady-state free precession, TI inversion time, LGE late gadolinium enhancement, LAA left atrial appendage, CMR cardiovascular magnetic resonance, LV left ventricle
Fig. 2
The two other non-invasive imaging modalities used clinically for pre-ablation assessment include computed tomography (CT) and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE), each with distinct advantages and disadvantages in comparison to CMR as summarized in Table 3. For pulmonary vein anatomy imaging, while CMR has lower spatial resolution than CT, it is adequate for the task. Some institutions may use CT and CMR interchangeably, while other hospital systems may stratify referral based on patient’s age or kidney function. For detecting LA or LAA thrombus, TEE is the gold standard, but it is an invasive procedure requiring sedation. CT is a reliable alternative to TEE for thrombus detection, but it often requires two or more acquisitions, leading to an increased radiation dose for patients. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) with long inversion time (TI) CMR is also a reliable alternative for detecting thrombus, as shown in Fig. 2. Current American Heart Association guidelines on AF management, however, suggest TEE or CT for detection of LAA thrombus but not CMR. This indicates that additional evidence might be needed to investigate the accuracy of CMR-based thrombus detection, to consider moving forward with AF ablation without prior TEE.
In the new era of pulse field ablation, however, many operators are foregoing pre-ablation imaging altogether with the widespread adoption of ablation performed on those fully anticoagulated and the increasing use of pulsed-field ablation that may be less anatomy-dependent than prior energy sources. As for the LAA thrombus issue, first note that the rate of true thrombus is quite low (approximately 0.5%), particularly in those with paroxysmal AF who are in normal sinus rhythm at time of ablation, and that the risk is highest in those with elevated CHA2DS2–VASc scores and those in persistent AF. Recent data suggest that no pre-ablation imaging is needed to evaluate for LAA thrombus in those patients appropriately anticoagulated with direct oral anticoagulants.
In addition, imaging of the LAA before interventional or surgical closure in AF patients is getting increasingly important and can also be performed using CMR.

LA morphology

LA size and function
Enlargement of the LA was first described in the context of AF as mentioned above based on echocardiography. In 2000, the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) was initiated, an ongoing multi-center study on subclinical cardiovascular disease in the United States. It included CMR during the first examination between 2000 and 2002 for all participants. The initial CMR protocol included cardiac CINE fast gradient-echo sequences in two-chamber (2Ch) and four-chamber (4Ch) orientations which also covered the LA. These imaging data enabled biplane analysis of left atrial parameters which represents the most common method to assess LA volume (LAV) (and function) using CMR. Based on this data, reference values for LAV index (LAVi) and LA function were established. Moreover, studies in MESA showed that increased LAV and/or reduced LA function were associated with AF, cardiovascular disease, and ischemic events as well as introduced novel imaging biomarkers such as the atrioventricular coupling index to predict incident AF.
Over the years, other associations of LA size and function were found, especially with major adverse cardiovascular event (MACE). In a meta-analysis by Froehlich et al., larger LA parameters were associated with MACE in AF- and non-AF-cohorts. In the latter, larger LA was also associated with stroke and thromboembolic events. LAVi is a key metric in evaluation of diastolic function.
One important question in the assessment of LA size and function is the relative value of biplane (2D [two-dimensional]) or volumetric (3D) analysis. The biplane area-length method, which uses 2Ch and 4Ch CINE series, was adapted from echocardiography and makes assessment of LAV and LA emptying fraction (LAEF) readily available. The limitations of biplane assessment of LAV include the foreshortening effects of 2Ch and 4Ch planes, subjectivity in 2Ch and 4Ch prescription, and the lack of a uniform geometric model that accounts for the heterogeneity of LA shape across populations. For 3D-based assessment, a stack of short axis (SAx) or transversal slices requires additional acquisitions and, more importantly, more complex analysis. However, there is growing evidence to suggest that 2D-based assessment produces lower accuracy for LAV (maximal and minimal) and LAEF; Liu et al. showed a systemic underestimation of LAV at any time point of the cardiac cycle as well as overestimation of LAEF in a sub cohort of 158 MESA participants. Moreover, in a cohort of AF patients, maximum LAV measures from biplane assessment were significantly lower compared to two independent 3D-based acquisitions which point toward a non-spherical LA enlargement. Deep learning (DL) might support automatic 3D-based LA assessment by increasing availability, which could lead to novel insights. For example, a study by Pirruccello et al. identified genetic loci associated with left atrial parameters and reconfirmed the connection between enlarged LAV and AF and, ultimately, stroke in the United Kingdom Biobank.
SCMR reporting recommendation include evaluating LA size as normal or dilated. Reporting of qualitative degree of dilatation, the LAV, and LAVi as well as LA function are optional. Furthermore, presence of lipomatous hypertrophy of interatrial septum should be reported.

Left atrial strain
Strain assessment is a measure of deformation. Adapted from speckle tracking echocardiography, LA strain analysis allows for the assessment of diastolic dysfunction by evaluating longitudinal strain and strain rate. Clinical usefulness and even prognostic information of CMR-based strain were found after myocardial infarction, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, cardiac toxicity, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Moreover, impaired strain was associated with subclinical atrial arrhythmias in MESA. It can be applied to bSSFP CINE series, most commonly 2Ch- and 4Ch-long-axis (LAx) views, using dedicated software solutions. SCMR reporting guidelines do not recommend including LA strain analysis, probably due to still limited spatial resolution of 2D cine for resolving the atrial wall (and hence clinical value) in combination with required software solutions. Compared to the LAV and LAEF assessments, reproducibility of LA strain measures was reported to be lower. In addition, inter-modality comparisons of strain measures between echocardiography and CMR only showed poor agreement in patients with cardiac amyloidosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathies, suggesting poor generalizability as of late.

Other clinical applications for LA CMR

Left atrial mass assessment
Among cardiac imaging modalities, CMR plays a major role in tissue characterization of cardiac masses with high sensitivity and specificity. Oftentimes, an atrial mass has been found in echocardiography and CMR helps to distinguish between benign and malignant features. The most common LA masses are atrial myxoma, thrombus, or angiosarcoma. CMR assessment and reporting (according to SCMR guidelines) recommends reporting location, size, and relationship with other structures. Furthermore, criteria for malignancy as well as tissue characterization include perfusion and LGE patterns. Additional imaging modalities such as CT or positron emission tomography-CT might be useful to determine the presence of calcifications (which might support the diagnosis of myxoma) or hypermetabolic in case of suspected malignancy.

Congenital heart disease and atrial septal defect
Congenital heart disease (CHD) might involve the LA, and especially morphological assessments important for patient management during initial diagnosis as well as follow-up after surgery/surgical repair. CMR provides superior overview of the anatomy, which can be important for example in cases with anomalies of the pulmonary veins or after atrial switch surgery. 3D bSSFP MRA sequence is known to be useful for anatomical assessment in CHD.
Atrial septal defect (ASD) affects about 0.3% of all live births. The presence of ASD (or persistent foramen ovale) should be reported. Mainly depending on the ASD size, a left-to-right shunt can occur, causing pulmonary hypertension, supraventricular arrhythmias, and right heart failure. Shunt quantification, measured as Qp:Qs ratio (net flow ratio in main pulmonary artery and aorta by 2D-phase contrast magnetic resonance imaging [MRI]) and volumetry of the heart chambers including the LA are important measures to assess the severity of the disease. Furthermore, direct quantification of ASD size can also be performed with CMR. More recently, studies suggested direct quantification of shunt volume at the level of ASD using four-dimensional (4D)-flow MRI.

Mitral regurgitation
In mitral regurgitation (MR), assessment of ventricular volumes, function, and viability is important. In addition, direct quantification of shunt volume at the level of the mitral valve and morphological assessment of valve prolapse are also important parameters that CMR measures. Direct correlation of MR severity assessment between CMR and echocardiography was reported as moderate in multiple studies. However, CMR has potentially a higher accuracy quantifying MR severity compared to echocardiography. Advanced methods, such as MR jet tracking, show promising results by reducing inter-observer variability. Reporting should include whether the jet is centric or eccentric, to describe the mechanism of MR (e.g. in case of systolic anterior motion phenomenon) as well as regurgitant volume and function.

Emerging and promising future applications of LA imaging
Here we introduce two broad (structural and functional) categories of emerging techniques.

Structural techniques

3D LA LGE
LA fibrosis quantification using 3D LGE gained significant attention during 2010s for its potential to perform tissue characterization of the LA. The presence of fibrosis in the atrium had already been long reported by both pathology studies and confirmed by later EP voltage mapping. Using CMR, atrial scar was first imaged after ablation, where it is readily apparent. However, more importantly, several CMR studies have shown that “pre-existent” atrial fibrosis predicts AF recurrence after pulmonary vein ablation (i.e. patients with greater remodeling have worse outcomes). The DECAFF I trial has shown an association between LGE burden and AF recurrence following ablation, though targeting such sites in the DECAFF II trial did not result in higher success rates in a pivotal clinical trial. Furthermore, LGE may not correlate with low-voltage areas using bipolar electroanatomic mapping collected at the time of ablation. Therefore, this writing group supports further exploration of the role of 3D LGE-guided therapy, as well as improved and standardized LA LGE evaluation.
LGE evaluation of the LA is technically challenging for several reasons. Compared with the LV, the LA is more irregular in shape and has much thinner walls (mean thickness of 2.0–2.5 mm), and is surrounded by epicardial adipose tissue (EAT), making it ill-suited for conventional 2D LGE with relatively thick slice dimensions (6–8 mm). This necessitates 3D LGE with higher spatial resolution, including in the through-plane direction, to avoid partial volume averaging effects. The other important consideration is imaging the LA during its resting phase to minimize the influence of cardiac motion. The LA’s phases—reservoir, conduit, and contractile phases —differ from those of the LV. Ideally, 3D LGE should be performed during a quiescent period (i.e. conduit phase), which coincides with mid-diastole of the LV. However, especially in patients with active AF during the CMR scan, a shorter systolic window can be used, reducing the readout duration per heartbeat to 100–150 ms. Due to the high spatial resolution and volumetric coverage of 3D LGE, the total scan time is prolonged. Consequently, the typical scan time is considerably longer than a breath-hold duration, making some form of respiratory motion compensation essential for 3D LGE.
First, respiratory motion compensation is one of the most important challenges for achieving high-image quality. Traditional approaches include respiratory bellows and navigator-gating without tracking and phase-encoding in the right-left direction. More advanced approaches include one-dimensional (1D) self-navigation, image-based 2D navigation, image-based self-navigation, and pilot tone. The most widely used approach is electrocardiogram (ECG)-triggered, navigator-gated LGE scan. A major disadvantage of navigator gating is that gating efficiency is unpredictable, often resulting in unpredictable (usually longer) scan times. In contrast, self-navigation using 1D or image-based methods permits 100% scanning efficiency because both navigation and acquired data can be retrospectively processed and rebinned based on motion tracking, enabling either respiratory motion-resolved or motion-compensated average reconstruction. Compared to 1D self-navigation, the image-based or 2D self-navigation is potentially more robust, as an image (as opposed to 1D projection) allows for the localization of image features corresponding to respiratory motion. The pilot tone is a relatively novel technique for the MRI community for sampling motion-modulated RF signals via an external RF transmitter. The major advantage of pilot tone is that the motion signal is independent of the pulse sequence. However, the disadvantage of pilot tone is that external hardware (i.e., additional cost) is required. Although it has not been applied to 3D LGE yet, it has been shown potential as an alternative for respiratory motion compensation.
(A) 3D LA LGE pulse sequence diagram using stack-of-star k-space sampling; (B) XD-GRASP reconstruction pipeline with self-navigation of respiratory motion; (C) LA LGE images in three orthogonal planes and the corresponding LA fibrosis map using the IIR method with 1.2 cutoff value. 3D three-dimensional, LA left atrium, LGE late gadolinium enhancement, XD-GRASP eXtra-Dimensional Golden-angle RAdial Sparse Parallel, ECG electrocardiogram, TI inversion time, NUFFT non-uniform fast Fourier transform, CS compressed sensing, DE delayed enhancement MRI, cor coronal, sag sagittal, axi axial.
Fig. 3
Alongside navigator gating, achieving high spatial resolution is crucial to minimizing the partial volume averaging effects. We recommend an actual spatial resolution of 1.5 mm × 1.5 mm in-plane. Slice resolution of 1.5 mm is advocated by some, while others observed that one must consider the balance between signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and partial volume effects when choosing the slice thickness. The imaging goal should be to achieve the highest image quality, which is determined by a combination of spatial resolution, temporal resolution, and SNR. Depending on resolution and coverage LA LGE requires 4–10 min of scan time and should be performed during the optimal LGE window (20–30 min post gadolinium administration). For high spatial resolution, it is important to accelerate the acquisition beyond conventional parallel imaging. Techniques such as compressed sensing or DL should be employed to target a scan time on the order of 10 min or less. This could be accomplished using a combination of non-Cartesian k-space sampling and advanced reconstruction methods such as eXtra-Dimensional Golden-angle RAdial Sparse Parallel (XD-GRASP) or undersampled patch-based reconstruction. Fig. 3 shows a 3D LGE pulse sequence using a stack-of-stars k-space sampling with XD-GRASP reconstruction with self-navigation of respiratory motion, as well as example LGE images and the post-processed fibrosis map of a patient with AF.
Another important consideration for achieving good image quality is the gadolinium dose and kinetics. Even for LGE of the LV wall, a double dose of gadolinium improves both the accuracy and precision of scar visualization. It is conventional to use 0.2 mmol/kg of gadolinium contrast agent for LA LGE. While it stands to reason that a double dose is preferred for LA LGE, given that the LA wall is considerably thinner than the LV wall, Chubb et al. reported that double dose did not improve reproducibility in quantifying LA fibrosis. The main principle in LV LGE is to exploit the differences in washout rates of gadolinium between the healthy and scarred myocardium. However, in the LA, fibrosis is more diffuse and patchier, suggesting a different optimal LGE timing compared with the LV. In fact, a previous study demonstrated that the reproducibility of LA fibrosis quantification from LGE is higher for delayed imaging time between 20 and 30 min post gadolinium administration compared to imaging at 10 min post.
In addition to utilizing a later LGE time (20–30 min post gadolinium administration) to enhance the contrast between the LA blood cavity and the LA wall, it may be beneficial to entirely suppress the blood signal using dark-blood LGE techniques. This is hypothesized to improve the visibility of LA wall, but its effectiveness has not yet been demonstrated. To improve the overall SNR, it may be beneficial to perform 3D LGE at 3T, but Chubb et al. reported that it does not improve reproducibility. Robust fat suppression is essential to distinguish between the LA wall enhancement and epicardial fat. Dixon 3D LGE also may have benefits and permits a linear acquisition order. In patients with AF arrhythmia during the LA LGE scan, the images are sometimes acceptable, and the use of end-systole for imaging reduces motion blur. However, the RR variability can generate artifacts and result in very poor nulling of normal myocardium.
Finally, the image processing task for LA fibrosis quantification is challenging due to several factors. Notably, there is no standardized method for quantifying LA fibrosis from LGE images. Existing analysis tools include standard deviations (SD) above the mean LA wall signal, 2 or 3 SD above the blood pool (BP), image intensity ratio (IIR), Otsu thresholding, z-score, and visual assessment. Unfortunately, the performance of these threshold-based methods varies among different research groups and lacks independent evaluation, highlighting the need for further research to improve the reliability. There are also differences regarding what regions of the LA to include (e.g. regarding the PV ostia and the LAA). Last, meticulous or systematic care is required to prevent inclusion of mitral valve annulus enhancement or aortic enhancement. Standardization in this realm is highly needed.

Black-blood 3D MRI
MR imaging of the cardiovascular system is typically done using “bright blood” imaging techniques. Examples include MR cineangiography using a bSSFP pulse sequence to evaluate cardiac function and imaging of LGE using a bSSFP or spoiled gradient-recalled echo (GRE) readout. Motion-compensated, free-breathing 3D bright blood imaging techniques are particularly useful for imaging the LA because they provide isotropic high spatial resolution and volumetric coverage. However, these techniques have a significant drawback in that the bright BP may make it difficult to visualize the thin LA wall, especially in the presence of enhancing scar tissue. As a result, dark blood imaging techniques are being actively investigated.

Unenhanced dark-blood imaging
Techniques for dark blood imaging of the LA can be divided into those that are primarily used for unenhanced CMR and those that are used after contrast administration. Dark blood unenhanced CMR can be helpful for evaluating chamber morphology and intracardiac masses. The standard approach uses a black blood dual inversion magnetization preparation and 2D turbo spin-echo readout. However, this approach is largely limited to imaging a single slice at a time. For unenhanced 3D dark blood imaging, one option is to use a motion-sensitized driven equilibrium (MSDE) magnetization preparation. Alternatively, a delay alternating with nutation for tailored excitation (DANTE) magnetization preparation can be applied. To date, the DANTE technique has proved more useful for dark blood imaging of the extracranial carotid arteries and intracranial vessels than the heart.
(A) Healthy subject. Comparison of bright blood bSSFP (top row, left) with coronal (top row, right) and short-axis (bottom row) dark blood echo-uT1RESS. (B) Patient with apical variant hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, small left ventricular apical aneurysm, and left atrial myxoma (arrow). The mass appears relatively dark with bright blood cine (left) and bright with dark blood unenhanced echo-uT1RESS (middle). After contrast administration, dark blood inversion-prepared echo-uT1RESS (right) shows enhancement of the mass and scar tissue at the left ventricular apex (open arrow). bSSFP balanced steady-state free precession, uT1RESS unbalanced T1 Relaxation-Enhanced Steady-State
Fig. 4
Edelman et al. have been exploring the use of gradient-spoiled, unbalanced 3D SSFP imaging techniques, which show promise for dark blood imaging of the heart and lungs both before and after contrast administration. One version of this pulse sequence uses a 3D fast imaging steady precession (FISP) readout. With FISP, a free induction decay (FID) signal is produced by the preceding Radiofrequency excitation along with signal contributions from alternative signal pathways. For cardiac imaging, we have found that an “echo-unbalanced T1 Relaxation-Enhanced Steady-State (uT1RESS)” technique, which uses a time-reversed 3D FISP readout and produces a spin-echo signal instead of an FID, is a better choice as it more effectively suppresses the BP signal and seems to have less motion sensitivity. By incorporating 2D parallel acceleration using Controlled Aliasing In Parallel Imaging Results IN Higher Acceleration, it is possible to obtain volumetric dark blood images of the entire heart, including the LA in a single breath-hold. For unenhanced scans, echo-uT1RESS can be used to image the anatomy of the LA and depict masses, while an inversion preparation can be used to detect LGE (Fig. 4).

Contrast-enhanced dark-blood imaging
Ferumoxytol is commercially available as an iron replacement therapy, but in recent years it has been used as an off-label BP contrast agent for CMR. Ferumoxytol is a superparamagnetic iron complex with an intravascular half-life on the order of 17 h. Unlike standard extracellular gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCAs), where the T1 and T2 relaxivities are similar, ferumoxytol has a T2 relaxivity that is much larger than the T1 relaxivity. After ferumoxytol administration, the BP will appear bright if imaging is performed with a short echo time 3D GRE pulse sequence, while imaging with a T2-weighted turbo spin-echo pulse sequence will make the BP appear dark. Since ferumoxytol is a BP contrast agent, uptake by inflamed or scarred myocardium will be substantially different from GBCA. For instance, in a rat model ferumoxytol-enhanced T2* mapping proved more sensitive for early-stage myocarditis than LGE using a GBCA but was less sensitive for myocardial necrosis.
Given the limitations of ferumoxytol with respect to LGE, along with high cost and lack of United States Food and Drug Administration approval as an MRI contrast agent, contrast-enhanced cardiac MRI is usually obtained using extracellular GBCA. For dark blood imaging after administering a GBCA, one approach that does not require a special pulse sequence is to use a standard inversion recovery-prepared LGE technique and set the TI to null the BP signal instead of the myocardium. Use of a phase-sensitive reconstruction will make the BP appear gray, while enhancing scar tissue in the left atrial wall or elsewhere in the heart will appear bright.
The T1 relaxation times of enhancing myocardial scar tissue and enhancing BP are generally similar after GBCA administration, so that their signal intensities are difficult to distinguish using a standard inversion-prepared LGE technique. However, other tissue characteristics of myocardial scar tissue and the BP, such as T1rho, T2, and magnetization transfer rate differ substantially. Consequently, various magnetization preparation schemes can be used to separate the signal intensities of BP, healthy myocardium, and enhancing infarct. For instance, dark blood LGE images can be obtained by applying a T2 preparation followed by an inversion pulse, or conversely by applying an inversion pulse followed by a T2 preparation. Other approaches apply an inversion pulse with a magnetization transfer or adiabatic T1ρ preparation.
Several free-breathing, motion-corrected 3D dark blood imaging techniques are under development. One such technique, called “Bright-blood and black-blOOd phase SensiTive inversion recovery (BOOST),” uses image navigators for 2D motion correction. Two sets of data are acquired on alternate heartbeats, consisting respectively of T2/IR-prepared BOOST and T2-prepared BOOST, which are then combined using a phase-sensitive reconstruction to generate bright and dark blood image sets. The images are acquired with 100% scan efficiency and whole-heart scan times can be as short as 5 min. A BOOST technique using a magnetization transfer preparation instead of T2 preparation has shown promise for imaging the LA and pulmonary veins. MR multitasking methods also show great promise for 3D bright and dark blood imaging of the heart, including the LA.

Dixon imaging
Obesity is considered a risk factor for AF. Emerging data suggest the potential role of adiposity in arrhythmia. EAT, the adipose tissue between the myocardium and visceral pericardium, has anatomical and functional interactions with the heart. Increased atrial EAT has been associated with the risk of AF. Additionally, there is an association between EAT burden, as measured by thickness, and AF recurrence after catheter ablation. AF also results in fibrotic remodeling of the adipose tissue in the subepicardium. Therefore, there is a growing interest in imaging of EAT in patients at risk or with established AF.
Non-invasive imaging, including echocardiography, CT, and CMR, can quantify the EAT burden. Echocardiography can assess EAT thickness but is mainly limited to evaluating the right ventricular free wall and has lower sensitivity than CT and CMR. CT provides higher spatial resolution. EAT can be quantified using signal thresholding, albeit variable across systems, or as a ratio between non-contrast-enhanced and contrast-enhanced scanning. However, CT exposes patients to ionizing radiation, particularly for EAT evaluation and screening with serial imaging. CMR provides an alternative imaging modality with excellent soft tissue contrast. MRI imaging of body fat is considered the gold standard. Fat appears bright on bSSFP cine images. Due to the wide availability of the cine data, many studies have relied on measurements using cine images for EAT quantification. However, image artifacts and pericardial effusion could impact the accuracy of fat quantification on cine. Dark-blood T1-weighted spin-echo images with water suppression also enable imaging of EAT. Dixon-based CMR sequences allow direct water and fat imaging, using differences in frequency offset of the fat signal. Dixon CMR sequence has been used to visualize atrial EAT. Over the past two decades, there have been steady advances in improving the robustness and accuracy of Dixon-based CMR sequences for EAT imaging, including improved robustness in field-inhomogeneity, 3D coverage, and free-breathing imaging. Compared to the age-matched healthy control, patients with AF showed higher left atrial EAT when measured using a free-breathing 3D Dixon, providing an accurate volumetric EAT assessment. Dixon sequences can also be readily combined with LGE to simultaneously assess both EAT and left atrial fibrosis. This sequence is particularly effective in 3T imaging, where fat suppression is not always uniform. However, it could impact the fat SNR. This SNR loss can be recovered by applying a spectrally selective inversion pulse that only inverts water. Despite the advantages of CMR in direct imaging of EAT, CMR Dixon sequence availability is limited by vendors. Furthermore, there is no standard processing software for fat quantification by any of the image software platforms. Therefore, a collaborative industry-academic partnership is needed to accelerate the translational and implementation of existing and emerging fat imaging sequences into cardiac products to enable further research in understanding the role of EAT in AF and its clinical implications.

TWILITE imaging
The appearance of acute ablation lesions in LGE changes with time after GBCA administration. MVO regions (red arrows) significantly decrease with time post GBCA administration. LGE was performed about 1 h after the conclusion of ablation procedure. Axial and sagittal views are shown. LGE late gadolinium enhancement, GBCA gadolinium-based contrast agent, MVO microvascular obstruction
Fig. 5
Pulmonary vein isolation through catheter‐mediated ablation has emerged as a first-line therapy for restoration of sinus rhythm in AF. However, arrhythmia recurrence rates remain high and, in the case of paroxysmal AF, are associated with regions of incomplete ablation undetected during the intervention. Ablation creates a permanent conduction block within arrhythmogenic pathways using heating, freezing, or electroporation to induce necrosis. Conventional electrophysiology lacks tools for accurately visualizing tissue necrosis and does not always distinguish transient edema, reducing critical feedback during intervention or post-procedural assessment. CMR-based lesion assessment using LGE relies on GBCAs, which are limited to a single use and lack specificity for necrosis. The appearance of acute lesions in LGE drastically changes with time after contrast administration (Fig. 5). New more sensitive techniques for non-invasive assessment of heat-induced necrosis are now available. In particular, T1-weighted long-inversion time (TWILITE)  imaging has developed as a straight-forward approach for identifying ablation-induced coagulation necrosis acutely and without the need for GBCAs.
(A) Pulse sequence diagram for 3D TWILITE demonstrating a 2-RR interval acquisition with a long inversion time and a respiratory navigator. (B) Longitudinal magnetization evolution for TWILITE showing increased contrast between lesion core (with reduced T1) and normal myocardium after a long inversion time and a low-intensity (dark) blood pool. C. Sample non-contrast enhanced T1-weighted 3D TWILITE images acquired in swine after RF ablation mimicking pulmonary vein isolation. Necrosis from ablation is hyperintense relative to unablated tissues. Yellow: ablations in LA; orange: ablations in right superior pulmonary vein (RSPV); yellow ellipse: ostium of RSPV. (D) Comparison of 3D TWILITE and early and late gadolinium contrast-enhanced after RF ablation in the same swine shown in (C) LGE is complicated by time-varying contrast (signal voids) and enhancement of edema and preexisting scar as well as necrosis. Yellow: anterior ablations; orange: posterior ablations; red arrows: gaps between lesions. 3D three-dimensional, TWILITE T1-weighted long-inversion time, LGE late gadolinium enhancement, ECG electrocardiogram, LA left atrium, LV left ventricle, AO aorta, RV right ventricle.
Fig. 6
Coagulation necrosis from ablation heating in myocardium results in immediate increase in T1 due to the transition of iron in globin proteins to a paramagnetic state after sufficient heating. However, as the T1 of coagulation necrosis is only ∼15% higher than that of normal myocardium, long evolution times (i.e., TIs) are needed to generate contrast. Furthermore, any signal enhancement from epicardial ablation can be obscured by a bright BP. TWILITE enhances differences between normal myocardium and necrosis while nulling the signal of the BP (Fig. 6). To support long TIs, imaging is carried out every other heartbeat (2-RR triggering). Non-selective inversion is applied during the first heartbeat, while diastolic imaging takes place during the second heartbeat. TI selection for maximal blood suppression can be tuned using a low-resolution short 2D scan with matched timing. 2D and 3D TWILITE images can be acquired using breath-holding or by inclusion of a respiratory navigator, respectively. Either gradient echo or bSSFP readouts can be used for data acquisition.
TWILITE is an alternative to LGE, which can only be acquired once due to the use of GBCAs, making it ideal for repeated intraprocedural monitoring. The approach has already been applied successfully in a clinical setting, (e.g., ) and may be a key component of MRI-guided EP intervention, providing feedback pertaining to extent, location, and permanence of ablation lesions. Note that, recent work indicates that TWILITE is sensitive to coagulation necrosis present in lesion cores but may underestimate total lesion size vs LGE as it does not effectively visualize contraction band necrosis at the periphery of ablation lesions. TWILITE represents a technique central to helping MR-guided intervention deliver on the promise of accurate target substrate and ablation lesion visualization without ionizing radiation. However, it is primarily used in research settings today.

Functional techniques

CMR-SAx derived LA circumferential strain in mitral regurgitation
LA strain quantification from CMR by feature tracking (FT) has primarily been conducted by measuring longitudinal strain from long-axis views, such as 2Ch and 4Ch views. Unlike the LV, the LA does not have a “long” or “short” axis per se, and its geometry and wall thickness are different from those of LV. Therefore, the conventional longitudinal strain approach fails to capture the complete deformation along the main circumferential muscle fibers of the LA wall. Moreover, given the thinness of the LA wall and its more spherical geometry, it is preferential to measure strain along the circumferential direction than small patches along the longitudinal direction. Although circumferential strain has been examined from 2Ch and 4Ch views, these views can only assess circumferential strain from short segments of the LA wall. To capture anterolateral, anteroseptal, inferolateral, and inferoseptal circumferential deformation, SAx views are required. A recent study showed that SAx LA circumferential strain analysis from FT-CMR at three LA cross-sectional levels (superior, mid, and inferior) is feasible and reproducible. In patients with MR, peak LA circumferential strain was significantly lower at the superior and mid LA levels compared to healthy volunteers, which contrasts with traditional longitudinal strain parameters that did not show significant differences between healthy and MR cohorts. Notably, LA circumferential strain was significantly associated with MR severity, regurgitant fraction, and LAV independent of longitudinal strain, indicating that LA circumferential strain may complement longitudinal strain. The study also investigated the scan-rescan reproducibility of SAx circumferential strain and showed that peak strain exhibited moderate reproducibility, with the highest reliability observed at the superior and mid LA slices. It is worth noting that this study of LA FT-CMR from SAx used the standard LV SAx acquisition parameters with slices extended to the LA. Hence, adding only three SAx slices to standard LV SAx acquisition may enable assessment of LA circumferential strain that provided independent value to longitudinal LA strain, suggesting potential translational utility of this technique. More studies are still needed to assess the potential prognostic of CMR-SAx derived LA circumferential strain in MR and other cardiac pathologies such as AF.

Atrial hemodynamics in 4D flow
Atrial hemodynamics reflect the functional consequences of atrial myopathy. 4D flow CMR as an advanced technique allows for quantification of LA and LAA blood flow including peak velocity, stasis, kinetic energy (KE), or vorticity. Shen et al. suggested that atrial 4D flow MRI could help identify changes in LA blood flow and, thereby, reveal an increased predisposition to atrial thrombogenesis. This statement was based on initial studies investigating blood stasis and peak velocity in the LA and LAA in AF patients. Since then, more studies have investigated LA hemodynamics, in both AF but also in MESA participants compared to conventional LA parameters such as LAV and LA function. More recently, associations between impaired LA and LAA hemodynamics with embolic brain infarction as well as silent cerebral infarction were reported.

Hemodynamic signature index of composite flow dynamics in AF
Example of LA 4D hemodynamic signature quantification quantifying 4D flow MRI-derived velocity vector fields in seven dimensions (3D space + 3 velocity directions + time) for a 72-year-old male AF patient vs a 77-year-old female healthy control. (a) LA velocity vector field in the healthy control that an average of healthy hemodynamic signature index (HSI) of 11.8, showing dynamic flow and vortex formation. (b) LA velocity vector field in the AF patient with an elevated HSI of 24, showing reduced dynamics, disturbed flow, and lack of vortex formation. (c) 4D flow MRI-derived hemodynamic signature profiles (analyzing all seven dimensions) of the AF patient (red) compared to the interquartile range of healthy controls (shaded gray), indicating increased lower velocity vector disparities (left skew), reduced flow complexity, and stagnant flow patterns, highlighting impaired flow dynamics in the AF patient. LA left atrium, 4D four-dimensional, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, 3D three-dimensional, AF atrial fibrillation, IQR interquartile range
Fig. 7
The dynamics of blood flow in the LA are complex and involve various features such as vortical flow, flow jets, and regions of slow or stagnant flow. However, current flow analysis techniques can only capture a single flow feature, which makes it difficult to diagnose the severity of complex flow changes associated with disease progression. Additionally, the accuracy of these techniques is highly sensitive to factors such as spatial resolution and different acquisition parameters. Recently, a novel technique known as the 4D flow hemodynamic signature index (HSI) has been introduced to quantify composite flow dynamics. This technique analyzes millions of co-associations per patient to derive the unique signature of the patient's composite flow profile in just half a second. The HSI technique uses a novel mathematical stochastic analysis gradient-free formulation and has exceptional robustness and reproducibility to an array of uncertainty sources, including noise, spatiotemporal resolution, and segmentation errors. Despite analyzing millions of co-associations per patient to derive the unique composite flow signature profile, the HSI technique is ultrafast, with only 0.5 s of processing time. In a study evaluating AF and healthy subjects, the HSI technique showed up to 14 times more robustness to uncertainties compared to advanced flow metrics such as KE, viscous energy loss (EL), and vorticity. The technique was able to identify AF from healthy controls with an area under the curve of 0.78, independently of KE, viscous EL, and vorticity. In AF patients, the HSI technique identified complex composite flow changes independently of those derived by individual flow metrics (KE, EL, vorticity). HSI showed excellent scan-rescan reproducibility of the same protocol as well as between different 4D flow MRI protocols (compressed sensing vs generalized autocalibrating partially parallel acquisition . Thus, this suggests the potential of the HSI technique in enabling and facilitating standardized, comprehensive, and fast analysis of composite multifaceted flow dynamics changes that may occur in different pathophysiology, as illustrated in Fig. 7. It also shows its potential in facilitating the translation of comprehensive but data-intensive 4D flow CMR.

5D flow imaging for the atrium
Advanced imaging acquisition and flexible reconstruction may greatly benefit atrial imaging, especially in the setting of arrhythmias. 4D flow allows for the imaging of blood velocities in the atrium but tends to rely on a rigid cardiac gating scheme paired with a reconstructed data set centered on one heart rate. Prospective gating and arrhythmia rejection are recommended for 4D flow imaging of patients with arrhythmias. However, prospective gating tends to trim diastolic acquisition which may contain important events for LA and, especially, LAA blood flow measurement. Arrhythmia rejection rejects heartbeats with too long or short of a duration where these data may contain important information for understanding blood flow and its impact on clinical outcomes in this population.
Five-dimensional (5D) MRI allows for resolving cardiac and respiratory motion through self-gating algorithms, not relying on external ECG or respiratory bellows. Early work demonstrated the possibility to use a free running radial acquisition with a compressed sensing reconstruction. This framework allowed for flexibility in merging k-space lines sampled at any point during acquisition together for reconstruction. Indeed, it demonstrated that heartbeats during arrhythmia could be segregated and reconstructed separately from sinus rate beats. This has the benefit of both removing differing heartbeats from the typical image reconstruction but also allowing reconstruction and interrogation of the heart during arrhythmia.
(A) Arrhythmia resolved 5D flow MRI (x, y, z, t, heart rate) utilizes a free running, radial acquisition with 3D velocity encoding. An SI projection is played out every 21 radial lines for inherent cardiac and/or respiratory signal extraction. (B) The atrial fibrillation (AF) cardiac signal, as determined by the SI signal or an external ECG, is subdivided into different heartbeat length bins by an algorithm (e.g. for four bins in this example: RR1, RR2, RR3, and RR4). K-space data are sorted and combined based on these heartbeats and desired temporal resolution for cardiac phases within each heartbeat. (C) Compressed sensing is used to reconstruct each data set (color-coded for each RR bin), yielding a flow data set (x, y, z, vx, vy, vz, t) centered at a specific heart rate. (D) Atrial blood flow can then be pre-processed for each RR bin and the left atrial structure(s) subsequently segmented, allowing for blood flow quantification, such as atrial blood stasis of the left atrium, in this example. 5D five-dimensional, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, 3D three-dimensional, ECG electrocardiogram
Fig. 8
Ma et al. extended this framework to include phase contrast blood flow measurement, creating 5D flow MRI. Principally, the respiratory signal was utilized as the fifth dimension to reconstruct four 4D flow-like data sets across different respiratory cycles (expiration to inspiration). Respiratory-resolved 5D flow imaging may be useful for examining respiratory-driven flow effects in the atrium or pulmonary veins. In the setting of AF and atrial flow measurement, this framework was adapted to utilize heartbeat duration as the fifth dimension, allowing for the reconstruction of four 4D flow-like data sets centered at different heart rates occurring in AF: an arrhythmia-resolved 5D flow. Initial work demonstrated excellent in-vitro flow agreement with this arrhythmia-resolved 5D flow vs 2D real-time phase contrast. It was also able to differentiate atrial peak velocities and stasis between AF patients likely in sinus rhythm vs those potentially undergoing AF. Fig. 8 shows the pulse sequence, data-binning reconstruction pipeline, and example images and results. However, for patients likely to be in AF, within patient atrial stasis and peak velocities did not change significantly across varying heart rates, but this may be due to low number of subjects in this group (nine subjects) and more studies using this technique would be necessary to confirm this. Overall, this may be a promising technique to fully understand atrial hemodynamics during sinus or arrhythmias.

Role of artificial intelligence in LA CMR
Structural changes in the LA can be used to predict outcomes in patients undergoing catheter ablation for AF. Machine learning is a promising approach to improve predictive risk models by integrating recognized morphologic features of interest (including LA shape and volume, LAA anatomy, and location and size of the pulmonary vein ostia), clinical data, and deep features from the CMR itself. In one study comparing clinical data with DL from CT images to predict successful AF ablation, the model incorporating both data sources outperformed those trained solely on clinical or imaging data. For CMR, two groups have shown artificial intelligence (AI)-based segmentation for quantification of LA fibrosis. These advanced tools can automate the segmentation task and eliminate subjective observer variability. As of today, there are no proven AI tools to predict the best ablation lesion set for catheter ablation of AF, the need for antiarrhythmic drugs after catheter ablation, and the probability of freedom from AF and atrial flutter after ablation.

Discussion
CMR of the LA has received more attention over the last decade, driven by new insights of its role derived from large studies such as MESA including CV disease, stroke, demographics, or heart failure. The findings were mainly based on available imaging series, such as LAx CINE series and applying methods such as the biplane area-length method for LA assessment. Moreover, the importance of increased minimum LAVi rather than increased maximum LAVi in certain contexts, such as heart failure was reported. Since studies suggest that the assessment of minimum LAVi is typically underestimated using the biplane methods compared to a SAx method, 3D-based LAV quantification should be considered in future investigations.
Besides LAV assessment, other techniques such as strain assessment have been applied to LA CINE imaging. It has revealed important information on LA function from LAx-based analyses, in regard to atrioventricular coupling. However, directions of LA muscle fibers suggest investigation of circumferential strain which will likely benefit from 3D CINE imaging with high spatial resolution to accurately track deformation.
LA imaging in the next decade will overall likely be fully 3D. Whether 3D-based, for example by using a stack of SAx CINE covering the entire heart for functional assessment of the LA (and the other heart chambers). Achieving high spatial resolution and scanning the LA within clinically acceptable times requires advanced CMR techniques, such as high data acquisition acceleration and motion compensation.
For a comprehensive evaluation of LA myopathy, it may be necessary to complement cine imaging with more advanced 3D techniques such as 3D LGE, 3D black blood imaging, or atrial hemodynamic assessment using 4D or even 5D flow CMR. These will probably allow for more detailed tissue characterization, for example, quantification of LA fibrosis or EAT and LA hemodynamics. Hemodynamic assessment might capture features similar to minimum LAVi from functional assessment. These advanced, investigational pulse sequences, however, need to be validated further in clinical studies and trials before they are translated into clinical routine.
An irregular heart rhythm is a source of image (e.g., ghosting or motion) artifacts for most cardiovascular pulse sequences that sample k-space over multiple heartbeats in a segmented fashion. In patients with severe arrhythmia, more advanced sequences, capable of rejecting k-space data acquired during ectopic beats (i.e., “prospective or retrospective arrhythmia rejection”), may help suppress these image artifacts. However, this comes at the expense of a reduced SNR due to the exclusion of signal. Another strategy is employing AI to detect and suppress image artifacts.
Once the investigational pulse sequences are further validated in clinical studies, future CMR studies that the SCMR community might consider include (a) using CMR to predict who will respond to antiarrhythmic drugs alone; (b) using CMR to guide ablation strategy of pulmonary vein isolation vs pulmonary vein isolation + (posterior wall? anterior wall? septum?); (c) understand effects of extensive catheter ablation on chronic LA structure and function; (d) use AI to combine CMR and clinical variables to predict success of rhythm control strategies (drugs, ablation); (e) stratify for stroke risk.
In summary, recent developments in LA CMR uncovered new insights into the role of the LA in several diseases. They will allow for more advanced morphologic and functional assessments as well as more detailed tissue characterization. We recommend the SCMR community work together to further advance the CMR techniques and apply them to discover mechanisms involving LA myopathy.

Funding
Dr. Kim is sponsored by funding from the  () that is directly related to this review article.

Author contributions
KyungPyo Hong: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Rod S. Passman: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Mohammed S.M. Elbaz: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Daniel C. Lee: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Justin J. Baraboo: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Daniel A. Herzka: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Eugene Kholmovski: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Dana C. Peters: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Maurice Pradella: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Reza Nezafat: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Robert R. Edelman: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization. Daniel Kim: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Conceptualization.

Declaration of competing interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

References
An approach to longitudinal studies in a community: the Framingham Study
Left atrial size and the risk of stroke and death. The Framingham Heart Study
Atrial fibrillation
Atrial myopathy
Evaluating the atrial myopathy underlying atrial fibrillation: identifying the arrhythmogenic and thrombogenic substrate
Atrial amyloidosis: mechanisms and clinical manifestations
Atrial fibrillation: global burdens and global opportunities
Atrial fibrillation
Independent risk factors for atrial fibrillation in a population-based cohort. The Framingham Heart Study
Spontaneous initiation of atrial fibrillation by ectopic beats originating in the pulmonary veins
2023 ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS guideline for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines
Evaluating the left atrium by magnetic resonance imaging
Three dimensional mapping of atrial fibrillation: techniques and necessity
Standardized cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) protocols: 2020 update
Gadolinium based contrast agent-free cardiac magnetic resonance imaging for the assessment of heart anatomy. A feasibility study
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (SCMR) guidelines for reporting cardiovascular magnetic resonance examinations
Detection of left atrial appendage thrombus by cardiac computed tomography in patients with atrial fibrillation: a meta-analysis
Detection of LA and LAA thrombus by CMR in patients referred for pulmonary vein isolation
Contrast-enhanced CMR is equally effective as TEE in the evaluation of left atrial appendage thrombus in patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing pulmonary vein isolation procedure
2023 ACC/AHA/ACCP/HRS guideline for the diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association joint committee on clinical practice guidelines
Role of the CHADS2 score in the evaluation of thromboembolic risk in patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing transesophageal echocardiography before pulmonary vein isolation
Ablation of atrial fibrillation without left atrial appendage imaging in patients treated with direct oral anticoagulants
Surgical left atrial appendage occlusion: evaluation of a novel device with magnetic resonance imaging
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging for preprocedural planning of percutaneous left atrial appendage closure
Multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis: objectives and design
Cardiovascular function in multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis: normal values by age, sex, and ethnicity
References values for left atrial volumes, emptying fractions, strains, and strain rates and their determinants by age, gender, and ethnicity: the Multiethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA)
Cardiac magnetic resonance-measured left atrial volume and function and incident atrial fibrillation: results from MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis)
Association of left atrial structure and function and incident cardiovascular disease in patients with diabetes mellitus: results from multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis (MESA)
Change in left atrioventricular coupling index to predict incident atrial fibrillation: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA)
Left atrial dimension and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with and without atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Recommendations for the evaluation of left ventricular diastolic function by echocardiography: an update from the American Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging
Quantification of left atrial function by the area-length method overestimates left atrial emptying fraction
Comparison of biplane area-length method and 3D volume quantification by using cardiac MRI for assessment of left atrial volume in atrial fibrillation
Associations between fully-automated, 3D-based functional analysis of the left atrium and classification schemes in atrial fibrillation
Deep learning of left atrial structure and function provides link to atrial fibrillation risk
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance (SCMR) guidelines for reporting cardiovascular magnetic resonance examinations
Quantification of left atrial strain and strain rate using Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance myocardial feature tracking: a feasibility study
Left atrial aging: a cardiac magnetic resonance feature-tracking study
Left atrial size and function: role in prognosis
The emerging role of atrial strain assessed by cardiac MRI in different cardiovascular settings: an up-to-date review
Long-term prognostic value of cardiac MRI left atrial strain in ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction
Influence of left atrial function on exercise capacity and left ventricular function in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction
Prognostic value of left atrial function by cardiovascular magnetic resonance feature tracking in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Left atrial strain as a predictor of early anthracycline-induced chemotherapy-related cardiac dysfunction: a pilot systematic review and meta-analysis
Left atrial strain and the risk of atrial arrhythmias from extended ambulatory cardiac monitoring: MESA
Myocardial strain evaluation with cardiovascular MRI: physics, principles, and clinical applications
Reproducibility of left atrial function using cardiac magnetic resonance imaging
Multimodal imaging assessment of left atrial strain in cardiac amyloidosis and hypertrophic cardiomyopathies
Cardiac tumors: JACC cardiooncology state-of-the-art review
Cardiac magnetic resonance to predict cardiac mass malignancy: the CMR mass score
Assessment of cardiac masses by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging: histological correlation and clinical outcomes
Value of CMR for the differential diagnosis of cardiac masses
Guidelines and protocols for cardiovascular magnetic resonance in children and adults with congenital heart disease: SCMR expert consensus group on congenital heart disease
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance/European Society of Cardiovascular Imaging/American Society of Echocardiography/Society for Pediatric Radiology/North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging guidelines for the use of cardiac magnetic resonance in pediatric congenital and acquired heart disease: endorsed by the American Heart Association
Role of cardiovascular magnetic resonance end-systolic 3D-SSFP sequence in repaired tetralogy of Fallot patients eligible for transcatheter pulmonary valve implantation
Birth prevalence of congenital heart disease worldwide: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Assessment of atrial septal defects in adults comparing cardiovascular magnetic resonance with transoesophageal echocardiography
Evaluation of atrial septal defects with 4D flow MRI-multilevel and inter-reader reproducibility for quantification of shunt severity
Assessment of mitral valve regurgitation by cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging
Discordance between echocardiography and MRI in the assessment of mitral regurgitation severity: a prospective multicenter trial
Multimodality imaging for the quantitative assessment of mitral regurgitation
Direct mitral regurgitation quantification in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy using 4D flow CMR jet tracking: evaluation in comparison to conventional CMR
Recurrence of atrial fibrillation correlates with the extent of post-procedural late gadolinium enhancement: a pilot study
Detection and quantification of left atrial structural remodeling with delayed-enhancement magnetic resonance imaging in patients with atrial fibrillation
Left atrial ultrastructure in mitral valvular disease
Pre-existent left atrial scarring in patients undergoing pulmonary vein antrum isolation: an independent predictor of procedural failure
Automated analysis of atrial late gadolinium enhancement imaging that correlates with endocardial voltage and clinical outcomes: a 2-center study
Association of atrial tissue fibrosis identified by delayed enhancement MRI and atrial fibrillation catheter ablation: the DECAAF study
Effect of MRI-guided fibrosis ablation vs conventional catheter ablation on atrial arrhythmia recurrence in patients with persistent atrial fibrillation: the DECAAF II randomized clinical trial
Unipolar voltage electroanatomic mapping detects structural atrial remodeling identified by LGE-MRI
Left atrial anatomy revisited
The role of myocardial wall thickness in atrial arrhythmogenesis
Left atrial function: physiology, assessment, and clinical implications
Automated detection of cardiac rest period for trigger delay calculation for image-based navigator coronary magnetic resonance angiography
Respiratory bellows revisited for motion compensation: preliminary experience for cardiovascular MR
Navigator-echo-based real-time respiratory gating and triggering for reduction of respiration effects in three-dimensional coronary MR angiography
Free-breathing whole-heart coronary MRA with 3D radial SSFP and self-navigated image reconstruction
3D image-based navigators for coronary MR angiography
Whole-heart coronary MR angiography with 2D self-navigated image reconstruction
Speier P, Fenchel M, Rehner R. PT-Nav: a novel respiratory navigation method for continuous acquisitions based on modulation of a pilot tone in the MR-receiver. ESMRMB 2015, 32nd Annual Scientific Meeting, Edinburgh, UK, Abstracts; October 1-3, 2015; 28(Suppl 1):1–135. doi:10.1007/s10334-015-0487-2.
Free-breathing radial imaging using a pilot-tone radiofrequency transmitter for detection of respiratory motion
Detection of pulmonary vein and left atrial scar after catheter ablation with three-dimensional navigator-gated delayed enhancement MR imaging: initial experience
3D whole-heart isotropic sub-millimeter resolution coronary magnetic resonance angiography with non-rigid motion-compensated PROST
Accelerated 3D left atrial late gadolinium enhancement in patients with atrial fibrillation at 1.5 T: technical development
Respiratory motion detection and correction for MR using the pilot tone: applications for MR and simultaneous PET/MR examinations
Accelerated late gadolinium enhancement cardiac MR imaging with isotropic spatial resolution using compressed sensing: initial experience
XD-GRASP: golden-angle radial MRI with reconstruction of extra motion-state dimensions using compressed sensing
Revisiting how we perform late gadolinium enhancement CMR: insights gleaned over 25 years of clinical practice
The reproducibility of late gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging of post-ablation atrial scar: a cross-over study
Dark blood late enhancement imaging
Dark-blood delayed enhancement cardiac magnetic resonance of myocardial infarction
Three-dimensional high-resolution dark-blood late gadolinium enhancement imaging for improved atrial scar evaluation
Gray blood late gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magnetic resonance for improved detection of myocardial scar
Improved dark blood late gadolinium enhancement (DB-LGE) imaging using an optimized joint inversion preparation and T(2) magnetization preparation
REPAIRit: improving myocardial nulling and ghosting artifacts of 3D navigator-gated late gadolinium enhancement imaging during arrhythmia
Age, atrial fibrillation, and structural heart disease are the main determinants of left atrial fibrosis detected by delayed-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging in a general cardiology population
Repeat left atrial catheter ablation: cardiac magnetic resonance prediction of endocardial voltage and gaps in ablation lesion sets
Magnetic resonance image intensity ratio, a normalized measure to enable interpatient comparability of left atrial fibrosis
Left atrial fibrosis quantification by late gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance: a new method to standardize the thresholds for reproducibility
Reproducibility of clinical late gadolinium enhancement magnetic resonance imaging in detecting left atrial scar after atrial fibrillation ablation
Association of left atrial high-resolution late gadolinium enhancement on cardiac magnetic resonance with electrogram abnormalities beyond voltage in patients with atrial fibrillation
Cine MR angiography of the heart with segmented true fast imaging with steady-state precession
Late gadolinium enhancement cardiac magnetic resonance imaging: from basic concepts to emerging methods
Evaluation of accelerated motion-compensated 3D water/fat late gadolinium enhanced MR for atrial wall imaging
Black-blood contrast in cardiovascular MRI
Dark-blood late gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magnetic resonance for improved detection of subendocardial scar: a review of current techniques
Fast selective black blood MR imaging
“Black blood” T2-weighted inversion-recovery MR imaging of the heart
Free-breathing 3D whole-heart black-blood imaging with motion sensitized driven equilibrium
DANTE-prepared pulse trains: a novel approach to motion-sensitized and motion-suppressed quantitative magnetic resonance imaging
Improved black-blood imaging using DANTE-SPACE for simultaneous carotid and intracranial vessel wall evaluation
Dark blood cardiovascular magnetic resonance of the heart, great vessels, and lungs using electrocardiographic-gated three-dimensional unbalanced steady-state free precession
Steady-state MRI: methods for neuroimaging
The application of steady-state free precession in rapid 2DFT NMR imaging: FAST and CE-FAST sequences
Dark blood contrast-enhanced brain mri using echo-uT(1) RESS
Controlled aliasing in volumetric parallel imaging (2D CAIPIRINHA)
Ferumoxytol enhanced black-blood cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging
First-pass contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance angiography in humans using ferumoxytol, a novel ultrasmall superparamagnetic iron oxide (USPIO)-based blood pool agent
Ferumoxytol-enhanced cardiovascular magnetic resonance detection of early stage acute myocarditis
Clinical value of dark-blood late gadolinium enhancement cardiovascular magnetic resonance without additional magnetization preparation
Improved delayed enhanced myocardial imaging with T2-Prep inversion recovery magnetization preparation
Improved myocardial scar visualization with fast free-breathing motion-compensated black-blood T(1)-rho-prepared late gadolinium enhancement MRI
Simultaneous bright- and black-blood whole-heart MRI for noncontrast enhanced coronary lumen and thrombus visualization
Accelerated high-resolution free-breathing 3D whole-heart T(2)-prepared black-blood and bright-blood cardiovascular magnetic resonance
Feasibility and image quality of bright-blood and black-blood phase-sensitive inversion recovery (BOOST) sequence in clinical practice using for left atrial visualization in patients with atrial fibrillation
MR Multitasking-based multi-dimensional assessment of cardiovascular system (MT-MACS) with extended spatial coverage and water-fat separation
Obesity is associated with incident atrial fibrillation independent of gender: a meta‐analysis
Role of epicardial adipose tissue in human atrial fibrillation
Epicardial adipose tissue and atrial fibrillation: possible mechanisms, potential therapies, and future directions
Epicardial adipose tissue is associated with higher recurrence risk after catheter ablation in atrial fibrillation patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Atrial fibrillation is associated with the fibrotic remodelling of adipose tissue in the subepicardium of human and sheep atria
The relationship between enhancing left atrial adipose tissue at CT and recurrent atrial fibrillation
Volumetric assessment of epicardial adipose tissue with cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging
Simultaneous assessment of left atrial fibrosis and epicardial adipose tissue using 3D late gadolinium enhanced Dixon MRI
Left atrial epicardial fat volume is associated with atrial fibrillation: a prospective cardiovascular magnetic resonance 3D Dixon study
Improved fat water separation with water selective inversion pulse for inversion recovery imaging in cardiac MRI
Ablation versus drugs: what is the best first-line therapy for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation? Antiarrhythmic drugs are outmoded and catheter ablation should be the first-line option for all patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation: pro
Left atrial ablation for management of atrial fibrillation: CABANA vs. real-world data. Apples and oranges?
Three-year outcomes and reconnection patterns after initial contact force guided pulmonary vein isolation for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation
Long-term outcomes of catheter ablation of atrial fibrillation: a systematic review and meta-analysis
Predictors of recurrence of AF in patients after radiofrequency ablation
Acute and chronic electrophysiologic changes surrounding radiofrequency lesions
Recovered pulmonary vein conduction as a dominant factor for recurrent atrial tachyarrhythmias after complete circular isolation of the pulmonary veins: lessons from double Lasso technique
Electrophysiological findings during ablation of persistent atrial fibrillation with electroanatomic mapping and double Lasso catheter technique
Poor scar formation after ablation is associated with atrial fibrillation recurrence
Cardiac magnetic resonance for early atrial lesion visualization post atrial fibrillation radiofrequency catheter ablation
Characterization of radiofrequency ablation lesions with gadolinium-enhanced cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging
Characterization of acute and subacute radiofrequency ablation lesions with nonenhanced magnetic resonance imaging
Visualization and temporal/spatial characterization of cardiac radiofrequency ablation lesions using magnetic resonance imaging
Characterization of gadolinium contrast enhancement of radiofrequency ablation lesions in predicting edema and chronic lesion size
Dark regions of no-reflow on late gadolinium enhancement magnetic resonance imaging result in scar formation after atrial fibrillation ablation
Non-contrast-enhanced T(1) -weighted MRI of myocardial radiofrequency ablation lesions
Acute enhancement of necrotic radio-frequency ablation lesions in left atrium and pulmonary vein ostia in swine model with non-contrast-enhanced T(1) -weighted MRI
Ablation lesion characterization in scarred substrate assessed using cardiac magnetic resonance
Intrinsic contrast for characterization of acute radiofrequency ablation lesions
Native contrast visualization and tissue characterization of myocardial radiofrequency ablation and acetic acid chemoablation lesions at 0.55
Non-contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MRI inadequate for visualizing atrial radiofrequency lesions subacutely postablation in atrial fibrillation patients
Association of left atrial strain by cardiovascular magnetic resonance with recurrence of atrial fibrillation following catheter ablation
Early detection of left atrial and bi-ventricular myocardial strain abnormalities by MRI feature tracking in normotensive or hypertensive T2DM patients with preserved LV function
CMR-verified lower LA strain in the presence of regional atrial fibrosis in atrial fibrillation
MRI quantification of left atrial circumferential strain in mitral regurgitation: a feasibility and reproducibility study
4D flow MRI
Left atrial 4D flow cardiovascular magnetic resonance: a reproducibility study in sinus rhythm and atrial fibrillation
Left atrial and left atrial appendage 4D blood flow dynamics in atrial fibrillation
Left atrial 4-dimensional flow magnetic resonance imaging: stasis and velocity mapping in patients with atrial fibrillation
The impact of atrial fibrillation and stroke risk factors on left atrial blood flow characteristics
Altered left atrial 4D flow characteristics in patients with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation in the absence of apparent remodeling
Associations between 3D-based left atrial volumetric and blood flow parameters in a single-site cohort of the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis
Reduced Left atrial rotational flow is independently associated with embolic brain infarcts
MRI Investigation of the association of left atrial and left atrial appendage hemodynamics with silent brain infarction
Robust and fast stochastic 4D flow vector-field signature technique for quantifying composite flow dynamics from 4D flow MRI: application to left atrial flow in atrial fibrillation
4D Flow cardiovascular magnetic resonance consensus statement: 2023 update
5D whole-heart sparse MRI
An automated approach to fully self-gated free-running cardiac and respiratory motion-resolved 5D whole-heart MRI
5D flow MRI: a fully self-gated, free-running framework for cardiac and respiratory motion-resolved 3D hemodynamics
Using 5D flow MRI to decode the effects of rhythm on left atrial 3D flow dynamics in patients with atrial fibrillation
Atrial fibrillation ablation outcome prediction with a machine learning fusion framework incorporating cardiac computed tomography
Usformer: a small network for left atrium segmentation of 3D LGE MRI
Multiview sequential learning and dilated residual learning for a fully automatic delineation of the left atrium and pulmonary veins from late gadolinium-enhanced cardiac MRI images
Association of CMR-measured LA function with heart failure development: results from the MESA study
Left atrial structure in relationship to age, sex, ethnicity, and cardiovascular risk factors: MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis)
Left atrial mechanical function and incident ischemic cerebrovascular events independent of AF: insights from the MESA study
Change in minimum indexed left atrial volume predicts incident heart failure: the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis
Reference value of left and right atrial size and phasic function by SSFP CMR at 3.0 T in healthy Chinese adults
AI-based motion artifact severity estimation in undersampled MRI allowing for selection of appropriate reconstruction models