--- page 1 ---
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY
DOCUMENTS
Diagnosis and Treatment of Adults with Community-acquired
Pneumonia
An Ofﬁcial Clinical Practice Guideline of the American Thoracic Society and
Infectious Diseases Society of America: Executive Summary
Joshua P. Metlay*, Grant W. Waterer*, Ann C. Long, Antonio Anzueto, Jan Brozek, Kristina Crothers, Laura A. Cooley,
Nathan C. Dean, Michael J. Fine, Scott A. Flanders, Marie R. Grifﬁn, Mark L. Metersky, Daniel M. Musher,
Marcos I. Restrepo, and Cynthia G. Whitney; on behalf of the American Thoracic Society and Infectious Diseases
Society of America
THIS OFFICIAL CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE WAS APPROVED BY THE AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY MAY 2019 AND THE INFECTIOUS DISEASES SOCIETY OF AMERICA
AUGUST 2019
Background: This document provides evidence-based clinical
practice guidelines on the management of adult patients with
community-acquired pneumonia.
Methods: A multidisciplinary panel conducted pragmatic
systematic reviews of the relevant research and applied Grading of
Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation
methodology for clinical recommendations.
Results: The panel addressed 16 speciﬁca r e a sf o r
recommendations spanning questions of diagnostic
testing, determination of site of care, selection of initial
empiric antibiotic therapy, and subsequent management
decisions. Although some recommendations remain
unchanged from the 2007 guideline, the availability of
results from new therapeutic trials and epidemiological
investigations led to revised recommendations for
empiric treatment strategies and additional management
decisions.
Conclusions: The panel formulated and provided the rationale
for recommendations on selected diagnostic and treatment
strategies for adult patients with community-acquired pneumonia.
Keywords: community-acquired pneumonia; pneumonia; patient
management
*Co–ﬁrst authors.
Endorsed by the Society of Infectious Disease Pharmacists July 2019.
ORCID IDs: 0000-0003-2259-6282 (J.P.M.); 0000-0002-7222-8018 (G.W.W.); 0000-0002-7007-588X (A.A.); 0000-0002-3122-0773 (J.B.);
0000-0001-9702-0371 (K.C.); 0000-0002-5127-3442 (L.A.C.); 0000-0002-1996-0533 (N.C.D.); 0000-0003-3470-9846 (M.J.F.);
0000-0002-8634-4909 (S.A.F.); 0000-0001-7114-7614 (M.R.G.); 0000-0003-1968-1400 (M.L.M.); 0000-0002-7571-066X (D.M.M.);
0000-0001-9107-3405 (M.I.R.); 0000-0002-1056-3216 (C.G.W.).
Supported by the American Thoracic Society and Infectious Diseases Society of America.
The ﬁndings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the ofﬁcial position of the U.S. CDC.
This Executive Summary is part of the full ofﬁcial ATS clinical practice guideline, which readers may access online at http://www.atsjournals.org/
doi/abs/10.1164/rccm.201908-1581ST. Only the Executive Summary is appearing in the print edition of the Journal. The article of record, and the
one that should be cited, is: Diagnosis and Treatment of Adults with Community-acquired Pneumonia: An Ofﬁcial Clinical Practice Guideline of the
American Thoracic Society and Infectious Diseases Society of America. Am J Respir Crit Care Med2019;200:e45–e67.
You may print one copy of this document at no charge. However, if you require more than one copy, you must place a reprint order. Domestic reprint orders:
amy.schriver@sheridan.com; international reprint orders: louisa.mott@springer.com.
This article has an online supplement, which is accessible from this issue’s table of contents at www.atsjournals.org.
Am J Respir Crit Care Med Vol 200, Iss 7, pp 809–821, Oct 1, 2019
Copyright © 2019 by the American Thoracic Society
DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201908-1581ST
Internet address: www.atsjournals.org
American Thoracic Society Documents 809


--- page 2 ---
Contents
Introduction
Methods
Recommendations
Question 1: In Adults with CAP,
Should Gram Stain and Culture
of Lower Respiratory Secretions
Be Obtained at the Time of
Diagnosis?
Question 2: In Adults with CAP,
Should Blood Cultures Be
Obtained at the Time of Diagnosis?
Question 3: In Adults with CAP,
Should Legionella and
Pneumococcal Urinary Antigen
Testing Be Performed at the
Time of Diagnosis?
Question 4: In Adults with CAP,
Should a Respiratory Sample Be
Tested for Inﬂuenza Virus at the
Time of Diagnosis?
Question 5: In Adults with CAP,
Should Serum Procalcitonin
plus Clinical Judgment
versus Clinical Judgment
Alone Be Used to Withhold
Initiation of Antibiotic Treatment?
Question 6: Should a Clinical
Prediction Rule for Prognosis
plus Clinical Judgment versus
Clinical Judgment Alone Be
Used to Determine Inpatient
versus Outpatient Treatment
Location for Adults with CAP?
Question 7: Should a Clinical
Prediction Rule for Prognosis
plus Clinical Judgment versus
Clinical Judgment Alone Be Used
to Determine Inpatient General
Medical versus Higher Levels of
Inpatient Treatment Intensity
(ICU, Step-Down, or Telemetry
Unit) for Adults with CAP?
Question 8: In the Outpatient
Setting, Which Antibiotics Are
Recommended for Empiric
Treatment of CAP in Adults?
Question 9: In the Inpatient
Setting, Which Antibiotic
Regimens Are Recommended
for Empiric Treatment of
CAP in Adults without Risk
Factors for MRSA and
P. aeruginosa?
Question 10: In the Inpatient
Setting, Should Patients with
Suspected Aspiration Pneumonia
Receive Additional Anaerobic
Coverage beyond Standard
Empiric Treatment for CAP?
Question 11: In the Inpatient
Setting, Should Adults with
CAP and Risk Factors for
MRSA or P. aeruginosa Be
Treated with Extended-
Spectrum Antibiotic Therapy
Instead of Standard CAP
Regimens?
Question 12: In the Inpatient
Setting, Should Adults with
CAP Be Treated with
Corticosteroids?
Question 13: In Adults with CAP
Who Test Positive for
Inﬂuenza, Should the
Treatment Regimen Include
Antiviral Therapy?
Question 14: In Adults with CAP
Who Test Positive for Inﬂuenza,
Should the Treatment
Regimen Include Antibacterial
Therapy?
Question 15: In Outpatient
and Inpatient Adults with
CAP Who Are Improving,
What Is the Appropriate
Duration of Antibiotic
Treatment?
Question 16: In Adults with CAP
Who Are Improving, Should
Follow-up Chest Imaging Be
Obtained?
Conclusions
Introduction
In the 10 years since the last American
Thoracic Society (ATS)/Infectious
Diseases Society of America (IDSA)
community-acquired pneumonia (CAP)
guideline (1), there have been changes in
the process for guideline development, as
well as generation of new clinical data. ATS
and IDSA agreed on moving from the
narrative style of previous documents to the
Grading of Recommendations Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE)
format. We thus developed this updated CAP
guideline as a series of questions answered
from available evidence in an“is option A
b e t t e rt h a no p t i o nB” format using the Patient
or Population, Intervention, Comparison,
Outcome (PICO) framework (2).
This guideline addresses the clinical
entity of pneumonia that is acquired outside
of the hospital setting by adults who do not
have an immunocompromising condition.
Antibiotic recommendations are based on
selecting agents effective against the major
treatable bacterial causes of CAP. As
bacterial pathogens often coexist with
viruses and there is no current diagnostic
test accurate enough or fast enough to
determine that CAP is due solely to a virus at
the time of presentation (see below), our
recommendations are to initially treat
empirically for possible bacterial infection
or coinfection. In addition, the emergence
of multidrug-resistant pathogens, including
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
require separate recommendations when
the risk of each of these pathogens is
elevated. We acknowledge that other
multidrug-resistant Enterobacteriaceae can
cause CAP, including organisms producing
extended-spectrum b-lactamase, but we do
not discuss them separately because they
are much less common and are effectively
covered by the strategies presented for
P. aeruginosa. Therefore, throughout this
document when discussingP. aeruginosa
we are also referring to other similar
multiresistant gram-negative bacteria.
We have maintained the convention of
separate recommendations on the basis of
the severity of illness. Although historically
site of care (outpatient, inpatient general
ward, ICU) has served as a severity
surrogate, decisions about site of care may
be based on considerations other than
severity and can vary widely between
hospitals and practice sites. We have
therefore chosen to use the IDSA/ATS CAP
severity criteria that have been validated and
deﬁne severe CAP as present in patients
with either one major criterion or three or
more minor criteria (Table 1).
This guideline reafﬁrms many
recommendations from the 2007 statement.
However, new evidence and a new process
have led to signiﬁcant changes, which are
summarized in Table 2.
Methods
The guideline development methodology
and how conﬂict of interest was managed
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
810 American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 200 Number 7 | October 1 2019


--- page 3 ---
are presented in the online supplement. We
followed the GRADE standards for
evaluating the evidence for each PICO and
assigned a quality of evidence rating of high,
moderate, low, or very low. On the basis of
the quality of evidence, recommendations
were assigned as strong or conditional.
Recommendations that were based on
low or very low quality of evidence and
not believed to represent standards of
care were labeled as conditional
recommendations. Statements in favor of
strong recommendations begin with the
words “We recommend . . .”; statements in
favor of conditional recommendations
begin with the words“We suggest . . . .”
Although we speciﬁed pairwise PICO
questions for all antibiotic options in the
outpatient and inpatient settings, we
summarized the recommendations using
lists of treatment options, in no preferred
order, rather than retain the PICO format
f o rt h i ss e c t i o n .
Recommendations
Question 1: In Adults with CAP,
Should Gram Stain and Culture of
Lower Respiratory Secretions Be
Obtained at the Time of Diagnosis?
Recommendation. We recommend not
obtaining sputum Gram stain and culture
routinely in adults with CAP managed in the
outpatient setting (strong recommendation,
very low quality of evidence).
We recommend obtaining pretreatment
Gram stain and culture of respiratory
secretions in adults with CAP managed in the
hospital setting who:
1. are classiﬁed as severe CAP (see Table 1),
especially if they are intubated (strong
recommendation, very low quality of
evidence); or
2.
a. are being empirically treated for
MRSA orP. aeruginosa(strong
recommendation, very low quality of
evidence); or
b. were previously infected with MRSA
or P. aeruginosa, especially those with
prior respiratory tract infection
(conditional recommendation, very
low quality of evidence); or
c. were hospitalized and received
parenteral antibiotics, whether during
the hospitalization event or not, in
the last 90 days (conditional
recommendation, very low quality of
evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.In
balancing the lack of evidence supporting
routine sputum culture with the desire for
improved antimicrobial stewardship, the
committee voted to continue the stance of
previous guidelines in recommending
neither for nor against routinely obtaining
sputum Gram stain and culture in all
adults with CAP managed in the hospital
setting. Whether to culture patients or
not should be determined by individual
clinicians on the basis of clinical presentation,
local etiological considerations, and local
antimicrobial stewardship processes.
The committee identiﬁed two
situations in which we recommend sputum
Gram stain and culture: in hospitalized
patients with severe CAP, and when strong
risk factors for MRSA andP. aeruginosaare
identiﬁed, unless local etiological data have
already shown these pathogens are very
infrequently identiﬁed in patients with
CAP. Patients who have severe CAP
requiring intubation should have lower
respiratory tract samples, such as
endotracheal aspirates, sent for Gram stain
and culture promptly after intubation,
particularly as these patients may be more
likely to have pneumonia due to MRSA or
P. aeruginosa and endotracheal aspirates
have a better yield of microbiological
organisms than sputum culture (3).
We recommend obtaining sputum for
Gram stain and culture in situations when
risk factors for MRSA orP. aeruginosa are
present, both when initial empiric therapy
is expanded to cover these pathogens and
when it is not expanded. In the former case,
negative microbiological test results may be
used to deescalate therapy, and in the latter
case, positive microbiological test results
may be used to adjust therapy. As discussed
below, although there are numerous studies
identifying individual risk factors for MRSA
and P. aeruginosa, many of these
associations are weak and vary across sites.
The most consistently strong risk factor to
consider is prior infection with either
MRSA or P. aeruginosa. In addition,
hospitalization and treatment with
parenteral antibiotics in the last 90 days is
associated with an increased risk of
these pathogens, and so we recommend
sputum culture in this situation. These
recommendations are not based on high-
grade evidence but reﬂect the committee’s
desire to improve antibiotic use as well as
improve clinicians’ understanding of their
local pathogen prevalences and resistance
patterns, which we believe are key to
selecting appropriate empiric antibiotic
therapy.
Question 2: In Adults with CAP,
Should Blood Cultures Be Obtained at
the Time of Diagnosis?
Recommendation. We recommend not
obtaining blood cultures in adults with CAP
managed in the outpatient setting (strong
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
We suggest not routinely obtaining
blood cultures in adults with CAP managed
in the hospital setting (conditional
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
We recommend obtaining
pretreatment blood cultures in adults with
CAP managed in the hospital setting who:
1. are classiﬁed as severe CAP (see Table 1)
(strong recommendation, very low
quality of evidence); or
2.
a. are being empirically treated for
MRSA or P. aeruginosa (strong
recommendation, very low quality of
evidence); or
b. were previously infected with MRSA
or P. aeruginosa, especially those
with prior respiratory tract infection
(conditional recommendation, very
low quality of evidence); or
c. were hospitalized and received
parenteral antibiotics, whether during
the hospitalization event or not, in
the last 90 days (conditional
recommendation, very low quality of
evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.
Although additional diagnostic information
could improve the quality of treatment
decisions, support for routine collection of
blood cultures is reduced by the low quality
of studies demonstrating clinical beneﬁt.
Routinely obtaining blood cultures may
generate false-positive results that lead to
unnecessary antibiotic use and increased
length of stay.
In severe CAP, delay in covering less-
common pathogens can have serious
consequences. Therefore, the potential beneﬁt
of blood cultures is much larger when results
can be returned within 24 to 48 hours. The
rationale for the recommendation for blood
cultures in the setting of risk factors for MRSA
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents 811


--- page 4 ---
and P. aeruginosais the same as for sputum
culture.
Question 3: In Adults with CAP,
Should Legionella and Pneumococcal
Urinary Antigen Testing Be Performed
at the Time of Diagnosis?
Recommendation. We suggest not
routinely testing urine for pneumococcal
antigen in adults with CAP (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence),
except in adults with severe CAP (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
We suggest not routinely testing urine
for Legionella antigen in adults with CAP
(conditional recommendation, low quality
of evidence), except
1. in cases where indicated by
epidemiological factors, such as
association with aLegionellaoutbreak or
recent travel (conditional recommendation,
low quality of evidence); or
2. in adults with severe CAP (see Table 1)
(conditional recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
We suggest testing forLegionellaurinary
antigen and collecting lower respiratory tract
secretions forLegionellaculture on selective
media orLegionellanucleic acid ampliﬁcation
testing in adults with severe CAP (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.
Randomized trials have failed to identify a
beneﬁt for urinary antigen testing for
Streptococcus pneumoniaeand Legionella.
Concern has also been raised that narrowing
therapy in response to positive urinary
antigen tests could lead to increased risk of
clinical relapse (4). In large observational
studies, these diagnostic tests have been
associated with reduction in mortality;
therefore, we recommend testing in patients
with severe disease. An increase inLegionella
infections in the United States in the
past decade highlights the importance of this
diagnosis, especially among severely ill
patients, particularly in the setting
of potential outbreaks due to a
common source, although most cases
are not associated with a known
outbreak and remain sporadic (5, 6).
Question 4: In Adults with CAP,
Should a Respiratory Sample Be
Tested for Inﬂuenza Virus at the Time
of Diagnosis?
Recommendation.
When inﬂuenza viruses
are circulating in the community, we
recommend testing for inﬂuenza with a rapid
inﬂuenza molecular assay (i.e., inﬂuenza
nucleic acid ampliﬁcation test), which is
preferred over a rapid inﬂuenza diagnostic test
(i.e., antigen test) (strong recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.The
beneﬁts of antiviral therapy support testing of
patients during periods of high inﬂuenza
activity. During periods of low inﬂuenza
activity, testing can be considered but may not
be routinely performed. Of note, this testing
recommendation has both therapeutic
and infection-control implications in the
hospital setting. Updated inﬂuenza testing
recommendations are also available on the
CDC website (https://www.cdc.gov/ﬂu/
professionals/diagnosis/index.htm).
Question 5: In Adults with CAP,
Should Serum Procalcitonin plus
Clinical Judgment versus Clinical
Judgment Alone Be Used to Withhold
Initiation of Antibiotic Treatment?
Recommendation.
We recommend that
empiric antibiotic therapy should be
initiated in adults with clinically suspected
and radiographically conﬁrmed CAP
regardless of initial serum procalcitonin
level (strong recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.
Procalcitonin has been used to guide
initiation of antibiotics in patients with lower
respiratory infections, but many of these
studies are not restricted to patients with
radiographically conﬁrmed pneumonia.
Some patients with low procalcitonin
levels have CAP and have been safely
treated without antibiotics (7), but these
represent small subgroups, raising concerns
about the safety of widely using such a
strategy.
Question 6: Should a Clinical
Prediction Rule for Prognosis plus
Clinical Judgment versus Clinical
Judgment Alone Be Used to
Determine Inpatient versus
Outpatient Treatment Location for
Adults with CAP?
Recommendation.
In addition to clinical
judgement, we recommend that
clinicians use a validated clinical prediction
rule for prognosis, preferentially the
Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI) (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence) over the CURB-65 (tool based
on confusion, urea level, respiratory rate,
blood pressure, and age>65) (conditional
recommendation, low quality of
evidence), to determine the need for
hospitalization in adults diagnosed with
CAP.
Rationale for the recommendation.Our
recommendation to use the PSI as an adjunct
to clinical judgment to guide the initial site of
treatment is based on consistent evidence of
the effectiveness and safety of this approach.
Using a safe and effective decision aid to
increase outpatient treatment of patients
with CAP has potential to decrease
unnecessary variability in admission rates,
the high cost of inpatient pneumonia
treatment (8, 9), and the risk of hospital-
acquired complications. Providing a
conditional recommendation to use
CURB-65 considers its greater simplicity
of use relative to the PSI despite the paucity
of evidence regarding its effectiveness
or safety.
Table 1. 2007 Infectious Diseases
Society of America/American Thoracic
Society Criteria for Deﬁning Severe
Community-acquired Pneumonia
Validated deﬁnition includes either one
major criterion or three or more
minor criteria
Minor criteria
Respiratory rate>30 breaths/min
Pa
O2/FIO2 ratio <250
Multilobar inﬁltrates
Confusion/disorientation
Uremia (blood urea nitrogen
level >20 mg/dl)
Leukopenia* (white blood cell
count ,4,000 cells/ml)
Thrombocytopenia (platelet
count ,100,000/ml)
Hypothermia (core temperature,368C)
Hypotension requiring aggressiveﬂuid
resuscitation
Major criteria
Septic shock with need for
vasopressors
Respiratory failure requiring mechanical
ventilation
*Due to infection alone (i.e., not chemotherapy
induced).
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
812 American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 200 Number 7 | October 1 2019


--- page 5 ---
Question 7: Should a Clinical
Prediction Rule for Prognosis plus
Clinical Judgment versus Clinical
Judgment Alone Be Used to
Determine Inpatient General Medical
versus Higher Levels of Inpatient
Treatment Intensity (ICU, Step-Down,
or Telemetry Unit) for Adults with
CAP?
Recommendation.
We recommend direct
admission to an ICU for patients with
hypotension requiring vasopressors or
respiratory failure requiring mechanical
ventilation (strong recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
For patients not requiring
vasopressors or mechanical ventilator
support, we suggest using the IDSA/ATS
2007 minor severity criteria (Table 1)
together with clinical judgment to guide
the need for higher levels of treatment
intensity (conditional recommendation,
low quality of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.Patients
transferred to an ICU after admission to
a hospital ward experience higher
mortality than those directly admitted to
the ICU from an emergency department
(10– 13). This higher mortality may in
part be attributable to progressive
pneumonia, but “mis-triage ” of patients
with unrecognized severe pneumonia
may be a contributing factor (10). It
seems unlikely that physician judgment
alone would be equivalent to physician
judgment together with a severity tool to
guide the site-of-care decision. We
recommend the 2007 IDSA/ATS severe
CAP criteria over other published scores,
because they are composed of readily
available severity parameters and are
more accurate than other available
scores.
Question 8: In the Outpatient Setting,
Which Antibiotics Are Recommended
for Empiric Treatment of CAP in
Adults?
Recommendation.
1. For healthy outpatient adults without
comorbidities listed below or risk factors
for antibiotic resistant pathogens, we
recommend (Table 3):
d amoxicillin 1 g three times daily
(strong recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence), or
d doxycycline 100 mg twice daily
(conditional recommendation, low
quality of evidence), or
d a macrolide (azithromycin 500 mg on
ﬁrst day then 250 mg daily or
clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily or
clarithromycin extended release 1,000
mg daily) only in areas with
pneumococcal resistance to macrolides
Table 2. Differences between the 2019 and 2007 American Thoracic Society/Infectious Diseases Society of America
Community-acquired Pneumonia Guidelines
Recommendation 2007 ATS/IDSA Guideline 2019 ATS/IDSA Guideline
Sputum culture Primarily recommended in patients with
severe disease
Now recommended in patients with severe
disease as well as in all inpatients
empirically treated for MRSA or
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Blood culture Primarily recommended in patients with
severe disease
Now recommended in patients with severe
disease as well as in all inpatients
empirically treated for MRSA orP.
aeruginosa
Macrolide monotherapy Strong recommendation for outpatients Conditional recommendation for outpatients
based on resistance levels
Use of procalcitonin Not covered Not recommended to determine need for
initial antibacterial therapy
Use of corticosteroids Not covered Recommended not to use. May be
considered in patients with refractory septic
shock
Use of healthcare-associated pneumonia
category
Accepted as introduced in the 2005
ATS/IDSA hospital-acquired and
ventilator-associated pneumonia
guidelines
Recommend abandoning this categorization.
Emphasis on local epidemiology and
validated risk factors to determine need for
MRSA or P. aeruginosacoverage.
Increased emphasis on deescalation of
treatment if cultures are negative
Standard empiric therapy for severe CAP b-Lactam/macrolide and
b-lactam/ﬂuoroquinolone combinations
given equal weighting
Both accepted but stronger evidence in favor
of b-lactam/macrolide combination
Routine use of follow-up chest imaging Not addressed Recommended not to obtain. Patients may be
eligible for lung cancer screening, which
should be performed as clinically indicated
Deﬁnition of abbreviations: ATS = American Thoracic Society; CAP = community-acquired pneumonia; IDSA = Infectious Diseases Society of America;
MRSA = methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents 813


--- page 6 ---
,25% (conditional recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence).
2. For outpatient adults with comorbidities
such as chronic heart, lung, liver, or renal
disease; diabetes mellitus; alcoholism;
malignancy; or asplenia, we recommend
(Table 3) (in no particular order of
preference):
d Combination therapy:
B amoxicillin/clavulanate 500 mg/125
mg three times daily, or amoxicillin/
clavulanate 875 mg/125 mg twice
daily, or 2,000 mg/125 mg twice daily,
or a cephalosporin (cefpodoxime
200 mg twice daily or cefuroxime
500 mg twice daily); AND
B macrolide (azithromycin 500 mg on
ﬁrst day then 250 mg daily,
clarithromycin [500 mg twice daily
or extended release 1,000 mg once
daily]) (strong recommendation,
moderate quality of evidence for
combination therapy) or doxycycline
1 0 0m gt w i c ed a i l y( c o n d i t i o n a l
recommendation, low quality of
evidence for combination therapy);
OR
d Monotherapy:
B respiratory ﬂuoroquinolone
(levoﬂoxacin 750 mg daily,
moxiﬂoxacin 400 mg daily, or
gemiﬂoxacin 320 mg daily) (strong
recommendation, moderate quality
of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.Given
the paucity of randomized controlled trial
(RCT) data in the outpatient setting, the
committee considered all available evidence.
The data included the few RCTs of
outpatient CAP, observational studies,
RCTs of inpatient CAP treatment,
antimicrobial resistance data from
surveillance programs, and data
regarding antibiotic-related adverse
events.
For patients without comorbidities that
increase the risk for poor outcomes, the
panel recommended amoxicillin 1 g every
8 hours or doxycycline 100 mg twice daily.
The recommendation for amoxicillin was
based on several studies that showed efﬁcacy
of this regimen for inpatient CAP despite
presumed lack of coverage of this antibiotic
for atypical organisms. This treatment also
has a long track record of safety. The
recommendation for doxycycline was based
on limited clinical trial data, but a broad
spectrum of action, including the most
common relevant organisms. Some experts
recommend that theﬁrst dose of oral
doxycycline be 200 mg, to achieve adequate
serum levels more rapidly. There are no data
assessing whether such an approach is
associated with improved outcomes.
In a departure from the prior CAP
guidelines, the panel did not give a strong
recommendation for routine use of a
macrolide antibiotic as monotherapy for
outpatient CAP, even in patients without
comorbidities. This was based on studies
of macrolide failures in patients with
macrolide-resistant S. pneumoniae (14, 15),
in combination with a macrolide resistance
rate of.30% amongS. pneumoniaeisolates
in the United States, most of which is high-
level resistance (16). However, in settings
where macrolide resistance is documented
to be low and there are contraindications to
alternative therapies, a macrolide as
monotherapy is a treatment option.
Patients with comorbidities should
receive broader-spectrum treatment for two
reasons. First, such patients are likely more
vulnerable to poor outcomes if the initial
empiric antibiotic regimen is inadequate.
Second, many such patients have risk
factors for antibiotic resistance by virtue of
previous contact with the healthcare system
and/or prior antibiotic exposure (see
Recommendation 10) and are therefore
recommended to receive broader-spectrum
therapy to ensure adequate coverage. In
addition to Haemophilus inﬂuenzae and
Moraxella catarrhalis (both of which
frequently produce b-lactamase), S. aureus
and gram-negative bacilli are more
common causes of CAP in patients with
comorbidities, such as COPD.
Regimens recommended for patients
with comorbidities include ab-lactam
or cephalosporin in combination with
either a macrolide or doxycycline. These
combinations should effectively target
macrolide- and doxycycline-resistant
S. pneumoniae (as b-lactam resistance in
S. pneumoniae remains less common), in
addition to b-lactamase– producing
strains of H. inﬂuenzae, many enteric
gram-negative bacilli, most methicillin-
susceptible S. aureus, and Mycoplasma
pneumoniae and Chlamydia pneumoniae.
The monotherapies listed also are effective
against most common bacterial pathogens.
Both sets of treatment recommendations
contain multiple antibiotic options without
specifying a preference order. The choice
between these options requires a
risk– beneﬁt assessment for each individual
patient, weighing local epidemiological data
Table 3. Initial Treatment Strategies for Outpatients with Community-acquired
Pneumonia
Standard Regimen
No comorbidities or risk factors for MRSA
or Pseudomonas aeruginosa*
Amoxicillin or
doxycycline or
macrolide (if local pneumococcal
resistance is ,25%)†
With comorbidities‡ Combination therapy with
amoxicillin/clavulanate or cephalosporin
AND
macrolide or doxycycline
x
OR
monotherapy with respiratory
ﬂuoroquinolonejj
Deﬁnition of abbreviations: ER = extended release; MRSA = methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus.
*Risk factors include prior respiratory isolation of MRSA or P. aeruginosa or recent hospitalization
AND receipt of parenteral antibiotics (in the last 90 d).
†Amoxicillin 1 g three times daily, doxycycline 100 mg twice daily, azithromycin 500 mg on ﬁrst day
then 250 mg daily, clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily, or clarithromycin ER 1,000 mg daily.
‡Comorbidities include chronic heart, lung, liver, or renal disease; diabetes mellitus; alcoholism;
malignancy; or asplenia.
xAmoxicillin/clavulanate 500 mg/125 mg three times daily, amoxicillin/clavulanate 875 mg/125 mg
twice daily, 2,000 mg/125 mg twice daily, cefpodoxime 200 mg twice daily, or cefuroxime 500 mg
twice daily; AND azithromycin 500 mg on ﬁrst day then 250 mg daily, clarithromycin 500 mg twice
daily, clarithromycin ER 1,000 mg daily, or doxycycline 100 mg twice daily.
jjLevoﬂoxacin 750 mg daily, moxiﬂoxacin 400 mg daily, or gemiﬂoxacin 320 mg daily.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
814 American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 200 Number 7 | October 1 2019


--- page 7 ---
Table 4. Initial Treatment Strategies for Inpatients with Community-acquired Pneumonia by Level of Severity and Risk for Drug Resistance
Standard Regimen
Prior Respiratory Isolation of
MRSA
Prior Respiratory Isolation of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Recent Hospitalization and
Parenteral Antibiotics and
Locally Validated Risk
Factors for MRSA
Recent Hospitalization and
Parenteral Antibiotics and
Locally Validated Risk
Factors forP. aeruginosa
Nonsevere inpatient
pneumonia*
b-Lactam 1macrolide† or
respiratory ﬂuroquinolone‡
Add MRSA coveragex and obtain
cultures/nasal PCR to allow
deescalation or conﬁrmation of
need for continued therapy
Add coverage forP. aeruginosajj
and obtain cultures to allow
deescalation or conﬁrmation of
need for continued therapy
Obtain cultures but withhold
MRSA coverage unless
culture results are positive. If
rapid nasal PCR is available,
withhold additional empiric
therapy against MRSA if rapid
testing is negative or add
coverage if PCR is positive
and obtain cultures
Obtain cultures but initiate
coverage forP. aeruginosaonly
if culture results are positive
Severe inpatient
pneumonia*
b-Lactam 1macrolide
† or
b-lactam 1ﬂuroquinolone‡
Add MRSA coveragex and obtain
cultures/nasal PCR to allow
deescalation or conﬁrmation of
need for continued therapy
Add coverage forP. aeruginosajj
and obtain cultures to allow
deescalation or conﬁrmation of
need for continued therapy
Add MRSA coveragex and
obtain nasal PCR and
cultures to allow deescalation
or conﬁrmation of need for
continued therapy
Add coverage forP. aeruginosajj
and obtain cultures to allow
deescalation or conﬁrmation of
need for continued therapy
Deﬁnition of abbreviations: ATS = American Thoracic Society; CAP = community-acquired pneumonia; HAP = hospital-acquired pneumonia; IDSA = Infectious Diseases Society of Ame rica;
MRSA = methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; VAP = ventilator-associated pneumonia.
*As deﬁned by 2007 ATS/IDSA CAP severity criteria guidelines ( see Table 1).
†Ampicillin 1sulbactam 1.5–3 g every 6 hours, cefotaxime 1–2 g every 8 hours, ceftriaxone 1–2 g daily, or ceftaroline 600 mg every 12 hours AND azithromycin 500 mg dai ly or clarithromycin
500 mg twice daily.
‡Levoﬂoxacin 750 mg daily or moxiﬂoxacin 400 mg daily.
xPer the 2016 ATS/IDSA HAP/VAP guidelines: vancomycin (15 mg/kg every 12 h, adjust based on levels) or linezolid (600 mg every 12 h).
jjPer the 2016 ATS/IDSA HAP/VAP guidelines: piperacillin-tazobactam (4.5 g every 6 h), cefepime (2 g every 8 h), ceftazidime (2 g every 8 h), imipenem (50 0 mg every 6 h), meropenem
(1 g every 8 h), or aztreonam (2 g every 8 h). Does not include coverage for extended-spectrum b-lactamase–producing Enterobacteriaceae, which should be considered only on the
basis of patient or local microbiological data.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents 815


--- page 8 ---
against speciﬁc risk factors that increase
the risk of individual choices, such as
documented b-lactam or macrolide allergy,
cardiac arrhythmia (macrolides), vascular
disease (ﬂuoroquinolones), and history of
infection with Clostridium difﬁcile.I n
particular, despite the concern regarding
adverse events associated with
ﬂuoroquinolones, the panel believed that
ﬂuoroquinolone therapy was justiﬁed for
adults with comorbidities and CAP
managed in the outpatient setting.
Reasons included the performance of
ﬂuoroquinolones in numerous studies of
outpatient CAP (17– 22) and inpatient
CAP (see inpatient CAP section), the very
low resistance rates in common bacterial
causes of CAP, their coverage of both
typical and atypical organisms, their oral
bioavailability, the convenience of
monotherapy, and the relative rarity of
serious adverse events related to their use.
However, there have been increasing
reports of adverse events related to
ﬂuoroquinolone use as summarized on the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
website (23).
Of note, we adopt the convention of
prior guidelines to recommend that patients
with recent exposure to one class of
antibiotics recommended above receive
treatment with antibiotics from a different
class, given increased risk for bacterial
resistance to the initial treatment regimen.
We also highlight that although patients
with signiﬁcant risk factors for CAP
due to MRSA orP. aeruginosa (see
Recommendation 11) are uncommonly
managed in the outpatient setting, these
patients may require antibiotics that
include coverage for these pathogens.
Question 9: In the Inpatient Setting,
Which Antibiotic Regimens Are
Recommended for Empiric Treatment
of CAP in Adults without Risk Factors
for MRSA andP. aeruginosa?
Recommendation 9.1.
In inpatient adults
with nonsevere CAP without risk factors
for MRSA orP. aeruginosa (see
Recommendation 10), we recommend
the following empiric treatment
regimens (Table 4) (in no order of
preference):
d combination therapy with ab-lactam
(ampicillin1sulbactam 1.5– 3ge v e r y6h ,
cefotaxime 1– 2 g every 8 h, ceftriaxone
1– 2 g daily, or ceftaroline 600 mg every
12 h) and a macrolide (azithromycin
500 mg daily or clarithromycin 500 mg
twice daily) (strong recommendation,
high quality of evidence), or
d monotherapy with a respiratory
ﬂuoroquinolone (levoﬂoxacin 750 mg
daily, moxiﬂoxacin 400 mg daily) (strong
recommendation, high quality of
evidence).
A third option for adults with CAP who
have contraindications to both macrolides
and ﬂuoroquinolones is:
d combination therapy with ab-lactam
(ampicillin 1sulbactam, cefotaxime,
ceftaroline, or ceftriaxone, doses as
above) and doxycycline 100 mg twice
daily (conditional recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.As
summarized in Table 4, the empiric
antibiotic coverage recommendations for
patients hospitalized with CAP remain
aligned to cover the most likely pathogens
causing CAP. There is a paucity of RCTs
to favor the recommendation of
combination b-lactam plus macrolide
versus monotherapy with a respiratory
ﬂuoroquinolone versus combined therapy
with b-lactam plus doxycycline.
Recommendation 9.2. In inpatient
adults with severe CAP (see Table 1)
without risk factors for MRSA orP.
aeruginosa, we recommend (Table 4) (note
speciﬁc agents and doses are the same as 9.1):
d a b-lactam plus a macrolide (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence), or
d a b-lactam plus a respiratory
ﬂuoroquinolone (strong recommendation,
low quality of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.In
the absence of data from clinical trials
demonstrating the superiority of any speciﬁc
regimen for patients with severe CAP, the
committee considered epidemiological data
for severe CAP pathogens and observational
studies comparing different regimens. As a
result, we recommend that combination
therapy with ab-lactam plus a macrolide
or a b-lactam plus a respiratory
ﬂuoroquinolone should be the treatment of
choice for patients with severe CAP. Both
ﬂuoroquinolone monotherapy and the
combination of b-lactam plus doxycycline
have not been well studied in severe CAP
and are not recommended as empiric
therapy for adults with severe CAP.
Question 10: In the Inpatient Setting,
Should Patients with Suspected
Aspiration Pneumonia Receive
Additional Anaerobic Coverage beyond
Standard Empiric Treatment for CAP?
Recommendation.
We suggest not routinely
adding anaerobic coverage for suspected
aspiration pneumonia unless lung abscess or
empyema is suspected (conditional
recommendation, very low quality of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.
Although older studies of patients with
aspiration pneumonia showed high
isolation rates of anaerobic organisms, more
recent studies have shown that anaerobes
a r eu n c o m m o ni np a t i e n t sh o s p i t a l i z e d
with suspected aspiration (24, 25).
Increasing prevalence of antibiotic-
resistant pathogens and complications of
antibiotic use highlight the need for a
treatment approach that avoids
unnecessary use of antibiotics.
Question 11: In the Inpatient Setting,
Should Adults with CAP and Risk
Factors for MRSA orP. aeruginosaBe
Treated with Extended-Spectrum
Antibiotic Therapy Instead of
Standard CAP Regimens?
Recommendation.
We recommend
abandoning use of the prior categorization
of healthcare-associated pneumonia
(HCAP) to guide selection of extended
antibiotic coverage in adults with CAP
(strong recommendation, moderate quality
of evidence).
We recommend clinicians only cover
empirically for MRSA orP. aeruginosa in
adults with CAP if locally validated risk
factors for either pathogen are present
(strong recommendation, moderate quality
of evidence). Empiric treatment options for
MRSA include vancomycin (15 mg/kg
every 12 h, adjust based on levels) or
linezolid (600 mg every 12 h). Empiric
treatment options forP. aeruginosa
include piperacillin-tazobactam (4.5 g every
6 h), cefepime (2 g every 8 h), ceftazidime
(2 g every 8 h), aztreonam (2 g every 8 h),
meropenem (1 g every 8 h), or imipenem
(500 mg every 6 h).
If clinicians are currently covering
empirically for MRSA orP. aeruginosa in
adults with CAP on the basis of published
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
816 American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 200 Number 7 | October 1 2019


--- page 9 ---
risk factors but do not have local etiological
data, we recommend continuing empiric
coverage while obtaining culture data to
establish if these pathogens are present to
justify continued treatment for these
pathogens after theﬁrst few days of empiric
treatment (strong recommendation, low
quality of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.Our
approach to treating inpatient adults with
CAP is summarized in Table 4. Our
recommendation against using the former
category of HCAP as a basis for selecting
extended spectrum therapy is based on
high-quality studies of patient outcomes.
Although we understand that clinicians
would prefer a simple rule that does not
require incorporating site-speciﬁc data,
the current evidence does not permit
endorsement of a simple and accurate rule
to determine which patients with CAP
should be covered for MRSA and/or
P. aeruginosa. However, the alternative
approach to MRSA andP. aeruginosa that
we propose as a replacement is not based
on high-quality studies, because such
studies do not exist. The lack of adequate
outcome data and marked variation
between sites in prevalence of MRSA andP.
aeruginosa make generalizing anyﬁndings
extremely difﬁcult. We hope that future
research will improve our understanding of
this challenging clinical problem.
Our ﬁrst principle was to maintain the
distinction between severe and nonsevere
pneumonia as per prior guidelines, because
the risk of inadequate empiric antibiotic
therapy is much greater in severe CAP. As
noted previously, severity is deﬁned by the
degree of physiological impairment as
classiﬁed by the IDSA/ATS 2007 criteria.
The second principle was that there is
sufﬁcient evidence that prior identiﬁcation
of MRSA orP. aeruginosain the respiratory
tract within the prior year predicts a very
high risk of these pathogens being
identiﬁed in patients presenting with CAP
(26– 31), and therefore these were sufﬁcient
indications to recommend blood and
sputum cultures and empiric therapy for
these pathogens in patients with CAP in
addition to coverage for standard CAP
pathogens, with deescalation at 48 hours if
cultures are negative. We endorse the
empiric treatment recommendations for
MRSA and P. aeruginosa provided by the
2016 Clinical Practice Guideline from IDSA
and ATS for the management of adults with
hospital-acquired and ventilator-associated
pneumonia (32).
The major additional risk factors for
MRSA and P. aeruginosa identiﬁed in the
literature are hospitalization and parenteral
antibiotic exposure in the last 90 days
(30, 31, 33– 45). In patients with recent
hospitalization and exposure to parenteral
antibiotics, we recommend microbiological
testing without empiric extended-spectrum
therapy for treatment of nonsevere CAP,
and microbiological testing with extended-
spectrum empiric therapy in addition to
coverage for standard CAP pathogens for
treatment of severe CAP, with deescalation
at 48 hours if cultures are negative and the
patient is improving.
The data supporting rapid MRSA nasal
testing are robust (46, 47), and treatment
for MRSA pneumonia can generally be
withheld when the nasal swab is negative,
especially in nonsevere CAP. However, the
positive predictive value is not as high;
therefore, when the nasal swab is positive,
coverage for MRSA pneumonia should
generally be initiated, but blood and
sputum cultures should be sent and
therapy deescalated if cultures are
negative. However, this latter strategy of
deescalation in the face of a positive nasal
swab will vary depending on the severity of
CAP and the local prevalence of MRSA as
a pathogen.
Question 12: In the Inpatient Setting,
Should Adults with CAP Be Treated
with Corticosteroids?
Recommendation. We recommend not
routinely using corticosteroids in
adults with nonsevere CAP (strong
recommendation, high quality of evidence).
We suggest not routinely using
corticosteroids in adults with severe CAP
(conditional recommendation, moderate
quality of evidence).
We suggest not routinely using
corticosteroids in adults with severe
inﬂuenza pneumonia (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
We endorse the Surviving Sepsis
Campaign recommendations on the use of
corticosteroids in patients with CAP and
refractory septic shock (48).
Rationale for the recommendation.
There are no data suggesting beneﬁto f
corticosteroids in patients with nonsevere
CAP with respect to mortality or organ
failure and only limited data in patients
with severe CAP. The risk of corticosteroids
in the dose range up to 240 mg of
hydrocortisone equivalent per day for a
maximum of 7 days is predominantly
hyperglycemia, although rehospitalization
rates may also be higher (49), and
more general concerns about greater
complications in the following 30 to
90 days have been raised (50). At
least one large trial (clinicaltrials.gov
NCT01283009) has been completed but not
reported and may further inform which
subgroups of patients beneﬁt from steroids.
We also endorse the Surviving Sepsis
Campaign recommendations on the
use of steroids in patients with septic
shock refractory to adequateﬂuid
resuscitation and vasopressor support (48).
Of note, there is no intent that our
recommendations would override clinically
appropriate use of steroids for comorbid
diseases, such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, asthma, and
autoimmune diseases, where corticosteroids
are supported as a component of treatment.
Question 13: In Adults with CAP Who
Test Positive for Inﬂuenza, Should the
Treatment Regimen Include Antiviral
Therapy?
Recommendation. We recommend that
antiinﬂuenza treatment, such as oseltamivir,
be prescribed for adults with CAP who test
positive for inﬂuenza in the inpatient
setting, independent of duration of
illness before diagnosis (strong
recommendation, moderate quality of
evidence).
We suggest that antiinﬂuenza
treatment be prescribed for adults with CAP
who test positive for inﬂuenza in the
outpatient setting, independent of
duration of illness before diagnosis
(conditional recommendation, low quality
of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.
For inpatients, a substantial body of
observational evidence suggests that giving
antiinﬂuenza agents reduces mortality risk
in adults with inﬂuenza infection. Although
beneﬁts are strongest when therapy is
started within 48 hours of symptom
onset, studies also support starting later
(51). These data underlie our strong
recommendation for using antiinﬂuenza
agents for patients with CAP and
inﬂuenza in the inpatient setting,
consistent with the recently published
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents 817


--- page 10 ---
IDSA Inﬂuenza Clinical Practice
Guideline (52).
Although we did not identify studies
that speciﬁcally evaluated antiinﬂuenza
agents for treating outpatients with CAP
who test positive for inﬂuenza, we make
the same recommendation as for
inpatients, on the basis of the inpatient
data and on outpatient data showing
better time to resolution of symptoms and
prevention of hospitalization among
those with inﬂuenza but without
pneumonia. Our recommendations are
consistent with the IDSA inﬂuenza
guidelines, which were recently
released (52).
Question 14: In Adults with CAP Who
Test Positive for Inﬂuenza, Should the
Treatment Regimen Include
Antibacterial Therapy?
Recommendation. We recommend that
standard antibacterial treatment be initially
prescribed for adults with clinical and
radiographic evidence of CAP who test
positive for inﬂuenza in the inpatient
and outpatient settings (strong
recommendation, low quality
of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.The
recommendation to routinely prescribe
antibacterial agents in patients with
inﬂuenza virus infection and pneumonia
was based on evidence suggesting that
bacterial coinfections are a common and
serious complication of inﬂuenza, as well as
the inability to exclude the presence of
bacterial coinfection in a patient with
CAP who has a positive test for inﬂuenza
virus. Although low levels of biomarkers
such as procalcitonin decrease the
likelihood that patients have bacterial
infections, these biomarkers do not
completely rule out bacterial pneumonia in
an individual patient with sufﬁcient
accuracy to justify initially withholding
antibiotic therapy, especially among patients
with severe CAP (53– 55). We have
provided a strong recommendation
because of the signiﬁcant risk of
treatment failure in delaying appropriate
antibacterial therapy in patients with CAP.
However, in patients with CAP, a positive
inﬂuenza test, no evidence of a bacterial
pathogen (including a low procalcitonin
level), and early clinical stability,
consideration could be given to earlier
discontinuation of antibiotic treatment at
48 to 72 hours.
Question 15: In Outpatient and
Inpatient Adults with CAP Who Are
Improving, What Is the Appropriate
Duration of Antibiotic Treatment?
Recommendation. We recommend that the
duration of antibiotic therapy should be
guided by a validated measure of clinical
stability (resolution of vital sign
abnormalities [heart rate, respiratory rate,
blood pressure, oxygen saturation, and
temperature], ability to eat, and normal
mentation), and antibiotic therapy should
be continued until the patient achieves
stability and for no less than a total of 5 days
(strong recommendation, moderate quality
of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.As
recent data supporting antibiotic
administration for ,5 days are scant, on a
risk– beneﬁt basis we recommend treating
for a minimum of 5 days, even if the patient
has reached clinical stability before 5 days.
As most patients will achieve clinical
stability within theﬁrst 48 to 72 hours, a
total duration of therapy of 5 days will be
appropriate for most patients. In switching
from parenteral to oral antibiotics, either
the same agent or the same drug class
should be used.
We acknowledge that most studies
in support of 5 days of antibiotic therapy
include patients without severe CAP, but
we believe these results apply to
patients with severe CAP and without
infectious complications. We believe that
the duration of therapy for CAP due
to suspected or proven MRSA or
P. aeruginosa should be 7 days, in
agreement with the recent HAP/VAP
guidelines (32).
Question 16: In Adults with CAP Who
Are Improving, Should Follow-up
Chest Imaging Be Obtained?
Recommendation. In adults with CAP
whose symptoms have resolved within 5 to
7 days, we suggest not routinely obtaining
follow-up chest imaging (conditional
recommendation, low quality of evidence).
Rationale for the recommendation.
Available data suggest the positive yield
from repeat imaging ranges from 0.2% to
5.0%; however, many patients with new
abnormalities in these studies meet criteria
for lung cancer screening among current
or past smokers (56).
Conclusions
Recommendations to help clinicians
optimize therapy for their patients with CAP
have been revised in light of new data.
Methods of quality improvement are
critical to the implementation of
guideline recommendations. It remains
disappointing how few key clinical questions
have been studied adequately enough to
allow for strong recommendations regarding
the standard of care. We hope that the
research priorities outlined in this document
will prompt new investigations addressing
key knowledge gaps.
Despite substantial concern over the
rise of antibiotic-resistant pathogens, most
patients with CAP can be adequately treated
with regimens that have been used for
multiple decades. It is also true that the
subset of patients with CAP who have
signiﬁcant comorbidities and frequent
contact with healthcare settings and
antibiotics is increasing, and, in some
settings, the rates of infection with MRSA or
P. aeruginosa are high enough to warrant
empiric treatment.
Unfortunately, microbiological testing
has yet to deliver fast, accurate, and
affordable testing that results in proven
beneﬁt for patients with CAP in terms of
more rapid delivery of targeted therapy or
safe deescalation of unnecessary therapy.
Exceptions include rapid testing for
MRSA and inﬂuenza. Until we have such
widely available (and affordable) tests,
therapy for many or most patients with CAP
will remain empiric. Therefore, clinicians
need to be aware of the spectrum of local
pathogens, especially if they care for patients
at a center where infection with antibiotic-
resistant pathogens such as MRSA and
P. aeruginosa are more common.
A difference between this guideline and
previous ones is that we have signiﬁcantly
increased the proportion of patients
in whom we recommend routinely
obtaining respiratory tract samples for
microbiologic studies. This decision
is largely based on a desire to correct
the overuse of anti-MRSA and
antipseudomonal therapy that has occurred
since the introduction of the HCAP
classiﬁcation (which we recommend
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
818 American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 200 Number 7 | October 1 2019


--- page 11 ---
abandoning) rather than high-quality
evidence. We expect this change will
generate signiﬁcant research to prove
or disprove the value of this approach.
As it is not possible to create a“one
size ﬁts all” schema for empiric therapy
for CAP, clinicians must validate any
approach taking into account their local
spectrum and frequency of resistant
pathogens, which is another driver for
recommending increased testing. We
similarly expect our move against
endorsing monotherapy with macrolides,
which is based on population resistance
data rather than high-quality clinical
studies, will generate future outcomes
studies comparing different treatment
strategies.
We hope that clinicians and
researchers will ﬁnd this guideline useful,
but the recommendations included here do
not obviate the need for clinical
assessment and knowledge to ensure
each individual patient receives
appropriate and timely care. However,
this guideline delineates minimum
clinical standards that are achievable
and will help drive the best patient
outcomes on the basis of currently
available data. n
This clinical practice guideline was prepared by an ATS/IDSA ad hoc committee on community-acquired pneumonia in adults .
Members of the committee are as
follows:
JOSHUA P. METLAY, M.D., PH.D.
(Co-Chair)1,2
GRANT W. WATERER, M.B. B.S., PH.D.
(Co-Chair)3
ANTONIO ANZUETO, M.D.4,5
JAN BROZEK, M.D., PH.D.6*
KRISTINA CROTHERS, M.D.7,8
LAURA A. COOLEY, M.D.9
NATHAN C. DEAN, M.D.10,11
MICHAEL J. FINE, M.D., M.SC.12,13
SCOTT A. FLANDERS, M.D.14
MARIE R. GRIFFIN, M.D., M.P.H.15
ANN C. LONG, M.D., M.S.8*
MARK L. METERSKY, M.D.16
DANIEL M. MUSHER, M.D.17,18
MARCOS I. RESTREPO, M.D., M.SC., PH.D.4,5
CYNTHIA G. WHITNEY, M.D., M.P.H.9
*Methodologist.
1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts; 2Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts; 3Royal Perth
Hospital and University of Western Australia,
Perth, Australia; 4South Texas Veterans
Healthcare System, San Antonio, Texas;
5University of Texas Health San Antonio,
San Antonio, Texas; 6McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada; 7VA Puget Sound
Health Care System, Seattle, Washington;
8University of Washington, Seattle, Washington;
9Respiratory Diseases Branch, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia;
10Intermountain Medical Center, Salt
Lake City, Utah; 11University of Utah,
Salt Lake City, Utah; 12VA Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania;
13University of Pitts burgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania; 14University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan; 15Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, Tennessee; 16University of
Connecticut School of Medicine,
Farmington, Connecticut; 17Michael E.
DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston,
Texas; and
18Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas
Author Disclosures:A.A. served as a
consultant for AstraZeneca, Bayer, Boehringer
Ingelheim, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Pﬁzer,
and Sunovion; served on an advisory
committee for AstraZeneca, Forest, and
Novartis; served on a data safety and
monitoring board for Bayer; and received
research support from GlaxoSmithKline.
N.C.D. served as a consultant for Cerexa;
served on a data safety and monitoring board
for Contrafect and Theravance; and served on
an advisory committee for Cempra and
Paratek. S.A.F. received research support from
the Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan;
received personal fees for expert testimony
related to the practice of hospital medicine;
and received royalties from Wiley Publishing.
A.C.L. has ownership or investment interest
with Aurora Cannabis, Canopy Growth, and
Cronos Group. M.L.M. received research
support from Gilead, Insmed, Multiclonal
Therapeutics, and Pharmaxis; served as a
consultant for Aradigm, Arsanis, Bayer,
Insmed, International Biophysics, Savara,
Shionogi, and various law ﬁrms; served as a
consultant for EBSCO as a reviewer for
DynaMed, a decision support tool; and served
on an advisory committee and as a consultant
for Grifols. J.P.M., G.W., J.B., K.C., L.A.C.,
M.J.F., M.R.G., D.M.M., M.I.R., and C.G.W.
reported no relevant commercial relationships.
References
1. Mandell LA, Wunderink RG, Anzueto A, Bartlett JG, Campbell GD,
Dean NC, et al.; Infectious Diseases Society of America; American
Thoracic Society. Infectious Diseases Society of America/American
Thoracic Society consensus guidelines on the management of
community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect Dis2007;44:
S27–S72.
2. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Atkins D, Brozek J, Vist G,et al. GRADE
guidelines: 2. Framing the question and deciding on important
outcomes. J Clin Epidemiol2011;64:395–400.
3. McCauley LM, Webb BJ, Sorensen J, Dean NC. Use of tracheal aspirate
culture in newly intubated patients with community-onset pneumonia.
Ann Am Thorac Soc2016;13:376–381.
4. Falguera M, Ruiz-Gonz ´alez A, Schoenenberger JA, Touz ´on C,
G´azquez I, Galindo C,et al. Prospective, randomised study to compare
empirical treatment versus targeted treatment on the basis of the urine
antigen results in hospitalised patients with community-acquired
pneumonia. Thorax 2010;65:101–106.
5. Garrison LE, Kunz JM, Cooley LA, Moore MR, Lucas C, Schrag S,
et al. Vital signs: deﬁciencies in environmental control
identiﬁed in outbreaks of legionnaires’ disease. North
America, 2000-2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep2016;65:
576–584.
6. Dooling KL, Toews KA, Hicks LA, Garrison LE, Bachaus B, Zansky S,
et al. Active bacterial core surveillance for legionellosis: United
States, 2011-2013. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep2015;64:
1190–1193.
7. Christ-Crain M, Stolz D, Bingisser R, M ¨uller C, Miedinger D, Huber PR,
et al. Procalcitonin guidance of antibiotic therapy in community-
acquired pneumonia: a randomized trial.Am J Respir Crit Care Med
2006;174:84–93.
8. Colice GL, Morley MA, Asche C, Birnbaum HG. Treatment costs of
community-acquired pneumonia in an employed population.Chest
2004;125:2140–2145.
9. Yu H, Rubin J, Dunning S, Li S, Sato R. Clinical and economic burden of
community-acquired pneumonia in the Medicare fee-for-service
population. J Am Geriatr Soc2012;60:2137–2143.
10. Brown SM, Jones JP, Aronsky D, Jones BE, Lanspa MJ, Dean NC.
Relationships among initial hospital triage, disease progression and
mortality in community-acquired pneumonia.Respirology 2012;17:
1207–1213.
11. Phua J, Ngerng WJ, Lim TK. The impact of a delay in intensive care unit
admission for community-acquired pneumonia.Eur Respir J2010;
36:826–833.
12. Renaud B, Brun-Buisson C, Santin A, Coma E, Noyez C, Fine MJ,et al.
Outcomes of early, late, and no admission to the intensive care unit
for patients hospitalized with community-acquired pneumonia.Acad
Emerg Med2012;19:294–303.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents 819


--- page 12 ---
13. Restrepo MI, Mortensen EM, Rello J, Brody J, Anzueto A. Late
admission to the ICU in patients with community-acquired pneumonia
is associated with higher mortality.Chest 2010;137:552–557.
14. Lonks JR, Garau J, Gomez L, Xercavins M, Ochoa de Echag ¨uen A,
Gareen IF, et al. Failure of macrolide antibiotic treatment in patients
with bacteremia due to erythromycin-resistantStreptococcus
pneumoniae. Clin Infect Dis2002;35:556–564.
15. Daneman N, McGeer A, Green K, Low DE; Toronto Invasive Bacterial
Diseases Network. Macrolide resistance in bacteremic
pneumococcal disease: implications for patient management.Clin
Infect Dis2006;43:432–438.
16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Active Bacterial Core
surveillance (ABCs) report, Emerging Infections Program Network,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 2016 [accessed 2019 Sept 8]. Available
from: https://www.cdc.gov/abcs/reports-ﬁndings/survreports/
spneu16.pdf.
17. Fogarty C, Grossman C, Williams J, Haverstock M, Church D. Efﬁcacy
and safety of moxiﬂoxacin vs clarithromycin for community-acquired
pneumonia. Infect Med1999;16:748–763.
18. Gotfried MH, Dattani D, Riffer E, Devcich KJ, Busman TA, Notario GF,et al.
A controlled, double-blind, multicenter study comparing clarithromycin
extended-release tablets and levoﬂoxacin tablets in the treatment of
community-acquired pneumonia.Clin Ther2002;24:736–751.
19. Liu Y, Zhang Y, Wu J, Zhu D, Sun S, Zhao L,et al. A randomized,
double-blind, multicenter phase II study comparing the efﬁcacy and
safety of oral nemonoxacin with oral levoﬂoxacin in the treatment of
community-acquired pneumonia. J Microbiol Immunol Infect2017;
50:811–820.
20. D’Ignazio J, Camere MA, Lewis DE, Jorgensen D, Breen JD. Novel,
single-dose microsphere formulation of azithromycin versus 7-day
levoﬂoxacin therapy for treatment of mild to moderate community-
acquired pneumonia in adults.Antimicrob Agents Chemother2005;
49:4035–4041.
21. van Rensburg DJ, Perng RP, Mitha IH, Bester AJ, Kasumba J, Wu RG,
et al.E fﬁcacy and safety of nemonoxacin versus levoﬂoxacin for
community-acquired pneumonia. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2010;54:4098–4106.
22. Oldach D, Clark K, Schranz J, Das A, Craft JC, Scott D,et al.
Randomized, double-blind, multicenter phase 2 study comparing the
efﬁcacy and safety of oral solithromycin (CEM-101) to those of oral
levoﬂoxacin in the treatment of patients with community-acquired
bacterial pneumonia.Antimicrob Agents Chemother2013;57:2526–2534.
23. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Fluoroquinolone antimicrobial
drugs information. 2019 [accessed 2019 Mar 8]. Available from: https://
www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/InformationbyDrugClass/ucm346750.htm.
24. El-Solh AA, Pietrantoni C, Bhat A, Aquilina AT, Okada M, Grover V,et al.
Microbiology of severe aspiration pneumonia in institutionalized
elderly. Am J Respir Crit Care Med2003;167:1650–1654.
25. Marik PE, Careau P. The role of anaerobes in patients with ventilator-
associated pneumonia and aspiration pneumonia: a prospective
study. Chest 1999;115:178–183.
26. Aliberti S, Reyes LF, Faverio P, Sotgiu G, Dore S, Rodriguez AH,et al.;
GLIMP Investigators. Global initiative for methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia (GLIMP): an international,
observational cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis2016;16:1364–1376.
27. Gross AE, Van Schooneveld TC, Olsen KM, Rupp ME, Bui TH, Forsung
E, et al. Epidemiology and predictors of multidrug-resistant
community-acquired and health care-associated pneumonia.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother2014;58:5262–5268.
28. Jones BE, Brown KA, Jones MM, Huttner BD, Greene T, Sauer BC,
et al. Variation in empiric coverage versus detection of methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureusand Pseudomonas aeruginosain
hospitalizations for community-onset pneumonia across 128 US
Veterans Affairs Medical Centers.Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2017;38:937–944.
29. Jung WJ, Kang YA, Park MS, Park SC, Leem AY, Kim EY,et al.
Prediction of methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureusin patients
with non-nosocomial pneumonia.BMC Infect Dis2013;13:370.
30. Minejima E, Lou M, Nieberg P, Wong-Beringer A. Patients presenting to
the hospital with MRSA pneumonia: differentiating characteristics and
outcomes with empiric treatment.BMC Infect Dis2014;14:252.
3 1 .T o r r e - C i s n e r o sJ ,N a t e r aC ,M e s aF ,T r i k i cM ,R o d r´ıguez-Baño J. Clinical
predictors of methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureusin nosocomial
and healthcare-associated pneumonia: a multicenter, matched case-
control study.Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis2018;37:51–56.
32. Kalil AC, Metersky ML, Klompas M, Muscedere J, Sweeney DA, Palmer
LB, et al. Management of adults with hospital-acquired and
ventilator-associated pneumonia: 2016 clinical practice guidelines
by the infectious diseases society of America and the American
Thoracic Society. Clin Infect Dis2016;63:e61–e111.
33. Arancibia F, Bauer TT, Ewig S, Mensa J, Gonzalez J, Niederman MS,
et al
. Community-acquired pneumonia due to gram-negative
bacteria and pseudomonas aeruginosa: incidence, risk, and
prognosis. Arch Intern Med2002;162:1849–1858.
34. Cill ´oniz C, Gabarr ´us A, Ferrer M, Puig de la Bellacasa J, Rinaudo M, Mensa
J, et al. Community-acquired pneumonia due to multidrug- and non-
multidrug-resistantPseudomonas aeruginosa. Chest2016;150:415–425.
35. Falcone M, Russo A, Giannella M, Cangemi R, Scarpellini MG,
Bertazzoni G,et al. Individualizing risk of multidrug-resistant pathogens
in community-onset pneumonia.PLoS One2015;10:e0119528.
36. Jung JY, Park MS, Kim YS, Park BH, Kim SK, Chang J,et al.
Healthcare-associated pneumonia among hospitalized patients in a
Korean tertiary hospital.BMC Infect Dis2011;11:61.
37. Metersky ML, Frei CR, Mortensen EM. Predictors ofPseudomonas and
methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureusin hospitalized patients
with healthcare-associated pneumonia.Respirology2016;21:157–163.
38. Pifarre R, Falguera M, Vicente-de-Vera C, Nogues A. Characteristics of
community-acquired pneumonia in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease. Respir Med2007;101:2139–2144.
39. Polverino E, Cilloniz C, Menendez R, Gabarrus A, Rosales-Mayor E,
Alcaraz V,et al. Microbiology and outcomes of community acquired
pneumonia in non cystic-ﬁbrosis bronchiectasis patients.J Infect
2015;71:28–36.
40. Prina E, Ranzani OT, Polverino E, Cill ´oniz C, Ferrer M, Fernandez L,
et al. Risk factors associated with potentially antibiotic-resistant
pathogens in community-acquired pneumonia.Ann Am Thorac Soc
2015;12:153–160.
41. Rodrigo-Troyano A, Sibila O. The respiratory threat posed by multidrug
resistant Gram-negative bacteria.Respirology 2017;22:1288–1299.
42. Shindo Y, Ito R, Kobayashi D, Ando M, Ichikawa M, Shiraki A,et al. Risk
factors for drug-resistant pathogens in community-acquired and
healthcare-associated pneumonia.Am J Respir Crit Care Med2013;
188:985–995.
43. von Baum H, Welte T, Marre R, Suttorp N, Ewig S; CAPNETZ study
group. Community-acquired pneumonia through Enterobacteriaceae
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa: diagnosis, incidence and predictors.
Eur Respir J2010;35:598–605.
44. Shorr AF, Myers DE, Huang DB, Nathanson BH, Emons MF, Kollef MH.
A risk score for identifying methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus
aureus in patients presenting to the hospital with pneumonia.BMC
Infect Dis2013;13:268.
45. Wooten DA, Winston LG. Risk factors for methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureusin patients with community-onset and
hospital-onset pneumonia. Respir Med2013;107:1266–1270.
46. Dangerﬁeld B, Chung A, Webb B, Seville MT. Predictive value of
methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus(MRSA) nasal swab PCR assay
for MRSA pneumonia.Antimicrob Agents Chemother2014;58:859–864.
47. Parente DM, Cunha CB, Mylonakis E, Timbrook TT. The clinical utility of
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus(MRSA) nasal screening
to rule out MRSA pneumonia: a diagnostic meta-analysis with
antimicrobial stewardship implications.Clin Infect Dis2018;67:1–7.
48. Rhodes A, Evans LE, Alhazzani W, Levy MM, Antonelli M, Ferrer R,et al.
Surviving sepsis campaign: international guidelines for management
of sepsis and septic shock: 2016.I n t e n s i v eC a r eM e d2017;43:304–377.
49. Briel M, Spoorenberg SMC, Snijders D, Torres A, Fernandez-Serrano S,
Meduri GU,et al.; Ovidius Study Group; Capisce Study Group; STEP
Study Group. Corticosteroids in patients hospitalized with
community-acquired pneumonia: systematic review and individual
patient data metaanalysis.Clin Infect Dis2018;66:346–354.
50. Waljee AK, Rogers MA, Lin P, Singal AG, Stein JD, Marks RM,et al.
Short term use of oral corticosteroids and related harms among
adults in the United States: population based cohort study.BMJ
2017;357:j1415.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
820 American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Volume 200 Number 7 | October 1 2019


--- page 13 ---
51. Louie JK, Yang S, Acosta M, Yen C, Samuel MC, Schechter R,et al.
Treatment with neuraminidase inhibitors for critically ill patients with
inﬂuenza A (H1N1)pdm09.Clin Infect Dis2012;55:1198–1204.
52. Uyeki TM, Bernstein HH, Bradley JS, Englund JA, File TM Jr, Fry AM,
et al. Clinical practice guidelines by the infectious diseases society of
America: 2018 update on diagnosis, treatment, chemoprophylaxis,
and institutional outbreak management of seasonal inﬂuenzaa. Clin
Infect Dis2018;68:e1–e47.
53. Kamat IS, Ramachandran V, Eswaran H, Abers MS, Musher DM. Low
procalcitonin, community acquired pneumonia, and antibiotic
therapy. Lancet Infect Dis2018;18:496–497.
54. Self WH, Balk RA, Grijalva CG, Williams DJ, Zhu Y, Anderson EJ,et al.
Procalcitonin as a marker of etiology in adults hospitalized
with community-acquired pneumonia.Clin Infect Dis2017;65:
183–190.
55. Rodr´ıguez AH, Avil ´es-Jurado FX, D´ıaz E, Schuetz P, Treﬂer SI, Sol ´e-
Viol ´an J, et al.; SEMICYUC/GETGAG Working Group. Procalcitonin
(PCT) levels for ruling-out bacterial coinfection in ICU patients with
inﬂuenza: a CHAID decision-tree analysis.J Infect2016;72:143–151.
56. Moyer VA; U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for lung
cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med2014;160:330–338.
AMERICAN THORACIC SOCIETY DOCUMENTS
American Thoracic Society Documents 821
